Ardian Fullani: Economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  presentation  of  the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  Annual  Report  2009  to  the  Albanian  Parliament  on  29  April  2010, 
published on 30 April 2010. 
 The country’s macroeconomic balances;  
Our financial system’s stability;  
The business models and the private sector’s financial sustainability; and  
The analytical and responsive capacities of macroeconomic policies.  
Honourable Ms. Chairwoman,  
Dear deputies,  
It is a privilege to present to you today the Bank of Albania’s Annual Report for 2009. This 
Report, the key conclusions of which will be briefly reviewed in my speech today, makes a 
thorough and transparent analysis of economic and financial developments in Albania, and 
provides  an  overview  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  work  to  meet  its  legal  obligations  and 
institutional commitments.  
The  year  2009  was  a  challenging  year  for  the  Albanian  economy  in  all  its  dimensions.  In 
response to the global economic and financial crisis, the following were put to the test during 
this year: 
 
 
 
 
In  a  broader  setting,  the  shock  that  hit  the  Albanian  economy  in  2009  put  the  flexibility  of 
Albania’s  economic  development  model  and  its  capacity  to  respond  to  a  thoroughly 
transformed global environment to test.  
The  global  crisis  provided  a  quick  impact  on  the  economic  activity  at  home.  It  was  soon 
followed  by  the  reduction  of  current  and  capital  account  foreign  inflows,  an  abrupt  fall  of 
foreign demand and slowdown of domestic demand for goods and services. In response to 
these developments, the economic growth rate marked a progressive slowdown during the 
last  year,  but  still  remained  positive.  Albania’s  balance  of  payments  was  characterized  by 
imbalances in foreign currency inflows and outflows. The imbalances were reflected in the 
swinging  of  demand  and  supply  ratios  of  foreign  currency,  yielding  the  depreciation  of  the 
exchange  rate  in  response  to  new  balances  that  dominated  the  foreign  exchange  market. 
Fiscal policy became more expansionary in 2009, supporting economic activity in the country 
but also increasing the pressures on the financial markets. 
The  shock  that  hit  the  financial  system  gave  rise  to  the  establishment  of  a  challenging 
environment  for  the  monetary  policy  to  be  transmitted  completely  and  timely.  Against  this 
challenging  background,  the  Bank  of  Albania  accomplished  its  legal  mandate  to  maintain 
price stability in economy successfully: CPI annual inflation remained within our 3 + 1 percent 
target in 2009.  
The  Bank  of  Albania’s  easing  monetary  policy  established  the  proper  monetary  conditions 
required to maintain price stability. In addition, the supply of the economy with the necessary 
liquidity  and  at  a  declining  cost  stabilized  the  financial  markets  and  created  the  proper 
conditions for the support of economic activity during 2009. 
The  performance  of  the  Albanian  financial  system  was  affected  by  the  wavering  of 
confidence  in  our  financial  system  during  the  first  half of  the  year  and the  withdrawal  of  a 
portion  of  deposits.  This  performance,  coupled  with  another  group  of  factors,  yielded  less 
support, and at higher cost, to the Albanian economy with banking loans. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 1
Higher economic agents’ uncertainty and liquidity premiums;  
The correction of the business model in particular financial market segments;  
Increased exchange rate volatility; and 
Contracted demand for loans in the second half of 2009.  
Among the factors worth noting are: 
 
 
 
 
The wavering of public confidence underscored the prime importance of financial stability in 
Albania’s  economic  life.  Within  its  area  of  responsibility,  the  Bank  of  Albania  undertook  a 
number of comprehensive and co-ordinated measures, which aimed at maintaining financial 
stability at a systemic and institutional level.  
These measures, inter alia, consisted in:  
 
 
 
Reviewing the regulatory base in terms of increasing the supervisory prudence;  
Strengthening on-site supervision;  
Increasing the analysis of banks’ balance sheets at an individual and systemic level; 
and 
Enhancing the co-operation with the national and foreign counterpart institutions.  
 
Our  endeavours  to  preserve  financial  stability  were  also  coordinated  with  other  public, 
executive and legislative authorities. Worth noting is the improvement of the public deposit 
insurance scheme and the increase of the deposit insurance level by the Deposit Insurance 
Agency. These measures proved successful in curtailing the negative consequences and in 
fully restoring confidence in the banking system. 
Subsequently, the Albanian banking system maintained sound balance sheets and was in full 
capacity to carry out its function as a financial intermediary and supplier of the economy with 
payment instruments. The developments of the first quarter of 2010 attest to the full restoring 
of  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  Currently,  the  level  of  deposits  has  exceeded 
that of end September 2008, prior to the beginning of the withdrawal of deposits.  
In what follows, I would like to dwell on the aforementioned topics.  
Monetary policy and price stability  
1.  
In  accordance  with  its  legal  mandate,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  monetary  policy  has  been 
designed and implemented in order to achieve and maintain price stability. During 2009, the 
main risks to price stability have arisen from the slowdown of economic activity, wavering of 
economic agents’ confidence, imbalanced external position of the Albanian economy and the 
exchange rate depreciation. Despite these challenges, the Bank of Albania managed to keep 
the CPI inflation within the target. Let us dwell on these elements further. 
Economic growth  
1.1  
The global context that accompanied Albania’s economic and financial performance over the 
past  year  was  not  at  all  favourable.  The  year  2009  featured  contracted  global  economic 
activity  as  a  result  of  the  economic  downturn  in  advanced  economies  and  considerable 
economic slowdown in emerging countries. Global economy posted the first negative growth 
rate of the last 50 years.  
The  increasing  integration  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  the  financial  system  in  particular 
caused the global crisis to be reflected early in our country. The main channels the Albanian 
economy was exposed to were: 
 
Decline of exports;  
2 
 BIS Review 78/2010
Decline of remittances and other foreign currency inflows;  
Increased uncertainty in the financial institutions; and, in response to the latter 
Review of almost all economic agents’ business plans.  
 
 
 
This impact was reflected in low growth rates and shaking of some macroeconomic balances 
in 2009. According to the Statistics Institute, GDP grew 3.1 percent in annual terms in 2009. 
The  slowdown  of  GDP  growth  reflected  the  contraction  of  activity  in  industry  and 
construction,  while  the  services  sector’s  value  added  remained  the  key  contributor  to 
economic growth. 
Given the difficult circumstances in which economic activity took place and compared with 
other  regional  countries’  experiences,  the  preservation  of  the  economic  growth  rate  at 
positive  levels  is  an  encouraging  development.  However,  its  slowdown  and  the  new 
macroeconomic balances need due attention by all economic agents in their projections for 
the future. Albania’s economic development outlook also requires greater support from the 
private sector, while the contribution of the public sector to economic growth is expected to 
decline.  The  data  on  aggregate  demand  show  that  the  contraction  of  private  consumption 
and the fall in investment were determining factors in the slower growth of demand at home. 
Net  exports  continued  to  provide  a  negative  contribution  to  aggregate  demand  in  2009, 
however at more moderate rates than in 2008. In addition to easing monetary conditions, the 
fiscal stimulus supported the economy in generating positive growth rates during 2009.  
Private  consumption  is  the  key  component  of  aggregate  demand  accounting  for  about  80 
percent  of  GDP.  The  slow  growth  rate  in  wages,  the  decline  of  remittances  and  the 
contraction of consumer loans contributed to the slowdown of consumption in 2009. 
Private  investments  are  assessed  to  have  been  affected  more  by  the  global  financial  and 
economic crisis than the other components of aggregate demand. The contracted domestic 
and  foreign  demand  and  the  tight  lending  conditions  triggered  the  contraction  of  private 
investment in 2009. 
Fiscal policy and fiscal indicators  
1.2  
The slowdown of the Albanian economy affected the performance of fiscal policy and fiscal 
indicators. Fiscal policy was expansionary being reflected in the deepening of budget deficit. 
Budget  deficit  for  2009  is  estimated  at  7.1  percent  of  GDP.  The  main  sources  of  deficit 
financing were privatization receipts and syndicated loan, which reduced the need to borrow 
in the domestic market. 
Budget revenues posted an annual increase of 2.7 percent, largely due to the slow increase 
in tax revenue. On the other hand, public spending grew by about 8 percent, led by the high 
rate  of  current  expenditure.  The  expansionary  fiscal  policy  provided  the  economic  activity 
with the necessary impulse over the course of the year; however it was also accompanied by 
higher public debt and upward pressures on Government T-bill yields. 
The  deepening  of  budget  deficit  resulted  in  substantial  public  debt  increase,  which  as  at 
year-end 2009 accounted for about 59.5 percent of GDP.  
The Bank of Albania encourages measures to reduce the budget deficit and public debt in 
the  medium  run.  Lower  budget  deficit  and  public  debt  levels  will  provide  more  room  in 
accessing of funds from the private sector and boost confidence in Albania’s macroeconomic 
stability. In addition, these measures will help to create appropriate conditions for attracting 
foreign capital in the form of private loans or foreign direct investment. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 3
Monetary developments and financial markets  
1.3  
Financial  intermediation  in  economy  was  conditioned  by  the  contraction  of  financial 
resources,  wavering  of  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and  the  decline  of  demand  for 
banking loans in 2009. At the end of March, deposits fell to 55 percent of GDP compared to 
63 percent in September 2008. The withdrawal of deposits during the first quarter of the year 
brought about the slowdown of money growth in economy.  
Banking activity recovered slowly during the following three quarters. Money supply grew by 
an average of 6 percent this year or about twice less than the previous year. The growth of 
money supply mainly attributes to the growth of its ALL component, while foreign currency 
loans and deposits contracted in 2009. The creation of money in ALL has been based on the 
fiscal  sector’s  domestic  borrowing  and  the  preservation  of  the  private  sector’s  ALL  credit 
rates. 
In  addition  to  the  higher  banks’  sensitivity  to  their  liquidity  indicators,  private  sector  credit 
activity  was  carried  out  under  the  conditions  of  a  more  conservative  behaviour  of  banks’ 
lending in 2009. This conservative behaviour owes also to an increased caution of banks to 
certain banking products, such as: 
 
foreign  currency  loans  to  certain  segments  of  the  economy  exposed  to  exchange 
rate fluctuations, and 
consumer loans.  
 
In  the  second  half  of  the  year,  demand  for  loans  declined  as  a  result  of  the  tight  lending 
standards and the slowdown of economic activity. Despite the easy monetary policy of the 
Bank of Albania, private sector credit maintained a uniform slowdown trend during 2009. 
As  at  year-end  2009,  credit  annual  growth  rate  marked  12  percent  versus  33  percent  in 
2008.  The  growth  of  credit  has  been  triggered  by  the  business  demand  to  finance  the 
liquidity needs, while the households’ loan portfolio contracted over the same year. 
Balance of payments and the exchange rate  
1.4  
In the presence of slow domestic demand and reflecting the difficult situation of the global 
economy, current account deficit narrowed by about 3 percent in 2009, standing at 15.3 percent 
of GDP.  
Despite the slight correction during the year, current account deficit remains high and one of 
the weaknesses of the Albanian economy. The Bank of Albania considers that the prioritized 
handling of the current account deficit requires the formulation of policies supportive to the 
long-term  growth  of  savings  in  Albania,  as  well  as  measures  to  encourage  production  in 
those branches or industries that result competitive in the international markets. 
Trade  balance  narrowing  was  affected  by  the  concurrent  annual  decline  of  exports  and 
imports by 18 and 9 percent, respectively. The difficult situation in our neighbouring countries 
has been also reflected in the decline of remittances, which contracted 6.5 percent in annual 
terms, while their share to GDP was 9 percent. Capital and financial account surplus reduced 
substantially  over  the  course  of  2009,  dropping  by  35.6  percent  compared  to  2008.  This 
performance owes to a large extent to the low increase in foreign direct investment and the 
reduction of private foreign borrowing. 
Unlike the previous two years when capital and financial account covered over 100 percent 
of  the  current  deficit,  in  2009  it  financed  only  77  percent.  Total  foreign  inflows,  albeit 
downward, were almost sufficient to cover this deficit in 2009. The country’s foreign reserve 
remained at similar levels as in 2008, sufficient to cover 4.2 months of imports of goods and 
services.  
4 
 BIS Review 78/2010
The  contraction  of  foreign  inflows  exerted  depreciating  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate, 
particularly in the first half of 2009. In the domestic foreign exchange market, average annual 
depreciation of ALL against the EUR and the USD was 7.6 and 13.2 percent, respectively.  
Inflation and monetary policy  
1.5  
1.5.1   CPI inflation  
Consumer  prices  rose  2.2  percent  on  average  in  2009,  which  is  in  line  with  the  Bank  of 
Albania’s  target  for  inflation.  As  a  result  of  the  reduced  inflationary  pressures  worldwide, 
annual inflation marked low rates – 1.8 percent on average – during the first quarter of 2009. 
In the following two quarters, inflation rates stabilized close to the lower limit of the Bank of 
Albania’s  target,  2.0  percent.  Annual  inflation  displayed  an  upward  tendency  in  the  last 
quarter, when it marked 2.9 per cent in average terms and converging to the inflation target. 
The highest inflation rate of 3.5 percent was marked in December. The increase of inflation in 
the  last  part  of  the  year  was  mainly  triggered  by  the  more  complete  exchange  rate 
devaluation pass-through to consumer prices, in the presence of upward primary commodity 
prices in the global markets.  
The  slowdown  of  economic  activity  at  home  and  the  low  inflationary  pressures  from  the 
global  economy  created  an  environment  of  relatively  low  inflationary  pressures.  Core  and 
non-traded  inflation  marked  average  rates  of  1.3  and  1.6  percent,  respectively,  in  2009 
attesting to the low inflationary pressures of the domestic economy. These factors offset the 
devaluation effect of the national currency, which led to higher prices of imported goods and 
a  part  of  products  that  are  still  indexed  to  the  exchange  rate.  Traded  goods’  inflation  –  a 
portion of which are imported and the rest are directly affected by global prices – increased 
substantially compared to the previous two years. Its contribution to headline inflation was 
about 73 percent in 2009. 
1.5.2   Bank of Albania’s monetary policy  
The weakening of economic activity and domestic inflationary pressures, our forecasts for a 
contained inflation in the future and the anchored expectations of economic agents provided 
room  for  pursuing  an  easing  monetary  policy  in  2009.  This  policy  was  materialized  in  two 
interest rate cuts by 0.5 percentage points each in January and October 2009 to 5.25 percent, 
and  in  the  continuous  injection  of  liquidity  required  by  the  market  and  the  economy.  By 
means  of  this  prudent  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Albania  aimed  at  creating  appropriate 
monetary conditions for a balanced and long-term development of the country. 
The key interest rate cuts were instantly passed through to the short-term interest rates in the 
interbank  market,  which  declined  and  were  less  volatile  than  in  2008.  On  the  other  hand, 
these  movements  were  not  fully  and  instantly  transmitted  to  the  interest  rates  on  banking 
loans and deposits. As in all other countries, the increase of the liquidity premium, the higher 
uncertainty  and  the  deterioration  of  the  banking  system’s  financial  results  were  amortizing 
factors for the easy monetary authorities’ measures. However, our monetary policy and our 
interbank  market  operations  managed  to  successfully  avoid  a  detrimental  contraction  of 
banks’ balance sheets, something that many emerging countries had to go through.  
The 1.00 percentage point cut in 2009 relaxed the financial burden of the banking system’s 
intermediation activity. The Bank of Albania has consistently supported the banking system 
with the required liquidity. In addition to cutting the key interest rate, the Bank of Albania has 
helped Albania’s banking system activity through: 
 
the  refinancing  auction 
fixed-amount  auction 
form 
to  
the  change  of 
unlimited-amount auction; 
up to 3-month extension of the maturity term of injected liquidity;  
expansion of the range of collateral in our refinancing operations; 
from 
 BIS Review 78/2010 
 5
 increase  of  the  use  of  required  reserve;  and  the  reduction  of  the  overnight  loan 
interest rate. 
We have employed almost all of our range of instruments for implementing monetary policy. 
The amount of liquidity injected by the Bank of Albania peaked in summer with ALL 40 billion. 
As  a  result of  the  deposits  entering  the  banking  system,  this  amount reduced  gradually  to 
about ALL 28 billion at the end of 2009. 
Banking supervision and financial stability  
2.  
The banking system performance was significantly conditioned by the economic slowdown 
and  wavering  of  confidence,  aspects  that  were  elaborated  at  length  in  my  speech. 
Consequently,  there  was  higher  uncertainty,  higher  bank  sensitivity  to  liquidity,  a  more 
cautious  lending  behaviour,  and  an  increase  in  non-performing  loans.  These  are  the  main 
highlights of the banking system performance during 2009.  
Despite the downward profitability, capitalization indicators remain at satisfactory levels. The 
banking system remains sound, a fact that also attributes to the effective carrying out of the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  function  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  In  what  follows  I  would  like  to 
elaborate more on these aspects. 
Banking system performance  
2.1  
The  Albanian  banking  system’s  total  assets  increased  in  2009,  but  at  a  rate  about  twice 
lower than in 2008. This decrease reflects fully the lower expansion of lending. Our banking 
system continues to be mainly financed by public deposits and be concentrated on business 
lending.  
The banking system’s deposits and loans grew but at a lower rate than in the previous years. 
Loans to total deposits increased by nearly 3 percentage points, from 62 to 65 percent. On 
the  other  hand,  the  increase  of  deposits  as  a  result  of  the  restored  public  confidence  has 
improved the liquidity situation in the banking system. 
Non-performing loans increased in 2009 owing to the economic slowdown and the exchange 
rate  depreciation.  Loan  portfolio  quality  index  expressed  as  “non-performing  loans  to  total 
outstanding  loans”  rose  to  10.48  percent  as  at  end  2009  from  6.64  percent  at  the  end  of 
2008. On net basis, that is deducting total provision fund, the same figure is only 6.3 percent. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  monitored  the  situation  closely  being  aware  of  the  pro-cyclical 
effects  that  these  developments  may  have  on  the  loan  portfolio.  Despite  the  loan  portfolio 
deterioration,  capital  adequacy  and  quality,  to  carry  out  the  banking  operations,  to  extend 
and expand lending, have remained almost intact. Although the loan portfolio growth is below 
the previous years’ levels, it is satisfactory and at higher levels than in the region. 
Based on the periodical stress-tests, the Bank of Albania has identified all banks’ needs for 
capital, thereby enabling a rapid increase of the capital when necessary. Banks’ responses 
were instantaneous bringing in new capital. 
Total regulatory capital of the banking system increased 37.7 percent, being dominated by 
the core capital providing evidence for a qualitatively good and sustainable regulatory capital. 
The  banking  system’s  capitalization  level  was  significantly  above  the  regulatory  minimum 
required by our regulations and international practices. 
Efficiency  indicator  shows  almost  the  same  level  as  at  year-end  2008,  attesting  to  a 
prudential and stable growth of banking activity in general. On the other hand, shareholder’s 
equity is estimated to have increased 18.7 percent in 2009 versus 2008. Financial leverage 
reduced  gradually  during  2009.  The  decline  of  the  financial  leverage  from  11.7  to 
10.4 percent over a year implies that the system has relied less on debt to finance assets. 
Compared  with  the  European  Union  countries,  the  Albanian  banking  system’s  financial 
6 
 BIS Review 78/2010
leverage  remains  low  attesting  to  a  low  degree  of  the  system’s  borrowing  practice.  This 
indicator provides further evidence for the sound situation of the banking system.  
The  network  expansion  of  banking  branches  and  agencies  in  the  territory  of  Albania 
persisted  in  2009  however  at  lower  rates  compared  to  the  previous  years.  As  at  year-end 
2009, the total number of branches and agencies amounted to 530 from 517 at the year-end 
2008. 17 new bank branches were opened while 4 existing branches were closed.  
Banking system supervision  
2.2  
The medium-term strategy for banking supervision approved in 2009. The main pillar of this 
strategy is the adoption of a new philosophy: risk-oriented supervision.  
The main highlights of this new supervisory policy are:  
 
further interaction and harmonization among monetary policy, financial stability and 
supervision; 
harmonization of our supervisory framework with the acquis communautaire; 
interaction  between  the  domestic  and  foreign  supervisory  authorities  and  the 
Financial Supervisory Authority; 
harmonization  with  the  third  pillar  of  Basel  II,  encouraging  the  process  of  
self-regulation and consumer protection.  
  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  constantly  engaged  in  a  process  of  deep  analysis  and 
supervision  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  compliance  and  enforcement  from  the 
licensed entities. This process has been achieved through on-site inspections, which in 2009 
were more frequent and rigorous. Besides the observance of the supervisory cycle, banks 
were constantly contacted for phenomena that have represented a concern during the year, 
taking appropriate measures to address potential problems in due time. Overall, the banking 
system has acted with caution in conducting the operational processes of their activities and 
in compliance with the regulatory framework of the Bank of Albania.  
Strengthening of regulatory and supervisory framework  
2.3  
The  design  of  strong  and  appropriate  rules  and  their  rigorous  monitoring  constitutes  a 
guarantee for the preservation of financial stability.  
The Bank of Albania has been active in improving the regulatory framework, consolidating it 
further  in  compliance  with  the  legal  provisions  and  the  Basel  Committee  principles,  the 
European Council directives and the best practices in the area of regulation and supervision 
of financial institutions licensed by the Bank of Albania. 
The main objective was the harmonization of the best practices in: 
 
 
 
 
With  respect  to  the  latter,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  required  higher  and  improved 
communication of the banking system with the public about the products and services being 
provided, the promotional campaigns for new  products and the provision of information on 
their real financial situation and risk profile. 
strengthening internal control;  
improving banking institutions’ governance;  
strengthening the risk management capacities; and  
increasing the level of banks’ transparency to the public.  
BIS Review 78/2010 
 7
Other Bank of Albania activities  
3.  
After the analysis of the two key functions of the Bank of Albania, I would like to elaborate on 
some other aspects of the central bank’s work.  
Payments’ system  
3.1  
The  payments’  system  reflected  security  and  efficiency  in  2009.  On  average,  225 
transactions  a  day  were  processed  and  settled  in  the  AIPS  system,  with  an  average  daily 
value of ALL 19 billion. Total liquidities settled in the AIPS system during 2009 is about 4.3 
times higher than the GDP.  
European integration  
3.2  
The  Bank  of  Albania  plays  a  key  role  in  the  European  integration  process.  The  Bank  of 
Albania has been active in revising the National Plan for the Implementation of the SAA for 
the period 2009–2014.  
The Bank of Albania has prepared monthly progress reports that reflect the achievements in 
terms  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  legal  measures  and  implementing  activities,  and  a 
description of the level of compliance of judicial acts approved by the Bank of Albania with 
the acquis communautaire. 
Communication and transparency  
our analyses of economic and financial developments at home,  
the risk balance and potential implications for the economy,  
the entire regulatory and supervisory activity of the banking system. 
3.3  
Public  communication  was  one  of  the  major  priorities  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  2009.  We 
have  aimed  at  transmitting  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  decision-making  to  the  financial  market, 
other  decision-making  institutions,  media,  other  economic  agents  and  the  public  at  large, 
timely and efficiently.  
The Bank of Albania’s communication has been materialized through added transparency in: 
 
 
 
With the belief that added transparency is translated into higher integrity and transparency, 
the Bank of Albania has been paying an increasing attention to public education as well.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  acknowledges  and  appreciates 
importance  of  having  a  
well-informed  and  well-educated  public  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
economy, by taking timely, right and rational decisions.  
In this context, our activities in the area of public’s financial education intensified further in 
2009 through the expansion of age groups and greater geographical coverage.  
In figures, for the period 2008–2009:  
 
 
were distributed a total of 21 000 educational leaflets;  
were held training seminars for around 170 teachers teaching Economics in Tirana, 
Vlora, Korça, Shkodra, Gjirokastra and Elbasan;  
were  held  20  meetings  with  different  stakeholders  in  Tirana,  Vlora,  Korça, 
Gjirokastra and Shkodra;  
the competition “The Real Value of Money” was organized in Tirana, Vlora, Shkodra, 
Korça and Gjirokastra, with a total of 100 high schools taking part; 
were held seminars for 60 social workers in Tirana;  
the 
BIS Review 78/2010
   8 
 were held full cycles of training seminars and lectures for the journalists;  
the Governor held 7 lectures for students in Albania and abroad;  
Bank of Albania Day was organized in four universities. 
 
 
 
Lastly, the redesign of the Bank of Albania website in the beginning of 2009 provides a more 
efficient  portal  for  the  provision  of  information,  making  it  efficient,  re-arranged  and  
user-friendly.  
Monetary and financial statistics  
3.4  
The  Bank  of  Albania  plays  a  key  role  in  the  national  statistical  system,  as  an  institution 
responsible for the production and dissemination of monetary statistics and external sector 
statistics.  
In 2009, the Bank of Albania continued to develop and disseminate monetary statistics and 
external sector statistics, aiming at: 
 
the  further  approximation  of  the  methodology  with  the  recommendations  and  best 
international practices,  
enhancing  the  quality  of  data  through  the  improvement  and  automation  of  control 
processes, and  
increasing the number of released indicators and detailing of aggregate indicators. 
  Strengthening of research capacities  
3.5  
Based  on  the  tradition  of  the  best  international  models,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  
ever-increasingly paying special attention to enhancing the research capacities in the field of 
economy and finance.  
Our guiding philosophy has been the improvement of the Bank of Albania decision-making, 
basing  it  on  scientific  conclusions  and  empirical  results.  The  study  of  different  economic 
phenomena is now based on complete or partial econometric models that allow the drawing 
of conclusions and reliable forecasts. Our future challenge will be the further refining of these 
models and their growing use in the Bank of Albania decision-making. 
Bank of Albania’s financial statements  
4.  
The financial statements of 2009 were audited by an Independent Auditor and they give a 
true and fair view of the Bank of Albania’s financial position for 2009.  
Bank  of  Albania’s  financial  position  has  improved  further.  Total  assets  have  amounted  to 
ALL 353,6 billion, whilst liabilities have amounted to ALL 321 billion. Realized profit totalled 
about ALL 10 (9,993) billion, the highest in the last three years. This result has increased the 
Bank of Albania’s capital.  
Pursuant to the obligations of Law No. 8269, dated 23 December 1997, Article 9, 25 percent, 
about ALL 2,5 (2,479) billion, of the net profit was capitalized, causing the general reserve to 
amount to ALL 10 (9.994) billion.  
Similarly, the Bank of Albania has observed the obligation of transferring the net profit to the 
State Budget pursuant to Article 10 of the same Law, and paid to the State Budget about 
ALL 6,74 billion for the year 2009. 
Pursuant  to  Article  10,  in  March  2010  the  balance  of  2009  net  profit  amounting  to  ALL 
2,4 (2,436) billion was paid to the State Budget.  
BIS Review 78/2010 
 9
Honourable Ms. Chairwoman,  
Dear deputies,  
Thanking you for your attention, on behalf of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, 
I  want  to  guarantee  the  Parliament  of  the  Republic  of  Albania  that  the  central  bank  will 
remain a responsible decision-making institution in 2010.  
Our decision-making will: 
 
 
 
 
remain transparent both for the financial market and the public at large; 
consider all possible information in and out of Albania;  
rely on qualified human resources, and  
improve  its  policy  and  operational  framework,  considering  the  best  contemporary 
and international practices.  
The  focus  of  monetary  policy  will  remain  oriented  to  consumer  price  stability,  whilst 
endeavouring to accomplish successfully all the other legal objectives.  
Albania’s  financial  stability  remains  another  major  priority  for  the  period  to  follow.  To  this 
purpose, the Bank of Albania is fully committed to monitoring the situation and designing and 
implementing proper measures timely and at the right intensity.  
Lastly, in the capacity of the Governor of the Bank of Albania, I guarantee that the central 
bank  will  continue  to  provide  a  responsible,  accountable  and  transparent  reporting  to  the 
Albanian Parliament without hesitancy to meet the constitutional and legal obligations.  
In  addition,  in  full  observance  of  the  legal  obligation  to  preserve  the  autonomy  of  the 
institution  I  preside,  I  assure  you  that  I  will  make  any  ethical,  legal  and  constitutional 
endeavours to ensure that our accountability before you and the public at large is unbiased 
and true.  
Expressing my highest considerations on my behalf, on the behalf of the Supervisory Council 
and  the  Bank  of  Albania  staff,  I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Albanian 
Parliament for the contribution and continuous support provided to our institution.  
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 78/2010
