Jean-Claude Trichet: Lessons to be learned from the European 
sovereign debt crisis – interview with Libération 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Libération, 
conducted by Mr Jean Quatremer on 8 July 2010 and published in French via his blog on 
13 July 2010. 
 Q: Is the sovereign debt crisis that has rocked the euro area since last January over now? 
A: The concerns of investors and savers over sovereign debt are a global phenomenon and 
have  particularly  affected  industrialised  countries.  Indeed,  industrialised  countries  were  hit 
hard  by  the  financial  crisis  of  2008  and  2009  and,  for  the  most  part,  their  government 
financial  accounts  suffered  badly.  In  the  particular  case  of  Greece,  some  investors  were 
convinced that the Greek government would be unable to take the bold decisions that were 
absolutely  necessary,  and  that  neither  in  Europe  nor  within  the  international  community 
would there be the capacity to support its recovery plan. On a more general level, the ability 
of  the  Europeans  to  face  up  to  a  difficult  situation  seems  to  me  to  have  been  seriously 
underestimated initially. Consider that, at the time of speaking, we have a recovery plan for 
Greece  that  has  been  approved  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  by  the  European 
Commission,  in  liaison  with  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  and  by  the  European 
governments  of  the  Eurogroup.  Several  European  countries  have  adopted  ambitious 
recovery packages. All of them have committed to stepping up their fiscal consolidation. The 
euro area governments decided to support the Greek recovery plan to the tune of €80 billion. 
They  also  decided  to  set  up  a  financial  stabilisation  fund  (European  Financial  Stability 
Facility) for the euro area with guarantees amounting to €440 billion, and this on top of the 
above-mentioned €80 billion and the €60 billion which can also be mobilised at the European 
Union level. Just a few months or even weeks ago, investors deemed all of this impossible. 
They are progressively taking these decisions into account.  
Q: Was it the case, then, that the markets underestimated the political will of the European 
Union? 
A:  There  is  a  tendency  among  some  investors  and  market  participants  to  underestimate 
Europe’s  ability  to  take  bold  decisions.  In  their  defence,  I  would  simply  say  that  the 
institutional structure of Europe is very different to what they are used to, especially on the 
other side of the Atlantic. The decision-making processes are not the same. But it would be a 
mistake to underestimate Europe, in general, and the euro area, in particular.  
Q: The markets attacked Europe precisely where it is most vulnerable, in that it has a federal 
monetary policy without a single economic and fiscal policy. 
A:  This  is  not  how  I  would  describe  matters.  Since  the  severe  crisis  that  erupted  in  2007, 
which we countered by avoiding a recession that could have been as devastating as the one 
in 1929, all fiscal policies of the industrialised countries have been vulnerable, and not only 
those in the euro area. The scale of the recession has significantly weakened a number of 
budgets  that  were  already  in  difficulty.  I  do  not  see  what  happened  –  and  what  is  in  the 
process of being gradually resolved – as a targeted attack on the sovereign risks of the euro 
area, but rather as questioning the fiscal policy of industrialised countries. Some countries 
have  shown  themselves  to  be  more  vulnerable  than  others.  Certainly,  it  immediately  calls 
into  question  the  quality  of  the  surveillance  of  fiscal  policies  undertaken  by  the  other 
governments.  
Q: Wasn’t it the case that Europe responded too late to the sovereign debt crisis, given that 
all the elements of the crisis were in place as early as January 2009? 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
A: It was first necessary for the countries that were afflicted by a lack of market confidence to 
adopt a fiscal policy that would enable them to convince all market participants. That is what 
Greece failed to do in 2009. This made all the difference for a country like Ireland, which – 
despite the severity of its situation – drew up in advance and adopted a large-scale recovery 
programme  without  waiting  to  find  itself  in  extremely  difficult  circumstances  vis-à-vis 
investors.  What  is  more,  in  the  case  of  Greece,  there  was  the  unusual  and  very  grave 
problem  of  false  data.  That  is  why  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  and,  in  particular, 
Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  is  stressing  the  need  for  an 
independent body, preferably within the European Commission, that is able to lay down the 
law as far as statistics are concerned and establish a reliable fiscal assessment. This is a key 
point:  if  the  real  figures  had  been  known,  it  is  likely  that  things  would  have  turned  out 
differently.  
Q: Why did you wait until 10 May 2010 to intervene in the secondary market for sovereign 
debt by purchasing Greek bonds and those of other countries? If you had done so earlier, 
you would have tripped up the speculators.  
A: We acted because we saw a serious and unprecedented malfunctioning of the financial 
markets of certain euro area countries in the afternoon of 6 May and on Friday 7 May. At that 
moment in time and not before, we judged that we had a very serious problem with regard to 
the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  in  part  of  the  euro  area,  and  that  we  had  to 
contribute to re-establish a more normal functioning of the markets in question. Our aim was 
not  to  change  our  monetary  policy,  which  is  to  maintain  price  stability  for  our  330  million 
fellow European citizens. Inflation is a tax on the poor and most vulnerable. 
Q: So the ECB isn’t there to mop up the reckless spending of Member States? 
A:  The  central  bank  is  certainly  not  there  to  rectify  the  fiscal  mistakes  of  governments, 
mistakes it constantly warned them about.  
Q: Nevertheless, you have already purchased government bonds to the value of €59 billion. 
That is a huge figure!  
A:  Those  interventions  are  sterilised.  We  are  maintaining  our  monetary  policy  unchanged. 
We believe that the present monetary policy is appropriate in order to maintain price stability. 
In  order  to  avoid  changing  our  monetary  policy  by  increasing  liquidity,  we  are  completely 
re-absorbing the liquidity provided as a result of these interventions.  
Q: Isn’t the ECB becoming a sort of “bad bank” which allows commercial banks to get rid of 
their dubious sovereign bonds? 
A:  No,  the  sole  aim  of  our  interventions  is  to  help  us  to  improve  the  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy by contributing to the better functioning of certain bond markets.  
Q:  Isn’t  there  a  risk  that  the  next  stage  of  the  crisis  will  occur  in  the  private  debt  security 
market, as seen in Spain, where credit institutions are very vulnerable? 
A:  The  calling  into  question  of  certain  private  debt  instruments  was  the  source  of  the 
international crisis that we are experiencing. It is as a result of this “private” crisis that we 
have  been  faced  later  with  the  problem  of  sovereign  debt  risk.  All  industrialised  countries 
must  strengthen  the  soundness  and  credibility  of  all  public  policies,  and  in  particular  fiscal 
policy. It is also essential that the overall balance sheets of certain institutions continue to be 
adjusted. This is now happening through the “stress tests” which Europeans have fortunately 
decided to conduct, the results of which will be published, bank by bank. 
Q: Are there many skeletons still hiding in the closets of banks? 
A: The purpose of the stress test is to measure the resilience of banks in especially difficult 
circumstances. Transparency is very important. This is what we have also seen in the United 
States, where in the past there was a general absence of confidence, which was rectified by 
the publication of such stress tests.  
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
Q: Is greater fiscal integration necessary to avoid a repeat crisis of this nature? 
A:  We  must,  in  particular,  be  able  to  go  as  far  as  possible,  without  necessarily  changing 
immediately  the  Treaty,  notably  with  regard  to  very  early  surveillance,  almost  automatic 
sanctions, and the strengthening and extension of sanctions so that the euro area has the 
equivalent of what we would have if we were in a fiscal federation.  
Q: But wouldn’t a federal budget be the ideal solution?  
A: A federal solution would require a huge leap forward at the institutional level. It seems to 
me  that  a  fully  fledged  political  federation  is  not,  at  present,  wanted  by  the  countries 
themselves,  speaking  as  a  citizen,  it  is  a  matter  of  regret  to  me  that  the  chance  to  take 
further steps was not seized in the 1990s. In the meantime, responsibility for the economic 
union itself – as part of the economic and monetary union, the EMU – rests with the Member 
States themselves. They, of course, fulfil this responsibility within the framework of their own 
national institutions. That being said, the “peers”, namely the other governments, duly guided 
by the European Commission in liaison with the ECB, should not hesitate to meet all their 
own  responsibilities:  they  should  ensure  that  none  of  them  adopts  policies  that  could 
undermine the stability of the euro area as a whole. They have just seen for themselves the 
extent to which they share a common destiny. 
Q: Why not jointly manage some of the debt of European States? 
A: We have always been opposed to merging treasury operations, because this would strip 
States  of  their  responsibilities  and  they  would  lose  the  financial  incentive  for  sound 
governance.  
Q: Do the austerity plans announced amid monumental disarray by the Member States pose 
the risk of killing off the first green shoots of growth? 
A: It is an error to think that fiscal austerity is a threat to growth and job creation. At present, 
a  major  problem  is  the  lack  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  households,  firms,  savers  and 
investors  who  feel  that  fiscal  policies  are  not  sound  and  sustainable.  In  a  number  of 
economies,  it  is  this  lack  of  confidence  that  poses  a  threat  to  the  consolidation  of  the 
recovery. Economies embarking on austerity policies that lend credibility to their fiscal policy 
strengthen confidence, growth and job creation. 
Q:  Should  a  European  rating  agency  be  created,  since  the  Anglo-Saxon  agencies  have 
added fuel to the flames during this crisis? 
A: Rating agencies in general have had a pro-cyclical impact. They tend to amplify upward 
and downward swings in the financial markets. This is still obvious today. This runs counter 
to  financial  stability.  It  is  probably  advisable  to  put  an  end  to  a  global  oligopoly  of  three 
agencies. But the fundamental problem is to reduce, or eliminate, this amplifying effect that 
the rating agencies contribute to. 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 3
