Mario Draghi: The world economic recovery and Italy’s part in it 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  16th  Associazione  Italiana  Analisti  Finanziari  (AIAF)  –  Associazione 
Italiana  Operatori  Mercati  dei  Capitali  (ASSIOM)  –  ATIC  FOREX  Congress,  Naples, 
13 February 2010. 
 The recovery 
The strains in the international financial markets have eased considerably in the last twelve 
months:  the  banks  are  once  again  raising  funds  and,  in  several  cases,  they  have  made 
significant increases to their capital; asset writedowns have diminished. Nevertheless, in the 
last few weeks the markets have become more volatile. 
The world economic recovery is under way, although in a different manner in different areas. 
The  international  organizations  and  private  analysts  are  forecasting  that  this  year  China, 
India and Brazil will return to their high pre-crisis growth rates; not the advanced economies, 
whose growth is expected to remain modest, even in comparison with the initial upturns in 
previous recessions. The prices of oil and other raw materials have risen again. Despite this, 
inflation is still being held down by ample unused production capacity; in the next few months 
inflation in the euro area is expected to reach levels only slightly higher than in January, and 
it is likely to remain moderate in the medium term. 
The  return  to  growth  is  still  fragile,  particularly  in  the  euro  area.  Employment  is  slow  to 
recover. Credit conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises are still tight and hindering 
recovery. 
Last year in Italy GDP fell by almost 5 per cent. Recovery is expected to be slow, with great 
uncertainty  linked  in  particular  to  trends  in  the  international  business  cycle  and  to  labour 
market  conditions.  For  many  Italian  companies,  preexisting  structural  problems  have  been 
aggravated; others are able to take advantage of the crisis-induced changes in the market to 
increase their competitive edge. Domestic demand is still weak. 
At the end of last year, the number of people employed in Italy was down more than 600,000 
from  the  peak  of  July  2008.  The  share  of  the  potential  labour  force  that  is  currently 
experiencing  enforced  idleness  is  large  and  growing.  Until  the  fall  in  employment  ceases, 
there remains the risk of repercussions on consumption and hence on GDP. 
Policies 
During the crisis, extremely far-reaching economic policy measures were essential in many 
countries:  the  central  banks  cut  their  interest  rates  to  unprecedentedly  low  levels  and 
resorted  to  unconventional  expansionary  measures;  governments  used  their  budgets  to 
support  the  financial  system  and  sustain  demand  and  employment.  These  measures  will 
have to be gradually phased out. 
As  we  emphasized  at  the  last  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, the current level of official interest rates in the area is appropriate; no medium-term 
risk  of  inflation  has  emerged.  The  Eurosystem’s  operations  to  support  liquidity  and  banks’ 
lending  capacity  are  continuing.  Nevertheless,  the  unconventional  measures  that  are  no 
longer  necessary  thanks  to  improved  financial  market  conditions  are  being  gradually 
discontinued. In December, we announced that the main refinancing operations with twelve 
and six-month maturities would not be repeated beyond December and March, respectively. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 1
The  exit  from  the  current  set  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  should  not  be 
premature so as not to hinder recovery, but neither should it be tardy so as not to put price 
stability  at  risk  and  so  as  to  avoid  fuelling  market  distortions  and  speculative  bubbles  that 
would constitute the premises for new crises. At the beginning of March, we will take further 
decisions on the phasing out of the extraordinary operations, considering the prospects for 
price stability. The demand on the part of banks which may have difficulties raising funds can 
be satisfied without affecting monetary policy. 
As of now, it would appear necessary to normalize budget policies, at least by drawing up 
clear exit paths. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  estimates  that  since  2007  in  the  leading  advanced 
economies there has been a five-fold increase in the deficit, from 2 to 10 per cent of GDP. It 
also forecasts that budget deficits in the euro area will still be more than 3 per cent of GDP in 
2014. 
In  recent  weeks,  the  state  of  the  public  finances  in  Greece  has  alarmed  the  international 
financial markets. If the Greek government adjusts its budget with determination, with careful 
monitoring  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB,  the  markets  will  subscribe  new 
securities  as  old  issues  fall  due,  as  happened  in  Italy  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  It  is 
nevertheless important that the euro-area countries have expressed their intention, should it 
prove necessary, to take decisive and coordinated action to ensure financial stability within 
the area. 
The public finances in many countries will be increasingly burdened in the coming years by 
costs  associated  with  population  ageing  and  climate  change.  A  prompt  and  credible 
indication of the ways to correct the trend of the public debt is needed, among other things to 
reduce  volatility  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  issue  costs  of  government  securities. 
Increases  in  long-term  interest  rates  would  impact  on  the  real  economy,  with  possible 
repercussions on banks’ balance sheets, casting doubt on the strengthening of the financial 
system. 
Rules and controls on finance 
The  purpose  of  the  package  of  regulatory  proposals  recently  announced  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision is to strengthen banks’ stability and contain liquidity risk. 
Banks’  capital  bases  will  have  to  consist  of  high-quality  instruments,  genuinely  capable  of 
absorbing  losses;  leverage  will  be  curtailed;  the  procyclical  aspects  of  regulation  will  be 
attenuated through the build-up of capital buffers and provisioning in periods of strong growth 
for use when losses materialize. 
In the early part of this year, the Committee will conduct a detailed impact assessment, in 
order  to  appraise  alternative  proposals,  calibrate  the  new  rules  and  set  the  new,  higher 
capital  requirements  for  banks.  It  will  be  important  to  verify  the  overall  consistency  of  the 
framework, imposing stricter prudential requirements on those banks that operated with the 
particularly risky business models that were at the root of the crisis. 
The G20 leaders decided that the new rules do not have to take effect immediately, but only 
at the end of 2012, and in any event under the proviso that they not impair the stability of the 
markets and the resumption of an adequate flow of funds to the economy. They called on the 
Financial Stability Board to examine the macroeconomic implications of the reform, and to 
ensure  the  requisite  gradualness  of  its  implementation,  with  appropriate  transitional  and 
grandfathering clauses governing the instruments already issued. 
The  crisis  demonstrated  the  devastating  repercussions  of  the  failures  of  major  financial 
institutions. Governments and central banks intervened to mitigate its impact; in so doing, at 
times they supported and protected the very institutions that had triggered the crisis in the 
first  place.  Moral  hazard  was  compounded  by  the  crisis:  financial  institutions  have  felt 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2010
sheltered from the risk of failure and the fear this inspires, they have been taking new risks 
and,  thanks  to  the  extraordinary  market  conditions  that  have  been  created,  are  reaping 
enormous  profits.  Reducing  moral  hazard  is  a  shared  objective.  This  is  to  be  done  by 
lessening  the  likelihood  of  failures  and  circumscribing  the  attendant  damage;  creating 
mechanisms for their orderly management; and centralizing the channels that transmit their 
effects,  such  as  derivative  instruments,  which  nowadays  are  traded  outside  regulated 
markets and bilaterally. 
Criteria  must  be  devised  to  determine  the  systemic  importance  of  an  institution.  This  will 
have  to  be  done  without  compiling  lists  of  intermediaries,  which  would  create  an  unjust 
segmentation of the banking system and could have adverse effects on risk-taking. 
The  following  measures  are  being  considered:  more  stringent  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements, which will have to take account of the proposals already set out by the Basel 
Committee; the intensification of supervision; and robust and harmonized crisis management 
procedures. 
Other  proposals  aim  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  cross-border  groups.  One,  in  particular, 
would  make  it  obligatory  to  operate  in  each  foreign  jurisdiction  via  a  subsidiary,  i.e.  a 
company  enjoying  substantial  autonomy  in  its  funding,  liquidity  and  operations.  The 
segmentation of computer systems and procedures within a group may impede consolidated 
supervision;  the  groups’  international  integration  and  the  overall  development  of  financial 
markets could be adversely affected. In any event, it is important that banks’ organization be 
simple, so that supervisory authorities can make a full assessment of the systemic risks in 
the event of a failure; in addition, it is more likely that we will move towards the subsidiary 
model  if  it  proves  impossible  to  attain  minimum  harmonization  of  the  procedures  for  the 
resolution and winding up of major banks. 
The Financial Stability Board, which will present a report to the G20 summit in November, 
also envisages that banks will draw up emergency plans for refinancing, curbing risks, and in 
cases of evident insolvency, liquidating their assets in the most orderly fashion possible. 
Also  under  discussion  is  the  desirability  of  separating  traditional  banking  business  from 
investment banking, with a view to limiting risk-taking by banks. 
As can be seen, there are various measures being discussed to address systemic risk, but 
they are all part of the process of international cooperation. Indeed, many are similar to those 
set out in the Basel Committee’s plan, where the higher risk of investment banking compared 
with  traditional  banking  is  dealt  with  through  higher  capital  requirements.  In  this  area  it  is 
unlikely, however, that countries with different banking structures, each affected by the crisis 
in its own way, will adopt the same measures; international cooperation will probably achieve 
minimum harmonization, while the capital and liquidity regulations provided for by the Basel 
reform aim at achieving maximum harmonization. 
In the new design of the structures of European supervision, the Commission’s project aims 
at harmonizing national authorities’ crisis powers and instruments through the introduction of 
special provisions for cross-border groups. We believe that Italy has complete and effective 
legislation in this field, together with valid practices and experience, all of which will need to 
be turned to account in the negotiations with the Community institutions. 
Europe  has  shown  that  it  wants  to  increase  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  while 
preserving a high degree of integration of the markets in the area. 
The  analyses  of  the  different  authorities  will  need  to  be  supplemented  to  arrive  at  truly 
uniform risk evaluations in the supervisory colleges of banking groups. Within the colleges for 
which we are responsible, we have vigorously promoted this integration. 
The objective of reconstructing a world financial system with more capital, less debt and the 
ability  to  withstand  the  collapse  of  large  financial  institutions  without  public  aid  is  now 
unanimously shared. Agreement on a gradual transition towards this objective is also close. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 3
It is important that the international banking community participate in this process and fully 
appreciate the determination with which it is being pursued. That the new rules threaten the 
recovery by causing a contraction in credit is a claim that is easily refuted: the new system 
will be introduced gradually, and credit stopped expanding some time ago without the new 
rules even being known. Moreover, to believe that regulatory arbitrage will make it possible 
to  elude  the  new  rules  underestimates  the  broad  consensus  on  their  introduction.  It  is 
possible that the combination of the various measures under discussion will result in a fall in 
banks’ profits, but it will also reduce the risks they run. It will be advisable to respond to the 
former with appropriate and far-reaching reorganizations and not to oppose the latter with the 
assumption of new risks. 
Italian banks 
Thanks to the interventions of the last few months, Italian banks are bolstering their liquidity 
and capital, an essential condition for tackling the significant deterioration in loan quality and 
profitability. 
Banks’ liquidity continues to improve, thanks in part to the partial reopening of the wholesale 
markets  for  funds.  In  January  euro-area  banks  issued  about  €60  billion  of  bonds  on  the 
Euromarket, compared with an average of about €30 billion a month in the second half of 
2009. 
Italian banks are well placed to cope with the international environment, which is being made 
more  complex  by  the  phasing  out  of  support  measures  by  monetary  authorities  and 
governments. Their capital bases have been strengthened by share issues, disposals of non-
strategic  assets,  the  ploughing  back  of  a  large  part  of  profits  and,  in  some  cases,  public 
interventions. Between the end of 2008 and September 2009 the average core tier 1 ratio of 
the five largest banking groups rose from 5.8 to 7.3 per cent. The capital strengthening is 
continuing:  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  increase  banks’  ability  to  hold  up  under  adverse 
macroeconomic scenarios. The market’s evaluation of the riskiness of banks has improved. 
The  regulatory  changes  currently  released  by  the  Basel  Committee  for  consultation  will 
require  Italian  banks  to  make  significant  adjustments.  They  nonetheless  start  out  from  a 
better situation than other banking systems in terms of capital quality, having issued mostly 
high-quality capital instruments. 
The biggest impact could come from the proposal to deduct deferred tax assets from capital. 
For Italian banks such assets are considerable, owing to the restrictions in Italy on the tax 
deductibility  of  loan  losses,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  soon  be  revised.  On  this  front  the 
impact assessment will make it possible to evaluate alternative options, such as deducting 
only  part  of  these  assets,  so  as  to  attenuate  the  competitive  distortions  created  by  the 
differences in national tax treatments. 
Italian banks, which tend to engage to a greater extent in traditional forms of intermediation, 
have a low leverage by international standards. Measured by the ratio of total assets to tier 1 
capital it was 24 for the largest groups in June 2009, as against 34 for the leading banks of 
the other European countries. The introduction of a prudential leverage ratio should therefore 
not have significant consequences. The same can be said of a tightening of the prudential 
requirements  for  trading  books  in  view  of  the  smaller  share  of  innovative  financial 
transactions and structured credit products in Italian banks’ balance sheets. 
The profitability of Italian banks has declined markedly, in parallel with the deterioration in the 
quality of their loans. In the first nine months of last year the net profits of the largest banking 
groups  were  down  by  50  per  cent  compared  with  the  same  period  of  2008  as  a  result  of 
larger  loan  loss  provisions.  On  an  annual  basis  the  return  on  equity  fell  from  9  to  4.2  per 
cent. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2010
In  the  third  quarter  of  2009  the  ratio  of  new  bad  debts  to  outstanding  loans  to  firms  was 
above  3  per  cent,  its  highest  value  in  ten  years.  According  to  preliminary  estimates,  the 
deterioration in loan quality continued in the last part of the year, probably depressing banks’ 
results for the fourth quarter. The increase in substandard loans and past due instalments 
points to a further deterioration in the months to come. 
The priority use of the profits earned must be to strengthen banks’ capital bases. 
Credit 
In December the total stock of outstanding bank loans was 0.7 per cent lower than a year 
earlier. Lending to non-bank customers in the Centre and North was down by 1.3 per cent, 
while lending in the South recorded further growth of 2.7 per cent. 
The  contraction  in  credit  regards  businesses,  not  households.  In  December  the  stock  of 
loans to firms was 3 per cent smaller than in December 2008. On the one hand, demand for 
loans  had  fallen  owing  to  the  steep  drop  in  investment;  on  the  other,  banks  had  become 
more cautious in supplying financing during a phase of deep recession. 
By  contrast,  lending  to  households  has  continued  to  grow  at  a  twelvemonth  rate  of  about 
3 per  cent.  The  expansion  is  concentrated  in  home  mortgages,  mostly  variable-rate.  The 
contracting parties must be warned of the risk they run in the event of rate increases. 
According to the latest surveys of banks, there is a moderate recovery in loan demand on the 
part of firms. Those engaged in technological upgrading and internationalization merit greater 
attention. The Government took various measures in the course of 2009 to strengthen the 
support provided by banks to small and medium-sized enterprises. Collective loan guarantee 
consortia will continue to play an important role in improving the conditions of access to loans 
and preserving the quality of bank credit. 
The statistical models employed by banks to rate borrowers are now using companies’ 2008 
financial statement data; in the spring they will begin to process the data for 2009, which, if 
the recovery continues, could provide an outdated picture of the situation. It is necessary to 
supplement financial statement data with information gathered locally, review credit facilities 
in a more timely manner, refine screening procedures and establish balanced incentives for 
those who manage relations with customers. 
The Italian financial market 
Unlike bank lending, the bond market showed signs of recovery in 2009. Net issues by non-
financial companies rose to exceed pre-crisis volumes. All the main industrial groups made 
bond issues. In the stock market, instead, both the number of listed companies and the ratio 
of market capitalization to GDP are down. The market capitalization ratio in Italy is one of the 
lowest among the advanced countries. 
Fund-raising by Italian mutual funds was negative again in 2009, albeit with signs of recovery 
in  the  final  part  of  the  year,  confirming  the  structural  nature  of  the  crisis  of  the  asset 
management  industry.  At  the  end  of  the  year  foreign  funds  had  more  assets  under 
management than Italian funds. 
In  order  to  enhance  the  autonomy  and  independence  of  asset  management  companies 
belonging  to  banking  groups,  in  October  we  issued  rules  on  the  exercise  of  the  parent 
company’s powers of direction and coordination. Groups must comply with them by June. 
To revive the sector, it is also necessary to intervene on the transparency and correctness of 
dealings with customers. The differences of tax treatment that penalize asset management 
products vis-à-vis competing instruments must be eliminated. Lastly, the asset management 
industry’s strategies and organizational arrangements need to be reviewed. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 5
As  a  consequence  of  the  crisis  a  trend  is  taking  hold,  with  strong  encouragement  from 
central banks and the Financial Stability Board, to shift over-the-counter trading to organized 
markets, to use central counterparties that can minimize the risks for individual participants 
and to centralize the data on contracts in so-called trade repositories. We hope the work by 
the  European  Commission  to  define  a  harmonized  legislative  framework  will  soon  help  to 
increase the transparency, liquidity and stability of the derivatives market, above all that in 
credit default swaps, which is most susceptible to speculative manoeuvres. 
Italy’s  market  infrastructures  are  at  a  decisive  juncture.  There  is  growing  competition 
between  organized  markets  and  in  post-trading.  At  European  level  the  centralization  of 
settlement  is  a  tangible  prospect  and  the  development  of  a  market  patterned  on  our 
Collateralized Interbank Market is becoming a possibility. 
Italy has everything necessary to respond to these challenges. It has trading platforms for 
financial instruments and post-trading infrastructures that are at the cutting edge in Europe 
and  integrated  with  the  international  markets.  Wholesale  trading  in  government  securities 
takes place on a transparent and broad regulated market that held up well under the crisis 
and  has  recovered  in  the  last  few  months.  By  international  standards,  the  post-trading 
structures are among the least costly. 
Italian banks have significant ownership interests in the main systemic infrastructures; if they 
recognize their value, they can draw great benefits from them. 
Bank-customer relations 
The Bank of Italy has completed a broad survey – with more than 500 banks accounting for 
some 80 per cent of the current accounts supplied to customers – of the types and amounts 
of the fees applied to credit facilities and overdrafts. 
The results, transmitted to the Ministry for the Economy and Finance, to which the decrees 
assigned supervisory tasks regarding bank fees, were made available today on the Bank’s 
website.1 They show a marked differentiation among the intermediaries: although there has 
been an overall reduction, in a third of the cases the charge has increased. 
The variety of new fees makes it difficult for customers to compare the different offers. The 
fee structure needs to be drastically simplified. New legislation to resolve the ambiguities of 
its  predecessor  would  appear  necessary.  Within  days  we  will  submit  to  the  Government  a 
comprehensive  regulatory  proposal  that  can  lead  to  clearly  stated  charges,  so  that  all 
customers  can  compare  different  banks  and  competition  can  operate  freely,  without  the 
impediment of opacity. 
For a month, new rules on transparency in banking and financial services and on the “basic 
current account” have been in effect. 
A  major  contribution  to  improving  relations  between  intermediaries  and  customers  comes 
from the institution of the Banking and Financial Arbiter, which has been in operation since 
15 October. Customer appeals have come in steadily, and the panels have already handed 
down  their  first  decisions.  In  a  number  of  cases  disputes  were  settled  in  the  customer’s 
favour even before the Arbiter’s ruling. The initial signs are therefore very encouraging. The 
overall  outcomes  of  customer  complaints  will  be  made  public  in  April,  providing  useful 
information for supervisory action. 
                                                 
1   http://www.bancaditalia.it/vigilanza/banche/questio/comm_banche.pdf (only in Italian). 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2010
Supervisory action 
The action of the Bank of Italy in supervising banks and financial intermediaries is governed 
by a consistent logic. On-site inspections, off-site controls, measures on capital and liquidity, 
provisions  on  banks’  by-laws  and  managers’  compensation,  and  rules  and  controls  for 
transparency and correctness in dealings with customers are all shaped by the assessment 
of the risks to which intermediaries are subject. 
Following  the  coordinated  exercises  conducted  last  year  by  the  European  supervisory 
authorities, a new round of stress testing of the major EU banks has begun in recent weeks. 
The  results  will  be  released  by  the  end  of  June.  Stress  tests  are  by  now  an  ordinary 
supervisory tool; the Bank of Italy, with the active participation of the banks, has promoted 
the corrective actions needed to refine and reinforce them. 
In 2009 we intervened repeatedly to remind banks of the need for full compliance with the 
rules on corporate organization and governance. 
For  the  cooperative  banks,  the  aim  has  been  to  strike  a  balance  between  ensuring  the 
stability of the governance structures approved by membership meetings and avoiding the 
risk  of  overly  self-referential  management.  To  this  end  we  have  recommended  the 
amendment of by-laws to guarantee sufficient representation of minorities within the banks’ 
governing bodies and to facilitate membership participation at meetings through such means 
as increasing the number of proxies and allowing distance voting. Additional progress along 
these  lines  is  all  the  more  necessary  when  cooperative  institutions  move  away  from  their 
original localist character to become systemically important intermediaries listed on regulated 
markets with complex business and group structures. 
The guidelines issued by the Financial Stability Board envisage two basic principles for bank 
managers’  compensation:  that  it  must  be  tied  to  the  risks  taken;  and  that  it  must  not 
jeopardize the preservation of the bank’s capital. 
We  asked  the  six  largest  banking  groups  to  verify  that  their  compensation  and  incentive 
schemes are also consistent with the Financial Stability Board’s standards. The main open 
questions  concern  the  proportion  between  the  fixed  and  the  variable  parts  of  top 
management’s  compensation,  the  introduction  of  medium  and  long-term  incentives  and 
methods  for  deferring  the  variable  pay  component,  and  the  refinement  of  risk-adjusted 
performance parameters. 
The  reports  to  the  banks’  next  shareholders’  meeting  must  give  thorough  information  and 
precise  data  on  their  effective  adaptation  of  contracts  and  incentive  schemes  to  the 
regulations. 
A bank’s reputation also depends on how it prevents and combats money laundering. 
The new rules in effect since the start of the year on the single database to counter money 
laundering increase the traceability of transactions. 
Controls  have  been  redoubled  by  means  of  new  assessment  procedures  and  dedicated 
analytical and inspection processes. Checks at individual branches, concentrated in the parts 
of the country considered to be at the greatest risk of infiltration by organized crime, are now 
being carried out in the inland areas of Campania, the Milanese hinterland and the province 
of Palermo. 
Capital  repatriations  under  the  foreign  assets  disclosure  scheme  (“tax  shield”)  need  to  be 
closely scrutinized by intermediaries in order to detect and report transactions that may be 
suspected of money laundering. 
So  far,  scarcely  fifty  reports  of  possible  crimes  in  connection  with  transactions  under  the 
disclosure scheme have been received. This low number is explained only in part by the fact 
that the law abrogates the reporting requirement for a number of types of crime. The banks 
need to step up their commitment to careful scrutiny of the repatriation transactions. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 7
It is important to dispel all doubts over the way in which the anti-money-laundering rules are 
to  be  applied  to  these  transactions.  Italy’s  foreign  assets  disclosure  scheme  will  soon  be 
examined by the Financial Action Task Force. 
 Little more than a year ago Italy was beginning to feel the full effects of a crisis that, following 
the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  had  become  global.  It  went  into  the  recession  with  a  low 
growth rate, one of the lowest in Europe. 
On the financial front our economy withstood the impact of the crisis better than many others: 
the soundness and prudence of the banks meant that support measures of the magnitude 
that weighed so heavily on the budgets of other countries were not necessary in Italy. But the 
loss  of  output  and  income  has  been  enormous.  The  social  protection  network,  though  not 
systematically  reformed,  has  rightly  been  extended  to  cope  with  unemployment,  social 
hardship and neglect. 
We are now emerging from the recession with a low growth rate, one of the lowest in Europe. 
Rapid economic growth is the basis of well-being; for a country like Italy, with a large public 
debt, it is a prerequisite for financial stability. For the young, it means a future; for the old, 
decent living standards; our South would benefit from it and could be its engine. 
A precondition of rapid growth is structural reform, the lack of which has marked the loss of 
competitiveness that has been under way for fifteen years now. 
This is not a strictly Italian problem, it is common to the other countries of Europe. It lies at 
the origin of today’s fragility. European integration has brought price stability and, until the 
crisis,  the  effective  control  of  public  deficits.  Ten  years  ago,  at  the  launch  of  the  single 
currency,  there  were  calls  for  it  to  be  accompanied  by  stronger  economic  management  at 
European  Union  level;  these  voices  were  drowned  out  by  the  chorus  of  enthusiasts  who 
celebrated the achievement together with the commitment to resist all further integration. 
The  euro  is  sound.  Clearly,  a  crisis  that  generates  world  financial  instability  will  have  an 
impact on the economies of the area that varies with the structures upon which they rest. It is 
essential that within the Union there form the common will to extend to economic structures 
and to the reforms they require the same careful verification and the same vigorous pursuit 
that have been devoted over the years to government budgets. 
8 
 BIS Review 20/2010
