Pierre Duguay: The Bank of Canada’s perspective on the penny 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pierre  Duguay,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Senate 
Committee on National Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 26 May 2010. 
 Good evening Mr. Chairman, honourable Senators.  
I’m  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  tonight  to  provide  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s perspective on the penny. First, let me take a moment to explain the Bank’s role 
regarding Canada’s currency. We are responsible for supplying Canadians with bank notes 
that  they  can  use  with  confidence.  At  year-end  2009,  there  were  1.8  billion  bank  notes  in 
circulation, with a total value of $55.5 billion – approximately $1,630 per Canadian. The Bank 
of  Canada  is  not  responsible  for  coins.  Decisions  on  coinage  rest  with  the  federal 
government,  in  particular,  the  Department  of  Finance,  and  with  the  Royal  Canadian  Mint. 
However, coins are an essential adjunct of bank notes to complete cash transactions. So, the 
Bank does have an interest in coins, and we welcome your review of the case for keeping or 
eliminating the penny. 
I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  cash  remains  very  important  to  Canadians,  despite  the 
popularity of alternative payment options. Surveys by the Bank of Canada have found that 
almost  three-quarters  of  Canadians  pay  with  cash  at  least  once  a  week,  compared  with 
64 per cent for debit cards and 36 per cent for credit cards.1 These surveys show that cash is 
the  preferred  method  of  payment  for  purchases  under  $25.  (Debit  cards  are  preferred  for 
purchases  in  the  $25  to  $100  range,  and  credit  cards  are  preferred  for  purchases  greater 
than $100.) 
The  Bank’s  interest  in  coins  can  also  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  our  responsibility  for 
monetary policy, which is anchored in our commitment to achieve our 2 per cent target for 
inflation.  Experience  has  shown  that  the  best  way  for  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to 
economic  performance  is  by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  Therefore,  the 
Bank views the possible elimination of the penny in terms of the potential impact on inflation, 
and has conducted some preliminary research on this issue. The findings, which have been 
made available to other researchers, show that any impact on inflation would be insignificant 
and more likely non-existent. 
A  common  concern  is  that  retailers,  who  often  post  prices  ending  in  9  cents,  may  round 
prices  up  to  an  even  number,  absent  the  penny,  and  that  this  would  be  inflationary.  This 
concern is unwarranted for a number of reasons. First, even if the elimination of the penny 
did result in a rounding up of prices to the nearest multiple of 5 cents, which is unlikely, that 
would be a one-time price increase and not a change in trend inflation. 
Second, this one-time price increase of one or two cents would be so small, relative to the 
prices  of  the  items  that  make  up  the  basket  of  goods  and  services  priced  by  the  total 
consumer price index (CPI) that it would not register on that index since the CPI is rounded 
to the nearest 0.1 per cent. 
Third, it is very unlikely that prices would be rounded up, since such rounding would not carry 
through  to  the  cash  register  after  sales  taxes  are  applied,  and  retailers  would  lose  the 
perceived  marketing  benefit  of  posting  a  price  that  ends  in  9  cents.  In  the  absence  of  a 
penny, rounding would only need come into play in cash transactions and would apply to the 
total  bill  after  tax,  and  not  to  each  individual  item  purchased.  If  applied  symmetrically, 
                                                 
1  Varya Taylor. “Trends in Retail Payments and Insights from Public Survey Results.” Bank of Canada Review. 
(Spring 2006): 25-36. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 1
rounding down of cash purchases ending in 1,2, 6, and 7 cents would offset the rounding up 
of those ending in 3,4 8, and 9 cents. 
In New Zealand, for example, the choice of rounding up or down on cash transactions was 
left to retailers after the country eliminated its one- and two-cent coins in 1989. Many larger 
retailers opted to round down; a few small retailers opted to round up. Ultimately, there was 
no noticeable effect on inflation in New Zealand. 
Indeed, that has been the international experience that we have seen. In both Australia and 
New  Zealand,  the  elimination  of  small  coins  (one-cent  and  two-cent  coins)  has  had  no 
noticeable effect on inflation. 
Inflation, however, does have an influence on the value of the penny. Since the coin was first 
produced  by  the  Royal  Canadian  Mint  in  1908,  the  penny  has  lost  95  per  cent  of  its 
purchasing  power.  In  other  words,  the  penny  then  had  the  same  purchasing  power  as 
20 cents would today. Indeed, in 1908, you could buy your daily newspaper for two cents, 
and a loaf of bread cost five cents. 
On that, I thank you for your invitation to appear here tonight, and welcome the opportunity to 
answer your questions related to the future of the penny. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2010
