Amando M Tetangco: State of the Philippine economy and inauguration 
of a new regional branch 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas,  on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  the  BSP  Pampanga  regional  branch, 
San Fernando, 17 June 2010. 
 Her  Excellency  Gloria  Macapagal  Arroyo,  Secretary  Gary  Teves,  fellow  workers  in 
government,  leaders  of  the  business  community,  members  of  the  banking  community, 
special guests, mga kabalen, good afternoon. 
On behalf of the members of the Monetary Board we welcome all of you to this new home of 
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in the City of San Fernando. 
We  are  happy  and  honored  that  you  have  accepted  our  invitation  to  join  the  inaugural 
ceremonies of this new landmark in Pampanga. 
Indeed, we should celebrate what the transfer of our Pampanga office represents – that the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas needed bigger offices to support sustained growth of economic 
transactions  here  in  Pampanga  and  in  nearby  provinces  such  as  Zambales,  Tarlac,  and 
Bulacan. 
In fact, of the 21 regional offices and branches of the Bangko Sentral, our Pampanga branch 
is the second largest in terms of deposits, next only to Cebu. 
In addition, Region III or Central Luzon ranks the third largest in terms of net loan portfolio, 
after the National Capital Region and Central Visayas. 
This is concrete proof of the gains this region has made over the years, having overcome the 
setbacks  wrought  by  the  eruption  of  Mt.  Pinatubo.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  celebrate 
this success with a round of applause! 
It  is  not  surprising  therefore  that  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  recent  surveys  indicated  that  the 
business  sector  and  the  consumers  in  Region  III  are  optimistic  that  even  higher  levels  of 
growth and prosperity will continue to be achieved. 
And while the Bangko Sentral has moved to San Fernando, we remain grateful to Angeles 
City for supporting us in the last 23 years that we held office at the historic Pamintuan House 
where the first anniversary of the Philippine Republic was held and which served briefly as 
presidential residence of Emilio Aguinildo, the first Philippine President. 
For this reason, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has included the Pamintuan House in the list 
of real estate properties that will be turned over to the Department of Finance as property 
dividends. The Department of Finance in turn will transfer responsibility over the property to 
the National Historical Commission which will convert this into a museum. 
In this manner, we ensure that ownership of Pamintuan House remains with government and 
Angeles City will be assured that this historic landmark in its midst will be preserved for the 
next generations as witness to the history and heroism of our people. 
Ladies and gentlemen. I am also pleased to report that our country, as a whole, is also doing 
relatively well. While the world economy remain in distress following the worst global financial 
crisis  in  decades,  the  Philippine  economy  continued  to  move  forward,  culminating  in  the 
7.3% GDP in the first quarter this year. 
The  resiliency  of  our  economy  was  not  lost  to  global  analysts  and  investors.  One  of  the 
world’s  biggest  investment  banks  said  the  Philippines  surpassed  expectations,  displaying 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
reinforced 
financial  education  on 
lowering  remittance  charges  and  conducting 
remarkable  resilience  and  an  impressive  rebound.  The  pursuit  of  sustained  economic 
reforms under the Administration of President Arroyo made this possible. 
At the same time, the Bangko Sentral as an independent institution responsible for in inflation 
management  and  banking  supervision 
the  Philippines’  macroeconomic 
achievements. 
Average annual inflation was kept at single digits dropping to 2.8 percent in 2007, the lowest 
annual average in 21 years. This year, the average inflation for the year is at 4.3 percent, 
well  within  the  government’s  target  of  3.5  to  5.5  percent  for  2010.  The  centrality  of  price 
stability,  particularly  in  creating  an  environment  conducive  to  informed  consumption  and 
investment decisions cannot be overemphasized. 
At  the  same  time,  our  external  position  remains  strong.  Our  balance  of  payments  is  in 
surplus  in  spite  of  a  difficult  environment  while  the  country’s  Gross  International  Reserves 
(GIR) is at a record high level of $48 billion and could cover more than 9 months of imports of 
goods, three times the standard of three months. 
Our  healthy  external  position  is  due  in  part  to  the  continued  surge  of  Overseas  Filipino 
remittances to historic high levels. In support of our OFs, Bangko Sentral has been working 
on 
investment 
opportunities and investor protection programs. 
Another  important  mandate  of  the  BSP  is  maintaining  financial  stability,  which  proved  its 
significance in the recent global economic turmoil. The financial reforms we have consistently 
pursued  have  enabled  the  Philippine  financial  system  to  remain  resilient  amidst  the  global 
financial storm. In fact, the country’s financial system has substantially improved as indicated 
by the uptrend in total assets, the rise in bank capital ratios, improvement in bank profitability 
and better non-performing loan ratios. The promotion of good governance practices, steady 
capitalization  build-up,  and  continuing  reforms  generated  positive  results  for  the  banking 
sector. 
We  are  also  pleased  to  report  that  we  continue  to  make  good  progress  in  integrating  our 
countrymen into the net of the formal financial system through a program to provide financial 
services to the underserved as well as the unserved and unbanked. 
In  particular,  we  have  made  inroads  in  improving  lives  through  microfinance  with  an 
impressive rise in the number of clients served, in loans granted and in savings generated. In 
fact, the country has been recognized as one of the best in the world of microfinance by the 
Economist Intelligence Unit. The Philippines is also in a leadership position for mobile money 
transfers. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  road  ahead  will  be  easy.  However,  we  have  learned  that 
cooperating  and  working  together  can  do  wonders  in  terms  of  keeping  our  economy  on 
sound and stable footing in the years ahead to improve the lives of Filipinos. 
This,  we  shall  continue  to  do  as  we  pursue  our  mandate  to  ensure  stable  prices  through 
monetary  policies;  a  sound  and  stable  banking  system  through  appropriate  policies  and 
programs;  as  well  as  a  safe  and  reliable  payments  system  that  inspires  confidence  in  our 
financial system. . 
These topics will be discussed in greater detail in the Restrospective Forum that will follow 
later. 
Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of my fellow central bankers, I thank you 
for  joining  us  today  on  the  inauguration  of  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  new  branch  office  in 
Pampanga. 
Mabuhay! 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
