European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
4 February 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  today.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on 14 January 2010, price developments are expected to remain subdued over the policy-
relevant horizon. The latest information has also confirmed that euro area economic activity 
continued  to  expand  around  the  turn  of  the  year.  Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council 
expects the euro area economy to grow at a moderate pace in 2010. The recovery process is 
likely  to  be  uneven  and  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  uncertainty.  The  outcome  of  the 
monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium 
term.  All  in  all,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. Medium to longer-term inflation 
expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
The latest information confirms that economic activity in the euro area continued to expand 
around the turn of the year. The euro area has been benefiting from a turn in the inventory 
cycle  and  a  recovery  in  exports,  as  well  as  from  the  significant  macroeconomic  stimulus 
under  way  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. 
However, these stimuli will unwind over time, while activity is likely to be adversely affected 
by  the  ongoing  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  in  the  financial  and  non-financial 
sectors, both inside and outside the euro area. In addition, low capacity utilisation rates are 
likely  to  dampen  investment,  and  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  increase 
somewhat further, thereby lowering consumption growth. For these reasons, the euro area 
economy  is  expected  to  grow  only  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010  and  the  recovery  process 
could be uneven. 
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced. On 
the upside, confidence may improve more than expected, and both the global economy and 
foreign trade may recover more strongly than projected. Furthermore, there may be stronger 
than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive  macroeconomic  stimulus  being 
provided and from other policy measures taken. On the downside, concerns remain relating 
to  a  stronger  or  more  protracted  than  expected  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real 
economy and the financial sector, renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, the 
intensification of protectionist pressures and the possibility of a disorderly correction of global 
imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  further  in 
January  2010  to  stand  at  1.0%,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  after  0.9%  in 
December  2009.  Inflation  is  expected  to  be  around  1%  in  the  near  term  and  to  remain 
moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. In line with a slow recovery in demand in the euro 
area  and  elsewhere,  overall  price,  cost  and  wage  developments  are  expected  to  stay 
subdued.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  inflation  expectations  over  the 
medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 1
Risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  They  relate,  in  particular,  to  the  further 
development  of  economic  activity  and  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  stronger  than  currently 
expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  remained  negative  in 
December 2009, standing at –0.2%. In the same period, annual growth in loans to the private 
sector was zero. These data continue to support our assessment of a moderate underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion  and  low  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term.  Actual 
monetary  developments  are  likely  to  be  weaker  than  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion, owing to the downward impact of the rather steep yield curve. Looking ahead, M3 
and credit growth is likely to remain weak for some time to come.  
The  prevailing  interest  rate  constellation  continues  to  have  a  strong  influence  on  both  the 
level and composition of annual M3 growth. On the one hand, the low rates of remuneration 
on short-term bank deposits foster the allocation of funds away from M3 and into longer-term 
deposits and securities. On the other hand, the narrow spreads between the interest rates 
paid on different short-term deposits imply a low opportunity cost of holding funds in the most 
liquid components included in M1, which continued to grow at a robust annual rate of more 
than 12% in December. 
The zero annual growth rate of bank loans to the private sector reflects a further increase in 
the  growth  in  loans  to  households,  while  the  annual  growth  in  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations  moved  further  into  negative  territory.  Such  divergence  remains  in  line  with 
business cycle regularities. The ongoing contraction in the outstanding amounts of loans to 
non-financial corporations continues to be accounted for entirely by a strong net redemption 
of loans with a short maturity. For the sector as a whole, the overall contraction may be due 
partly to substitution with market-based financing.  
Given the typical lags between turning points in economic activity and those in the demand 
for bank loans, growth in loans can be expected to remain weak over the months to come. In 
the meantime, the real cost of external financing for non-financial enterprises has declined 
further,  while  the  net  tightening  of  credit  standards  applied  by  banks  has  continued  to 
diminish, as indicated by the Bank Lending Survey for the last quarter of 2009. At the same 
time, banks have continued to reduce the size of their overall balance sheets over the past 
few months. In this respect, the challenge remains for banks to adjust the size and structure 
of their balance sheets while ensuring the availability of credit to the non-financial sector. To 
address this challenge, banks should use the improved funding conditions to strengthen their 
capital  bases  further  and,  where  necessary,  take  full  advantage  of  government  support 
measures for recapitalisation. This is important to facilitate access to finance, especially for 
those enterprises that do not have recourse to market-based financing.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the 
information and analyses that have become available since our meeting on 14 January 2010, 
price  developments  are  expected  to  remain  subdued  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  The 
latest information has also confirmed that euro area economic activity continued to expand 
around  the  turn  of  the  year.  Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council  expects  the  euro  area 
economy to grow at a moderate pace in 2010. The recovery process is likely to be uneven 
and  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  uncertainty.  A  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the 
economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium  term.  All  in  all,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be 
maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area 
households. Medium to longer-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with 
the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term.  
We  will  continue  our  enhanced  credit  support  to  the  banking  system,  while  taking  into 
account  the  ongoing  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions  and  avoiding  distortions 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 2
associated with maintaining non-standard measures for too long. The Governing Council will, 
in early March, take decisions on the continued implementation of the gradual phasing-out of 
the extraordinary liquidity measures that are not needed to the same extent as in the past. In 
order to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term, the 
liquidity provided will be absorbed when necessary. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  many  euro  area  countries  are  faced  with  large,  sharply  rising 
fiscal imbalances, leading to less favourable medium and long-term interest rates and lower 
levels  of  private  investment.  Moreover,  high  levels  of  public  deficit  and  debt  place  an 
additional burden on monetary policy and undermine the Stability and Growth Pact as a key 
pillar  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Against  this  background,  it  is  of  paramount 
importance that the stability programme of each euro area country clearly defines the fiscal 
exit and consolidation strategies for the period ahead. Countries will be required to meet their 
commitments under the excessive deficit procedures. Consolidation of public finances should 
start in 2011 at the latest and will have to exceed substantially the annual adjustment of 0.5% 
of GDP set as a minimum requirement by the Stability and Growth Pact. A strong focus on 
expenditure reforms is needed. 
The key challenge in order to reinforce sustainable growth and job creation is to accelerate 
structural reforms, as the financial crisis has negatively affected the productive capacity of 
our  economies.  In  the  case  of  product  markets,  policies  that  enhance  competition  and 
innovation are urgently needed to speed up restructuring and investment and to create new 
business  opportunities.  In  labour  markets,  moderate  wage-setting,  effective  incentives  to 
work and sufficient labour market flexibility are required in order to avoid significantly higher 
structural unemployment over the coming years. Finally, an appropriate restructuring of the 
banking  sector  should  play  an  important  role.  Sound  balance  sheets,  effective  risk 
management  and  transparent,  robust  business  models  are  key  to  strengthening  banks’ 
resilience  to  shocks,  thereby  laying  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  and  financial 
stability.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 3
