Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy in 2009 – review of the year and 
challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Board  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 24 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honored  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  the  representatives  of  Japan’s  economy 
that are gathered here today. 
This year is just over a week remaining to its end. Looking back, when I addressed this forum 
exactly one year ago, the economies of Japan and the world were in the midst of a panicked 
contraction of  economic  activity  associated  with  the  occurrence  of  a  global  financial  crisis. 
Since then governments and central banks around the world have launched various policy 
measures, firms have made significant production adjustment and other painstaking efforts, 
and Japan’s economy and overseas economies have been picking up since around spring. 
However,  amid  the  after-effects  of  the  bursting  of  the  global  credit  bubble,  uncertainties 
surrounding the future remain high and many issues must be resolved in order that the global 
economy  can  return  to  a  new,  sustainable  growth  path,  and  shift  to  the  so-called  “new 
normal”.  Today,  I  will  first  review  economic  and  financial  developments  in  2009,  then 
describe the Bank’s thinking on the conduct of monetary policy and conclude with an outline 
of the challenges Japan’s economy needs to tackle from next year onward.  
Developments in the global economy 
I. 
I would like to start by discussing global economic developments. In my end-of-year speech 
last  year,  I  said  that  the  reason  for  the  recent  economic  downturn  was  the  bursting  of  a 
global-scale credit bubble. The process of the economic downturn may be summarized in the 
following two factors. The first factor is the unwinding of excess accumulated globally until 
the mid-2000s, mainly in the United States and Europe. We can call this a process in which 
problems  of  households’  excess  debts,  firms’  excess  production  capacity,  and  financial 
institutions’  impaired  assets  are  being  addressed,  or  in  other  words,  a  process  of  making 
repairs and adjustments to the balance sheet. During this process, economic agents restrain 
spending activity, and chronic downward pressure is exerted on the economy. The second 
factor is the panicked contraction of economic and financial activity due to the financial crisis 
caused  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  While  balance-sheet 
adjustments exert chronic downward pressures as I just explained, the panicked contraction 
had acute effects on the economy. 
The main reason that the global economy started to pick up from early spring this year is that 
the second factor, the contraction of financial and economic activity, started to calm. In fact, 
due to the provision of liquidity by central banks around the world and government measures 
to  restore  the  financial  system,  global  financial  markets  have,  regained  a  considerable 
degree of stability, a major difference from the situation one year ago. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  it  is  becoming  clear  that  considerable  pressure  from  balance-
sheet adjustment, which I mentioned as the first factor, remains in the U.S. and European 
economies. Therefore, there is an increasingly stark contrast between the slow recovery of 
advanced  economies,  and  the  faster  recovery  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies.  Specifically,  in  advanced  economies,  particularly  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe, balance-sheet adjustments are still being made and as a result domestic demand is 
struggling to gather momentum, while emerging and commodity-exporting economies have 
been  recovering  at  a  faster  pace  than  was  expected  in  the  spring  of  2009.  Against  a 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
backdrop of the need to improve standards of living and social infrastructure, many emerging 
and  commodity-exporting  countries  are  generally  exhibiting  a  trend  of  strong  domestic 
demand.  On  top  of  that,  in  these  economies  increased  fiscal  expenditure  has  been  more 
effective  in  creating  domestic  demand  through  a  strong  multiplier  effect,  as,  unlike  the 
advanced  economies,  they  face  relatively  minor  pressure  from  balance-sheet  adjustment. 
And, an inflow of funds from advanced economies, where interest rates are low, has helped 
growth by increasing lending and boosting asset prices. 
Moving on to the outlook for the global economy, on the whole, the recovery trend is likely to 
continue  due  partly  to  advanced  economies  picking  up,  and  also  to  the  high  growth  of 
emerging  economies,  but  uncertainties  regarding  the  outlook  are  judged  to  remain  high. 
There  are  both  upside  and  downside  risk  factors.  Major  downside  risk  factors  include 
possible consequences of balance-sheet adjustment in the United States and Europe as well 
as  the  gradual  waning  of  policy  effects.  Meanwhile,  although  the  strength  of  emerging 
economies  is  an  upside  risk  factor,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that,  if  capital  inflows  from 
advanced  to  emerging  economies  continue,  this  could  lead  to  a  rapid  overheating  and 
subsequent  plunge  in  emerging  economies.  Moreover,  the  recent  so-called  “Dubai  shock,” 
which is fortunately calming, has served to reinforce the perception that attention should be 
paid to risk factors on the global financial front.  
Developments in Japan’s economy 
II. 
Next, I would like to discuss the current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy. 
Amid the global economic downturn that I have just described, Japan’s economy deteriorated 
significantly, due mainly to an unprecedented decline in exports and production. Thereafter, 
as overseas economies improved and progress  was made in inventory adjustment both at 
home and abroad, exports and production started to recover. Furthermore, as demand for 
automobiles and electrical appliances, which were subject to tax reductions and subsidies, 
started to increase, Japan’s economy bottomed out from around this spring, and can now be 
judged  to  be  picking  up.  However,  the  level  of  economic  activity  remains  low,  signs  of 
improvement have mostly been supported by the government’s stimulus measures, and it is 
judged that there is not yet sufficient momentum for a self-sustaining recovery. 
Turning  to  corporate  financing,  you  may  vividly  remember  that,  around  this  time  last  year, 
issuance in the CP and corporate bond markets was difficult due to the effects of the failure 
of Lehman Brothers in 2008, those markets are now showing considerable improvement. In 
the CP market, issuance rates for CP have declined noticeably and issuance rates for some 
high-rated CP are even below yields on government bills. The corporate bond market has 
also been active. In addition to a decline in issuance rates, we have seen a rush in issuance 
since the summer, while firms have shifted the emphasis of their fund-raising from short-term 
funds to long-term funds. Large firms’ financial positions have been improving, supported in 
part by a pick up in their sales and profits and also by a considerable improvement in the 
issuing  conditions  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  However,  the  management  at  many  large 
companies  seem  to  have  not  completely  loosened  the  reins  about  their  future  financial 
position  despite  high  levels  of  liquidity  on  hand,  given  their  vivid  memory  of  the  difficulties 
experienced since the autumn of 2008 and persistent uncertainties regarding the economic 
outlook. Moreover, the Bank is fully aware of the fact that, although policy effects from the 
government’s emergency guarantee program have appeared, the financial position of small 
firms  remains  weak,  as  improvements  in  their  sales  and  profits  are  lagging.  As  such, 
although Japan’s corporate financing has been showing signs of improvement, the situation 
as a whole remains severe. 
Regarding Japan’s economic outlook, we expect that the pace of improvement will remain 
moderate up to around the middle of fiscal 2010 as pressure to adjust production capacity 
and  employment  is  likely  to  remain.  Indeed,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  may  slow 
temporarily,  particularly  around  early  next  spring,  when  the  effects  of  various  economic 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
stimulus  policies  are  expected  to  subside.  This  tendency  will  be  stronger  in  regional 
economies that depend heavily on public investment. However, in my view, it is unlikely that 
the  recovery  of  the  economy  will  stall  at that  time.  This  is because,  advanced  economies, 
including  Japan,  have  made  clear  that  they  intend  to  continue  with  economic  stimulus 
measures until economic recovery is assured. Also, the strength of domestic private demand 
in  emerging  economies  is  likely  to remain  self-sustaining. Nevertheless,  we  recognize  that 
the recovery path will not be a smooth one, and the Bank will examine the economic situation 
without any predetermined view. 
Next, looking at prices during this period, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  fluctuated  widely  due  to  the  effects  of  petroleum  product  prices.  After 
registering a sharp increase of 2.4 percent in the summer of 2008, it turned negative in the 
spring  of  2009,  and  in  August  2009,  posted  the  largest  decline  on  record  of  minus 
2.4 percent. As the effect of last year’s surge in oil prices fades, the rate of decline in the CPI 
is expected to shrink to around minus 1 percent. Developments thereafter will be key to the 
outlook  for  prices.  Based  on  the  economic  outlook  I  outlined  earlier,  as  economic  slack 
dissipates  the  pace  of  decline  in  the  CPI  will  tend  to  gradually  moderate.  However,  if  the 
pace of recovery in the economy is gradual, we should expect that downward pressure on 
prices would remain for a considerable period. 
The  root  cause  of  a  continuous  decline  in  prices,  that  is,  the  phenomenon  referred  to  as 
deflation, is weaker aggregate demand compared to the supply capacity of the economy as a 
whole. Therefore, to emerge from such a situation, it is vital to strive to continuously improve 
the supply-demand balance of the overall economy. In relation to this, two approaches will be 
necessary, namely efforts to generate short-term demand  and improving medium- to long-
term  expectations  for  income  growth  that  reflect  increases  in  productivity.  As  these  are 
closely  related  to  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  to  challenges  Japan  should 
tackle, I would like to discuss them again later. 
The Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Next, I would like to discuss the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. 
I explained earlier that we can summarize the causes of the global economic downturn since 
the  autumn  of  2008  based  on  two  factors.  Similarly,  the  measures  implemented  by  the 
central banks of major economies, including the Bank of Japan, may be categorized into two 
factors,  namely  measures  to  address  the  acute  problems  brought  about  by  the  financial 
crisis, and measures to address the chronic effects of balance-sheet adjustment. 
As  for  the  acute  problems  arising  from  the  financial  crisis,  many  central  banks  have 
conducted  various  measures  to  restore  the  necessary  market  functioning,  which  had 
seriously  deteriorated,  by  providing  ample  liquidity  to  the  financial  markets  and  by,  for 
example,  purchasing  certain  financial  assets,  focusing  on  markets  whose  functioning  was 
impaired.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  also  introduced  various  temporary  measures,  including 
extraordinary measures for a central bank, such as outright purchases of CP and corporate 
bonds. It might be safe to say that these measures by central banks have been effective in 
restoring  stability  in  financial  markets  and  facilitating  corporate  financing.  Therefore,  the 
majority of central banks in advanced economies, such as the Federal Reserve (FRB) of the 
United  States  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  have  already  announced  their  intention  to 
unwind these emergency measures. To align with those moves, the Bank of Japan has also 
recently announced that it will cease outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds at the 
end of 2009 as scheduled. Moreover, in order to be extra careful, the Bank of Japan will let 
special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing remain in effect until the 
end of March 2010, to cover the fiscal year-end, before being replaced by ordinary funds-
supplying operations. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 3
Our revision of these temporary measures is predicated on our thinking of selecting the most 
effective  method  for  fund  provision,  in  accordance  with  changes  in  financial  market 
conditions.  For  example,  as  I  explained  earlier,  one  consequence  of  the  Bank’s  measures 
was  that  issuance  rates  on  some  high-rated  CP  fell  below  yields  on  government  bills. 
Therefore, investors exited the CP market and a side effect of the measures, shrinkage in 
market  size,  became  more  pronounced.  If  the  temporary  measures  are  maintained,  the 
functioning of the CP market, which is important for firms’ short-term fund raising, might in 
fact  be  damaged.  Given  that  an  improvement  of  the  issuance  conditions  for  CP  has  been 
achieved,  special  measures  such  as  outright  purchases  by  the  central  bank  should  be 
withdrawn. Instead, it would be more effective for improving the flow of funds if the regular 
funds-supplying operations, which accept a wide range of collateral, are actively used. While 
the Bank reviewed the temporary measures from this perspective, it goes without saying that 
one of the Bank’s most important purposes is ensuring stability in financial markets. I would 
like to reiterate that the Bank will be prepared to act swiftly and decisively if concerns arise 
that financial market stability might be compromised. 
While  the  central  banks  of  major  economies,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  have  generally 
addressed the acute problems brought about by the financial crisis, as regards the chronic 
effects  of  balance-sheet  adjustment  they  have  expressed  the  intention  of  maintaining  an 
accommodative  financial  environment.  For  example,  from  autumn  to  the  end  of  2008  the 
Bank of Japan reduced the policy rate to 0.1 percent, a level of interest rates of effectively 
zero.  As  for  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  has  announced  that  it  will 
maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment and provide consistent support 
to Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability. 
At the beginning of December, since there was concern over a risk that international financial 
developments and instability in the foreign exchange market might adversely affect economic 
activity  through  worsened  business  sentiment,  the  Bank  promptly  held  an  unscheduled 
Monetary Policy Meeting and introduced a new funds-supplying operation in order to further 
enhance  monetary  easing.  This  operation  employs  the  conventional  framework  of  funds-
supplying operations against pooled collateral, introduces a fixed interest rate set equal to 
the  extremely  low  policy  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent,  and  provides  to  the  money  market 
ample  longer-term  funds  with  a  term  of  three  months.  The  Bank  plans  to  provide 
approximately 10 trillion yen through this operation. We expect that the longer-term money 
market  rates,  known  as  interest  rates  on  term  instruments,  will  decline  further,  and  such 
effects  have  already  started  to  appear  and  the  financial  markets  appear  to  have  regained 
some stability. 
Moreover, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held in mid-December, the Bank clarified again its 
thinking on price stability. In 2006, the Bank introduced what is called an “understanding of 
medium- to  long-term price stability” (hereafter “understanding”), which outlines the Bank’s 
understanding of price stability that should be taken into account when discussing monetary 
policy, and released a numerical expression, a year-on-year rate of change in the CPI that 
“falls in the range approximately between 0 and 2 percent.” This time, in order to prevent the 
expression  “approximately”  from  inviting  misunderstanding,  we  decided  to  employ  clearer 
words to express the Policy Board’s intention to not tolerate a year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI equal to or below 0 percent and that the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ 
understanding are around 1 percent. The agreed new expression was that each Policy Board 
member’s understanding “falls in a positive range of 2 percent or lower, and the midpoints of 
most  Policy  Board  members’  ‘understanding’  are  around  1  percent.”  I  believe  that 
dissemination of the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices as well as its stance for 
the conduct of monetary policy, which I explained earlier, and its thinking on price stability will 
accordingly have a certain impact on the formation of interest rates in the financial markets.  
While keeping in mind its understanding of medium- to long-term price stability, the Bank will 
continue to make wide-ranging assessments of various risk factors and strive to achieve the 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2010
proper conduct of monetary policy. In doing so, based on lessons learnt from the bursting of 
the  recent  global  credit  bubble,  I  believe  it  is  crucial  to  also  pay  attention  to  the  possible 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  observed,  for  example,  in  asset  prices  and  credit 
aggregates. 
Global financial crisis and Japan’s economy 
IV. 
Next, I would like express my views on what kind of challenges Japan’s economy will face in 
2010 onward. 
In conducting economic policy, or, in the management of firms formulating future strategy, it 
is critical to consider the lessons Japan should draw from the experience of the recent global 
financial crisis. In order to consider this, in my view, it is necessary to recognize the following 
two facts. 
The first fact is that, as has often been pointed out during the recent economic downturn, the 
plunge  in  economic  activity  in  Japan  was  the  largest  among  the  advanced  economies. 
Comparing  internationally  the  trough  levels  of  real  GDP  by  taking  as  the  benchmark  the 
April–June quarter of 2008, which is before the global financial crisis broke out, real GDP in 
the  United  States,  where  the  global  financial  crisis  originated,  declined  by  less  than 
4 percentage points, while that in Japan decreased by more than 6 percentage points, which 
was the largest fall among the advanced economies. 
The second fact is that Japan’s financial system remained relatively robust, compared with 
those  of  the  United  States  and  Europe.  For  example,  although  various  credit  spreads  in 
financial markets, such as the yield premium of corporate bonds against that of government 
bonds, did widen in Japan as well, but compared to other countries the degree of widening 
was small. Another example is bank lending. In the United States and Europe, following the 
outbreak of the global financial crisis the year-on-year growth rates of bank lending declined 
sharply  by  more  than  10  percentage  points  over  a  period  of  one  year  and  few  months. 
Meanwhile in Japan, there was not such a sharp decline in the year-on-year growth rate of 
bank lending. Such marked difference is also observed in terms of the size of central bank 
balance sheets. In the United States, as credit markets had almost ceased to function, the 
central  bank  had  no  choice  but  to  step  in  to  take  the  place  of  the  credit  market,  which 
resulted  in  a  significant  expansion  of  the  FRB’s  balance  sheet.  Meanwhile,  in  Japan,  the 
situation  did  not  become  so  extreme.  Japan’s  financial  markets  were  also  affected 
significantly, but not in as extreme a fashion as the U.S. markets. As a result, the Bank of 
Japan’s balance sheet was not expanded as much as that of the FRB. 
Then, why was the decline in Japan’s economic activity particularly pronounced even though 
its financial system remained relatively robust? I believe that the answer to this question is 
key for discussing the future of Japan’s economy. 
In  terms  of  the  components  of  demand,  the  substantial  fall  in  economic  activity  was 
particularly evident in exports. While some interpret this as a weakness due to dependency 
on external demand and hold the view that Japan’s economy needs to make a full-fledged 
shift  from  being  an  external  demand-dependent  economy  to  being  a  domestic  demand-
driven  one,  I  do  not  go  along  with  such  a  view.  I  say  this  because  Japan’s  percentage 
dependency  on  exports  is  in  the  mid-teens  range,  which  is  slightly  higher  than  the  United 
States, but clearly lower than in advanced economies in Europe. For example, export trade 
accounts for approximately 40 percent of GDP in Germany and over 25 percent in the United 
Kingdom  and  France,  and  in  this  context,  Japan’s  economy  is  hardly  external-demand 
dependent. Rather than taking this view, we should pay attention to the rapid changes in the 
environment surrounding Japan’s manufacturing industry before and after the global financial 
crisis. Specifically, in my view, there are three key points.  
First, the global financial crisis had a pronounced impact on areas of industry in which Japan 
has  a  competitive  advantage.  The  global 
financial 
financial  crisis  paralyzed 
the 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 5
intermediation function around the globe and uncertainties regarding the outlook increased. 
This directly hit expenditure, mainly for business fixed investment and consumer durables, 
that  is  susceptible  to  the  fund-raising  environment  such  as  bank  lending  or  the  degree  of 
uncertainty  about  the  future,  and  dealt  a  major  blow  to  production  in  the  Japanese 
manufacturing industry, which supplies such goods globally.  
Second, the impact of the adjustment of excesses and balance-sheet adjustment also tended 
to become significant. Up to the mid-2000s when the global economy enjoyed high growth 
supported  by  the  credit  bubble,  there  was  a  worldwide  boom  in  spending  on  consumer 
durables.  The  Japanese  manufacturing  industry,  which  had  established  a  comparative 
advantage  in  these  areas,  greatly  benefited  from  this  boom.  However,  in  retrospect,  and 
setting emerging economies aside, the boom in the United States and Europe was based on 
overly optimistic expectations and was unsustainable. And the balance-sheet adjustments in 
the  United  States  and  Europe,  which  ensued  with  the  unwinding  of  the  boom,  directly  hit 
Japanese manufacturing industry. 
And  third,  there  was  a  reaction  to  the  considerable  depreciation  of  the  yen  from  the  mid-
2000s. To determine the effects of changes in exchange rates on export competitiveness, it 
is necessary to take into account differences in price fluctuations at home and abroad as well 
as the weights of trade. Looking at the real effective exchange rate of the yen, adjusted for 
these  factors,  we  see  that  from  around  2005  to  mid-2007  it  depreciated  by  more  than 
20 percent,  and  remained  at  its  lowest  level  in  the  past  20  years,  which  supported  a 
considerable increase in Japan’s exports. However, since the outbreak of the global financial 
crisis  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  the  yen  appreciated  rapidly  and  has  recently  been  trading 
around its level in the early 2000s. This suggests that the portion of exports supported by the 
depreciation of the yen since the second half of the 2000s has been eliminated. 
Based  on  these  observations,  the  lesson  that  can  be  learned  from  the  experience  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  is  not  that  Japan’s  economy  needs  to  make  a  full-fledged  shift  from 
being external demand-dependent to being domestic demand-driven, but that it is important 
that  the  global  economy  aims  to  achieve  sustainable  growth.  Given  that  globalization  is 
irreversible, it is not appropriate to see external demand and domestic demand as opposing 
concepts. I would emphasize that, for Japan’s economy, it is both important to reap the fruits 
of global economic growth and to lay the groundwork for expanding domestic demand. 
Five challenges 
V. 
Based on the lessons learned from the recent crisis and looking at the prospects for Japan’s 
economy from next year onward, various challenges lie ahead. Here, I would like to raise five 
challenges Japan should tackle. 
First, the shift to what has been called the “new normal.” The growth pattern we experienced 
up to the mid-2000s that was supported by the global credit bubble is not expected to recur, 
nor should we expect it to recur. Nobody knows what specifically the “new normal” will be, 
and we are in the process of exploring a sustainable new growth mechanism. However, the 
size of the decline from the prior economic boom and the fact that this process requires a 
certain amount of time may provoke calls for protectionism and excessive regulation. Japan 
and others must seek to prevent such a situation. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  review  various  systems  reflecting  the  ever-evolving  global 
economic environment. In each country where firms are exposed to global competition, they 
are constantly seeking to make use of their comparative advantages. Amid factors such as 
population  decline  that  could  contract  the  domestic  market  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  in 
order to reap fruits of the global economic growth Japan must constantly review systems that 
stipulate conditions for competition so that Japanese firms can maximize their management 
efforts. At the same time, firms are required to strive to take a diverse range of innovative 
approaches. 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2010
The third challenge is to actively participate in the creation of global rules. Currently, various 
moves are taking place to establish new international rules to address global environmental 
issues  and  others.  Moreover,  there  are  active  developments  to  take  the  initiative  in  rule-
setting at the corporate level. To reap the fruits of global economic growth, it is essential for 
public  authorities  and  private  firms  to  strive  to  actively  participate  and take  the  initiative  in 
such  moves.  In  the  financial  field  also,  discussions  are  underway  toward  revising  global 
financial regulations to reflect the lessons learned from the recent crisis. The Bank of Japan 
is also actively taking part in this process, through the G20 meetings and various venues for 
international discussion. 
The fourth challenge is to develop various safety nets. In order for the economy to grow in a 
sustainable manner, it is essential to have sustainable expansion of private consumption. In 
order to lay the foundations for this, and to allow individuals to take the initiative in various 
fields,  it  is  essential  to  enhance  households’  sense  of  security  about  their  future  lives  by 
providing various safety nets. 
The fifth challenge is to emerge from a mood that can be called “irrational pessimism.” In the 
same way that “irrational optimism” creates a bubble, “irrational pessimism” will certainly not 
have  positive  effects  on  economic activity  either.  Of  course,  the  economy  will  not  improve 
just  by  sentiment,  and  what  is  most  important  is  to  formulate  a  solid  growth  strategy  and 
strive actively to establish a new growth mechanism. In order to do so, however, sentiment 
matters. In the context of its role in realizing economic and financial stability a central bank 
can be compared to “an anchor,” and I believe that a central bank is expected to serve as a 
well-balanced anchor in terms of economic analysis and information dissemination.  
Closing remarks 
I  have  pointed  out  five  challenges  for  Japan’s  economy.  As  such  challenges  are  met, 
productivity  rises,  and  the  public  starts  to  expect  a  future  increase  in  income  we  will  then 
have reached a point at which demand can start a strong, full-fledged expansion. And that is 
the time when we will truly feel that Japan’s economy has emerged from a situation called 
deflation. For Japan’s economy to emerge from deflation and return to a sustainable growth 
path  with  price  stability  will  ultimately  require  consistent  endeavor  between  policymakers 
such  as  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  private  sector  entities  in  their  own  fields.  By  listening  to 
opinions and criticisms from you in the coming year, I will reaffirm that the Bank of Japan will 
continue to make consistent efforts to meet our challenges.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 7
