Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary  policy  decision  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana, 
27 January 2010. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, in its meeting of January 27, 2010, dwelt 
with  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  the  second  half  of  2009,  analysing  in  detail  the 
performance of monetary and economic indicators for the second half of 2009, as well as the 
macroeconomic projections and the balance of risks that may associate them in the coming 
month. At the end of the analysis, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to 
keep unchanged the key interest rate of repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, at 
5.25 percent. The Supervisory Council assessed that this interest rate is in line with Bank of 
Albania’s goal to keep inflation close to the medium-term target.  
 The Albanian economy has just left behind a difficult year. The deep global economic crisis 
was soon felt even in Albania, testing the foundations of the economy: the financial stability 
and the macroeconomic balances. However, the good initial state of our economy and the 
proper response of macroeconomic policies helped to successfully cope with this test. During 
the  first  three  quarters of  the  year,  the  Albanian  economy  ensured  a  positive  growth,  thus 
preserving  the  financial  stability  and  the  key  indicators  of  macroeconomic  stability:  price 
stability, public debt level and balance of payments sustainability.  
The global economic and financial crisis, which was significantly intensified during the first 
half  of  the  year,  put  in  question  the  financial  system  sustainability,  the  macroeconomic 
stability  and  the  long-term  development  prospects  of  the  world  economy.  The  determined 
response of public authorities, increased coordination of economic policies and keeping open 
the world trade channels, helped preventing any negative economic spirals. The latest data 
on the global economy indicate a recovery of economic activity in the third quarter onwards. 
The  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  packages  resulted  successful  in  terms  of  stabilizing  the 
global economy.  
However,  the  sustainability  of  global  economic  growth  will  remain  fragile,  as  long  as  the 
economic activity continues to rely on significant monetary and fiscal stimuli. In particular, the 
public  debt  sustainability,  which  is  burdened  by  fiscal  stimulus  bill  to  exit  the  crisis,  is 
becoming  a  more  and  more  aggravated  problem  for  many  countries.  In  this  complex 
situation,  choosing  the  right  moment  for  withdrawing  the  economic  stimuli  will  have  a 
decisive importance in the future economic performance.  
In  a  more  structural  aspect,  the  recent  crisis  is  expected  to  leave  visible  traces  in  the 
economic  development.  In  a  long-term  horizon,  it  seems  that  new  economic  and  strategic 
balances are being determined, thus re-dimensioning the poles of global economic growth. In 
a medium-term horizon, the global economic growth rate is expected to converge in a lower 
balance than the one that has prevailed over the last two decades. This slowdown may be 
accompanied by economic and social problems for those countries, which would not know 
how  to  figure  out  their  relevant  implications.  In  a  short-term  horizon,  discussions  on  the 
state’s  role  in  the  economy,  on  economic  development  and  growth  patterns,  on  the 
philosophy  and  appropriate  practices  regulating  the  financial  markets,  will  dominate  the 
political  round-table  debates.  In  particular,  the  economic  growth  model  will  be  a  sensitive 
topic  for  economies  significantly  affected  by  the  crisis,  including  many  Eastern  European 
countries.  Promoting  competitive  advantage  and  increasing  competitiveness  in  global 
markets will be the subject of discussions and intended reforms.  
BIS Review 11/2010 
 1
Turning to domestic economic developments, the analysis of available indicators shows that 
the Albanian economy has had a positive economic growth during the first nine months of the 
year.  However,  these  indicators  suggest  that  the  growth  rate  was  characterized  by  a 
progressive slowdown during 2009. Such performance was conditioned by reduced foreign 
demand and slowed domestic demand, in the presence of a tight liquidity situation, financing 
restriction and increased uncertainty.  
According  to  preliminary  data  from  INSTAT,  the  economic  growth  for  the  first  nine-month 
period of the year was 4.9 percent, against 7.8 percent recorded for the same period of the 
previous year. In sectoral terms, the sectors that benefited most from the economic growth 
are  the  services  and  construction  ones,  while  the  industry  sector  underwent  a  more 
problematic performance.  
The positive growth rate has been supported by the fiscal stimulus, while consumer demand 
and  the  contribution  of  external  sector  to  the  economy  have  been  relatively  stable.  At  the 
same time, private investments have declined. Consumer demand has been supported by a 
slight rise in employment and wages, while the mortgage and consumer credit contraction, 
as well as reduction of remittances have given the reverse effect. Private investments have 
been contracted, as a consequence of limited financing resources, reduced lending support 
by  the  banking  system  and  limited  access  to  international  capital  markets.  Increased 
uncertainty,  slowed  progress  of  the  final  demand  for  their  products  and  reduced  capacity 
utilization rate have impacted on such performance.  
Effects of domestic economic slowdown and the global economic crisis have appeared even 
in the foreign trade. Foreign economic activity is characterized by a simultaneous decline in 
both,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  and  services,  thus  impacting  significantly  on  the 
economic growth for 2009. On the other hand, fiscal stimulus, injected mainly during the first 
half of the year, has contributed to rapid increase of budget spending and public debt.  
The economic growth below the potential has created an environment of generally reduced 
inflationary  pressures.  The  annual  inflation  for  December  recorded  3.5  percent,  while  the 
average annual inflation rate was 2.2 percent. Both these indicators are in line with Bank of 
Albania’s target on price stability. The economic activity slowdown, low main products prices 
in  the  world  markets,  low  monetary  expansion  in  the  economy  and  controlled  inflationary 
expectations offset the inflationary pressures coming from exchange rate depreciation during 
2009.  
The  upward  inflation  trend  during  the  last  quarter  of  2009  was  expected  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania.  It  was  formed  mostly  by  transitory  factors,  which  are  not  expected  to  generate 
steady  inflationary  pressures.  In  particular,  this  performance  was  influenced  by  rising  food 
prices, which reflect the lagging effect of exchange rate depreciation, international markets 
conjunctures and structural problems of the Albanian market.  
These  factors  are  expected  to  exert  inflationary  pressures  during  the  first  half  of  2010, 
possibly  added  by  expected  reduction  of  agricultural  products  supply,  as  a  result  of  the 
flooding that has lately occurred. However, stable core inflation trend and low inflation rate of 
non-traded  goods  confirm  that  inflationary  pressures  exerted  by  domestic  demand  are 
moderate.  
In the absence of other supply shocks, the slow progress of domestic demand, low growth of 
monetary supply and anchored inflationary expectations, are premises for keeping inflation 
within the target in the medium run.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  pursued  a  prudent  monetary  policy  during  2009,  creating  a  suitable 
environment  for  a  balanced  development  of  the  economy  and  for  keeping  inflationary 
pressures  under  check.  In  the  presence  of  downward  inflationary  pressures  and  steady 
expectations,  the  hints  for  slow  domestic  demand  in  the  next  period  have  motivated  the 
progressive  growth  of  monetary  stimulus  during  2009.  The  Bank  of  Albania  cut  the  key 
interest  rate  by  one  percentage  point,  down  to  5.25  per  cent  during  this  period.  It  also 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2010
steadily increased liquidity injection, according to banking system needs for liquidity and the 
economy demand for funding. Concerning liquidity injection, the Bank of Albania has made 
use of the entire range of monetary policy injecting instruments, facilitating at the same time 
the access to and easing the cost of operation of the banking system with the central bank.  
Also,  in  the  presence  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation,  such  policy  has  brought  about 
easing  monetary  conditions,  serving  the  promotion  of  the  economic  activity.  However,  the 
pass-through  of  easing  monitoring  policy  on  interest  rates  of  banking  products  has  been 
limited,  due  to  liquidity  constraints  of  the  banking  system  and  weakened  demand  of  the 
public sector for funds. On the other hand, the banking system itself has been reserved with 
regards to lending, as a result of the increased risk in the economy and performance of loan 
portfolio  quality.  The  alleviation  of  these  problems  would  help  to  more  fully  transmit  the 
monetary policy and enhance its effectiveness.  
The country’s external position continues to be characterized by a high and upward current 
account  deficit.  During  the  first  three  quarters  of  the  year,  the  deficit  was  fully  covered  by 
capital and financial account inflows, resulting in increased foreign exchange reserves of the 
Bank  of  Albania.  However,  the  inflows  have  been  significantly  favoured  by  privatization 
receipts  and  by  public  sector  borrowing.  Both  these  items  are  limited  in  time  and  size, 
making  necessary  a  steadier  correction  of  the  external  position  of  our  economy.  This 
correction should aim at covering the trade deficit with stable funding resources, in the form 
of foreign direct investments and promoting export industries in branches that may constitute 
a competitive advantage for Albania.  
However,  short-term  developments  in  foreign  trade  for  October  to  November  show  a 
somewhat different performance compared with the first nine months of the year, testifying a 
modification of the trends observed earlier. Thus, the country’s exports fell in annual average 
terms by about 7.4 percent, recording a slowdown in comparison with the average decline by 
about  19  percent  during  the  first  nine  months  of  the  year.  On  the  other  hand,  imports 
recorded an annual average decline of 17% per cent over these two months, compared with 
the  average  annual  decline  of  7  percent  recorded  in  2009.  These  developments  contain 
encouraging signs for sustainability of the balance of payments in the short run 
Fiscal  policy  had  an  expansionary  nature  during  most  of  the  year,  being  materialized  in  a 
budget deficit of 6 percent of GDP. The increase of budget deficit reflects both the action of 
automatic  stabilizer  in  the  form  of  decreased  revenues,  and  the  intended  countercyclical 
character of fiscal policy, through increased wages and capital expenditures. The country’s 
economic activity slowdown has dictated a slow pace in budget revenue growth, especially 
after the first quarter of the year.  
In late November, the annual growth of budget revenues was only 2 percent, almost entirely 
reflecting  the  low  pace  of  generating  the  tax  revenues.  On  the  other  hand,  public 
expenditures have maintained high growth rates, accounting for 16.4 percent in November. 
The budget deficit reached ALL 65 billion in November. The deficit has been mostly financed 
through  foreign  borrowing  and  privatization  receipts,  dampening  the  pressures  in  the 
domestic financial market 
Rapid growth of expenditure and budget deficit during 2009 has further increased the public 
debt level, accounting for 58 per cent of GDP at the end of November. The Bank of Albania 
deems  that  the  future  budget  policy  orientation  towards  fiscal  consolidation,  aiming  at 
reducing the public debt, is now a prerequisite for the macroeconomic stability in the country. 
As  we  have  constantly  stated,  the  public  debt  reduction  will  mitigate  the  pressure  of  the 
public  sector  on  the  financial  markets,  creating  more  room  for  the  private  sector. 
Consolidation  of  public  finances  will  also lower the  risk  premiums  in  the  economy  and  will 
raise the monetary policy effectiveness.  
Monetary supply slowed down further in the second half, reflecting to a great extent, the ever 
lower credit growth. Annual growth of private sector loan portfolio slowed down to 10 percent 
in  November.  Unlike  the  first  six  months  of  2009,  when  credit  growth  curbing  was  more 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 3
affected by the tightened supply, in the second half of the year the credit performance was 
dictated by decreased demand for loans.  
The  economic  activity  slowdown  and  uncertainty  about  the  future,  in  the  face  of  still 
tightening lending terms by banks, have guided the economic agents’ decisions to postpone 
the investment plans and to less finance consumption from borrowing.  
However,  monetary  developments  confirm  an  improved  situation  of  deposits  during  the 
second half of 2009. The change in depositors’ behaviour, in the context of measures taken 
to prevent the spread of global crisis effects, and the foreign currency inflows in the form of 
remittances  during  summer,  have  contributed  to  stabilizing  the  liquidity  situation  of  the 
banking system.  
Financial markets were characterized by a more relaxed situation during the second half of 
the year. The banking system continued to be featured by liquidity constraints, which were 
remedied  by  central  bank  liquidity  injections.  Improved  liquidity  situation  due  to  increased 
deposits in the system and fostered certainty in the market created a suitable environment 
for transmitting the monetary policy signal to the interbank market. The key interest rate cut 
at  the  end  of  October  is  followed  by  reduced  yields  on  government  securities,  after  the 
upward trend characterizing them throughout the year. In the meantime, the Bank of Albania, 
in accordance with time lags that characterize the monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
expects and requires that the key interest rate cut be transmitted to credit markets.  
 The  Supervisory  Council’s  Decision  on  keeping  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged  aims  to 
further  maintain  and  consolidate  the  macroeconomic  balances,  considering  them  as  a 
necessary prerequisite for a sustainable and long-term growth. It also guarantees the proper 
monetary support for the economy under this stage of development. In the future, the Bank 
of Albania remains willing to operate in line with the actual and expected performance of the 
economic indicators and in accordance with its principal objective. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2010
