Caleb M Fundanga: Enhancing access to finance in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
launch  of  the  Access  Bank  Zambia  Limited  Acacia  and  Longacres  branches  and  the  Visa 
Debit Card, Lusaka, 16 February 2010. 
 Your Excellency the High Commissioner of the Republic of Nigeria in Zambia, Ms 
Marcus Folake Bello; 
The Chairman of the Board Access Bank Zambia Ltd, Mr Caleb Mulenga; 
The Group Deputy Managing Director, Access Bank Plc, Mr Herbert Wigwe; 
The Managing Director, Access Bank Zambia Ltd, Mrs Mukwandi Chibesakunda; 
Members of the Board of Directors for Access Bank Zambia Ltd, present; 
Management and Staff of Access Bank Zambia Ltd; 
Colleagues from Bank of Zambia; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is my privilege and honour to officiate at this important launch of the Longacres and Acacia 
branches of Access Bank Zambia Limited.  
As  the  Central  Bank  and  regulator  of  the  banking  sector,  we  are  always  pleased  to  be 
associated  with  the  achievements  of  the  institutions  that  we  regulate,  particularly  where 
these developments lead to increased access to banking services as well as convenience for 
the Zambian public.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a well known fact that bank branch expansion programmes play 
an  important  role  in  increasing  access  to  the  banking  services.  It  is  also  true  that  such 
developments will not only bring banking services closer to those who need them, but also 
improve competition among banks in Zambia  while creating jobs for  our people. However, 
there is need to complement physical branch expansion with product innovation programmes 
that will capture a lot more people in the remote areas of our country.  
In  addition,  the  crucial  role  that  banks  play  in  financial  intermediation  cannot  be  over-
emphasised. The real challenge is for all financial sector players to play their honest part in 
enhancing  savings  mobilization  and  to  effectively  channel  the  public’s  savings  to  support 
financing of economic activities in all parts of the country.  
Chairperson,  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  despite  the  recent  challenges  facing  the  global 
economies, Access Bank Zambia Limited remains committed to growth through its efforts to 
expand its branch network and through product innovation. Although the bank has been in 
existence  for  just  under  two  years,  it  now  has  three  branches  which  is  a  very  welcome 
development. I am certain that this development will go a long way in enhancing access to 
finance.  
Furthermore, I am reliably informed that the bank is earmarked not only to expand its branch 
network to five this year but also bring to the financial sector some exciting and innovative 
products. An example of this is the Visa Debit-card which was launched today. It is the Bank 
of Zambia’s expectation that these efforts, accompanied by prudence in risk management, 
will contribute to the further deepening of our financial markets.  
However, I must mention here that, most banks in Zambia have concentrated their branches 
expansion programmes in the already banked districts of our country. We still have a number 
of districts with a lot of economic potential but without financial service providers. This entails 
that civil servants and other citizens in formal employment have to travel long distances and 
in some instances for a number of days before they can access their salaries.  
BIS Review 19/2010 
 1
Furthermore,  income  earning  citizens  in  the  informal  sector  like  fishermen  and  farmers 
cannot  deposit  their  earnings  in  a  safe  savings  account  due  to  the  absence  of  bank 
branches. Most of our people cannot borrow loans to further create wealth by growing their 
projects. A number of them end up losing their hard earned income in fires, theft and other 
calamities. It is also very common for hard working women to lose their little incomes to their 
beer drinking husbands who know where their wives keep their little savings. 
I therefore, wish to challenge Access Bank through the Group Deputy Managing Director as 
well as the Managing Director of Access Bank in Zambia to consider opening branches in 
areas like Chavuma, Chiengi, Gwembe, Chilubi, Lufwanyama, Mufumbwe and several others 
to  tap  into  the  vast  potential  these  places  possess.  This  will  not  only  improve  financial 
inclusion but will also provide you with new customers and thus a higher deposit base. I am 
certain that over time these places will be your most profitable centers as places like Lusaka 
will only yield narrow margins due to stiff competition.  
Chairperson,  Zambia’s  economy  has  shown  some  resilience  in  the  midst  of  the  global 
economic crisis. As you are aware, the economy has posted some marked improvements in 
macroeconomic indicators in 2009 with GDP growth estimated at 6.3%. Both inflation and the 
yield rates on Government securities have edged downwards while the exchange rate of the 
Kwacha against major international currencies has also shown some stability in the recent 
months.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  reiterate  my  appeal  to  all  financial  service  providers 
including Access Bank Zambia Limited, to make some meaningful efforts in addressing the 
high cost of banking services in the country.  
It is also my expectation that the banking sector will take advantage of opportunities arising 
from  the  conducive  macroeconomic  environment  in  the  country  to  create  wealth  and 
contribute to the development in our economy.  
Finally, let me extend my gratitude to the Board of Directors and the Managing Director of 
Access Bank Zambia Limited for inviting me to officiate at this launch of the two branches 
and the Visa Debit Card. I also wish to particularly thank the Access Bank, Group Deputy 
Managing Director, Mr Herbert Wigwe for having travelled all the way from Nigeria, to come 
and be part of this event today.  
It now gives me great pleasure and honour to declare the Acacia and Longarces branches 
officially launched.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2010
