Caleb M Fundanga: Framework of cooperation between the Bank of 
Zambia and the University of Zambia 
Opening remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the signing 
ceremony  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the 
University of Zambia, Lusaka, 30 June 2010. 
 The Vice Chancellor, University of Zambia – Prof. Stephen Simukanga  
The  Deputy  Governor  –  Administration  and  University  Council  Chairperson  – 
Dr Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula  
Distinguished Professors and Lecturers from UNZA  
Colleagues from the Bank  
Members of the Press  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen;  
It  gives  me  great  delight,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  welcome  you  all  to  this 
important  signing  ceremony  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Bank  of 
Zambia and the University of Zambia. The MoU that we are about to sign today provides a 
framework  for  the  support  to  the  Economics  Department  and  Research  activities  in  the 
Department.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; the Bank of Zambia continues to view the University of Zambia and 
the Copperbelt University as strategic partners in the economic development of Zambia. It is 
for  this  reason  that  the  Bank  has  for  several  years  now  been  involved  in  the  support  of 
various  capacity  building  programmes  at  the  two  tertiary  learning  institutions.  This  support 
has taken various forms, including the following:  
 
Salary  supplementation  to  fifteen  (15)  academic  staff  in  the  Department  of 
Economics at UNZA and nineteen (19) academic staff in the School of Business at 
the Copperbelt University (CBU);  
Full sponsorship of five undergraduate students at third and fourth year level at CBU 
and five students at Masters Degree level at UNZA;  
Financial support in the acquisition of books and periodicals;  
Purchase of equipment such as computers and computer software.  
 
 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  acknowledges  the  various  efforts  being  made  by  the  University  to 
improve its infrastructure and the delivery of quality university education and research. We 
are also mindful of the various funding constraints faced by the University as it expands its 
programmes  to  meet  the  ever  increasing  demand  for  its  services.  The  Bank  is  therefore, 
proud to respond to the University’s call for partnership with industry and other stakeholders 
in  order  to  realise  its  noble  objectives  that  cannot  presently  be  fully  funded  from  public 
resources and students fees. In this regard, the Bank of Zambia has seen it fit to not only 
extend this support, but to also streamline and enhance it in order to better align this support 
with strategic objectives of both the Bank and the University.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; as you are aware, the Bank of Zambia has been providing financial 
support  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  scholarly  and  academic  excellence  in  research  and 
instruction  at  the  University  of  Zambia.  Today’s  MoU  is  meant  to  extend  this  support  for 
another  two  years  commencing  with  the  2009/2010  academic  year.  In  addition,  the  MoU 
aims  at  strengthening  the  framework  of  cooperation  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the 
Economics  Department  of  the  University  of  Zambia.  Under  this  agreement,  the  Bank  has 
committed  up  to  K605  million  per  annum  in  support  to  the  Economics  Department  of  the 
University of Zambia.  
 BIS Review 91/2010 
 1
This support will include monthly salary supplementation for 15 lecturers in the Department; 
scholarships  to  four  outstanding  UNZA  students  of  Economics  at  Masters  Degree  level; 
acquisition of books and periodicals; research support; and the purchase of computers and 
software for use in research. It is the hope of the Bank that this support will help address 
some of the challenges facing the University, including recruitment and retention of academic 
staff, funding for research and the acquisition of vital equipment and software.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  through  this  support,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  would  like  to  be 
associated  with  the  University’s  mandate  of  building  human  capital,  through  delivery  of 
quality  education,  and  the  extension  of  the  frontiers  of  knowledge  through  research.  This 
synergy  between  the  Bank  and  the  University  is  based  on  the  understanding  that  both 
institutions are knowledge based. It is therefore, our belief at the Bank that this cooperation 
will continue to generate positive externalities not only to the two partners but to the wider 
community through the developmental impact of enhancing knowledge.  
Let  me  re-iterate  that  sustainable  economic  development  is  not  possible  without  adequate 
investment in the knowledge industry. It is precisely for this reason that the nations that have 
attained great economic progress are also those that have invested heavily in education. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  in  the  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  been  striving  to 
strengthen  its  focus  on  economic  research  in  order  to  improve  the  formulation  and 
implementation of monetary policy in this dynamic economic environment. The Bank has in 
this  regard  been  publishing  the  BoZ  Reader  where  members  of  staff  and  external 
researchers  are  encouraged  to  publish  articles  which  have  a  bearing  to  the  economy  in 
general and monetary policy in particular. The Bank in collaboration with the Centre for the 
Study of African Economies at Oxford University is also in the process of publishing a book 
on  the  economic  prosperity  in  Zambia.  I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  encourage  all 
students and academic staff at UNZA to contribute to some of the forthcoming publications of 
the BoZ Reader.  
In conclusion, I wish to re-iterate that the Bank of Zambia commits to continue supporting 
the  Economics  Department  and  Research  programmes  at  UNZA  and  hopes  that  the 
University  will  live  up  to  its  obligations  under  the  framework  of  cooperation  to  be  signed 
today.  We  challenge  the  Economics  Department  at  UNZA  through  the  Vice  Chancellor  to 
scale up its research activities in issues of interest to the Bank and the Zambian economy in 
general. For this is what this MoU entails.  
We  also  call  upon  other  industry  players  in  the  financial  sector  to  emulate  our  noble 
contribution  in  building  human  capital  and  research  capacities  at  this  important  institution. 
This  is  important  to  ensure  that  our  financial  sector  operates  at  the  cutting  edge  of 
knowledge and innovation. I have no doubt therefore, that such investment will yield returns 
in the long run as knowledge is a secure investment.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2010
