Gill Marcus: The outlook for monetary policy 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the Bureau for 
Economic Research Annual Conference, Johannesburg, 22 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
The global economy appears to be emerging from one of its most turbulent periods in living 
memory.  Due  in  part  to  the  unprecedented  and  largely  coordinated  policy  responses  that 
were  undertaken  by  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  around  the  world,  we  seem  to  have 
weathered the storm. However, while there are many positive developments, we cannot be 
blind  to  the  risks  and  uncertainties  that  persist  which  could  have  systemic  implications 
globally.  
It  is  against  this  uncertain  global  backdrop  that  we  have  to  implement  monetary  policy 
domestically.  Because  monetary  policy  has  to  be  forward  looking,  it  is  a  truism  then  that 
monetary policy is always conducted in an uncertain environment.  
However  it  is  probably  true  to  say  that  the  current  environment  is  still  characterised  by 
heightened  uncertainty.  We  therefore  face  difficult  challenges  in  ensuring  that  inflation 
remains under control while allowing for the continued recovery of the domestic economy, 
which remains fragile.  
In my address today I will make a few comments on the lessons of the crisis for the monetary 
policy framework. I will then give a brief overview of the current domestic and global situation 
and end with some remarks on the outlook for monetary policy.  
The global crisis and monetary policy 
In  South  Africa,  there  has  been  considerable  focus  on  inflation  targeting.  The  debate  has 
generally revolved around the impact of monetary policy on domestic growth. 
Globally,  there  has  also  been  a  renewed  focus  on  inflation  targeting,  but  for  very  different 
reasons. 
The argument put forward by, amongst others, Bill White, formerly of the BIS, argues that 
inflation targeting contributed to the global crisis precisely because it was too successful. The 
period of the 2000s was one where global inflation was low and, in terms of the narrow focus 
on inflation, it meant that central banks could keep interest rates at very low levels.  
These  low  interest  rates,  the  argument  goes,  led  to  excessive  credit  extension  and  asset 
bubbles  in  the  housing  and  equity  markets,  and  to  the  lending  excesses  that  ultimately 
caused  or  exacerbated  the  crisis.  In  other  words,  by  focusing  too  narrowly  on  inflation, 
monetary policy ignored the financial stability implications of low interest rates.  
This  throws  the  issue  of  financial  stability  squarely  into  the  monetary  policy  arena.  What 
should the appropriate policy have been under these circumstances? Bill White argues that it 
means  that  interest  rates  should  have  been  higher  than  they  were,  and  this  would  have 
prevented the need for such low interest rates later on.  
In other words, monetary policy should have a clear financial stability mandate that is part of 
the  objective  function  of  the  Bank.  Others  have  a  different  take  on  this.  It  is  argued  that 
higher  interest  rates  on  their  own  would  not  have  prevented  the  credit  excesses,  and  that 
they would have been prohibitively high.  
BIS Review 62/2010 
 1
The alternative then is to assign different instruments to the financial stability objective while 
maintaining  the  interest  rate  for  the  broader  monetary  policy  objective.  But  it  is  not 
immediately obvious what these tools are and how effective they will be.  
In a recent review of macroeconomic policy issues, Olivier Blanchard and others of the IMF 
argue  that  previously  discarded  tools  need  to  be  reactivated  and  used  for  focused 
intervention, even though they may be partially circumvented.  
Such tools include reserve requirements, contra-cyclical capital requirements on banks, and 
loan-to-value ratio restrictions.  
A  related  question  is:  who  should  be  responsible  for  financial  macro-prudential  oversight? 
Should this be a central bank role, a separate entity or a joint role? If it is a central bank role, 
does it form part of the mandate of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), and how does it 
relate to the Bank’s supervisory role over the banking system?  
These  are  important  questions  currently  being  explored  by  central  banks,  and  there  is  no 
simple  or  correct  answer.  Our  own  view  is  that  the  central  bank  already  has  an  implicit 
financial  stability  mandate,  and  there  is  widespread  expectation  that,  should  a  systemic 
financial or banking crisis occur, the central bank has, and would be expected to have, a key 
role to play.  
Central banks already compile and analyse much of the macroeconomic data of a country. 
However, should a financial stability mandate be made explicit, a way needs to be found for 
co-ordination with government. Our suggestion, at this stage, is that while the compilation of 
data and analysis would primarily be the responsibility of the central bank, a financial stability 
committee co-chaired by the Governor and the Minister of Finance could be considered. 
These issues have been the focus of much discussion at the bi-monthly BIS meetings. While 
there is broad agreement that monetary policy should have some focus on macro-prudential 
issues, there is far less agreement on the application and efficacy of these proposed policy 
tools.  
Much of this is unchartered territory, and we do not really know what instruments to use, or 
how to separate micro- and macro-prudential instruments and banking oversight. 
It is also clear that in future the conduct of monetary policy, even within inflation targeting 
mandates, will need to have a more pro-active financial stability focus. 
The  idea  that  central  banks  cannot  recognise  or  pop  asset  price  bubbles,  and  that  they 
should  only  take  them  into  consideration  to  the  extent  that  these  bubbles  impact  on  the 
inflation  outlook  is  overly  simplistic.  Until  now  the  conventional  wisdom  has  been  that  the 
best that monetary policy can do is to clean up the mess after the bubble has popped.  
The  recent  cleaning  up  that  central  banks  and  governments  have  had  to  undertake  in  the 
aftermath of the crisis points to a need for a reconsideration of this issue. 
Although there will be more focus on financial stability issues in future, it will not be at the 
exclusion  of  other  objectives,  and  we  will  continue  to  implement  inflation  targeting  in  a 
flexible  manner.  This  means  that  while  our  primary  objective  remains  the  containment  of 
inflation, it is not to the exclusion of factors such as growth and employment.  
In our analysis and policy implementation we take account of these factors, not only through 
their impact on the inflation outlook, but also in terms of how our policies impact on these 
variables.  
Our  objective  in  this  respect  will  always  be  to  minimise  the  shocks  to  the  system,  and  to 
avoid unnecessary volatility in output and interest rates. 
Furthermore,  if  inflation  is,  or  is  expected  to  remain  within  the  target,  monetary  policy  will 
have greater flexibility to focus on growth issues, particularly when the growth rate is below 
potential. This is entirely consistent with a flexible inflation targeting environment.  
2 
 BIS Review 62/2010
But we also have to recognise the limits to our impact on growth. Monetary policy can and 
does affect cyclical growth around long run potential output growth. In other words, we can 
affect  the  size  of  the  output  gap  by  impacting  on  cyclical  growth.  However,  our  impact  on 
potential output itself is limited – this is really the job of micro-economic policies.  
These include industrial and trade policies, investment in infrastructure and physical capital, 
technological innovation and productivity, and the quantity and quality of labour. 
Low inflation or price stability can contribute to long-term growth by providing greater stability 
and  reducing  uncertainty,  which  will  be  positive  for  longer  term  investment.  However  we 
cannot buy more growth with high inflation, and we cannot expect monetary policy to solve 
what is essentially a structural unemployment problem in the economy.  
The review by Blanchard et al also identified the need for a reassessment of exchange rate 
policies, particularly in emerging market economies. 
The  authors  challenged  the  conventional  wisdom  that  inflation  targeting  emerging  market 
economies should adopt a policy of benign neglect with respect to the exchange rate, given 
the  significant  resource  misallocation  that  could  result  from  extended  periods  of  exchange 
rate misalignment.  
There is increasing recognition that emerging market economies are, in effect, being forced 
to  adjust  to  disequilibrium  positions  in  the  advanced  economies  where  abnormally  low 
interest rates are still prevalent.  
There  is  also  an  expectation  that  these  low  rates  are  likely  to  persist  for  some  time.  The 
resultant search for yield, particularly when risk aversion is low, has seen a wall of money 
moving into emerging markets, with consequences for their exchange rates.  
Year to date has seen non-resident purchases of South African bonds and equities totalling 
around R35bn, and the consequent impact on the exchange rate. This can be compared with 
net sales of R76 billion in the second half of 2008 and net purchases of R90bn for 2009.  
The fortunes of the rand exchange rate followed these trends. 
There is little doubt that the rand exchange rate is one of the most volatile currencies, and is 
also  currently  assessed  to  be  overvalued  by  many  market  participants  and  analysts, 
including the IMF. However, estimates of the degree of overvaluation differ markedly.  
More  vexing  is  the  question  as  to  what  can  be  done  about  it.  Direct  intervention  is 
constrained by the costs of sterilisation; the jury is still out as to whether taxation of inflows, 
such as applied by Brazil, are effective; and while economic theory tells us that a narrowing 
of  interest  differentials  should  lead  to  a  decline  in  inflows,  this  is  not  always  the  case, 
particularly if lower interest rates encourage growth-sensitive flows. 
The Bank has continued to buy foreign exchange as part of its strategy to increase the level 
of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Despite  significant  foreign  currency  purchases  at  times,  the 
rand has remained at elevated levels on a trade-weighted basis, but the cost of sterilisation 
has been significant, given the wide interest rate differential.  
One of the consequences of these interventions, and building up the gross foreign exchange 
reserves  of  the  country  to  US$42  billion,  is  that  the  SARB  will  report  an  after-tax  loss  of 
around R1billion for the financial year 2009/10.  
While it may appear that in the past months there has been minimal reserve accumulation, 
our  overall  reserves  are  reported  in  dollars,  and  the  recent  weakening  of  the  euro  and 
sterling have resulted in significant valuation changes which have, at times, dwarfed the net 
accumulation.  The  SARB  has  continued  to  build  reserves  as  and  when  this  has  been 
appropriate.  
The recent reduction of interest rates was seen by some as an attempt to weaken the rand. 
This was not a factor in our decision. Past experience has shown that the response of the 
BIS Review 62/2010 
 3
rand to lowering or raising interest rates is unpredictable, and it has previously responded by 
both appreciating and depreciating for varying periods of time.  
However, the recent rand strength has resulted in an improved inflation outlook, which in turn 
gave room for a further rate reduction. While we do not target the exchange rate, we would 
want to see the rand at a stable and competitive level.  
Unfortunately, we have seen that achieving this is not straightforward. 
The global outlook  
In  assessing  the  future  direction  of  monetary  policy,  it  is  important  to  have  a  view  of  the 
global and domestic outlook. Previous speakers will have dealt with these issues at greater 
length.  
Overall the global outlook is a lot more positive than it has been for some time. Many growth 
forecasts have been revised up progressively over the past months as the fear of a “double 
dip” or W shaped recovery has receded.  
The latest World Economic Outlook expects global growth to average 4,2 per cent in 2010 
and 4,3 per cent in 2012. In September 2009 their forecast for 2010 was 3,1 per cent. 
Emerging markets in general, and China in particular, which is forecast by the IMF to grow by 
9,6 per cent this year, have been growing strongly, and there are now fears of evolving asset 
price bubbles in China.  
Growth  prospects  in  the  advanced  economies  have  also  improved:  the  WEO  forecasts 
US growth to measure 3,1 per cent in 2010, and 2,6 per cent in 2011. In September 2009 the 
forecast for 2010 was 1,5 per cent. Growth prospects in the euro area have also improved, 
but remain subdued at 1,0 per cent for this year.  
Despite  the  good  news  and  increasingly  positive  outlook,  we  cannot  ignore  the  significant 
risks and uncertainties that still abound. The responses by governments and central banks 
around the world were necessary to prevent a full-blown depression. However the reversal of 
these  positions  is  a  significant  challenge  and  timing  will  be  crucial.  In  particular,  we  have 
seen  unsustainable  increases  in  fiscal  deficits  and  debt  ratios  in  a  number  of  advanced 
economies.  
For example, fiscal deficits in the United Kingdom, Greece, Ireland and the United States are 
expected to exceed 10 per cent of GDP in 2010, What happens when these fiscal stimuli are 
withdrawn is critical. Much depends on whether the consumers in these countries are in a 
position to take up the slack. The answer is not clear cut, and will differ in various countries.  
In the US, the latest indications are that retail sales are rebounding and the consumer appears 
to  be  recovering.  However,  the  housing  market  is  still  under  pressure  and  unemployment 
remains  high  at  around  10  per  cent  on  a  narrow  definition,  and  around  18  per  cent  on  a 
broader definition. The employment response to the downturn was far greater than in previous 
downturns,  and  the  question  8  remains  as  to  whether  this  decline  is  merely  cyclical  or 
structural. If it is structural, the US consumer may be constrained for longer. 
There  are  similar  concerns  about  the  health  of  the  consumer  in  several  European 
economies,  particularly  Greece,  the  UK  and  Spain,  where  unemployment  has  risen  to  in 
excess of 20 per cent.  
While  the  immediate  threat  from  Greece  appears  to  have  passed,  the  issue  has  not  been 
fully resolved and significant risks remain. 
It is clear that there are limits to further government expenditure stimuli, and at the same time 
a  number  of  European  economies  will  find  the  adjustment  process  painful  because  of  the 
lack of an exchange rate safety valve. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2010
The  IMF  also  expects  global  inflation  to  remain  low,  at  1,5  per  cent  in  the  advanced 
economies, and just under 3 per cent globally, in both 2010 and 2011. This, coupled with the 
relatively fragile economic recovery in some countries, is likely to result in monetary policy in 
some advanced economies being accommodative for some time.  
This  is  turn  means  that  emerging  markets,  including  South  Africa  can,  in  the  absence  of 
general risk aversion, continue to expect capital inflows. 
A  further  potential  constraint  on  the  growth  outlook  relates  to  the  recovery  of  the  global 
banking sector. 
According  to  the  latest  IMF  Global  Financial  Stability  Report,  current  estimates  are  that 
global bank write-downs through to end of 2010 will amount to US$2,3 trillion. As at the end 
of 2009, US$1,5 trillion of the $2,3 trillion had already been realised. These pressures mean 
that, in some countries, banks are still reluctant to lend.  
Hanging over the banks are the impending changes in global bank regulations. The nature of 
the changes and the implementation date are still to be decided by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision. These proposed changes are aimed at building up stronger buffers to 
counteract  the  build-up  of  excessive  procyclical  leverage.  Changes  in  the  regulatory 
framework are necessary to prevent a recurrence of the recent crisis. However, we do need 
banks to be in a position to lend, and to be engaged in maturity transformation. 
A fine line has to be drawn: we cannot admonish the banks for not lending, but at the same 
time introduce regulations that make it difficult for them to lend. 
Decisions on the final proposals and their calibration will be made only after an analysis of 
the  impact  assessments  that  are  currently  underway,  and  comments  received  on  the 
consultative documents.  
The domestic outlook 
The domestic outlook also looks increasingly more promising, but risks remain. Our current 
forecast  is  for  growth  to  average  around  2,6  per  cent  in  2010  and  around  3,5  per  cent  in 
2011.  
Growth is expected to be driven in part by the external sector, and is therefore dependent on 
the global growth outlook. If global growth is sustained, we can expect commodity prices to 
be well supported, but our manufacturing export performance may be affected by continued 
low growth in some of our traditional export markets.  
The manufacturing sector is experiencing positive growth again, driven primarily by external 
rather than internal demand. 
Domestic demand is still relatively weak but is showing signs of recovery. We believe it will 
remain relatively constrained for some time by elevated household debt levels, high levels of 
unemployment and the fact that credit extension by banks remains very subdued.  
Overall  we  would  expect  the  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  to 
widen somewhat as imports respond to the higher infrastructural expenditure. 
Private sector investment expenditure is expected to lag that of the public sector, particularly 
if  domestic  consumption  expenditure  remains  under  pressure.  Despite  the  more  positive 
growth outlook, employment is expected to lag somewhat. 
The  inflation  outlook  has  improved  despite  significant  risks  posed  by  administered  price 
developments.  Our  forecasts  indicate  that  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  within  the  target 
range for the remainder of the forecast period.  
BIS Review 62/2010 
 5
The combination of an improved inflation outlook, and a decline in the risks to the inflation 
outlook, allowed us to reduce the repurchase rate by a further 50 basis points at the most 
recent meeting of the MPC.  
The  factors  that  contributed  to  a  decline  in  the  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook  included  the 
persistent  strength  of  the  rand  exchange  rate  and  increased  certainty  with  regard  to  the 
electricity price increases granted to Eskom.  
The view was that despite the indications that the economy was turning around, this recovery 
was  expected  to  be  relatively  slow,  particularly  with  respect  to  household  consumption 
expenditure.  
Since  that  meeting,  there  have  been  a  number  of  data  releases  that  have  heightened 
speculation about further reductions in the repo rate. In particular, the February retail sales 
came  in  well  below  consensus,  and  some  of  the  manufacturing  sector  releases  also 
disappointed.  
I  should,  however,  warn  against  jumping  to  conclusions,  particularly  on  the  basis  of  one 
month’s data that is open to various interpretations. It is important to look at the reasons for 
the latest repurchase rate reduction.  
Our statement emphasised that despite clear signs that the economy had emerged from the 
recession,  the  pace  of  recovery  was  still  below  potential.  We  saw  the  improvement  in 
consumption expenditure in particular as being tenuous.  
It does not however follow that one bad retail sales number automatically leads to a need for 
further  easing.  The  latest  data  were  a  confirmation  of  the  fragile  nature  of  consumption 
expenditure  growth,  rather  than  necessarily  being  a  downside  surprise  requiring  further 
stimulus.  
I am sure that the general view of the MPC which prevailed at the time would therefore be 
unchanged in the light of recent data: that is, that the relatively low growth in consumption 
expenditure,  together  with  other  factors,  provided  a  window  of  opportunity  to  reduce  rates 
without jeopardising the inflation target. 
However, the scope for further easing is limited, and the repurchase rate is likely to remain 
stable for some time. 
I  must  emphasise  that  this  is  not  an  unconditional  commitment.  It  is  dependent  on  there 
being no major developments that change the inflation outlook, or significant changes in the 
risks to the outlook. Such occurrences would include markedly lower than expected output or 
expenditure  trends,  or  a  sustained  further  appreciation  of  the  rand  exchange  rate,  which 
overall would lead to a significant decline in the long term inflation forecast. 
Conclusion 
Monetary policy always has to be implemented in a forward-looking manner, given the lags 
between a policy change and its full impact on the economy. We will continue to examine the 
data in a forward-looking manner and, taking all factors into account, will decide accordingly. 
At  this  stage  inflation  appears  to  be  consistently  within  the  inflation  target  range  and  the 
domestic  economy  appears  to  be  on  a  recovery  path.  However,  significant  risks  to  the 
domestic and global outlook remain and we will maintain our vigilance. 
We will continue to try to contribute to long-term economic growth through our endeavours to 
achieve our mandate and through our commitment to price stability. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2010
