 Shyamala Gopinath: Pursuit of complete markets – the missing 
perspectives 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, delivered in absentia, at the Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) 
Annual Conference, Nairobi, 28 February 2010. 
 1. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  delivering  the  keynote  address  at  the  FEDAI  conference 
being hosted in this beautiful country. India and Kenya share a historical relationship and I 
am delighted to have got an opportunity to visit this country.  
2. 
I have been following some of the recent interesting initiatives by the Central Bank 
of  Kenya  and  was  really  impressed  by  the  developments  in  the  areas  such  as  payment 
systems, credit information sharing, currency management, financial inclusion, government 
securities  trading.  These  are  some  of  the  real  issues  in  an  emerging  economy  and  the 
Kenyan  experience  is  reminiscent  of  the  gradual  process  in  India  over  the  past  couple  of 
decades in the direction of financial sector reforms – how piece by piece, at times forced by 
events,  the  structural  edifice  for  the  financial  system  and  market  infrastructure  was  put  in 
place.  
3. 
India’s reform path in the financial sector has been different from most economies, 
including  other  emerging  markets.  It  has  been  a  measured,  gradual,  cautious  and  steady 
process, devoid of the many flourishes observed in other countries. From the outset, India 
has resolved to attain standards of international best practice, but the endeavour has been to 
fine tune the process keeping in view the underlying structural, institutional and operational 
considerations.  
4. 
In terms of broad stocktaking in respect of financial markets, we have today a deep 
and  liquid  equity  spot  and  derivatives  market,  a  very  large  and  liquid  forex  OTC  spot  and 
derivatives  market,  a  recently  introduced  exchange  traded  currency  futures,  a  very  large 
Government securities market and interest rate swap market, a robust securitization market, 
a large primary market in corporate bond and money market instruments, a repo market in 
Government  securities  as  well  as  corporate  bonds.  There  is  a  functional  regulatory 
framework for each of these markets.  
However, in my address today, for a change I want to focus on what we don’t have 
5. 
as  yet:  in  terms  of  market  segments,  we  do  not  have  an  active  secondary  market  in 
corporate bonds, a credit derivatives market, an active interest rate futures market (in spite of 
a new product being re-launched on the exchanges few months back), an active structured 
derivatives market. In terms of participants, we do not have an unrestricted access to foreign 
investors in various markets and instruments.  
6. 
Before addressing each of the above “missing” elements in our context, I would like 
to dwell a little on the conception of the “complete markets” and talk about a few accepted 
precepts related to financial markets that have been put to question post-crisis. In the last 
conference, I remarked that we would continue to learn from the lessons as the crisis was 
still  evolving.  As  we  are  transiting  from  crisis  to  recovery,  a  few  fundamental  issues  have 
become clearer.  
7. 
The pursuit of complete markets, before the crisis, was axiomatically believed to be 
an unalloyed virtue and the policy and regulatory frameworks were expected to have this as 
an explicit policy objective. It had become the holy grail of market regulation and everything 
else followed from this fundamental truth. The gospel also became a convenient complement 
to the idea of free cross-border capital mobility, with the logical conclusion that free capital 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 1
flows  into  the  financial  markets  are  necessary  for  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and  for 
completion of markets by providing more liquidity.  
8. 
Technically  speaking,  a  complete  market  is  one  in  which  the  complete  set  of 
possible gambles on future states-of-the-world can be constructed with existing assets1. In 
other words, a financial market place is said to be complete when a market exists with an 
equilibrium  price  for  every  asset  in  every  possible  state  of  the  world.  Derivatives  are 
expected  to  do  precisely  this,  though  subject  to  several  simplistic  assumptions.  The 
conception of “complete markets” essentially entails freedom to the arbitrageurs to operate 
across cash and derivatives markets in each asset class to be able to enforce the equilibrium 
price.  
9. 
So  far  so  good.  However,  the critical  part  from  a  regulatory  and  systemic  stability 
perspective is that sole pursuance of completion of markets may demand a certain kind of 
cash  markets,  which  fit  into  the  theoretical  construct  required  for  an  efficient  derivatives 
market. Thus the regulatory framework for cash markets gets driven by the demands of the 
efficient derivatives market more than the underlying needs and systemic risk assessment. In 
a perfect case of tail wagging the dog, the elusive search for market completion and efficient 
derivatives  markets  drives  the  cash  markets  rather  than  the  other  way  round.  The  risks 
induced by this process of backward re-engineering could be serious, particularly in case of 
key macroeconomic market variables such as interest rates and exchange rates.  
10. 
The crisis has undoubtedly raised serious issues with regard to the above market 
philosophy, as clearly evident in the explicit focus on financial stability which is being made 
formal  mandate  for  all  regulators,  as  part  of  the  restructured  regulatory  arrangements  in 
countries such as US and UK. While the crisis has not led to usurpation of the entrenched 
belief  in  the  neoclassical  theory  of  markets,  certain  long-held  axioms  have  certainly  been 
demolished. I would touch upon a few such issues in our context.  
Financial markets are self-equilibrating and hence self-correcting 
11. 
The pre-crisis paradigm pledged its faith in the acclaimed self-correcting nature of 
markets,  whereby  self-regulation,  internal  risk  management,  assessments  by  credit  rating 
agencies or setting of standards by industry participants were felt sufficient for ensuring an 
efficient  configuration  of  outcomes  in  terms  of  price  and  quantity.  The  regulatory  role 
envisaged  in  this  paradigm  is  confined  to  identifying  the  market  imperfections  and 
improvising  on  disclosure  and  transparency  requirements  towards  efficient  outcomes.  Any 
divergence  from  the  efficient  configuration  was  thought  to  be  transitory  and  self-correcting 
led by anonymous competitive forces and dissemination of information.  
12. 
The  current  crisis  has,  however,  demonstrated  that  the  financial  markets  may  not 
necessarily be driven to equilibrium by fundamental factors, but are often subject to divergent 
disequilibria, manias, panics and crashes. The self-framed codes of conduct devised by the 
financial industry  also  failed  to  activate  the  process  of self-correction sufficiently.  Similarly, 
the  internal  risk  management  system  in  global  financial  institutions,  which  is  supposed  to 
sensitize  the  senior  management  gave  way  to  the  risk  takers  in  an  atmosphere  of  high 
returns and apparently low risks. In view of the deep inter-connectedness and externalities 
posed  by  the  markets,  it  is  increasingly  being  felt  that  “no  market,  no  territory  and  no 
institution” should escape supervision (M. Barnier, Member, EC, February 16, 2010).  
                                                 
1  http://economics.about.com. 
 All financial innovation is useful and desirable 
13. 
In the long lull of the NICE (non-inflationary consistent expansion) pre-crisis phase, 
the  financial  sector  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  panacea  for  all  ills  and  financial 
innovation was taken as necessarily efficiency enhancing. In a clean, theoretical construct, 
financial  derivatives  were  perceived  as  pieces  of  a 
that  could  be 
combined/arranged in multiple ways to customize cash flows for hedging and managing risk. 
However, as Mr. Satyajit Das has noted in a recent FT article, derivatives were mostly used 
to “circumvent investment restrictions, accounting rules, securities and tax legislation”. The 
clearest  example  being  the  factory  production  of  credit  derivatives  portending  to  convert, 
quite literally, trash into gold. The recent case of Greek swaps is another instance. Without 
going into the legitimacy of such deals, what comes out clearly is the use of derivatives to 
suitably alter/manufacture cross-temporal cash flow profiles in a non-transparent manner.  
jigsaw  puzzle 
Key parameters for market efficiency are turnover and liquidity 
14. 
The crisis has clearly brought home the point that the size and liquidity of markets 
are  not  sufficient  conditions  for  protecting  the  markets  from  malfunctioning.  The  hitherto 
perceived  metrics  for  market  performance  –  larger  turnover,  deeper  liquidity  –  though 
beneficial, need to be supplemented with the assessment of markets in terms of their role in 
enhancing systemic risks, accentuating risk contagion, contributing to excessive volatility and 
leading to excessive speculation. 
15. 
As Lord Turner, Chairman, FSA, UK mentioned in a recent speech in Mumbai, “the 
benefits  of  increased  market  liquidity  have  been  an  article  of  faith,  frequently  deployed  to 
argue  against  tighter  regulation”.  However,  he  argues  that  beyond  a  point,  the  marginal 
benefits from increased liquidity are minimal and are far outweighed by the destabilising and 
harmful herd and momentum effects.  
Financial risk can be accurately measured and managed 
The myth of the riskometer, a term used by Jon Danielsson of the LSE2, is an apt 
16. 
description  of  the  false  sense  of  certainty  provided  by  risk  models  and  measurement 
techniques which legitimized the “risk-based” paradigms in diverse areas such as regulatory 
capital, performance evaluation, compensation etc. To paraphrase the Nobel Laureate, Paul 
Krugman,  we,  “as  a  group,  mistook  beauty,  clad  in  impressive  looking  mathematics,  for 
truth”. While these methods can certainly be of an indicative value, the problem arises when 
such  measures  are  sought  to  be  monetized.  The  scope  for  both  errors  as  well  as 
manipulations is larger.  
Free capital account imperative for deep, liquid financial markets 
17. 
Much of the argument, pre-crisis, for free capital mobility was based, among other 
things,  on  the  potential  benefits  for  the  development  of  efficient  and  complete  markets 
domestically.  Greater  foreign  participation  in  domestic  markets  was  perceived  to  be 
inherently  beneficial  for  the  financial  system.  Restrictions  on  foreign  participation  were 
generally viewed as involving loss of welfare and antithetical to the free market mechanism. 
However, there is now a greater appreciation of the need for strong domestic players in all 
markets  and  the  risks  of  excessive  foreign  dominance  in  any  of  the  domestic  market 
segments are now being acknowledged.  
18. 
While  foreign-owned  banks,  the  world  over,  generally  contributed  to  the  liquidity 
crunch  in  the  context  of  deleveraging  during  the  crisis,  the  emerging  Europe  with  heavy 
                                                 
2  www.voxeu.org. 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 3
dependence on foreign banking groups was particularly exposed, culminating in the Initiative 
for Coordination of European Banks to induce parent banks to maintain exposures to their 
subsidiaries.  As  chronicled  by  the  BIS  Annual  Report,  2009,  countries  such  as  Hungary, 
Indonesia, Mexico  and  Turkey  faced  huge  problems  when  there  were  sudden  reversals  in 
foreign  investment  in  local  bond  market.  Such  volatile  flows  can  exacerbate  the  situation 
merely through the confidence channel. The time honoured principles that underlie opening 
up of debt markets to foreign investment are convergence in nominal and real interest rates 
on a sustainable basis, low public debt/GDP ratio and low fiscal deficit to GDP ratios on a 
consistent  basis.  In  the  context  of  large  sovereign  debts,  countries  with  large  domestic 
investors  holding  sovereign  debt  are  considered  to  be  less  vulnerable  to  attacks  by 
speculators.  
19. 
More generally on the issue of capital controls, there is a growing recognition of the 
serious  challenges  for  macroeconomic  policy  on  account  of  large  swings  in  capital  inflows 
over a very short period of time beyond the absorptive capacity of the economy. There are 
also implications for financial stability in the forms of induced risks of currency mismatches, 
asset price bubbles and crowding out of domestic financial institutions on the lending side, 
increasing  their  risk  appetite  in  search  of  returns.  All  these  impose  significant  adjustment 
costs and complicate monetary and exchange rate management. The recent IMF update on 
the  World  Economy  Outlook  states  that  “Recognizing  that  inflows  can  be  very  large  and 
partly transitory, depending on circumstances, macro-prudential policies aimed at limiting the 
emergence of new asset price bubbles, some build-up of reserves, and some capital controls 
on inflows can be part of the appropriate response.” 
Completing the markets in India 
Corporate bond market 
I. 
20. 
The absence of active corporate bond market is generally perceived as one of the 
key missing market which has also hindered the non-bank funding for infrastructure projects. 
However,  the  reasons  for  this  lie  more  with  the  deeper  structural  issues  in  the  economy. 
Traditionally,  raising  of  resources  through  issuance  of  corporate  bonds  has  not  been  a 
preferred  mode  for  Indian  corporates.  Bank  finance,  coupled  with  equity  markets  and 
external borrowings have been the preferred funding sources. The public financial institutions 
and financial intermediaries have been dominant issuers although in the recent past following 
the lack of access to overseas markets the non-financial sectors are also raising funds in this 
market. 
21. 
The above issues are also not unique to India. Even internationally, other than few 
markets  like  the  US  and  Japan,  there  are  very  few  liquid  secondary  bond  markets.  Most 
corporate bond markets are used by large, highest rated issuers and the investors including 
in  India  are  typically  buy  and  hold.  Retail  interest  is  typically  low  given  the  relatively  low 
returns compared to equities and aversion to credit risk. 
22. 
Following the recommendations of the High Level Expert Committee on Corporate 
Bonds and Securitisation (chairman: Dr. R H Patil) numerous steps have been taken both on 
the primary issuance side as well as to smoothen the secondary market trading process for 
corporate  bonds.  Going  forward  there  is  need  to  have  uniform  stamp  duty,  product 
standardization,  centralized  database  and  more  importantly  the  removal  of  restrictions  on 
long term investors such as insurance companies and pension funds. Action also needs to 
be taken towards improving bankruptcy provisions.  
23. 
Foreign  investment  in  corporate  bond  market  has  been  permitted  up  to  a  limit  of 
USD 15 billion, which remains substantially underutilized. Apart from this, clearing houses of 
the exchanges have been given access to the RTGS for settling the OTC trades in corporate 
bonds on DvP basis. 
 It  has  been  argued  that  if  banks  are  permitted  to  guarantee  corporate  bonds,  the 
24. 
market  may  attract  more  interest.  However,  such  a  move  will  ultimately  hinder  the 
development  of  genuine  corporate  bond  market  and  more  importantly,  result  in  risk 
concentration  within  the  banking  system,  which  is  not  the  purpose  of  market-based 
disintermediation process.  
25. 
Recently, repos in corporate bonds have been permitted. Only listed corporate debt 
securities which are rated “AA” or above by the rating agencies have been made eligible for 
repo. To contain leverage, a minimum haircut of 25 per cent has been stipulated and selling 
of borrowed securities under repo has not been allowed during the period of repo. 
26. 
The  stance  of  the  Reserve  Bank  towards  introduction  of  repo  in  corporate  bonds 
needs to be viewed in the perspective of the role of repo in the recent financial crisis. Repo is 
a convenient way for building up of leveraged positions especially during good times when 
the  haircuts  are  very  low  and  liquidity  is  abundant.  Institutions  like  investment  banks 
(Bear Sterns, Lehman Brothers) with good credit standing managed to borrow from the repo 
market at very low rates thereby encouraging them to leverage excessively. In normal times, 
the repo borrowing is cheap and rollover is easy whereas during periods of financial stress, 
the  rollover  becomes  difficult,  leading  to  a  liquidity  crisis.  The  risk  of  the  illiquidity  of  the 
underlying asset leading to the drying up of repo markets is accentuated during periods of 
financial crisis.  
27. 
Further,  in  contrast  to  the  repo  transactions  in  Government  securities,  where  the 
inherent  risks  are  low  due  to  the  nature  of  the  underlying  (sovereign  bonds)  and  the 
presence  of  a  robust  clearing  and  settlement  system  with  CCP  guarantee,  the  repo 
transactions in corporate bonds do not lend themselves to a DVP III mechanism in view of 
the  heterogeneous  nature  of  the  bonds.  Repos  in  corporate  bonds,  therefore,  carry 
considerable risks that get amplified in the light of the state of the underlying cash market in 
corporate bonds.  
28. 
In an interesting paper, Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick in their Paper “Securitised 
Banking  and  the  Run  on  Repo”3  have  examined  the  role  of  repo  market  in  the  recent 
financial crisis. They show that the genesis of the crisis was a run on the “repo” market. This 
market is as vulnerable to a run as an unsecured funding. This is especially the case when 
the collateral is of a lower quality and markets are illiquid. 
29. 
The  RBI  has  therefore  adopted  a  cautious  approach  in  its  regulation  of  repos  in 
corporate bonds. Going forward, RBI will closely monitor the performance of the repo market 
for  corporate  bonds  once  it  becomes  operational  and  will  review  the  directions  at  an 
appropriate time. 
Credit derivatives  
II. 
30. 
Credit derivatives, in themselves, may be good risk management tools helping the 
investors  to  transfer/hedge  their  credit  risk.  Such  ability  to  hive  off  unwanted  credit  risk 
encourages investors to hold bonds which otherwise they would have not been inclined to 
hold, thus enhancing the liquidity in the markets. Credit derivatives also help participants to 
exercise their view on the credit risk of an entity and help the credit risk to align itself to “fair” 
levels.  The  problem,  however,  arises  when  the  products  do  not  remain  what  they  are 
originally intended to be. If these products disconnect themselves from the real sector and 
start behaving as standalone products, they could set a perfect stage for perverse incentives 
to set in, as we have been observing in the recent times.  
                                                
 
3  NBER Working Paper 15223 (2009). 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 5
Disconnect  can  happen  because  CDS  does  not  involve  an  insurable  interest. 
31. 
Contrary  to  popular  perception,  CDS  is  neither  fully  an  insurance  contract  nor  a  swap 
contract  like  an  interest  rate  swap  (IRS).  While  in  the  normal  insurance  contract,  having 
insurable interest is a pre-requisite, the same is not the case with CDS. Further, unlike an 
IRS  contract,  the  payoffs  in  a  CDS  to  the  protection  seller  are  the  “fees”  for  assuming  a 
contingent liability and not actually an income. The accounting treatment of recognizing fees 
as  income,  while  the  contingent  liabilities  are  relegated  to  “below  the  line”,  might  prompt 
participants  reckon  the  CDS  as  a  pure  income  generating  strategy,  oblivious  to  the 
embedded risks.  
32. 
While  the  facility  of  buying  protection  even  when  not  having  an  insurable  interest 
increases the universe of protection buyers thus increasing the market liquidity, it may result 
in adverse incentives. If the lenders have protection via CDSs, they may have more to gain 
from the company failing than they would gain if the company survives. If this is the case, the 
creditors  with  CDS  protection  could  have  incentives  to  push  troubled  companies  into 
bankruptcy  instead  of  working  out  the  troubled  debt.  Recently  in  the  context  of  CDS  on 
Greece  debt,  it  is  reported  that  the  US  regulators  will  look  into  the  matter  of  CDS  trader 
destabilizing not only companies but also countries.  
33. 
The CDS contracts involve a complex chain of counterparty risks and any default at 
any  point  can  potentially  become  a  systemic  issue  on  account  of  gridlocked  market.  It  is 
often assumed that once the credit risk is hived off by purchasing the protection, the risk is 
really out of the books. What is forgotten is, CDS is substituting the credit risk of the issuer 
with that of the protection seller and the comfort is only as good as the credit worthiness of 
the  protection  seller.  As  observed  in  the  case  of  AIG,  the  AAA  status  of  AIG  (protection 
seller) is taken too much for granted, without regard for possibility of credit events. Further, 
unlike  a  normal  insurance  business,  the  credit  events  in  a  CDS  transaction  are  highly 
correlated, thus exacerbating the paying pressure on the protection seller in the case of a 
credit event. The incident firmly conveys the importance of fully understanding the dynamics 
of  CDS  transactions  as  different  from  a  normal  insurance  business  and  also  of  a  robust 
counterparty credit risk management while undertaking CDS transactions. 
34. 
The  CDS  market  is  envisaged  to  complete  the  market  by  providing  to  the 
participants  the  information  pertaining  to  credit  risk.  CDS  spreads  are  expected  to 
dynamically,  and  in  real  time,  reflect  the  true  credit  quality  of  the  issuer.  It  is  however, 
interesting to note that CDS spreads for major international financial groups did not provide 
any forewarning of the impending disaster, reaching a historical low in the early summer of 
2007, the very eve of the worst financial crisis since the 1930s. In hindsight, this has been a 
case of extreme under pricing of credit risk, which had significant adverse impact on the real 
sector.  There  are  inherent  dangers  in  implying  the  spot  fundamentals  from  the  derivative 
markets,  especially  in  shallow  and  illiquid  segments.  The  CDS  spreads  which  could  have 
moved either on credit perceptions or on liquidity perceptions, prompt participants to revise 
their  views  on  the  credit  quality  of  the  issuer,  which  may  be  misplaced,  but  at  times  self 
fulfilling. Such “tail wagging the dog” tendencies may, even result in escalation of borrowing 
costs for the issuers such as corporates and banks, even when the fundamentals have not 
changed. 
35. 
You may recall that RBI had issued draft guidelines on CDS in 2007 but in the light 
of the crisis had kept in abeyance issuance of these guidelines. As per these guidelines it 
was proposed to permit single name plain vanilla CDS on resident reference obligations for 
resident entities. It was stipulated that the underlying asset/ obligation, the reference asset/ 
obligation, the deliverable asset/ obligation shall be to a resident and denominated in Indian 
Rupees. Further, the credit derivative contract was required to be denominated and settled in 
Indian Rupees. 
 With  the  benefits  of  lessons  learnt  from  the  global  crisis,  an  Internal  Group  in 
36. 
Reserve Bank is revisiting the issues related to introduction of CDS in the Indian markets. 
Some of the issues that are pertinent, besides the above general issues, in this context are: 
 
Rating  requirement  for  the  underlying:  There  are  mixed  views,  as  regards 
requirement of rating for the underlying of CDS. Internationally, it is observed that 
while there is a greater liquidity for publicly traded credits, there is no requirement of 
ratings.  It  may  be  argued  that  ratings  are  not  required  as  CDS  itself  will  act  as  a 
proxy for rating and is a more dynamic and closer reflection of the credit rating than 
the ratings issued by the rating agencies. On the other hand others could view the 
requirement  of  rating  as  a  means  to  bring  in  more  information  dissemination  and 
transparency  about  the  underlying,  which  may,  otherwise  not  be  available  to  the 
participants.  Especially  in  the  context  of  Indian  markets,  where  secondary  market 
liquidity is dormant, to provide the participants, information required for considering 
entering/continuing/ unwinding their CDS positions, the requirement of rating of the 
underlying may be necessary, at least to start with.  
Insurable  interest:  The  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  need  to  ensure 
existence of insurable interest for buyers of credit protection. The issue is whether 
banks that are market makers should be allowed to trade CDS without an underlying 
subject to limits. If so, we need to determine how to compute such limits.  
Centralized reporting: The opacity of OTC markets, especially those of derivatives, 
has also been cited as one of the contributors of the global turmoil. The need for 
centralized reporting,  enabling  the regulators  to  track  the  built-up  of  positions  and 
the participants to track the markets, has been flagged by many and already there 
have  been  some  systems  put  in  place.  A  centralized  reporting  system  is  being 
contemplated in the Indian context when the CDS are introduced.  
Centralized  clearing  and  settlement:  Internationally,  centralised  clearing  and 
settlement is also being proposed as a measure to address the risk management 
issues  in  OTC  derivatives.  It  would  be  a  challenging  task  to  devise  a  centralized 
clearing  and  settlement  framework  for  single  name  CDS.  The  RBI  is  examining 
international practices in this regard.  
The revised draft guidelines will be put in public domain in due course. Meanwhile 
37. 
we welcome any feedback on the above issues even at this stage.  
   Interest rate futures  
III. 
38. 
Interest  Rate  Futures  (IRF)  contracts  on  10-year  notional  coupon  bond  were 
launched  on  NSE  on  August  31,  2009.  Persons  resident  in  India  and  FIIs  have  been 
permitted to participate in the market. The FIIs participation in the market is subject to the 
condition  that  the  total  gross  long  position  in  the  cash  and  futures  market  taken  together 
does not exceed their limit for investments in Government and corporate bonds. The product 
witnessed activity and increasing volume during the initial period, but the liquidity tapered off 
subsequently. The discussion in respect of the IRF is about factors inhibiting the growth. I 
shall like to briefly discuss some of the issues being raised in this regard. 
39. 
Suggestions  have  been  voiced  in  some  quarters  that  requirement  of  physical 
settlement  is  a  major  hindrance  for  liquidity  of  the  IRF  market  and  cash  settlement  could 
provide a way out. Now, IRF contracts settled by cash as well as by physical delivery co-exist 
in the global financial markets. The well established IRF markets in US, UK, Eurozone and 
Japan use contracts based on physical delivery. Some of the recent IRF markets, notably in 
Australia,  Brazil  and  Singapore  have  cash-settled  contracts.  Korea,  which  introduced  cash 
settlement, has opted for physical settlement for the 10 year futures. It should be noted that 
in many of these markets the fiscal position is strong and there are supply constraints leading 
to fear of short squeeze.  
BIS Review 24/2010 
 7
The  proponents  of  cash  settlement  mode  point  out  that  in  the  illiquid  market,  the 
40. 
“longs” would end up with illiquid securities. On the other hand, the view against the cash 
settlement mode is that it does not ensure arbitrage-free cash futures price linkage. Hence, 
both physically-settled as well as cash-settled IRF contracts have supporting arguments.  
41. 
Notwithstanding  the  debate  in  favor  and  against  the  cash  settlement  mode,  the 
physical settlement mode should not pose great difficulties for market participants in taking 
positions in the IRF market as an insignificant percentage of IRF contracts are carried to the 
expiration  date  internationally,  as  also  seen  domestically  in  the  first  cycle.  While  the 
speculators can close out their positions before expiry to book profit, the hedgers can either 
close-out  or  roll-over  the  positions  depending  upon  the  tenor  of  hedging.  The  arbitrageurs 
can carry the positions till expiry in order to crystallize the arbitrage profits.  
Another  view  is  to  provide  the  choice  to  the  participants  to  settle  physically  or  in 
42. 
cash mode. This may not be an appropriate solution, as it may make it difficult for the “long” 
to chalk out his strategy, when he remains unclear till the settlement date as to whether he is 
going to get the cash, or the physical securities. 
43. 
There is also a view that the option of choosing the security may be  given to the 
“long” which may help him to avoid taking delivery of illiquid CTD bonds. In such case, the 
buyers will naturally prefer the expensive security to be delivered to him. This practice may 
further stifle the growth of the IRF market, as the traders, especially the arbitrageurs may shy 
away from taking “short” futures position as he may end up in delivering the most expensive 
security. 
44. 
It has also been argued that extending the period of short selling to be synchronous 
with the tenor of the futures contracts, may impart liquidity to the futures market by facilitating 
efficient  arbitrage.  However,  the  view  that  short  selling,  directly  or  indirectly,  could  pose 
potential  risks  and  can  easily  destabilize  the  markets  can’t  be  overlooked.  In  India,  with 
public sector spending being one of the dominant drivers of the economic growth and in the 
backdrop  of  heavily  loaded  government  borrowing  programme,  and  with  a  rather  shallow 
market,  it  would  need  careful  consideration  to  allow  free  short  selling  in  the  government 
securities market. 
Currency futures market  
IV. 
45. 
Recently,  the  recognized  stock  exchanges  have  been  permitted  to  offer  currency 
futures  contracts  in  the  currency  pairs  of  Euro-INR,  Japanese  Yen  (JPY)-INR  and  Pound 
Sterling  (GBP)-INR,  in  addition  to  the  USD-INR  contracts.  Two  exchanges  have  already 
introduced other currency pairs which has increased the volumes greatly.  
46. 
While the volume of trade in the currency futures has increased sharply, the open 
interest  has  remained  low  and  stagnant  and  constitutes  only  a  small  percentage  of  the 
outstanding OTC contracts. The above trend reflects that the exchange traded markets are 
still not being used for hedging purposes by different participants. It is largely the day-traders 
taking intra-day positions and closing by day-end which dominate the market.  
47. 
It  may  be  pertinent  to  mention  that  the  cash  settlement  mode  was  accepted  for 
currency futures because physical settlement was not a feasible option since Rupee is not 
fully convertible on the capital account. In the OTC market, there is an elaborate framework 
for  regulating  transactions,  including  derivatives,  in  foreign  currency  and  presence  of  an 
underlying exposure is a basic requirement. It was not possible to carry over this requirement 
onto the exchange traded market. Hence our reluctance to allow FIIs to trade in this market. 
It  is  not  considered  opportune  to  remove  the  requirement  of  underlying  commercial 
transactions in the OTC market.  
 Structured derivatives  
V. 
48. 
The  structured  derivative  market  in  India  is  of  nascent  origin  and  most  of  the 
structures  are  equity  linked  structures.  The  RBI  guidelines  clearly  prohibit  any  structured 
derivative product with another derivative as an underlying. However, many exotic currency 
derivatives  have  been  popular,  primarily  involving  zero-cost  strategies.  As  part  of  policy 
rationalization, the draft guidelines on forex derivatives have suggested permitting writing of 
covered options while prohibiting zero-cost structures. 
The cost reduction structures, introduced in 1996 have been used by the corporates 
49. 
in  hedging  their  currency  exposures.  The  products  inherently  involve  a  trade-off  between 
reduction in the cost of hedging and a corresponding increase in risk. The concerns relating 
to proper valuation, mis-selling of such products and other irregularities that emerged in the 
recent  past,  have  forced  the  Reserve  Bank  to  re-evaluate  the  propriety  of  allowing  such 
products in India.  
50. 
In  response  to  the  draft  Guidelines,  many  corporates  and  industry  associations 
FEDAI and FIMMDA have represented that prohibiting cost reduction structures will seriously 
impede  the  dynamic  forex  risk  management  operation  of  corporates  and  that  their 
competitiveness  in  the  global  markets,  as  their  counterparts  have  flexibility  in  using  such 
products  internationally.  Additionally,  if  such  structures  are  banned,  some  corporates  may 
not hedge their exposures due to costs, and this may result in aggregation of open currency 
risk  in  the  system,  which  is  riskier  than  allowing  hedging  within  a  range.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  structures  may  be  allowed  with  safeguards,  such  as  the  pay  off  of  such  a 
strategy  lies  between  an  unhedged  exposure  and  an  exposure  hedged  through  a  forward 
contract,  allowing  the  products  only  against  underlying  exposures,  not  allowing  leverage 
structures, limiting to corporate with threshold turnover and net worth, etc.  
51. 
appropriate forum to debate on the concerns and possible safeguards for such structures.  
 
We  are  examining  the  suggestions  and  the  FEDAI  conference  would  be  an 
Suitability and appropriateness – The complex products should be consistent with 
the users’ business, financial operations, skill and sophistication, internal policies as 
well  as  risk appetite.  Inadequate  understanding  of  the  risks  and  future  obligations 
under the contracts has led to many legal disputes. Some users too have feigned 
ignorance  of  the  products  and  deemed  it  unsuitable  only  in  the  event  of  losses 
crystallising.  The  developments  have  necessitated  greater  sense  of  responsibility 
and circumspection on the part of the banks and the users. In view of the same, it is 
worth debating that if at all such products are to be permitted it may be restricted to 
users with robust risk management systems, corporate governance, accounting and 
disclosure  practices.  Possible  safeguards  in  this  regard  could  be  adoption  of 
international accounting standards minimum net worth criteria, listing, etc.  
Extent  of  corresponding  increase  in  risk  and  net  receipt  of  premium  –  the 
extant guidelines permit cost reduction structures subject to the condition that there 
is  no  net  receipt  of  premium  as  this  in  effect  makes  the  user  a  net  option  writer. 
However, it has been observed that certain structures were sold, where premia had 
been passed on the users, thereby exposing them to uncapped downsides. There 
has been feedback that an additional safeguard to this condition could be to permit 
only  cost  efficient  structures  that  explicitly  demonstrate  that  the  pay  off  of  such  a 
strategy  lies  between  the  pay  offs  of  an  unhedged  exposure  and  an  exposure 
hedged through a forward contract.  
Existence of an underlying – The underlying principle of FEMA Regulation 25 is 
that  the  derivative  products  should  be  used  only  for  hedging  purposes,  although 
certain operational flexibility has been provided under the past performance route. 
Excessive leverage without concomitant underlying would magnify the risk. In view 
of  the  risks  related  in  such  structures,  it  is  felt  that  the  use  of  such  products,  if 
  BIS Review 24/2010 
 9
considered at all, may be liked to crystallized exposures. Also, there should not be 
any leverage in the structures.  
52. 
As we debate on the issue of cost reduction structures, we may also discuss issues 
relating to writing of stand-alone options. Given the market conditions and issues relating to 
suitability  and  appropriateness,  would  it  be  timely  to  allow  writing  of  standalone  covered 
options? Alternatively, instead of allowing writing of standalone covered options, should we 
consider allowing cost efficient structures with safeguards? The safeguards reduce the risk of 
mis-selling. We need market feedback on the degree of safeguards.  
Oversight of OTC markets 
53. 
In  India,  unlike  in  many  other  jurisdictions,  the  OTC  markets  are  well  regulated. 
Under the RBI Act, the validity of any OTC derivative contract is contingent on one of the 
parties  to  the  transaction  being  a  regulated  entity.  The  key  features  of  the  regulatory 
framework are: 
a. 
There  is  a  clear  distinction  between  the  roles  of  market  makers  and  users  for  all 
OTC  derivatives  and  it  is  mostly  banks  and  primary  dealers  in  case  of  certain 
interest rate derivatives which are permitted to act as market makers. 
The users are permitted to transact in derivatives essentially to hedge an underlying 
exposure.  For  interest  rate  derivatives,  there  is  an  additional  leeway  to  undertake 
derivative transactions for transformation of risk exposure, as specifically permitted 
by RBI. 
Structured derivative products are permitted only as long as these are a combination 
of two or more of the generic instruments permitted by RBI and do not contain any 
derivative not allowed on a standalone basis. 
All derivative instruments are required to be marked to market if a liquid market in 
the product exists or otherwise marked to model, provided all the model inputs are 
observable  market  variables  and  full  particulars  of  the  model,  including  the 
quantitative algorithm are documented. 
The  responsibility  for  assessment  of  customer  suitability  and  appropriateness  is 
squarely on the market maker and there are a detailed set of requirements that the 
market maker needs to fulfil in this regard while selling any product to a user.  
All derivative transactions must be undertaken within the Board-approved risk limits. 
The  system  of  limits  should  include  procedures  for  the  reporting  and  approval  of 
exceptions to limits. 
Several  measures  have  been  taken  in  the  past  to  improve  the  efficiency  and 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
54. 
reliability of the OTC market.  
 
First,  the  Bank  had  strengthened  the  oversight  of  OTC  derivatives  transactions 
through  institution  of  mandatory  reporting  system  for  the  trade  transactions.  The 
OTC  Rupee  derivatives  in  India  comprise  Interest  rate  swaps,  Forward  Rate 
Agreements, FX forwards, Currency swaps, Currency options. The banks have been 
mandated to report the inter-bank IRS trade data on-line to CCIL since August 2007. 
The client level trade data are also now collected from the banks. As and when the 
system stabilizes, market could be provided with the information. As regards the FX 
derivatives, the AD category-1 banks report the trade details of forward contracts, 
currency swaps and currency option to the Bank at fixed periodicity. The reported 
data provides the basis to the Bank to monitor the market wise aggregated exposure 
level as well as exposure level of individual banks and concentration of exposures to 
specific asset classes.  
    in  grater 
the  Bank  had  brought 
Second,  the  Bank  has  facilitated  greater  use  of  central  clearing  counterparties 
(CCP) by encouraging clearing initiatives and providing capital relief. Currently, the 
settlement  of  transactions  relating  to  G-Secs,  Market  Repo,  CBLO,  FX-spot  and 
forward are settled on guaranteed basis through CCIL.  
Third, the Bank had promoted use of electronic trade platforms for improving market 
transparency and efficiency than that available through completely private bilateral 
negotiation.  The  electronic  trade  platforms  lower  search  costs  by  improving  the 
ability of market participants to more quickly determine the range of prices at which 
they  could  potentially  execute  a  trade,  and  to  more  quickly  and  easily  identify  a 
counterparty  offering  attractive  terms.  The  NDS-OM,  NDS-Call,  CROMS  are  the 
landmark innovations in the space of OTC fixed income and money market.  
increased 
Fourth, 
dissemination  of  price  and  volume  information  of  the  OTC  trades.  The  price  and 
volume data enhances the ability of counterparties and other potential creditors to 
manage their exposure risks. Further, the increased level of information to the public 
at large enhances the price-discovery function, improves the options available to the 
hedgers  and  moreover,  offers  greater  degree  of  protection  to  the  unsophisticated 
class of investors.  
55. 
As per the existing regulations, only primary issuances of CPs and CDs are reported 
to RBI through the Negotiated Dealing System (NDS). In the case of CPs, the issuing and 
paying agents (IPAs) are required to report the issue details on the NDS within three days of 
issue.  CD  issuances  are  reported  on  a  fortnightly  basis  by  banks.  However,  there  is  no 
formal reporting of secondary market trades of CPs and CDs in any form, resulting in lack of 
transparency in the market. Further, settlement of trades in CPs and CDs is done bilaterally 
with  no  system  of  DvP  (Delivery  vs.  Payments)  in  place.  This  exposes  the  participants  to 
settlement risk.  
56. 
With  a  view  to  bring  in  transparency  to  the  CP  and  CD  market  and  also  reduce 
settlement risks, we are considering to bring in regulatory reporting of all CP, CD trades and 
non-guaranteed  DvP  based  settlements  similar  to  that  of  OTC  trades  in  corporate  bonds. 
The modalities will be worked out in consultation with all the stake holders. 
transparency 
through 
Conclusion  
57. 
It has been clearly evidenced during the crisis that financial sector development per 
se cannot be an objective in itself. It needs to be pursued in the broader context of financial 
stability and has to necessarily correspond to the level of maturity of the financial system and 
the needs of the real economy. Regulatory comfort and assessment should therefore be a 
critical determinant in this regard.  
58. 
A lot of far reaching measures have been taken recently in terms of allowing new 
products  such  as  interest  rate  futures,  currency  futures,  repo  in  corporate  bonds  etc.  and 
work is underway for introducing some others like credit default swaps. Such products are 
new  for  the  Indian  market  and  an  assessment  of  their  implication  on  other  markets, 
institutional  behaviour,  and  system  as  a  whole  would  be  critical.  Going  forward,  the 
immediate effort would be to design prudent guidelines, a robust market infrastructure and 
strengthen the systemic monitoring framework for these new markets.  
59. 
I wish the Conference all success. 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 11
