Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Slaves of defunct economists 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Master  Programme  in  International  Business  and  Economics,  University  of 
Pavia, Pavia, 24 February 2010. 
 Introduction1 
“The  economist  John  Maynard  Keynes  is  back  in  fashion”,  writes  Robert  Skidelsky  in  the 
preface of his most recent book “Keynes, the Return of the Master”, published less than one 
year ago. The reason, says Skidelsky, is not so much that the world is facing the worst crisis 
since  the  Great  Depression  and  that  governments  all  over  the  world  have  embarked  on 
stimulative  packages  to  support  the  economy,  as  the  author  of  the  General  Theory  had 
advocated,  but  because  Keynes  “provides  the  right  kind  of  theory”,  a  theory  which  is  “an 
indispensable guide for the future”. 
A  question  that  comes  to  mind  in  reading  these  words  is  why  Keynes  had  to  make  a 
comeback  in  the  first  place,  why  the  General  Theory  was  forgotten  and  its  prescriptions 
abandoned. If the Theory was indeed general, it should apply in all circumstances and not 
only when the world is on the verge of collapse.  
There are two possible answers to the question. The first is that the Theory is not general, 
and  thus  cannot  apply  to  all  economic  states  of  the  world.  The  second  is  that  Keynes’ 
famous  admonition  in  the  last  page  of  his  General  Theory  –  according  to  which  “Practical 
men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually 
the  slaves  of  some  defunct  economist  ”  –  has  been  turned  upside  down.  In  other  words, 
defunct economists – and their theories – are usually enslaved by practical men who do not 
fully understand them.  
I  side  with  the  second  interpretation  and  will  use  this  lecture  today  to  explain  why.  In  my 
view,  the  most  important  contribution  that  Keynes  has  made  throughout  his  life  is  to  warn 
practical men, including policy-makers, not to remain trapped in pre-conceived ideas when 
addressing new issues. In “The Economic Consequences of the Peace” (1919) he warned 
against  adopting  the  traditional  practice  of  peace  treaties  –  namely,  extracting  huge 
reparations  from  the  defeated  countries,  without  taking  into  account  the  general  economic 
situation and the burden that this would also impose on the victorious countries. In “A Tract 
on Monetary Reform” (1923), he warned against a precipitous return to the Gold Standard 
which prevailed before the war as a way to reinstate monetary discipline and fight against 
inflation.  In  “The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money”  (1936)  he  warned 
against the predictions of the classical theory, in particular when the underlying assumptions 
of such a theory are not fulfilled, as was the case during the Great Depression.  
Throughout  his  life  Keynes  questioned  mental  constructions  based  on  very  restrictive 
assumptions.  He  shows  the  limitations  of  such  approaches  in  “The  General  Theory”  by 
putting  at  the  centre  of  his  analysis  the  role  played  by  uncertainty  in  shaping  economic 
outcomes. As he pointed out: “The state of confidence, as they term it, is a matter to which 
practical  men  always  pay  the  closest  attention.  But  economists  have  not  analysed  it 
carefully.”2 In his view, the pervasive role played by uncertainty in the economy explains a 
number  of  otherwise  puzzling  departures  of  the  real  world  from  the  idealised  system 
                                                 
1 
I would like to thank Luca Benati for his contribution to the preparation of this lecture and Lorenzo Cappiello 
and David Clarke for reviewing it. All errors and opinions are my own. 
2  As quoted in Skidelsky (2009, p. 88). 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 1
described  by  classical  general  equilibrium  theory.  In  particular,  it  explains  why  a  state  of 
depressed  expectations  can  persist,  and  can  lead  to  a  protracted  recession,  or  even  to  a 
depression. According to Keynes, the “state of confidence” is constantly in flux. When it is 
high, business thrives; when it is depressed, on the other hand, the economy contracts, and 
can even end up in a permanent state of under-utilisation of resources. 
Keynes’  analysis  of  the  need  for  and  role  of  government  intervention  is  predicated  on  the 
state of uncertainty prevailing in the economy. The main contribution that economic policies 
can make is to reduce uncertainty. Policies are not intrinsically “good” or “bad”, but rather, 
their  effectiveness  depends,  first,  on  the  extent  to  which  they  decrease  or  increase 
macroeconomic uncertainty, and second, on their ability to coordinate agents’ expectations 
towards a better equilibrium. Keynes was not in favour of systematic government intervention 
in the economy under all circumstances and all states of the world. In his view government 
should abstain from interfering with the normal functioning of the economy and should only 
step in under exceptional circumstances, in particular in the presence of a heightened state 
of uncertainty. This point was unfortunately lost on many of his followers after the Second 
World War, who advocated government intervention under all circumstances and all states of 
uncertainty, thus leading to policy mistakes such as the Great Inflation of the 1970s.  
To make sure that Keynes is back for good, and will not be returned to the shelves when the 
crisis is over, we need to fully understand the breadth of his analysis, in particular the role 
played  by  uncertainty  in  shaping  economic  outcomes.  I  would  like  to  make  a  contribution 
here  by  reviewing  a  few  key  aspects  of  his  analytical  work  regarding  the  importance  of 
uncertainty, the role of government intervention and the effectiveness of stabilisation policies.  
The importance of uncertainty 
1. 
In his Treatise on Probability,3 Keynes discussed three types of uncertainty. The first, and 
easiest to characterise and handle within macroeconomic models, is cardinal uncertainty. Its 
key feature is that it can be measured, and that a specific number can be attached to it. For 
example,  we  can  say  that,  based  on  data  from  the  last  (say)  thirty  years,  there  is  an  X% 
probability that next year the euro area economy will grow by Y%. An important assumption 
is that the structure of the economy must remain sufficiently stable over time, or, in case it 
experiences  time-variation,  both  the  type  of  variation,  and  its  pace  (or  velocity)  must  be 
known with a reasonable degree of accuracy.  
The second type is ordinal uncertainty. In such a situation, although no specific number can 
be attached to the probability of a specific event, we are still in a position to state that event A 
is more likely than event B. According to Keynes this was by far the single most important 
probability class.4 It’s important to stress that this second type of uncertainty lies outside the 
dominant  macroeconomic  framework.  Indeed,  according  to  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis, agents use the structure of the model in order to compute objective, numerical 
probabilities of alternative events occurring. Even in models where expectations are not fully 
rational, but rather computed on the basis of learning schemes, probabilities are computed 
econometrically. 
Finally,  there  is  the  so-called  “irreducible  uncertainty”  –  a  concept  originally  introduced  by 
Frank  Knight5  –  which  is  simply  based  on  the  fact  that  agents  have  no  rational  basis  for 
                                                 
3  Keynes (1921). 
4  See Skidelsky (2009, p. 85). 
5  Knight  first  introduced  this  concept  in  his  1916  doctoral  dissertation  at  Cornell  University,  which  was 
subsequently published in revised form in 1921 – see Knight (1921). 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2010
instability,  of 
the  danger  of  stagnation,  of 
making  any  probabilistic  statement  of  any  kind  about  a  specific  event  occurring  or  not 
occurring. 
It is obviously very difficult to identify which type of uncertainty prevails at a specific point in 
time, especially with respect to this third one.  
There is ample evidence to suggest that the 1930s was a period in which the third type of 
uncertainty dominated. Paul Valéry, writing in 1931, captured the zeitgeist well:6 “Instead of, 
as  in  the  past,  playing  an  honest  card  game  with  fate,  knowing  the  rules,  knowing  the 
number of cards and face cards, we are now in the position of a player who is astonished to 
discover that his adversary’s hand contains face cards never seen before, and that the rules 
of the game change with each hand.” As The Magazine of Wall Street put it a month after 
Black Thursday:7 “Uncertainty is worse than knowing the truth, no matter how bad ”. This was 
the psychological climate and state of mind Franklin Roosevelt was referring to when, in his 
inaugural address as President of the United States in 1933, he stated that “the only thing we 
have to fear is fear itself ”. 
The economic literature confirms the uncertainty prevailing during those days. In their classic 
Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,8  Friedman  and  Schwartz  pointed  out  that:  “The 
contraction  after  1929  clearly  shattered  beliefs  in  a  “new  era”,  in  the  likelihood  of  long-
continued  stability  […].  The  contraction  instilled  instead  an  exaggerated  fear  of  continued 
economic 
the  possibility  of  recurrent 
unemployment”.  Events  such  as  the  1929  stock  market  crash,  or  the  September  2008 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, create a vast amount of “irreducible uncertainty”, which exerts 
paralysing  effects  on  spending  decisions  and  may  cause  the  economy  to  slide  into  a 
depression. 
During the months immediately following the 1929 crash, indeed, both consumer purchases 
of  durable  goods  and  business  investment  dropped  sharply,  while  spending  on  perishable 
goods rose slightly. Christina Romer (1990) argues that the most likely explanation for this 
phenomenon is that the uncertainty generated by the financial crisis induced both consumers 
and firms to put off purchases of durable and investment goods, respectively, thus causing 
the  economy  to  stall  and  contract.  The  mechanism  underlying  this  “wait  and  see”  attitude 
during periods of heightened uncertainty has been well known since the work of Bernanke 
(1983), and it has been extensively explored by Dixit and Pindyck (1994). The key point is 
that when a specific purchase is irreversible, as is the case with either investment or durable 
goods purchases, agents must make a trade-off between the benefit deriving from an early 
commitment  and  those  deriving  from  waiting  for  better  information.  Within  such  an 
environment,  an  increase  in  uncertainty  can  therefore  naturally  lead  to  a  postponement  of 
expenditure decisions in order to get better information, thus causing a fall in demand. 
The  effects  of  irreducible  uncertainty  tend  to  have  a  long-lasting  economic  impact.  For 
instance, one of the leading explanations for Mehra and Prescott’s (1985) “equity premium 
puzzle” – i.e. the large excess return of stocks over the risk-free rate which has characterised 
the last several decades – has to do with the trauma of the Great Depression, and with the 
public’s  gradual  and  slow  realisation  of  the  aberrant  nature  of  those  years,  which  led  the 
equity premium to gradually decrease from the peaks reached during the 1930s.9 
                                                 
6  From Paul Valéry (1931), “Regards Sur Le Monde Actuel”, as quoted by Delpech (2007). 
7  As quoted by Romer (1990). 
8  See Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
9  See in particular Cogley and Sargent (2008). 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 3
The role of government intervention 
2. 
Classical theory maintains that government should not interfere with the interaction between 
economic  agents,  because  this  would  lead  to  a  sub-optimal  allocation  of  resources.  This 
approach may apply also to situations of heightened uncertainty, to the extent that sooner or 
later  the  economy  is  expected  to get  back  to normal.  By  not  intervening,  the  policy-maker 
avoids  introducing  distortions  into  the  economy  which  may  cause  further  and  graver 
problems later on.  
The notion that the excesses and imbalances that lead to a crisis should be allowed to play 
out  and  unwind  without  government  intervention  was  the  intellectual  rationale  behind  the 
position  of  Herbert  Hoover’s  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Andrew  Mellon,  during  the  early 
years  of  the  Depression,  when  he  famously  stated:  “Liquidate  labor,  liquidate  stocks, 
liquidate  the  farmers,  liquidate  real  estate[…].  Purge  the  rottenness  out  of  the  system.” 
Expressed  less  dramatically,  Mellon’s  idea  was  that  the  crisis  originated  in  a  series  of 
distortions  which  had  been  building  up  in  the  American  economy  during  the  “Roaring 
Twenties”,  first  and  foremost  a  highly  overvalued  stock  market,  and,  to  a  slightly  lesser 
extent,  a  housing  boom.  Given  that  the  problem  resulted  from  massive  distortions  and 
imbalances  that  developed  over  the  years,  the  only  way  to  solve  the  problem  was  to  wait 
patiently  until  the  imbalances  unwound.  Once  the  storm  had  passed,  the  economy  would 
return to equilibrium, an equilibrium, it is important to note, free from the previous distortions.  
There  are  (at  least)  three  reasons  why  this  approach,  although  at  first  sight  intellectually 
attractive,  might  be  flawed.  The  first  reason  is  the  theoretical  possibility  that  the  economy 
possesses multiple equilibria, so that an especially large negative shock may push it into a 
permanent  underemployment  equilibrium.  Over  the  last  three  decades  a  branch  of 
macroeconomic research has further explored the idea, proposed by Keynes in “The General 
Theory”,  that  the  economy  may  possess  a  continuum  of  equilibria,  so  that  autonomous 
fluctuations in the degree of “optimism” or “pessimism” can move it from one equilibrium to 
the other, thus generating booms and recessions. Diamond (1982),10 for instance, develops 
a model characterised by trading externalities. The key intuition is that a firm’s optimal level 
of production crucially depends on the probability of finding buyers, which in turn depends on 
the level of aggregate demand. So if the firm thinks that the probability of selling its output is 
low, it will produce less. But since this holds for all firms, this attitude will generate a low level 
of aggregate demand, so that the initial pessimistic belief will be validated. Such an economy 
exhibits multiple equilibria, and, in principle, there is no reason why one of them should be 
“preferred”, or should be regarded as “more likely” than any other, so that the economy, once 
dislocated  from  a  high-employment  equilibrium  by  (say)  a  large  bout  of  pessimism,  can 
potentially  remain  in  the  low  equilibrium.  In  recent  years,  this  position  has  been  mainly 
associated  with  the  work  of  Roger  Farmer,  who  has  produced  several  examples  of 
economies characterised by a continuum of equilibria. Keynesian “animal spirits” may select 
one of these as “the” equilibrium which will ultimately prevail.11 
The possible existence of multiple equilibria, with a significant fraction of them characterised 
by  extensive  unemployment  and  under-utilisation  of  productive  resources,  provides  a 
conceptual rationale for government intervention in the economy. In this kind of environment, 
government’s  fundamental  role  is  to  help  coordinate  the  private  sector’s  expectations  in 
respect  of  one  of  the  high-employment  equilibria.  The  second  reason  why  government 
intervention is justified in the face of uncertainty is the possibility of deflation. On this I will be 
brief, because the argument is well known, and it has been well understood at least since the 
work of Irving Fisher.12 The key point is that, because of the zero lower bound on nominal 
                                                 
10  Diamond (1982 a, b; 1984). 
11  See, for example, Farmer (1999). 
12  See Fisher (1932, 1933). 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2010
interest  rates,  once  the  economy  has  fallen  into  a  deflationary  trap,  traditional  monetary 
policy tools, and in particular, changes in the short-term policy rate, are ineffective at lifting it 
out of the doldrums. To be sure, this does not imply that monetary policy, as more generally 
conceived, is ineffective under these circumstances.13 
The third reason has to do with the fact that the severity of the economic contraction may 
change the economy’s equilibrium level – or potential output – bringing it down together with 
actual output. This is routinely ignored by standard macroeconomic models, which are “log-
linearised”  (in  plain  English,  approximated)  around  a  fixed  equilibrium,  and  for  which 
macroeconomic  fluctuations  are,  by  construction,  temporary.  Although  the  assumption  that 
the economy’s equilibrium is independent of past business fluctuations represents a useful 
simplification when dealing with comparatively small fluctuations, this is not the case when 
we are dealing with collapses on the scale of the Great Depression, for the simple reason 
that they may trigger chains of events that can lower potential output permanently.  
There are several mechanisms through which a comparatively large economic downturn may 
lead  to  a  permanent  decrease  in  potential  output.  One  mechanism  involves  the  impact  of 
long  periods  of  unemployment  on  workers’  skill  sets,  their  productivity  and  their  very 
attachment to the labour force. To put it simply, the longer a worker is unemployed, the more 
his  or  her  skill  set  deteriorates  because  of  lack  of  use,  and  the  more  tenuous  his  or  her 
attachment  to  the  labour  force  becomes,  with  the  result  that,  as  time  passes,  the  less 
employable the worker becomes. In the end, some workers even drop out of the labour force 
altogether. This phenomenon used to characterise Europe, whereas the US labour market, 
significantly more flexible and dynamic, was essentially immune to it, with a comparatively 
low fraction of long-term unemployed. It is a measure of the depth of the recession in the 
United States that, in October of last year, nearly 40% of the unemployed had been out of a 
job for at least six months, whereas 20% had been jobless for at least a year.14 In both cases 
these were significantly higher figures than the corresponding ones for the recession of the 
early 1980s. 
The effectiveness of stabilisation policies 
3. 
Given the previously mentioned problems associated with a classical, laissez-faire approach 
in the presence of a heightened state of uncertainty, government has the responsibility under 
such circumstances to intervene in order to counteract the potentially devastating effects on 
the  economy.  Since  –  as  previously  mentioned  with  reference  to  the  period  following  the 
stock market collapse of 1929 – situations characterised by a heightened state of uncertainty 
are  also  typically  associated  with  a  collapse  in  aggregate  demand,  the  effectiveness  of 
stabilisation policies under these circumstances crucially depends on their ability to stimulate 
aggregate expenditure.  
A substantial body of literature has developed in recent decades showing how monetary and 
fiscal  policies  can  contribute  to  stabilising  income.  The  literature  is  based  on  several 
alternative  approaches,  from  the  so-called  “narrative  approach”  originally  introduced  by 
Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz in their historical analysis of US monetary policy,15 to 
                                                 
13  See, e.g., Orphanides (2003). 
14  As reported in the Financial Times of 23 November 2009 (see “US feels pain of long-term joblessness", by 
Sarah O’Connor). 
15  See Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 5
the  technically  clearest  evidence  coming  from  structural  vector  autoregressions16  and 
estimated general equilibrium macroeconomic models.17  
Macroeconomic  policies  can  contribute  to  decrease  heightened  uncertainty  by  supporting 
aggregate  demand  but  also  by  improving  the  functioning  of  markets.  As  we  have  seen 
recently, a key characteristic of such periods is that financial markets’ normal trading activity 
tends to become severely impaired, to the point that a significant fraction of operators may 
even  stop  trading  with  one  another,  thus  leading  to  a  credit  crunch,  and  to  a  further 
contraction in aggregate demand. Under these circumstances, central banks can intervene, 
for  example,  by  accommodating  banks’  liquidity  demand  at  a  pre-specified  interest  rate, 
lengthening the maturities of long-term refinancing operations, or expanding the list of assets 
which  banks  can  use  as  collateral.  All  these  measures  support  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets, thus countering the effects of the credit crunch and ultimately decreasing irreducible 
uncertainty and supporting aggregate demand. This prevents the economy from entering a 
recessionary  loop,  in  which  the  freezing-up  of  financial  markets  leads  to  a  contraction  of 
credit,  which,  in  turn,  leads  to  an  economic  contraction,  additional  uncertainty,  and  further 
financial market immobility, in a self-reinforcing cycle.  
The fact that macroeconomic policies can help to stabilise the economy, and prevent deep 
downturns,  by  reducing  the  heightened  state  of  uncertainty  prevailing  among  economic 
agents  does  not  mean  that  they  are  always  effective,  under  all  circumstances.  On  the 
contrary,  experience  has  shown  that  these  policies  may  well  turn  out  to  be  destabilising, 
especially if they are implemented in a way which increases the state of uncertainty, instead 
of  reducing  it.  This  may  happen,  in  particular,  if  the  size  of  the  fiscal  and/or  monetary 
injection is such that irreducible uncertainty is increased, rather than reduced.  
A case in point is when a government runs up a succession of very large deficits and ends 
up accumulating an excessive stock of national debt. At the limit, this may even lead to a 
dislocation  of  inflation  expectations,  as  financial  markets  start  to  expect  that  part  of  the 
national debt will be simply “inflated away” – that is, it will be eroded via higher inflation18 – 
with a resulting increase in interest rates. By definition, preventing a dangerous build-up of 
national debt requires keeping budget deficits under control. When this is especially difficult 
because  of  the  sheer  magnitude  of  the  recession,  governments  should  –  at  the  very 
minimum – provide financial markets with a clear “re-entry plan”, carefully specifying both the 
timeframe within which the deficit will be brought under control, and the specific measures 
the particular government intends to take. 
The need to avoid creating excessive uncertainty about a country’s long-term fiscal solvency 
represents the fundamental limit to the extent of the fiscal stimulus which can be injected into 
the economy. As Skidelsky19 observes, Keynes himself would not have excluded balanced 
budgets even during a recession, if this was needed to minimise the risk of sowing doubts 
about  long-term  fiscal  solvency  in  the  minds  of  market  operators.  The  alternative  is  an 
increase  in  the  risk  premia  that  financial  markets  require  in  order  to  absorb  government 
bonds,  and  therefore  an  increase  in  interest  rates.  In  turn,  this  results  in  lower  capital 
accumulation, and therefore, ceteris paribus, in lower productivity and output per capita.  
Empirical evidence suggests that countries whose level of national debt exceeds a certain 
threshold are also characterised by comparatively lower growth: Reinhart and Rogoff (2010), 
analysing  a  dataset  which  spans  the  last  few  centuries  and  comprises  several  dozen 
countries, show that, for those countries with a government debt-to-GDP ratio of over 90%, 
                                                 
16  See in particular Christiano et al. (1999). 
17  See in particular Christiano et al. (1999). 
18  See Aizenmann and Marion (2009). 
19  See Skidelsky (2009, Chapter 8). 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2010
median  GDP  growth  tends  to  be  about  one  percentage  point  lower  than  it  would  be 
otherwise.  Although  at  first  sight  this  may  appear  small,  when  cumulated  over  decades  it 
leads to significantly lower standards of living.  
Empirical  evidence  also  shows  that  higher  deficit-to-GDP  and  debt-to-GDP  ratios  lead  to 
higher  interest  rates  even  when  there  are  no  doubts  about  fiscal  solvency.  A  study  by 
Thomas Laubach20 based on US data, for example, estimates that every percentage point 
increase in the projected deficit-to-GDP ratio results in an increase in long-term interest rates 
of  20  to  29  basis  points,  whereas  a  percentage  point  increase  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is 
associated with an increase of about 3 to 4 basis points. Once again, although such effects 
may seem tiny, when cumulated over long periods of time their impact becomes significant. 
Another fundamental problem of fiscal policy is its lack of timeliness, or, to put it differently, 
its implementation lags. Whereas automatic stabilisers such as unemployment benefits are 
built  into  the  system,  and  therefore  have  no  implementation  lags  to  speak  of,  decisions 
concerning taxation and expenditure are legislated by parliament. As a result, as extensively 
discussed  in  standard  macroeconomic  textbooks,  a  fiscal  stimulus  may  come  to  be 
implemented with a potentially significant delay. A conceptually related problem with using 
fiscal  policy  as  a  stabilisation  tool  is  that  its  need  to  “pass  through  the  political  process” 
inevitably decreases its predictability. Fiscal stimulus packages, quite inevitably, become part 
of  a  larger  bargaining  process  between  competing  interest  groups,  so  that  not  only  the 
timing,  but  also  the  extent  and  composition  of  the  fiscal  stimulus  become  comparatively 
uncertain.  
Monetary policy has also its limitations when it comes to stabilisation purposes. One problem 
is  that  low  interest  rates,  if  protracted,  may  fuel  new  imbalances,  in  particular  bubbles  in 
asset  markets,  increasing  uncertainty  across  the  board,  rather  than  decreasing  it.  Once 
again,  this  is  nothing  but  an  illustration  of  the  same  general  point  I  previously  made  with 
reference  to  the  need  to  guarantee  fiscal  solvency:  the  fundamental  limit  to  government 
stabilisation policies is that such interventions should never increase overall uncertainty, and 
they should rather decrease it.  
This point was very clear to Keynes, but it was unfortunately lost on many of his followers 
during the early decades of the post-WWII period, who advocated government intervention 
under all circumstances, in order to keep the economy as close to potential as possible – that 
is,  to  “fine-tune”  it.  The  dangers  intrinsic  to  such  an  approach  to  stabilisation  policy  were 
pointed  out  by  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  William  Martin  in  his  February  1965  testimony 
before the Joint Economic Committee of the US Congress when he stated that: “There is, 
inevitably,  an  element  of  brinkmanship  in  our  laudable  efforts  to  push  our  economy  closer 
and closer to its full potential without straining it ”. The “brinkmanship” Martin mentioned has 
to  do  with  a  key  limitation  of  “fine-tuning”  policies  which  had  long  been  discussed  by 
monetarists  such  as  Milton  Friedman  and  Karl  Brunner:21  the  use  of  stabilisation  policies 
under  all  circumstances  is  predicated  on  a  reasonably  precise  knowledge  of  equilibrium 
levels, such as potential output and the natural rate of unemployment. Since they are both 
unobserved,  and  they  both  change  over  time,  the  use  of  such  policies  under  normal 
circumstances,  in  order  to  keep  the  economy  constantly  close  to  potential,  is  inevitably 
bound  to  fail.  And  indeed,  one  of  the  dominant  explanations  for  the  Great  Inflation  of  the 
1970s in the US traces its origins to the combination of “fine-tuning” policies and the inability 
of the Federal Reserve to detect the productivity slowdown of the 1960s–1970s in real time, 
thus resulting in a systematic over-estimation of the true extent of slack in the economy.22 
Since output gap measures were a key ingredient in the Fed’s monetary policy process, this 
                                                 
20  See Laubach (2009). 
21  See Friedman (1947) and Brunner (1985). 
22  See Orphanides, (2002, 2003 a, b). 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 7
automatically  resulted  in  an  excessively  loose  monetary  policy,  thus  igniting  and  then 
perpetuating the Great Inflation. 
The  fact  that  the  origin  of  the  inflationary  upsurge  of  the  1970s  is  to  be  found  in  the  fine-
tuning  policies  of  that  era  provides  a  stark  illustration  of  the  dangers  associated  with 
systematic  government  intervention  under  normal  circumstances  –  specifically,  under 
circumstances  which  are  not  characterised  by  irreducible  uncertainty.  As  extensively 
discussed  by  Milton  Friedman  in  his  critique  of  so-called  “Keynesian  stabilisation  policies”, 
even  in  a  best-case  scenario  the  systematic  use  of  such  policies  injects  noise  into  the 
economy,  thus  increasing  uncertainty  across  the  board.  This  was  the  key  rationale  for 
Friedman’s  rejection  of  discretion  in  favour  of  a  simple  monetary  policy  rule  such  as  the 
“k-percent rule”, according to which the central bank should focus on stabilising the rate of 
growth of the money supply at a specific value.  
There  is  a  further,  and  subtler  aspect  to  this.  As  was  demonstrated  by  the  rational 
expectations  school  back  in  the  1970s,  if  agents  are  rational,  only  the  unsystematic 
component  of  policy  –  that  is,  only  a  policy  surprise  –  has  an  impact  on  macroeconomic 
outcomes. But this implies that a policy-maker who aims to pursue stabilisation policies can 
only do that by systematically surprising the private sector, which is an obvious contradiction 
in  terms,  as  policy  surprises,  by  definition,  cannot  be  systematic:  if  they  were  systematic, 
indeed, they would be taken into account by private agents when forming expectations, and 
they would therefore be nullified. The conclusion, once again, is that, unless the economy is 
in a state of extreme uncertainty, systematic government intervention injects noise into the 
system, therefore increasing overall uncertainty. 
To  be  sure,  this  does  not  imply  that  any  kind  of  government  intervention  per  se  is 
counterproductive:  structural  policies  aimed  at  (e.g.)  fostering  productivity  growth,  or 
increasing 
force  participation  rates,  are  examples  of  beneficial  government 
interventions. The key reason why such policies are beneficial, however, is that rather than 
attempting  to  stabilise  the  economy  around  an  unobserved  and  imprecisely  estimated 
equilibrium level, they aim to increase such a level. As a consequence, structural policies do 
not  suffer  from  the  drawbacks  afflicting  systematic  stabilisation  policies  under  normal 
circumstances. 
labour 
Conclusions 
Keynes’ major contribution has been to challenge common wisdom, which rests on human 
beings’ innate tendency to tackle the problems they face in the same way as they did in the 
past, expecting to achieve the same outcome, even when circumstances differ. After the First 
World War, he accused the leaders of the time of “attacking the problems of the post-war 
world with unmodified pre-war views and ideas”.23 He repeated this charge after the Great 
Depression. Their failure to listen led to even greater problems.  
What are the lessons for our critical times?  
Let me elaborate on my personal views, considering in particular the role of policy-makers. 
Keynes has taught us to assess carefully the state of the world we live in before designing 
the  policies  that  authorities  should  implement.  When  heightened  uncertainty  prevails, 
government has a role to play in adopting measures that contribute to reducing the state of 
uncertainty  and  in  helping  economic  agents  coordinate  expectations  towards  a  socially 
optimal outcome. This raises a few difficulties for policy authorities. First, they have to assess 
whether the state of uncertainty is such as to justify active intervention. Second, they have to 
design  policies  that  help  to  reduce  uncertainty,  rather  than  increase  it.  History  is  full  of 
                                                 
23  J.M. Keynes, “Letter to Sir Charles Addis”, 25 July 1924, in Collected Writings, 19: 337–44. 
8 
 BIS Review 21/2010
examples of policy mistakes made in both directions, i.e. of states of heightened uncertainty 
which  were  not  recognised  and  were  not  accompanied  by  adequate  actions,  and  states 
which were considered as being of heightened uncertainty even though they were not and 
were  accompanied  by  policy  actions  which  increased  uncertainty  instead  of  decreasing  it. 
These are the typical type I and type II errors recognised in statistical analysis. 
How can we avoid making these mistakes, in the midst of the deepest economic slump since 
the  Second  World  War?  In  particular,  how  can  we  avoid  the  temptation  to  address  the 
problems of the post-crisis world with unmodified pre-crisis views and ideas? 
At  the  start  of  the  crisis,  authorities  around  the  world  intervened  massively,  using  both 
monetary and fiscal instruments. This prevented a total collapse of economic activity, which 
has  now  started  to  recover.  The  type  I  error  has  been  avoided.  Keynes’  lesson  has  been 
understood. 
The key question, from now on, is how to avoid the type II error, which consists of overstating 
the  conditions  of  uncertainty  and  implementing  policies  which  may  increase  uncertainty, 
rather than decrease it. I see here a risk that the lessons of the crisis will be quickly forgotten 
if the analytical framework underlying the policy decisions is not substantially improved. Let 
me give some examples.  
First, most models continue to assume that markets price assets in an efficient way and that 
agents  form  expectations  in  a  fully  rational  way.  The  state  of  uncertainty  in  the  economy 
continues to be assessed on the basis of market indicators, which have proven in the recent 
past  to  be  potentially  quite  misleading.  For  example,  the  sustainability  of  monetary  and 
economic policies is often evaluated in accordance with market-based indicators related in 
particular  to  inflation  expectations  and  credit  risk  premia.  Low  inflation  expectations  and 
default premia are often interpreted as a sign that markets are attributing a low probability to 
the risk that policies may become unsustainable. However, we have seen in the recent past 
that  markets  tend  to  adjust  prices  in  a  discontinuous  way.  Analysing  policy  sustainability 
exclusively  on  the  basis  of  market  indicators  may  create  the  illusion  that  inflation 
expectations are well anchored or that markets are willing to continue finance large budget 
deficits, thus creating an incentive for unduly prolonging very expansionary policies.  
Second, most models continue to be based on an unchanged belief about the capacity of 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  action  to  pilot  the  economy  towards  full  employment.  As 
mentioned  previously,  Keynes  taught  us  that  policy  multipliers  change  depending  on  the 
underlying  state  of  the  economy  and  on  its  prospects.  This  insight  was  rationalised  in  the 
mid-1970s by Robert Lucas, a neo-classical economist, in his seminal critique of econometric 
policy  evaluation.24  In  spite  of  this  rare  conjunction  of  minds,  mainstream  analytical 
frameworks, ironically named neo-Keynesian DSGE, largely ignore this aspect. No wonder 
that the policy analysis based on these models tend to be backward looking. For example, 
some recent suggestions have gone to the extreme of advising monetary policy to target a 
higher rate of inflation than what central banks currently do, so as to create more room for 
manoeuvre for monetary policy to react when bubbles burst without prematurely hitting the 
zero  lower  bound  for  interest  rates.  It’s  as  if  to  say  that  the  main  problem  with  monetary 
policy in the recent past was that the so-called Greenspan put had not been potent enough 
to  avoid  the  negative  consequences  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  rather  than  being  a 
mistaken policy which fuelled the bubble in the first place. “Errare humanum est, perseverare 
diabolicum!”  
Third, and most important, analytical models that underpin policy decisions are based on a 
key variable which characterises the long-term steady state of the economy. Recent debates 
have focused on whether and how the growth potential of our economies will be affected by 
                                                 
24  Lucas (1976). 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 9
the current crisis. This is obviously the key to understanding the current state of slack in the 
economy,  the  size  of  the  output  gap  and  thus  the  degree  of  stimulus  which  is  required  to 
push the economy towards its full employment level. But it seems to me that the debate on 
this  issue  is  based  on  the  wrong  assumption.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  in  the  years 
preceding  the  crisis  economic  activity  was  on  an  unsustainable  path  because  of 
inappropriate  macroeconomic,  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  which  particularly 
encouraged excessive debt accumulation. It is thus considered that changes in these policies 
would  make  it  possible  to  avoid  repeating  the  mistakes  of  the  past  although,  as  I  just 
showed, there is no guarantee that such wisdom will prevail. What is missing, in my view, is 
some  deeper  thinking  about  why  policy-makers  and  economic  agents  more  generally  took 
inappropriate decisions. 
I  believe  the  actions  and  policies  were  unsustainable  because  they  were  aiming  at  an 
objective which was not sustainable. At the heart of the wrong decisions that were made in 
the  past,  and  which  led  to  the  crisis,  was  the  expectation  that  the  increase  in  prosperity 
experienced by our societies in previous decades would simply continue, unaffected by the 
ongoing  integration  of  emerging  market  countries  into  the  global  system.  Policies,  be  they 
regulatory  or  macroeconomic,  aimed  at  achieving  a  rate  of  economic  growth  which  was 
based on past experience and which turned out to be too high. These policies were thus too 
expansionary,  leading  agents  to  borrow  excessively,  and  they  fuelled  a  bubble  which 
ultimately burst. In my view, advanced economies have not appropriately taken into account 
how  globalisation,  and  the  integration  of  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  into  the  market 
economy,  might  affect  their  standard  of  living,  including  the  possibility  of  a  slower  pace  of 
economic  growth  and  greater  inequalities  within  societies.25  A  few  years  ago  Samuelson 
dared  to  challenge  the  common  wisdom  according  to  which  the  law  of  comparative 
advantage  always  and  everywhere  benefits  all  parties  engaging  in  trade.26  His  hypothesis 
implied that a fast rate of growth in some parts of the world economy could reduce the rate of 
growth,  and  increase  its  dispersion,  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  His  ideas  were  rapidly 
dismissed,  not  only  in  academic  circles  but  more  generally  by  society.  There  is,  to  my 
knowledge, very little research being done in this field, with the notable exception of Ragu 
Rajan.27  
I think that Samuelson’s analysis can help to explain why the trend rate of income growth in 
the  advanced  economies  might  have  slowed  down  substantially  during  the  last  few  years, 
upsetting the social and political balance on which that growth rested. In particular, it helps to 
understand  why,  for  the  first  time  since  World  War  II  the  prospects  for  the  younger 
generations  appear  to  be  overall  less  promising  than  for  the  previous  ones.  And  why 
advanced economies, by pursuing policies with an ultimately unrealistic objective, fell into a 
crisis.  
If the above hypothesis is correct, then it’s a mistake to think that we can get out of this crisis 
and back on a path of sustainable growth only through the support of fiscal and monetary 
policies. To paraphrase Keynes, monetary and fiscal policies are “a subtle device for linking 
the present to the future”. These policies may be seriously misguided if they are based on 
false  expectations  about  the  future.  On  the  other  hand,  the  success  of  these  policies  in 
averting  a  collapse  of  the  world  economy  right  after  the  Lehman  Brothers’  failure,  in  the 
autumn  of  2008,  might  fuel  the  illusion  that  the  same  policies  can  bring  us  back  to  the 
halcyon  days  of  mid–2007,  when  we  were  “still  dancing”  as  one  famous  banker  put  it.  It 
would be an illusion, as I just said. And a waste of time and effort. 
                                                 
25  I briefly discussed these views in Bini Smaghi (2009). 
26  Samuelson (2004). 
27  Rajan is working on a book in which he analyses the impact of growing inequalities in advanced economies on 
agents’ behaviour leading to the crisis. 
10 
 BIS Review 21/2010
To avoid this waste, we need to come back to Keynes’ intuition, which is that the problems of 
the  future  cannot  be  dealt  with  simply  by  applying  the  solutions  of  the  past,  because  the 
problems  of  the  future  are  different  from  the  problems  of  the  past.  If  we  want  to  put  our 
societies  back  on  a  path  of  sustainable  prosperity  we  must  stand  ready  to  fundamentally 
reform the way in which our economies work and compete in the global environment.  
In doing that, we may well have to resuscitate some defunct economist. And read their work 
carefully. 
References 
Aizenmann,  Joshua,  and  Marion,  Nancy  (2009),  “Using  Inflation  to  Erode  the  U.S.  Public 
Debt”, NBER Working Paper 15562, December 2009. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (1983),  “Irreversibility,  Uncertainty,  and  Cyclical  Investment”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 98(1), 85–106. 
Bini Smaghi, L. (2009), “Towards the G8 – strategies for emerging from the crisis”, speech at 
the LUISS University, 27 May 2009 (www.ecb.int). 
Brunner, K. (1985), “Monetary Policy and Monetary Order”, in Monetary Policy and Monetary 
Regimes,  Center  for  Research  in  Government  Policy  and  Business,  Number  CS–17, 
Graduate School of Management, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY. 
Cogley,  Timothy  W.,  and  Thomas  J.  Sargent  (2008),  “The  Market  Price  of  Risk  and  the 
Equity Premium: A Legacy of the Great Depression?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 
454–476.  
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (1999), “Monetary Policy 
Shocks:  What  Have  We  Learned  and  to  What  End?”,  in  Taylor,  J.  B.,  and  Woodford,  M., 
eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam, North Holland. 
Christiano,  Lawrence  J.,  Martin  Eichenbaum,  and  Sergio  Rebelo  (2009),  “When  Is  the 
Government Spending Multiplier Large?”, Northwestern University, mimeo. 
Delpech,  Thérèse  (2007),  Savage  Century:  Back  to  Barbarism,  Carnegie  Endowment  for 
International Peace. 
Denes, Matthew, and Eggertson, Gauti (2009), “A Bayesian Approach to Estimating Tax and 
Spending Multipliers”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 403. 
Diamond, Peter (1982 a), “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium”, Journal 
of Political Economy, 90(5), 881–894.  
Diamond,  Peter  (1982  b),  “Wage  Determination  and  Efficiency  in  Search  Equilibrium”, 
Review of Economic Studies, 49, 217–227. 
Diamond, Peter (1984), “Money in Search Equilibrium”, Econometrica, 52, 1–20. 
Dixit, Avinash K., and Pindyck, Robert S. (1994), Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton 
University Press. 
Eggertson, Gauti (2009), “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?”, Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Staff  Report  no.  402,  November  2009,  prepared  for  Daron 
Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annuals 
2010, The MIT Press, forthcoming. 
Evans,  George,  and  Seppo  Honkapohja 
Macroeconomics, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press. 
Farmer,  Roger  (1999),  The  Macroeconomics  of  Self-Fulfilling  Prophecies,  Cambridge,  The 
MIT Press. 
Fisher, Irving (1932), Booms and Depressions, Pickering Masters Series.  
(2001),  Learning  and  Expectations 
in 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 11
Fisher, Irving (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica, 1(4), 
337–357. 
Friedman,  M.  (1947)  “Lerner  on  the  Economics  of  Control”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
55(5), 405–416. 
Friedman,  Milton,  and  A.J.  Schwartz  (1963),  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  
1867–1960, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press. 
Giavazzi,  Francesco  (2009),  “Issues  in  the  design  of  a  fiscal  exit  strategy”,  prepared  for 
discussion at the Informal Ecofin meeting, Götenborg, 1–2 October 2009. 
Issing, O. (2005), “Why Did the Great Inflation Not Happen in Germany?”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April 2005, 87(2, Part 2), 329–35. 
Keynes,  John  M.  (1973–89),  The  Collected  Writings  of  John  Maynard  Keynes,  Macmillan, 
London. 
Keynes,  John  M.  (1921),  A  Treatise  on  Probability,  in  The  Collected  Writings  of  John 
Maynard Keynes. 
Keynes,  John  M.  (1936),  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest,  and  Money,  in  The 
Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. 
Knight,  Frank  (1921),  Risk,  Uncertainty,  and  Profit,  Boston,  MA:  Hart,  Schaffner  &  Marx; 
Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Laubach, Thomas (2009), “New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget Deficits and 
Debt”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 7, 858–885. 
Lucas,  R.  (1976),  “Econometric  Policy  Evaluation:  a  Critique”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, 2, Supplement, Carnegie Rochester Conference series, Vol. 1.  
Mehra,  Rajnish,  and  Edward  Prescott  (1985),  “The  Equity  Premium:  A  Puzzle”  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 15(March), 145–61. 
Orphanides, A. (2002), “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation”, American Economic 
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), pp. 115–120. 
Orphanides,  A.  (2003a),  “The  Quest  for  Prosperity  Without  Inflation”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, 50, pp. 633–663. 
Orphanides, A. (2003b), “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor rule”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, 50, 983–1022. 
Reinhart,  Carmen,  and  Kenneth  Rogoff  (2010),  “Growth  in  a  Time  of  Debt”,  American 
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming. 
Romer,  Christina  D.  (1990),  “The  Great  Crash  and  the  Onset  of  the  Great  Depression”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(August), 597–624. 
Roosevelt, Franklin D. (1933) , “First Inaugural Address”, delivered on 4 March 1933. 
Samuelson, P. (2004), “Where Ricardo and Mill rebut and confirm arguments of mainstream 
economists supporting globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 3, pp. 135–146. 
Skidelsky, Robert (2009), Keynes: The Return of the Master, Allen Lane. 
Smets,  Frank  and  Rafael  Wouters  (2003),  “An  Estimated  Stochastic  Dynamic  General 
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 
1123–1175. 
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A 
Bayesian DSGE Approach”, American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606. 
12 
 BIS Review 21/2010
