Guy Quaden: Basel III and beyond 
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Eurofi 
Financial Forum, Brussels, 28 September 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  Brussels  Eurofi  conference 
and to share some thoughts with you at this opening session. It is now just about 3 years 
after the US subprime crisis triggered world-wide financial turbulence and 2 years after the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers dramatically escalated the crisis.  
The  crisis  has  seriously  dented  belief  in  the  ability  of  the  markets  to  regulate  themselves. 
There are currently a lot of items on the agenda of international fora waiting to be dealt with. 
The Financial Stability Board at the G20 level as well as Ecofin at the EU level have drawn 
up detailed roadmaps to pave the way for extensive reforms.  
The crisis has indeed given rise to a unique momentum for profound reforms of the financial 
system.  
We should not let this momentum slip away. Unfortunately the general public sometimes gets 
that impression.  
Of course many complicated technical issues have had to be resolved. And I admit that it will 
be important to introduce the new regulations in a timely manner so as not to hamper the 
smooth flow of credit which will be required to support the nascent recovery. In fact, while 
there  is  much  discussion  as  to  the  design  of  the  exit  strategy  from  the  public  support 
measures, in the monetary and financial fields, we should be equally aware of the need for 
an entry strategy for moving over to more comprehensive regulatory requirements.  
From this point of view the recent proposal coming from Basel represents a very important 
contribution.  
Two weeks ago, the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision, the oversight body of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, endorsed a broad proposal to strengthen the 
quality  and  quantity  of  regulatory  capital  held  by  banks  and  to  institute  a  global  liquidity 
standard. This proposal, the heart of the new Basel III framework, will be submitted to the 
approval of the leaders of the G20 countries at their November summit in Seoul.  
The proposal represents a major reform of banking regulations, which should substantially 
improve  the  resilience  of  banks  to  stress  conditions,  thus  reinforcing  financial  stability  and 
reducing the occurrence of a new crisis with injection of public money. Key elements include 
not only an increase in the minimum regulatory capital requirement but also an increase in 
the  amount  of  capital  that  must  be  held  in  the  form  of  common  equity,  which  offers  the 
greatest capacity for loss absorption.  
I will not discuss the various proposed ratios in detail, as by now I am sure you know them 
quite well. 
Many in the banking industry complained and argued that these reforms will make lending 
more expensive and imply a decline in the quantity of credit and, therefore, of GDP. We in 
the  regulatory  community  believe  that  the  length  of  the  transition  periods  provided  for  the 
implementation  of  the  new  rules  will  significantly  diminish  the  costs,  to  banks  and  the 
economy  alike.  Consequently,  the  economic  cost  of  the  transition  towards  the  new 
requirements  should  be  very  small  in  relation  to  the  magnitude  of  the  long-term  benefits, 
derived  from  reducing  the  probability  of  financial  crises  and  the  severe  loss  in  GDP  and 
growth that would ensue.  
BIS Review 124/2010 
 1
Moreover  the  banks  can  use  different  avenues  to  reach,  if  needed,  higher  capital  ratios: 
raising new funds, retaining a larger part of their profit, reducing some activities that are more 
risky.  
While the current proposal addresses a large part of the G20 global financial reform agenda, 
work on some crucial, additional elements will have to be completed in the coming months, in 
particular concerning the modalities of the introduction of a countercyclical buffer and new 
liquidity ratios.  
But I would like to insist in this short statement on a very critical macroprudential issue not 
yet  really  addressed:  the  potential  impact  of  failure  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, or SIFIs, and the moral hazard associated with the belief that these institutions 
are too big to fail, a curiosity and, if I may say so, an extravagance in a market economy.  
The  Basel  Committee  is  currently  working  together  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board  to 
develop  a  comprehensive,  global  approach  to  SIFIs  that  could  involve  a  potential  mix  of 
policies such as capital or liquidity surcharges, large exposure limits, contingent capital, and 
bail-in  debt.  The  goal  is  for  each  jurisdiction  to  have  in  place  a  SIFI  policy.  Effective 
resolution regimes, will constitute the basis of the approach, upon which other policies would 
build.  A  cornerstone  of  this  foundation  should,  I  think,  consist  of  recovery  and  resolution 
plans, or “living wills”, formulated by the largest financial institutions. These plans will require 
institutions to specify the measures they will take in the event of severe stress and will also 
allow  authorities  to  assess  the  potential  orderly  resolvability  of  these  institutions  without 
having recourse to public funds.  
The rapid spread of the financial crisis has been a lesson not only to market participants but 
also to supervisors. It has shown that the root of the problems was the gradual build-up of 
common risks within the system. It is now widely acknowledged that such crystallisation of 
risk, linked to major shifts in the correlation between financial products and markets, requires 
more  systemically-focused  oversight  and  regulation.  To  use  the  professional  jargon, 
microprudential control, the preserve of the supervisory authorities, must be complemented 
by macroprudential oversight, resorting to the expertise of central banks. In order to improve 
the symbiosis between these two approaches, a growing number of countries are adopting 
the  so-called  “twin  peaks  model”  where  the  central  bank  is  in  charge  of  the  full  range  of 
prudential  supervision,  in  both  its  micro  and  macro-dimension,  leaving  the  oversight  of 
market integrity and investor protection to a separate institution. This “twin peaks model” will 
also be introduced in Belgium next year.  
Needless to say, I am well aware that the macro-dimension does not stop at our country’s 
frontiers, while the micro-supervision of cross-border groups also requires close multinational 
coordination. So, I strongly support the recent decision to set up, at the EU level, a European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  a  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS), 
which  are  called  on  to  cooperate  closely  in  order  to  bring  more  comprehensiveness  and 
consistency to national and international supervision.  
Macroprudential  analysis  must  rely  on  rapid,  direct  and  comprehensive  access  to  data  on 
individual  developments  liable  to  affect  global  financial  stability  while,  in  turn,  this  analysis 
must feed into the microprudential supervision. It would be a pity if our efforts to improve this 
flow  of  information  in  our  respective  countries  were  to  be  impeded  by  hurdles  at  the 
international level.  
In  conclusion,  the  global  nature  of  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  necessity  of  a  holistic, 
internationally coordinated approach to achieve fundamental reforms in financial regulation. 
These  reforms  are  under  way.  It  is  important  that  this  approach  result  in  consistent, 
international adherence to measures aimed to raise the capacity of individual institutions to 
absorb  losses,  reduce  the  impact  of  systemically  important  institutions  on  the  financial 
system  and  the  whole  economy,  limit  the  buildup  of  systemic  risk,  and  foster  international 
cooperation in macro-prudential supervision.  
2 
 BIS Review 124/2010
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  week  the  Eurofi  conference  will  provide  ample  opportunity  to 
discuss and reflect on the topics and challenges the financial sector and the authorities are 
facing.  I  hope  you  will  all  have  a  very  successful  and  rewarding  conference  and  a  very 
pleasant stay in Brussels.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 124/2010 
 3
