Deepak Mohanty: Measures of inflation in India – issues and 
perspectives 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference of Indian Association for Research in National Income and Wealth (IARNIW) at 
the Centre for Development Studies (CDS), Thiruvananthapuram, 9 January 2010. 
  “I have said many, many times that inflation is a sinister beast.”  
Richard Fisher 
1. 
I thank the Indian Association for Research in National Income and Wealth (IARNIW) 
for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  important  issue  of  inflation  measurement  in 
India which is a key theme of this year’s Conference. The discussion is also timely as we 
would  be  moving  into  a  new  series  of  Wholesale  Price  Index  (WPI)  with  a  more 
representative commodity basket and the proposal for broad-based Consumer Price Indices 
(CPIs)  in  train.  Moreover,  there  is  now  considerable  discussion  in  India  on  inflation  as 
consumer prices are in double digits and wholesale prices are rising. 
In my talk today, I will briefly review the various primary measures of inflation with a 
2. 
particular  reference  to  the  divergence  between  WPI  and  CPI.  I  will  also  focus  on  different 
secondary (derived) measures of inflation, particularly core inflation, and end the discussion 
with some thoughts on the way forward. 
3.  What  is  inflation?  Why  do  we  care  so  much  about  inflation?  Inflation  is  a  sustained 
increase  in  the  overall  level  of  prices.  Since  price  stability  is  a  key  objective  of  monetary 
policy,  central  banks  are  obviously  concerned  with  inflation.  Prices  of  specific  goods  or 
services may go up or down relative to the prices of others reflecting changes in productivity 
or  demand  and  supply  conditions.  But  when  the  overall  price  level  rises,  it  erodes  the 
purchasing power of income, raises the cost of living and lowers the real value of savings. 
Savers,  investors  and  financial  intermediaries  track  closely  the  link  between  inflation  and 
interest rate. The level of inflation is also critical in terms of maintaining competitiveness of 
domestic industry in a liberalised trading and market determined exchange rate regime. More 
importantly,  it  is  the  poor  who  are  most  vulnerable  to  inflation  as  they  do  not  have  any 
effective hedge against inflation. As Keynes said, “Inflation is the form of taxation which the 
public find hardest to evade.” Thus, the issue of inflation and its measurement have always 
received lot of attention in India.  
Inflation measures: conceptual issues 
I. 
4. 
India has a rich tradition of collection and dissemination of price statistics dating back 
to  1861  when  the  Index  of  Indian  Prices  was  released.  Currently,  there  are  five  different 
primary measures of inflation – the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and four measures of the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI). In addition, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflator and Private 
Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) deflator from the National Accounts Statistics (NAS) 
provide  implicit  economy-wide  inflation  estimate.  The  WPI  is  considered  as  the  headline 
inflation  measure  because  of  its  availability  at  high  frequency1,  until  recently,  national 
coverage and availability of disaggregated data which facilitate better analysis of inflation. 
                                                 
1   WPI was available on a weekly basis with a lag of two weeks till October 24, 2009. Now the prices for two sub-
groups – primary article (weight in WPI: 22.03 per cent) and fuel and power, light and lubricants (weight in 
WPI:  14.23  per  cent)  are  available  on  a  weekly  basis  with  a  lag  of  a  fortnight.  The  overall  WPI  index  is 
available on a monthly basis with a lag of a fortnight. 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 1
5.  While the WPI does not cover prices of services, CPIs are meant to reflect the cost of 
living conditions for a homogeneous group of consumers based on retail prices. Among the 
four measures of CPI, the CPI for Industrial workers (IW) has a broader coverage than the 
others – the CPI for agricultural labourers (AL), rural labourers (RL) and urban non-manual 
employees (UNME). In the organised sector, CPI-IW is used as a cost of living index. 
6.  GDP  deflator,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  comprehensive  measure  of  inflation,  implicitly 
derived from national accounts data as a ratio of GDP at current prices to constant prices. 
While  it  encompasses  the  entire  spectrum  of  economic  activities  including  services,  it  is 
available  on  a  quarterly  basis  with  a  lag  of  two  months  since  1996.  Moreover,  national 
income aggregates extensively use WPI for deflating nominal price estimates to derive real 
price estimates.  
Even  as  each  of  the  measures  has  its  strengths  and  weaknesses,  the  selected 
7. 
measure of inflation should broadly capture the interplay of effective demand and supply in 
the economy at frequent intervals. However, the trend in various measures of inflation during 
the  recent  years  has  raised  several  conceptual  measurement  issues  of  inflation.  First,  the 
divergence  between  WPI 
the 
representativeness  of  WPI  has  reduced  as  it  does  not  capture  the  price  movement  in  the 
services  sector  which  has  a  larger  and  increasing  share  of  GDP  –  about  65  per  cent  in  
2008–09.  Third,  old  base  periods  –  for  WPI  (1993–94),  CPI-UNME  (1984–85),  CPI-RL  
(1986–87),  CPI-AL  (1986–87)  and  CPI-IW  (2001)  –  fail  to  capture  the  rapid  structural 
changes in the economy.2 
inflation  has  widened.  Second, 
inflation  and  CPI 
Divergence between WPI and CPI  
8.  Why do WPI and CPIs differ? They differ in terms of their weighting pattern. First, food 
has  a  larger  weight  in  CPI  ranging  from  46  per  cent  in  CPI-IW  to  69  per  cent  in  CPI-AL 
whereas it has a weight of only 27 per cent3 in WPI. The CPIs are, therefore, more sensitive 
to changes in prices of food items. Second, the fuel group has a much higher weight in the 
WPI  (14.2  per  cent)  than  the  CPIs  (5.5  to  8.4  per  cent).  As  a  result,  movement  in 
international crude prices has a greater bearing on WPI than on the CPIs. Third, services are 
not  covered  under  WPI  while  they  are,  to  different  degrees,  covered  under  CPIs. 
Consequently, service price inflation has a greater influence on CPIs.  
9. 
As the retail market receives commodities from wholesale market, it is expected that 
the change in the prices of commodities in wholesale market would normally transmit to the 
retail  market.  Granger  causality  test  in  a  vector  auto-regression  (VAR)  framework  using 
monthly  WPI  and  CPIs  indicates  that  at  the  trend  level  CPIs  lag  behind  WPI  by  a  month. 
There  is  also  a  long  run  cointegrating  relationship  between  WPI  and  CPI.  Therefore,  WPI 
and  CPIs  in  India  may  not  move  away  from  each  other  in  the  long-run  if  this  observed 
relationship continues to hold (Chart 1). 
                                                 
2  
It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  System  of  National  Accounts  (SNA)  1993  has  been  impressing  the  national 
statistical  agencies  for  regular  updation  of  the  base.  In  general,  revision  of  base  in  every  5  years  is  an 
accepted principle in major developed and emerging countries. 
Including manufactured food items. 
BIS Review 5/2010
3  
2 
 Long-run relationship between WPI and CPI Inflation 
Chart 1 
In addition, annual inflation based on WPI, CPI-IW, GDP deflator, and PFCE deflator, 
10. 
over longer time spans, followed a similar path (Table 1). 
 Table 1 
Decadal Average Inflation 
11.  Notwithstanding  the  long-run  lead-lag  relationship,  the  divergence  between  WPI  and 
CPI has accentuated since early 2008 (Chart 2). 
 Chart 2 
Divergence between WPI and CPI Inflation 
BIS Review 5/2010 
  3
12.  This could be attributed to the following factors. First, the price of minerals and metals 
went up sharply during May–June  2008 and then fell precipitously reflecting global trends. 
Since metals and alloys do not form a part of the CPI group, this accentuated the divergence 
between CPI and WPI. Second, there was a similar trend as metals in crude prices which 
had  a  larger  influence  on  WPI  than  CPI.  Third,  price  of  services  –  such  as,  medical  care, 
education, recreation and amusement, transport and communication and personal care and 
effects  –  in  CPI-IW  showed  a  significant  inflation  of  over  8  per  cent.  It  may,  however,  be 
indicated that CPIs recorded very similar trends as the food component of WPI despite the 
divergence of the overall indices during the recent period (Chart 3). 
Co-movement of Inflation Rates based on WPI (Food) and CPIs 
Chart 3 
 New WPI series 
13.  Following the recommendation of the Working Group for Revision of Wholesale Price 
Index  (Chairman:  Prof.  Abhijit  Sen),  the  base  year  is  being  updated  to  2004–05.  The 
proposed  basket  of  manufactured  products  in  the  new  series  would  cover  significantly  a 
higher  number  of  commodities  and  would  integrate  items  from  both  organised  and 
un-organised manufacturing sectors. While this would improve coverage, the challenge is to 
ensure collection of price data on a regular basis so that the quality could be maintained. The 
revised  WPI  basket,  however,  would  not  include  services  prices.  An  Expert  Group 
(Chairman: Prof. C. P. Chandrasekhar) is looking into process of developing a service price 
index. In order to enhance the representativeness of WPI index, it is important to expand the 
coverage to include services. 
Producer Price Index 
14.  Even  when  we  have  a  revised  WPI,  we  would  still  not  have  a  Producer  Price  Index 
(PPI). The PPI covers price changes faced by the producers on primary, intermediate and 
finished goods and services ready for the market. The primary difference between the WPI 
and the PPI is, in addition to the coverage, that the WPI reflects changes in the average cost 
of  production  including  mark-ups  and  taxes,  while  the  PPI  measures  price  changes  of 
transacted  goods  at  the  gate  excluding  taxes.  The  purpose  of  the  PPI  is  to  provide  a 
measure  of  prices  received  by  producers  of  commodities.  The  PPI  usually  covers  the 
industrial 
(electricity,  gas  and 
communications).  Some  countries  also  include  agriculture,  mining,  transportation,  and 
business services. Most of the countries replaced WPIs with PPIs in the 1970s and 1980s. 
(manufacturing)  sector  as  well  as  public  utilities 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2010
For analytical purposes, it would be desirable to initiate the process of compilation of PPI for 
India. 
New Consumer Price Indices 
15.  At the retail level, CPI is meant to reflect the cost of living conditions and is computed 
on the basis of the changes in the level of retail prices of selected goods and services on 
which consumers spend the major part of their income. Therefore, a broad based CPI for the 
country  as  a  whole,  including  both  services  and  manufacturing  products,  has  greater 
relevance for monetary policy formulation. 
16. 
In  India, however,  data  on  CPI  relates  to  different  segments  of  the  population  rather 
than the entire population. With a view to addressing this issue, the Reserve Bank had taken 
the  initiative  and  prepared  an  approach  paper  on  CPI  (Urban)  and  CPI  (Rural). 
Subsequently,  the  Central  Statistical  Organisation  (CSO)  has  taken  up  the  work  for 
generating data on CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural). The new CPIs once complied will go a long 
way in filling a major data gap in price statistics. 
Secondary (derived) measures of inflation 
II. 
17.  A  representative  measure  of  inflation  for  the  country  as  a  whole  and  availability  of 
information on inflation at high frequency with limited time lag are important for the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  A  number  of  empirical  works  based  on  the  long-run  equilibrium  analysis 
have  found  that  money  supply  (M3)  and  WPI  series  are  cointegrated  to  a  fair  extent,  thus 
providing evidence on the WPI being more amenable to monetary policy changes (Reddy, 
1999). The Report of the Working Group on Money Supply (1998) also used WPI as inflation 
measure  and  found  that  the  nominal  money  demand  equation  showed  long-run  price 
elasticity  close  to  unity.  Even  though  conventionally  WPI  inflation  has  been  used  as  the 
headline  inflation,  several  limitations  have  emerged  in  the  recent  past  that  complicate  a 
realistic assessment of inflation based essentially on WPI. This underscores the need for a 
representative measure of inflation for better articulation of monetary policy with the objective 
to  anchor  inflationary  expectations.  Since  inflation  objective  has  to  be  pursued  by  the 
Reserve Bank, to avoid any conflict of interest, the primary statistics on inflation should be 
generated by another statistical agency.  
Deseasonalised trend inflation  
18.  Apart  from  the  headline  inflation,  for  policy  purposes,  central  banks  look  at  various 
secondary  (derived)  measures  of  inflation  to  gauge  the  underlying  inflationary  pressures. 
One  such  indicator  of  inflationary  momentum  is  annualized  month-over-month  seasonally 
adjusted  inflation.  However,  the  use  of  such  indicator  for  emerging  market  economies  like 
India has its limitations because it could be quite volatile (Chart 4). 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 5
Annualised M-o-M WPI (seasonally adjusted) Inflation 
Chart 4 
 Core inflation  
19.  Another way to analyse inflation data is by looking at “core inflation,” which is generally 
a chosen measure of inflation that excludes the more volatile categories like food and energy 
prices. The main argument here is that the central bank should effectively be responding to 
the movements in permanent component of the price level rather than temporary deviations.  
20.  There  are  many  variants  of  core  inflation  which  try  to  remove  the  volatility  of  price 
changes by statistical means. These include truncation of commodities based on standard 
deviation  of  price  changes,  trimmed  mean,  median  and  other  filter  based  smoothing 
techniques.  Various  measures  of  WPI-based  core  inflation  for  the  years  2008–09  and  
2009–10 are presented in Table 2. It can be seen that the core measures show significant 
month  to  month  variations,  though  the  volatility  has  been  lower  compared  to  the  headline 
measure. Since core inflation is derived from the headline, it reflects the weaknesses in the 
primary measure of inflation. A prerequisite of a good inflation measure is that it is broader in 
coverage  and  the  base  period  is  updated  frequently  reflecting  structural  changes  in  the 
economy.  
21. 
In Indian context, the derivation of core inflation by exclusion of food and energy from 
CPI/WPI discards a substantial portion of the commodity basket. So the price movement of 
the  remaining  commodities  may  not  be  representative  of  the  underlying  inflationary  trend. 
Although  these  prices  have  substantial  effects  on  the  overall  index,  they  often  are  quickly 
reversed.  But  the  reversal  of  volatile  prices  sometimes  is  not  short-lived.  Therefore, 
determining  when  to  use  a  core  inflation  measure  versus  an  overall  inflation  measure 
remains a complex issue.  
6 
 BIS Review 5/2010
Table 2 
Various WPI-based Core Inflation Measures4 
(Per cent) 
 4  1.5 SD method: This method excludes all those commodities in which percentage price change is more than 
mean plus/minus 1.5 standard deviation over mean price change. 
Trimmed  mean:  The  trimmed  mean  procedure  estimate  price  change  of  each  commodities,  arrange  them  in 
increasing order, calculate cumulative weight of the series and cut the commodities for which cumulative weight 
is less than 8 per cent or greater than 92 per cent. 
Median:  This  procedure  computes  price  change  for  all  the  commodities,  arrange  them  in  ascending  order, 
calculate cumulative weight of the new series and take the inflation of the first commodity for which cumulative 
weight is greater than or equal to 50 per cent. 
Reweighting: In this method, we compute price change, calculate standard deviation of price change for WPI-All 
Commodities as well as each commodities over a period of time, calculate historical standard deviation for each 
commodity  as  the  difference  between  WPI-All  Commodities  standard  deviation  and  standard  deviation  of  that 
commodity. Then, we calculate final weight as the reciprocal of historical standard deviation, multiplied by initial 
weight. 
5  * and ** indicate that the core inflation standard deviation is lower and significantly different from the standard 
deviation of headline inflation at 1% and 5% level of significance, respectively. 
 
BIS Review 5/2010 
 7
Way forward 
III. 
22.  The  divergence  between  alternative  inflation  measures  complicates  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in India. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank looks at all the measures of inflation, 
both overall and disaggregated components, in conjunction with other economic and financial 
indicators,  to  assess  the  underlying  inflationary  conditions.  As  indicated  by  Governor 
Dr. Subbarao,  “the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  constantly  engaged  in  the  refinements  of  the 
various  price  indices  and  would  continue  to  provide  the  necessary  support  to  the 
Government  to  bring  about  further  improvements  in  the  measurement  of  inflationary 
conditions”.  
23. 
In the context of monetary policy formulation, it is important to have a robust primary 
measure of inflation at the national level. In this direction, the compilation of CPI (Urban) and 
CPI (Rural) could pave the way for a representative CPI for the country. There is also a need 
to augment the new series of WPI with a service price index to improve its overall coverage. 
In addition, it would be desirable to initiate steps to develop a Producer Price Index (PPI) for 
the  country.  Moreover,  the  representativeness  of  the  various  price  indices  could  be 
enhanced by frequent updation of the base year so that it reflects the structural change in the 
economy. 
Thank you. 
References  
Barman,  R.  B.  and  A.K.  Nag  (2002):  “Inflation  in  India:  A  multidimensional  view  through 
various  price  indices”  in  National  Income  Accounts  and  Data  Systems,  ed.,  B.  S.  Minhas, 
Oxford University Press. 
Central Statistical Organisation (2007): National Accounts Statistics – Sources and Methods. 
D. Subbarao (2009): “Inaugural Address: Third Annual Statistics Day Conference” Reserve 
Bank of India Bulletin, August. 
Das  A.,  J.  John  and  S.  Singh  (2009):  “Core  Inflation:  Issues  and  Measurement”,  Indian 
Economic Review (forthcoming). 
Mohanty  D,  D  P  Rath  and  M  Ramaiah  (2000):  “Measures  of  Core  Inflation  for  India”, 
Economic and Political Weekly, 35(5). 
Reddy,  Y.  V.  (1999):  Inflation  in  India:  Status  and  Issues,  speech  delivered  at  Centre  for 
Economic and Social Studies, Hyderabad. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (1998):  Report  of  Working  Group  on  Money  Supply:  Analytics  and 
Methodology of Compilation (Chairman: Dr. Y V Reddy). 
Samanta,  G.P.  (1999):  “Core  Inflation  in  India:  Measurement  and  Policy  Perspectives”, 
Reserve Bank of India Occasional Papers, 20(1).  
Srinivasan, T.N. (2008): “Price Indices and Inflation Rates”, Economic and Political Weekly, 
43(26). 
8 
 BIS Review 5/2010
