Loi M Bakani: The State of the economy and monetary policy 
Address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the National 
Development Forum, Port Moresby, 18 August 2010. 
 Thank you Chairman, Mr Brown Bai. 
Honourable  Paul  Tiensten,  M.P.  Minister  for  National  Planning  and  Rural  Development, 
Leader  of  the  Opposition,  Sir  Mekere  Morauta  KBE,  Deputy  Opposition  Leader  Hon.  Bart 
Philemon  MP,  Acting  Chief  Secretary  Mr  Manasupe  Zurenuoc,  Heads  of  Government 
Departments  and  State  Agencies, members  of  the  Consultative  Implementation  Monitoring 
Council,  my  fellow  colleagues  on  the  Panel,  Mr.  Simon  Tosali  Secretary  Department  of 
Treasury,  Mr. Joseph  Lelang  Secretary  Department  of  National  Planning,  Monitoring  and 
Rural  Development,  and  Mr.  Henry  Parakei,  Secretary  Department  of  Transport, 
distinguished participants. 
Papua  New  Guinea  is  enjoying  the  fourth  year  of  relatively  high  economic  activity  as 
measured by the real growth in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The average annual growth 
in GDP for the four years 2007 to 2010, is estimated at 6.7 percent which translates to a per 
capita  growth  of  4.3  percent  per  annum.  To  put  it  in  another  way,  at  the  end  of  2010  our 
people will be 18.3 percent better off from where they were at the beginning of 2007. This 
trend  is  likely  to  continue  for  the  next  three  years,  during  the  construction  period  of  the 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project. Even more important then the overall growth in GDP is 
the estimated non-mineral sectors growth of 7.2 percent per annum. This translates to a per 
capita  growth  of  4.7  percent,  the  highest  and  longest  period  of  growth  on  record  since 
independence. It is estimated that at the end of 2010 the great majority of our people, those 
in the non-mineral sectors will be 20% better off from where they were at the beginning of 
2007. 
Despite  the  Global  financial  Crisis  and  meltdown  in  2008  and  the  slow  recovery  from  it  in 
2009  and  2010,  the  Papua  New  Guinea  economy  continued  to  grow  and  performs 
exceptionally  well.  We  managed  to  avoid  all  the  financial  problems  and  at  the  same  time 
have  the  best  and  longest  stretch  of  growth  in  economic  activity  from  the  time  of 
independence. 
The  country  is  enjoying  a  mineral  boom  through  the  increase  in  international  commodity 
prices, which resulted in large Government surpluses up to 2008, and high accumulation of 
funds in trust accounts, that reached a peak of above K5 billion. Of this amount more than 
K4 billion  was  deposited  with  the  commercial  banks,  while  the  rest  was  deposited  at  the 
Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea.  The  budget  deficits  in  2008  and  2009,  coupled  with  the  fast 
draw  downs  of  funds  from  the  trust  accounts,  resulted  in  the  balances  declining  to  below 
K1 billion in August 2010. 
To those of us dealing with the Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) there was an opportunity to 
commence it during the recent mineral boom. Establishing a SWF to manage large windfall 
revenues from high commodity prices is talked about for some years. The decision to park 
the surplus revenue in trust accounts was not a good solution. I have no doubt that a SWF 
would have managed the surpluses in a much better way. As a consequence, we now have 
one more bad experience of the management of excess revenue from mineral resources, on 
top of the Mineral Resources Stabilization Fund. 
The  recovery  in  commodity  prices  in  2009  and  2010  might  entail  a  further  opportunity  to 
establish the SWF earlier than the production stage of the LNG project in 2014. 
The monetary aspects of the developments in the period were very large inflows of foreign 
exchange  as  mineral  and  petroleum  taxes.  These  flows  increased  the  foreign  exchange 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 1
reserves from around US$ 500 million in 2005 to a historical high of above US$ 2.8 billion in 
August 2010. The Bank of Papua New Guinea paid the Government Kina for the tax receipts 
it received in foreign currency. Through this process the infusion of liquidity into the financial 
system increased. The Government instead of re-depositing the Kina in trust accounts with 
the Bank of Papua New Guinea, decided to deposit most of it with the commercial banks, at 
a very substantial cost to the Government and the people of Papua New Guinea. 
To avoid the huge amount of liquidity from impacting on the exchange rate and inflation, the 
Central  Bank  had  to  defuse  it  by  issuing  Central  Bank  Bills  (CBB).  The  amount  of  CBB’s 
outstanding as of today exceeds K4 Billion. In the previous years the CBB’s were issued at a 
relatively high interest rate of 6 percent to 8 percent, but this has declined in 2010 to below 
3 percent,  mainly  due  to  excess  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  This  way  the  commercial 
banks managed to arbitrage between the Government Trust Accounts and the CBB’s, and 
earn a relatively high income on those deposits. 
I  am  very  pleased  that  the  Minister  for  Finance  and  Treasury  the  Honourable  Mr.  Peter 
O’Neill CMG M.P. decided that all future trust accounts will be held with the Central Bank. 
As  all  of  you  are  aware  the  Primary  Objective  of  the  Central  Bank  is  “Price  Stability”.  In 
previous  public  statements,  I  clearly  defined  it  as  stable  inflation  rate  below  the  two  digit 
level. Let me make it very clear, we do not target a specific level of inflation, as we do not 
follow an “inflation targeting” objective. We want inflation to be stable and predictable, so that 
investors, the business community, and households have some certainty in planning for the 
future. 
In 2008 the annual inflation increased to 11.2%. It was above the acceptable two digit range. 
The  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  took  all  the  necessary  actions,  and  used  the  available 
instruments and tools it has, to reduce it to within the acceptable level. As a result inflation 
declined to 5.7% in 2009, and is around this level in the first two quarters of 2010. 
One of the factors impacting on inflation is domestic demand and the utilization of the local 
productive  resources.  During  the  construction  stage  of  the  LNG  project,  the  domestic 
productive capacities will be utilized to their fullest extent, in the areas of development and 
construction  of  infrastructure  projects.  I  recommend  to  the  Government  to  reframe  its 
development  plans  to  avoid  competing  on  the  very  limited  productive  resources  within  the 
economy,  especially  in  the  earth  moving  and  construction  industries.  The  LNG  project 
developers  are  building  the  “infrastructure  corridor”  from  the  Southern  Highlands  to  Port 
Moresby.  They  are  implementing  the  largest  ever  infrastructure  project  in  the  country, 
involving roads, pipeline, power, telecommunication, etc… This development will use up all 
the existing earth moving and construction capacities within the country. 
The  Government  should  therefore  concentrate  on  maintenance  work  on  the  existing 
infrastructure of transport, health centers, schools-colleges and plan ahead for the utilization 
of the highly trained and experienced work force that will be released from the LNG project, 
at the end of construction phase. 
In the infrastructure areas the Government should concentrate its effort in areas that the LNG 
developers  are  not  extensively  using  their  resources  on,  such  as,  electricity,  power 
generation and telecommunication. 
The Government should direct its development budget and implementation capacities to the 
other priority areas of education, health, law and order, environment and conservation and 
specifically  the  agriculture  sector.  The  need  to  invest  in  the  agriculture  sector,  that  is 
generating the productive income and the source of livelihood for the great majority of our 
people, will ensure that the phenomena we define as the “Dutch Disease” will be avoided. 
The time is too short to go into a full analysis of the “Dutch Disease” phenomena. We at the 
Central Bank will do our best to ensure that the exchange rate is not pricing the traditional 
exports of Papua New Guinea uncompetitive in the international commodity markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2010
It is of paramount importance to commence the planning of the shift in the priorities now, to 
ensure that the 2011 budget reflects them. 
I  am  convinced  that  by  proper  planning  and  thoughtful  utilization  of  our  implementation 
capacities,  we  will  avoid  the  overstretching  of  the  nation’s  productive  resources  and 
capacities. This way we will avoid unwarranted domestic price increases and the import of 
competing machinery, equipment and labour that, will depart the day the construction of the 
LNG  project  is  completed.  Such  a  scenario  will  result  in  the  loss  of  all  the  knowhow  that 
could be accumulated for the future use and benefit of the nation’s development. 
The three to four years of the construction stage of the LNG project will be hard to manage. I 
am  however  confident  that  with  close  cooperation  and  coordination  with  the  Government 
specifically the Departments of Treasury, Finance and National Planning and Monitoring the 
Bank of Papua New Guinea can achieve the objective of price stability as I defined it. 
We  are  also  pursuing  vigorously  some  other  objectives  such  as  a  modern  Payments 
Systems that will provide a safer, efficient and cost-effective payment and settlement system 
in the future. 
Financial 
financial 
technological innovation through the use of mobile phone banking. 
All of it without compromising the objective of a stable prudently managed financial system 
that is customer and service oriented and will withstand future shocks as it did in 2008. 
If  the  Government  can  continue  its  focus  on  developing  and  improving  infrastructures  and 
basic social service in the rural areas, people can take advantage of these new financial and 
payments innovations to improve their livelihood and living conditions. They can also realize 
the  benefits  from  the  LNG  project  and  the  improved  macroeconomic  developments  in  the 
economy. If this is sustained into the future, the objectives of the Government’s Vision 2050 
can be realized. 
To  do  justice  to  all  the  roles  that  are  placed  under  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea’s 
mandate,  we  will  continue  to  protect  the  Contributor’s  Savings  in  the  long  term  Savings 
Schemes in the Superannuation and Life Insurance industries. 
I wish to thank the organizers for inviting me to address the forum and I look forward to the 
day’s presentations. 
Thank you. 
literacy,  micro  banking, 
the  rural  majority 
inclusion  of 
through 
BIS Review 112/2010 
 3
