Thomas J Jordan: A changing role for central banks? 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  J  Jordan,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Welcome  Event  Master  of  Banking  and  Finance,  St.  Gallen, 
22 September 2010. 
I would like to thank Dr. Claudia Strub and Till Ebner for their valuable support in drafting this speech. 
 Introduction 
The economic cost of financial crises is enormous. The recent crisis highlighted the extent of 
systemic  risk  and  thus  the  overriding  importance  of  a  stable  financial  system.  It  also 
demonstrated  the  inadequacy  of  the  instruments  and  measures  used  until  now  to  ensure 
financial stability. More effective measures are needed to check and prevent systemic risk. 
The key question is how should – or can – this be achieved in the future? 
In my talk today I would like to address this question by focusing on the role of central banks. 
Specifically, I will endeavour to answer the following question: To what extent will the lessons 
learned from this crisis affect or even alter the future role and tasks of central banks? I intend 
to examine this from three perspectives: 
In the first part of my talk, I will examine the extent to which central banks need to undertake 
a  fundamental  review  of  their  instruments  and  objectives  in  the  light  of  recent  events.  In 
particular, there is a need to analyse the effectiveness of the monetary policy strategies and 
instruments used to date, especially in periods of crisis. 
In my view, monetary policy measures and instruments alone are inadequate for the task of 
effectively  checking  and  preventing  systemic  crises.  In  the  second  part  of  my  talk,  I  shall 
therefore  focus  on  the  regulatory  response  to  deal  with  potential  instabilities  within  the 
financial system. One possible response to the inadequacies highlighted by the crisis would 
be  to  strengthen  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation.  In  this  case,  the  interaction 
between  these  measures  and  monetary  policy  would  have  to  be  borne  in  mind.  Thirdly, 
institutional aspects play a key role in the restructuring of the regulatory environment. I will 
outline these briefly in the final part of my talk. 
Monetary policy after the crisis 
Let  me  start  by  reviewing  the  objectives  and  instruments  of  central  banks  in  the  light  of 
recent  events.  Comparing  today’s  world  with  the  situation  a  few  decades  ago,  it  becomes 
evident  that  much  has  changed.  Deregulation  of  the  financial  markets  has  increased  and 
globalisation has progressed extremely fast – in the real economy as well. The brisk level of 
trading made a significant contribution to the long-lasting worldwide upswing in recent years. 
This  was  supported  by  the  credible  policies  pursued  by  central  banks,  which  increasingly 
prioritised the goal of price stability, thus contributing to a global reduction in the level and 
volatility  of  inflation.  The  battle  against  high inflation  appeared  to  have  been  won.  Overall, 
this led to firm expectations of low inflation and a dramatic drop in risk premia in virtually all 
areas of the financial markets. 
However, the successful battle against inflation and the related reduction in macroeconomic 
volatility  –  also  known  as  the  “Great  Moderation”  –  were  not  able  to  prevent  serious 
instabilities within the globalised financial system. 
Alongside  its  evident  benefits,  the  “Great  Moderation”  thus  seems  to  have  produced  a 
number  of  damaging  by-products.  In  combination  with  low  real  interest  rates,  financial 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 1
innovations  and  liberalised  capital  markets  provided  enormous  credit-creation  potential. 
Together with a reduced perception of risk, this fostered a rapid rise in asset prices which 
ultimately led to excesses and imbalances in some markets. Through contagion effects, the 
bursting of a credit and asset price bubble can bring the entire global financial system to the 
brink  of  collapse  within a  very  short  period  of  time.  In  view  of  the  interaction  with  the  real 
economy, this also has serious implications for the world economy and global growth. This 
raises  a  number  of  questions  about  the  future  role  of  central  banks.  Can  and  should 
monetary  policy  be  used  to  actively  counter  the  development  of  imbalances  or  financial 
bubbles?  Does  it  make  sense  to  use  monetary  policy  instruments  for  this?  Will  the  new 
instruments used during the crisis also play a more important role in monetary policy in the 
future? 
To  answer  these  questions,  I  would  like  to  look  specifically  at  two  aspects.  First,  I  will 
examine  the  measures  used  by  central  banks  during  the  crisis  and  briefly  outline  the 
possibilities  and  limitations  on  their  future  use  in  monetary  policy.  Then  I  will  consider 
whether monetary policy should step up its focus on the goal of financial stability. 
With  regard  to  measures  taken  during  the  crisis,  I  can  say  straight  away  that  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  instruments  was  clearly  demonstrated.  We  were  able  to 
safeguard  price  stability  and  cushion  the  negative  impact  on  the  real  economy.  However, 
vigorous  interest  rate  cuts  were  not  sufficient  on  their  own  –  neither  in  Switzerland  nor  in 
other  countries.  The  liquidity  situation  on  the  money  markets  initially  remained  extremely 
tense.  In  many  cases,  interest  rates  rapidly  dropped  to  zero.  The  chief  monetary  policy 
instrument could thus no longer be used. Central banks around the world therefore adopted 
so-called  unconventional  measures.  These  included  direct  intervention  in  the  financial 
markets by buying assets, such as long-dated government bonds, debt securities issued by 
private borrowers and foreign exchange. Another measure was the temporary expansion of 
liquidity  provision  to  banks  beyond  the  “normal”  level  –  for  example,  through  repo 
transactions with unusually long maturities of up to one year. 
These measures were taken for two reasons. First, they permit further monetary easing if the 
desired stabilisation of prices and the economy cannot be achieved through cutting interest 
rates alone. Second, unconventional measures can be justified by the central banks’ role as 
lender  of  last  resort.  Its  role,  in  other  words,  of  providing  emergency  funding  for  financial 
institutions that are facing short-term liquidity bottlenecks. The aim of these unconventional 
measures is to restore the functioning of market forces as quickly as possible and ultimately 
to restore market confidence in the financial system. Two main lessons can be learnt from 
the  vigorous  response  by  central  banks.  It  showed  that  zero  interest  rates  on  no  account 
mean that central banks have exhausted their set of monetary policy instruments. Through 
quantitative  and  credit  easing  measures,  the  central  banks  have  effective  instruments  that 
can  be  used  to  reduce  risk  premia,  alleviate  liquidity  bottlenecks  and  prevent  deflation. 
Moreover, their role as lender of last resort has taken on a new dimension. Previously, this 
role was confined to providing funds to bridge temporary liquidity bottlenecks at a particular 
bank.  At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  however,  the  priority  was  to  secure  the  liquidity  of  entire 
markets.  The  central  banks  demonstrated  that  they  can  fulfil  this  function  to  a  previously 
unforeseen extent. In short, they demonstrated their ability to respond to a systemic crisis. 
Nevertheless, we need to be cautious when considering whether such measures should be 
included  in  a  central  bank’s  conventional  set  of  instruments  in  the  future.  These 
unconventional  measures  proved  useful  for  direct  crisis  management.  However,  so  far  we 
have  little  practical  experience  of  monetary  policy  management  at  zero  interest  rates, 
especially over a prolonged period of time. It is clear that the instruments used come at a 
price. In the longer term, for instance, they could create new instabilities and distortions on 
the  financial  markets.  Similarly,  such  an  enormous  increase  in  liquidity  could  lead  to  a 
build-up  of  significant  inflationary  potential.  So  it  is  too  early  to  conclusively  assess  the 
impact  of  the  measures  taken.  In  general,  though,  they  should  be  reserved  principally  for 
crisis  management.  Looking  beyond  the  reactive  crisis  management,  the  aftermath  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2010
crisis  has  brought  an  old  question  back  into  the  limelight:  To  what  extent  should  central 
banks proactively hinder the development of imbalances on the financial markets, rather than 
simply adopting an ex post “mopping up” role. More specifically: should central banks try to 
counter market excesses by steering interest rates in order to prevent a potential collapse of 
the  financial  system  and  the  resultant  costly  implications  for  the  real  economy?  This  is  a 
complex issue and answering it would go well beyond the scope of this talk. However, it is 
very topical and tends to recur constantly in the public policy debate. I would therefore like to 
give you my view on this issue. 
For  a  long  time  now,  central  bankers  and  economists  have  been  examining  the  extent  to 
which changes in asset prices should be taken into account in monetary policy. For example, 
this could mean that the central bank would raise interest rates if there was a risk that an 
emerging credit bubble could destabilise the system. The debate is fraught with difficulties, 
and  though  it  started  some  time  ago,  research  is  still  in  its  infancy.  I  will  therefore  merely 
outline the possible problems and challenges that could arise. To make my position clear: I 
am  convinced  that  a  strategy  geared  to  medium  and  long-term  price  stability  is  vital  for 
effective implementation of monetary policy. After all, the economic benefits of stable prices 
are undisputed. High and volatile inflation rates are detrimental to productivity and growth. 
Uncertainty about future price trends leads to inefficient investment and consumer spending 
decisions. That does not mean, however, that financial stability should be ignored completely 
in  monetary  policy  considerations.  Nevertheless,  taking  greater  account  of  financial 
imbalances  presents  a  number  of  practical  difficulties.  An  initial  problem  is  that  a  single 
instrument  –  namely  the  interest  rate  –  would  be  expected  to  achieve  two  objectives 
simultaneously: price stability and financial stability. That does not seem to be a problem at 
first sight, because usually the two support each other, especially when taking a long-term 
view.  Credible  action  to  ensure  price  stability  fosters  a  sense  of  security  and  market 
confidence,  which  in  turn  play  a  key  role  in  ensuring  financial  stability.  Similarly,  a  stable 
financial system is a key prerequisite for price stability. The recent financial crisis provided 
impressive  negative  evidence  to  confirm  this  rule.  The  bursting  of  a  financial  bubble  can 
easily trigger a deflationary trend. 
So  far,  so  good.  However,  a  second  glance  reveals  potential  conflicts  between  these  two 
objectives  in  certain  situations.  For  example,  a  positive  supply  shock  –  as  a  result  of 
technological progress, for instance – could keep inflationary pressure low for a prolonged 
period.  Expansionary  monetary  policy  conditions  could  therefore  be  maintained.  But  if  we 
look  at  financial  stability,  this  situation  entails  the  risk  of  a  boom-bust  cycle,  which  would 
require  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy.  A  similar  problem  is  conceivable  if  the  economic 
outlook is so poor that raising interest rates would be inappropriate because of the risk of 
deflation.  However,  maintaining  low  interest  rates  would  pave  the  way  for  potential 
imbalances, which – from the point of view of financial stability – would actually have to be 
countered  by  raising  interest  rates.  Such  situations  make  it  clear  that  a  single  instrument 
cannot simultaneously achieve two objectives. 
A further problem is that a bubble is not easy to identify. Expecting us to be able to tell in 
advance whether damaging price imbalances are building up within certain asset classes is 
not  realistic.  First,  that  would  require  us  to  be  better  than  market  forces  in  assessing  the 
fundamentally  justified  value  of  a  specific  asset.  Second,  it  is  not  easy  to  clearly  identify 
which variables are to be used as indicators of imbalances. 
A third problem is that we do not yet have any sound knowledge of the timing, effectiveness 
and  required  scope  of  the  monetary  policy  response  that  would  be  necessary  to  counter 
financial  imbalances.  Since  asset  prices  are  typically  far  more  volatile  than  real  economic 
variables and general price levels, substantial changes in interest rates could be required to 
check  financial  imbalances,  and  this  could  have  serious  side-effects  on  the  goal  of 
maintaining price stability. 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 3
As you can see, there are many questions that have not yet been clarified. The problems I 
have mentioned make it clear that central banks would rapidly reach their limits if they were 
simply to add a further goal alongside price stability without new instruments to deal with it. 
The  more  objectives  an  instrument  is  expected  to  achieve,  the  greater  the  risk  of  wrong 
decisions and conflicting objectives. 
However, as I have already said, these problems do not mean that financial stability should 
be ignored completely in monetary policy decisions. Asset prices and other variables such as 
credit growth must be included as indicators when assessing the situation and the outlook for 
inflation. They are already included in the practical implementation of today’s monetary policy 
strategy. Yet care must be taken when interpreting such “instability variables” because they 
provide only limited information about future economic trends. To sum up, monetary policy 
can make an important contribution to financial stability. However, the set of monetary policy 
instruments  is  unsuitable  for  excluding  all  imbalances  in  all  circumstances.  Accordingly, 
instruments  that  have  a  direct  effect  are  needed  to  counter  the  emergence  of  (global) 
financial instabilities. A key lesson of the crisis is that there is scope to strengthen what is 
known  as  macroprudential  supervision  and 
regulation.  This  should  be  seen  as 
complementary to monetary policy, to aid attainment of the twin goals of price stability and 
financial stability. Allow me to explain this in more detail. 
A framework for macroprudential supervision and regulation 
Put simply, macroprudential supervision and regulation is concerned with the stability of the 
entire  financial  system,  rather  than  that  of  individual  institutions,  which  is  the  domain  of 
microprudential supervision and regulation. 
Macroprudential supervision and regulation involves examining systemic risks that arise from 
the  interaction  between  individual  banks  or  the  risk  that  the  default  of  a  single  bank 
– because of its size or market share – could jeopardise certain functions that are vital for the 
economy, such as payment transactions or lending business. For example, one solution that 
could  significantly  reduce  such  problems  would  be  progressive  capital  adequacy 
requirements. In other words, the greater a bank’s systemic importance, the more equity it 
would  be  required  to  hold.  If  capital  adequacy  requirements  rise  in  step  with  systemic 
importance,  banks  have  an  incentive  to  stay  smaller  and  thus  less  systemically  important. 
Capital reserves for systemically important banks in excess of a minimum level could also act 
as a kind of “automatic stabiliser”. Reserves built up in “good times” allow banks to absorb 
losses in “bad times” without having to cease normal business operations. Another central 
aspect  of  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation  takes  account  of  the  build-up  of 
systemic  risks  over  time,  and  especially  the  procyclical  effects  in  the  financial  sector. 
Discretionary  action  could  be  taken  to  cushion  the  growth  of  such  risks  over  time  –  for 
instance,  by  imposing  an  obligation  to  build  up  additional  capital  in  phases  of  excessive 
credit growth, in other words a countercyclical capital buffer. A key aspect here is that such 
measures  help  prevent  possible  imbalances  within  the  financial  system.  Another  way  of 
achieving the required countercyclical effect is, for example, imposing direct restrictions on 
loan-to-value ratios if there are signs that a bubble could be forming in certain markets, such 
as the mortgage market. 
The  difficulties  of  applying  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation  should  not  be 
underestimated, however. First and foremost, experience of discretionary instruments is still 
fairly limited. For example, there is not yet any conclusive research showing which indicators 
could be used to reliably identify systemic risks. Moreover, it is not easy to assess the point 
beyond which credit growth should be regarded as excessive. Furthermore, the interaction 
between macroprudential and monetary policy instruments could make implementation more 
difficult. In particular, monetary policy transmission channels could be affected. The impact of 
a change in interest rates on lending could vary depending on the level of a bank’s capital 
buffer.  Therefore,  in  order  to  develop  reliable  indicators  for  systemic  risk,  to  analyse  the 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2010
interaction and feedback between macroprudential and monetary policy instruments, and to 
carefully  evaluate  the  effective  measures,  we  need  clear  mandates,  enough  time  and 
additional expertise. 
So  what  is  the  role  of  central  banks  in  establishing  such  a  macroprudential  framework? 
Generally  speaking,  the  traditional  tasks  of  central  banks  are  closely  linked  to  various 
aspects  of  systemic  stability.  A  stable  financial  system  is  very  important  for  the  effective 
implementation of monetary policy. But also in active crisis management, central banks bear 
a major responsibility, as the recent financial crisis clearly demonstrated. The contribution of 
central banks is therefore of great relevance in the analysis and regulation of systemic risk. 
In particular, central banks will have a key role to play in macroprudential supervision and 
regulation for the following reasons: Developing and structuring macroprudential measures 
requires  reliable  analytical  and  forecasting  skills  –  for  instance,  with  regard  to  the  overall 
economy  or  specific  market  segments,  such  as  real  estate.  Central  banks  have  extensive 
and soundly based knowledge of these fields. Moreover – as I have already pointed out – 
macroprudential  policy  interacts  closely  with  monetary  policy.  This  implies  that  the 
information  advantage  of  central  banks  could  be  important  in  shaping  macroprudential 
measures.  Central  banks  will  therefore  almost  certainly  have  to  play  a  major  role  in 
implementing such instruments. 
At  the  same  time,  the  risks  involved  in  overemphasising  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
connection  with  such  supervision  and  regulation  also  have  to  be  borne  in  mind.  Central 
banks  could  find  themselves  facing  increased  political  pressure  that  could  jeopardise  their 
independence. If their credibility with regard to maintaining price stability were undermined, 
this could have devastating implications for the effective implementation of monetary policy. 
Institutional aspects 
And now, in the final part of my speech, I would like to look at some institutional aspects. To 
allow a more detailed analysis of systemic risks and how to keep them in check, we need a 
macroprudential framework in which various instruments can be combined to optimal effect. 
What  is  the  best  way  of  achieving  this?  Firstly,  it  is  essential  to  recognise  that  ensuring 
financial  stability  as  a  whole  is  generally  dependent  on  the  decisions  made  by  a  range  of 
different bodies. These need to act together in order to ensure financial stability. To create 
the  necessary  basis  for  a  functioning  macroprudential  framework,  the  exact  institutional 
set-up  of  the  regulatory  authorities  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  First  and  foremost, 
objectives,  mandates  and  responsibilities  need  to  be  clearly  defined.  In  Switzerland,  for 
instance,  FINMA  –  the  Financial  Market  Supervisory  Authority  –  is  responsible  for  the 
regulation and supervision of individual banks. The SNB, on the other hand, is required to 
contribute to financial stability. With regard to Switzerland’s two big banks, there is a clear 
overlap  between  institutional  and  systemic  risks.  In  this  context,  an  exact  definition  of  the 
responsibilities of the SNB and FINMA is of central importance for optimal macroprudential 
supervision  and  regulation.  The  revised  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  SNB 
and  FINMA  is  an  important  step  in  this  direction.  Secondly,  to  ensure  that  the  institutions 
involved can optimally carry out the roles assigned to them, it is also important to give them 
the right tools. In concrete terms, this means that the SNB would, for example, need to have 
more  extensive  information  about  the  stability  of  financial  institutions  –  regarding  their  risk 
exposure, interdependences, etc. – or it would require specific instruments enabling it to take 
the right decisions when implementing macroprudential policy. 
Thirdly,  the  crisis  made  it  clear  that  closer  international  cooperation  between  regulatory 
authorities is vital. Functioning international coordination mechanisms are required to counter 
future crises earlier and more effectively. International cooperation is the only way to check 
undesirable developments on the globalised financial markets. 
BIS Review 121/2010 
 5
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, the stable economic growth and low inflation of the last two decades 
could not prevent the emergence of vast imbalances in the global financial system, as the 
financial and economic crisis clearly showed. Such massive economic shocks are bound to 
have  an  impact  on  how  central  banks  work.  Nevertheless,  ensuring price  stability  remains 
our top priority. 
The crisis made it evident that central banks have an effective set of instruments that can be 
used to mitigate the negative impact of financial crises. The unconventional measures used 
in this regard also proved to be effective. Yet despite these measures, the cost of the crisis 
remains enormous. One central conclusion, therefore, is that more attention needs to be paid 
to crisis prevention in order to improve the stability of financial systems. However, monetary 
policy  instruments  are  only  suitable up  to  a  point  in countering  the  emergence  of  financial 
imbalances.  Hence,  a  different  approach 
is  needed.  Strengthening  macroprudential 
supervision and regulation is one plausible option. Macroprudential policy takes account of 
systemic risks in the financial sector through action geared to reducing such risks. As yet, 
however, we have little experience of this type of supervision and regulation. It is therefore 
vital that we act prudently and gradually when implementing any new measures, and that we 
give  ourselves  adequate  time.  The  first  step  is  to  define  clear  and  realistic  mandates  and 
objectives  and  to  evaluate  possible  instruments.  Collaboration  between  the  various 
authorities  involved  –  both  nationally  and  internationally  –  is  also  of  crucial  importance. 
Overall, we need to create conditions that allow the timely application of suitable instruments 
to counter emergent financial instabilities. These instruments would essentially supplement 
our set of existing monetary policy instruments. Within such a framework, the SNB would be 
able  to  make  an  optimum  contribution  to  both  objectives  –  price  stability  and  financial 
stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 121/2010
