Vítor Constâncio: Common European values and monetary policy to 
reinforce the euro area 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the dinner in honour of 
the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, Lisbon, 5 May 2010. 
 Prime Minister, 
Minister of State and Finance, 
President of the European Central Bank, 
Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all in this place full of history on the occasion of a 
meeting of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank. Look around. We are in a 
place  that  highlights  two  Portuguese  adventures.  Firstly,  this  monastery  of  Jerónimos  was 
built  in  the XVIth  century  to  celebrate  our  maritime  discoveries  and  secondly,  here,  in  this 
very cloister, was signed our accession treaty into the European Union in 1985. A few yards 
from here is the shore from where set sail the ships to launch the discoveries. For almost a 
century Portugal kept a monopoly of the spice maritime trade with India and the Far East, 
where our ships arrived in 1498. In 1500 the fleet of Álvares Cabral arrived in Brazil with all 
its riches. In 1501 the construction of this monastery began and was completed after several 
decades.  As  all  major  buildings  of  the  time  it  was  built  to  celebrate  spiritual  and  earthly 
endeavours. On the northern side of this cloister we find symbols of the Passion of Christ. On 
the  southern  side  we  have  the  symbols  of  kingdom  and  Kings.  The  concept  was  that  the 
history of Portugal and our monarchic dynasty interconnected with the history of Christianity. 
Appropriately,  the  King  was  called  Manuel,  from  Emmanuel  (meaning  God  with  us) 
announced by Isaiah as the Saviour, and the King’s wife was named Maria like the mother of 
Christ. The Armillary Sphere is an instrument of navigation with the celestial orbits, used by 
the King as his symbol and combined with the Christian Cross it appears in different places. 
Empire, earthly power and religion come together. Politics also enters. The monastery was 
given  to  the  Hermit  Order  of  St.  Hieronymus,  a  Spanish  order  of  monks  devoted  to  the 
perpetual service of the dynasty reigning in Castille. This is explained by the aim of our King 
of becoming the heir to the Castillian crown thus unifying the two kingdoms. He had after all 
just celebrated his second marriage to Maria of Castille, the sister of the great Queen Isabel. 
You see then how European history and politics are present in every stone. As this lengthy 
introduction shows it is difficult for me to resist the historic spell of the place. We are here in 
the  cradle  of  the  first  globalization,  the  first  adventure  to  articulate  the  unity  of  humanity. 
Denis de Rougemont, the great Swiss French European thinker defined Europe precisely by 
its “globalizing mission”. The Delphic oracle, when asked by Cadmon about the whereabouts 
of his sister Europe who had been kidnapped by the Great God of the Greeks, answered: 
“You  will  never  find  her”.  From  this  answer  and  from  the  wanderings  that  Cadmon  was 
advised to pursue until exhaustion, Rougemont concludes that “... it seems difficult to know 
where  is  Europe,  if  we  understand  by  this  bringing  her,  all  ready  and  made  by  history: 
because it is the search itself that creates her. Seeking Europe, is to make her! … and that is 
what I call: Adventure.” 
This  tendency  for  universalism,  for  the  globalizing  of  Europe,  is  what  our  greatest  poet 
Fernando  Pessoa  characterizes  as  the  main  contribution  of  our  country  to  civilization. 
Himself bilingual and with an English education, he wrote in the 1920’s: “The Portuguese are 
essentially  cosmopolitan.  Never  was  a  Portuguese  only  Portuguese:  he  was  always 
everything”.  An  expression  very  similar  to  the  one  used  by  a  German  philosopher  Johann 
E. Erdman,  a  disciple  of  Hegel  and  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  who  wrote:  “Es  ist  undeutsch, 
bloss deutsch zu sein” (“It is not German to be only German”). Written in 1862, in the context 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 1
of  the  debate  about  German  nationality  that  occupied  Germany  during  most  of  the 
XIXth century  until  its  unification,  the  sentence  reflects  the  caution  of  many  participants  to 
avoid any kind of nationalism. Another echo of this can be found in another expression by 
our  Fernando  Pessoa:  “To  be  Portuguese,  in  the  decent  sense  of  the  word,  is  to  be 
European without the bad manners of nationality”.  
In  the  same  vein,  we  may  recall  what  Ortega  y  Gasset  said  in  his  Meditación  de  Europa, 
delivered  in  1949  in  Berlin:  “...  Europe  as  a  society  precedes  the  existence  of  European 
nations. ... This historical space ... was created by the Roman Empire and the geographic 
configuration  of  the  emergent  nations  coincides  with  the  simple  administrative  definition  of 
the dioceses in the Late Middle Ages”.  
It is important to reflect upon this: before being a political project Europe is a memory, a key 
to understanding our own past. Nations are a construct of man, not a natural reality. They 
reflect the social a priori that implies that our consciousness and our knowledge are socially 
constituted.  Many  nations  were  even  the  product  of  the  action  of  a  State.  There  were 
Savoyards, Bretons, Gascons before there were French and Bavarians and Prussian before 
there were Germans. At the time of the French revolution half of the population did not speak 
French and only republican public schools completed the formation of Frenchmen. A form of 
civic  community  among  strangers  was  somewhat  artificially  created  to  shape  several 
European  nation-states.  Nothing  proves  that  a  similar  process,  certainly  longer  and  more 
difficult, cannot occur at the European level. This does not imply that Europe could become a 
Nation, not even as Montesquieu pretended “une Nation composée de plusieurs” (“a Nation 
composed of many”). Europeans are too diverse and too self-critical for that to happen. We 
belong  nevertheless  to  two  societies,  our  own  and  the  European  one  as  the  essential 
background for our rationalist, universal values.  
In his famous Vienna address in 1935 on the existential crisis of Europe, Edmund Husserl 
underlines the fact that philosophical reason is the “original phenomenon that characterizes 
Europe”. And his conclusion was: “The existential crisis of Europe has only two outcomes: 
either Europe will disappear in becoming ever more distant from its own rational signification, 
that is its vital sense, and will sink in the hatred of the spirit and in barbarity; or Europe will be 
reborn  from  the  philosophical  spirit  as  a  result  of  a  heroism  of  reason  that  will  overcome 
naturalism”.  
We know very well what happened at those dramatic times and how we could never again 
trust reason the same way after the war. We live now in so-called postmodern times, which 
value more the sceptical side of reason. It is no surprise then that the greatest contemporary 
Portuguese  thinker,  Eduardo  Lourenço,  who  has  lived  and  taught  in  Germany,  Brazil  and 
mostly  in  France,  a  true  “good  European”,  spoke  in  1989  about  European  culture  as  “a 
culture  of  inquietude,  a  culture  of  anguish  and  doubt,  that  is  to  say,  a  culture  of  radical 
defiance of the gods as figures of certainty. And above all a culture of defiance to the being 
never defined or pacified that we are as human beings”. This vision of Lourenço implies that 
our  Faustian  civilization  that  as  he  says  “has  spread  throughout  the  world  its  torment  and 
insatiable curiosity”, does not have a well defined identity. We could say that he theorizes our 
non-identitary identity. In this way, modern high culture has robbed us of any lofty spiritual 
goals behind our endeavours to build a unified Europe. 
It remains a fact that a truly united Europe can still be the mobilizing utopia of our times, but 
for most people committed to the idea we are talking now of a more prosaic utilitarian project. 
Even  the  original  mission  of  maintaining  peace  in  our  continent  seems  to  many  an 
implausible or unnecessary goal after so many years of democratic normality. What quietly 
dominates 
individual  national 
interdependences  to  promote  national  self-interest,  or  even  more  prosaically  to  create  the 
conditions to maximize GDP growth. Do not misinterpret me. These are important objectives 
and we all live and work to serve them. However, advanced European democracies face a 
difficult  period  ahead  of  slow  growth,  high  unemployment  and  deep  reforms  of  their  social 
target  of  achieving  a  better  management  of 
the 
is 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2010
and  economic  model.  I  worry,  consequently,  that  by  lacking  more  elevated  values  deeply 
rooted  in  the  core  of  our  humanity  as  rational,  forgiving  beings  we  may  lack  the  ramparts 
necessary  to  face  any deeper  crisis  that  may  defy  the  very  foundations  of  our  institutions. 
And we all know what Georges Santayana said: “Those who cannot remember the past, are 
condemned to repeat it”... 
Even  without  considering  long-term  structural  problems,  we  know  how  crises  can  emerge 
with threatening consequences. We are now going through one of the more acute episodes 
of turbulence in the short history of our monetary union. Investors in financial markets are 
trying to cast doubt on the capacity of the adjustment mechanisms within the monetary union 
to deal with the existence of macroeconomic imbalances in some member countries. They 
seem  to  forget  that  besides  the  functioning  of  the  institutional  framework  that  imposes 
corrective measures in any off-balance countries, there are endogenous mechanisms that in 
a currency area operate to restore a viable equilibrium between savings and investment. It 
has been known for quite a long time in economic theory that regions of a country with such 
an  imbalance  adjust,  albeit  through  a  recessionary  process,  to  correct  the  disequilibrium. 
Imbalances  that  stem  from  private  agents’  decisions  have  market-driven  self-correcting 
mechanisms  that  operate  through  changes  of  competitiveness  and  the  effect  of  budget 
constraints monitored by the financial sector. 
Naturally,  countries  must  adopt  policies  that  reinforce  those  spontaneous  processes  of 
adjustment by trying to prevent more serious problems to start with. As I wrote in 2000: “It 
can  be  said  that  the  macroeconomics  of  a  successful  monetary  integration  is  about  the 
interiorization by economic agents of new rules regarding fiscal policy and wage behaviour. 
Fiscal  policy  needs  to  keep  a  countercyclical  role  to  act  as  a  shock  absorber.  Wage 
behaviour should take as a reference wage cost developments in the euro area as a whole 
and should deviate from those only if there is a productivity growth differential.” In reference 
to Portugal, our policies did not always follow these principles. But independently of it, the 
initial shock of interest rate reduction after joining the euro coming from a previous regime of 
higher  rates,  implied  an  unavoidable  explosion  of  private  expenditure  and  debt  that  no 
sensible  fiscal  policy  could  completely  offset.  As  I  remarked  in  2004,  the  initial  boom  of 
private expenditure was as unavoidable as the subsequent fall and adjustment. After a mild 
recession in 2003 and a big budget slippage in 2005, we implemented what has been so far 
the biggest fiscal correction since the inception of the euro and initiated a broad process of 
adjustment. In mid 2007, we had achieved a budget deficit below 3% in a consistent way, the 
economy was growing again at around 2% and our inflation rate was below the euro area 
average.  Our  relative  unit  labour  costs  against  our  main  trading  partners  (21  countries) 
increased from 2003 to 2009 by just 4.4% which is well below the increase of 10.9% for the 
euro area average, using the same concept of the real effective exchange rate. Since 1999 
the figures are 9.1% for Portugal and 15.9% for the average of the euro area. On a par with 
this,  our  inflation  rate  since  mid  2007  has  been  below  the  figure  for  the  euro  area.  Our 
economy has been in a mode of competitive disinflation throughout this period. At the same 
time  our  productive  structure  continued  to  progress  in  the  value  chain  and  by  2008,  for 
instance, our exports of services to business already had a higher weight than the traditional 
exports of textiles and clothing. Unfortunately, the improvement in our balance of goods and 
services was not sufficient, as our savings rate continued to be very low and our energy bill 
and the outflows of the income balance combined to keep a very high external deficit that 
has to be significantly reduced, namely through the mechanisms I have already described. 
We have lived beyond our means and, as Kenneth Rogoff recently said, “Financial regulation 
has been appropriate, otherwise the situation would be much worse”. The point is, that we 
needed time to continue the adjustment and in principle, monetary union was supposed to 
give us that time for a gradual process of rebalancing. The international financial crisis that 
started  in  2007  interrupted  the  process  and  the  more  recent  market  attacks  on  euro  area 
countries vulnerable in terms of sovereign debt implies that time became a luxury: we have 
now to make a more abrupt, quicker and more severe adjustment. As I warned already in 
2001:  “Conceived  for  an  infinite  or  very  long  horizon,  the  technical  definition  of  external 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 3
sustainability ends up not being truly operational because it only refers to the capacity of the 
economy  to  pay  its  debt  within  that  time  horizon.  Operationally,  what  counts  is  the 
assessment  made  by  investors  about  that  capacity  of  repayment,  which  means  that  the 
possibility of financing depends on many factors, sometimes not fundamental ones”. That is 
what we face now and so, we may need to ponder whether the recently approved Stability 
Programme should be reinforced by adopting upfront measures foreseen for later years. We 
must be resolute and clear-headed in recognizing the reality of how markets operate and, as 
captains of an embattled ship, we should not complain too much about the sea where we 
have to navigate.  
We have to take comfort from the fact that we are not alone in this. A monetary union is not a 
sort of multilateral currency board. All member countries have a common interest in the well 
being of our union and its currency. We all share the guilt related to the failure of governance 
in  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  Pact.  We  ourselves,  have  never  tried  to  hamper  the 
functioning of the Pact and, when caught at fault, we have abided by the rules. The recent 
events revealed indecisions and surprising misinterpretations of self-interest, but the system 
worked and deserves our trust. The need for reforms in surveillance and crisis management 
became nevertheless apparent, including the creation of an European Monetary Fund that 
had  been  foreseen  in  very  early  discussions  about  monetary  union,  and  I  am  sure  this 
episode will have consequences for future institutional arrangements.  
Everything  must  in  fact  be  done  to  reinforce  the  euro  area.  We  can  all  see  how  it  was 
important  to  face  the  international  financial  crisis.  From  the  beginning  of  the  euro,  the 
Eurosystem was able to consolidate a culture of stability that is so important to create the 
conditions  for  long-term  economic  growth.  Since  1999,  we  have  been  able  to  deliver  an 
average inflation rate of just 1.9%, an important achievement during an extended period of 
ten years.  
Very significant was also the way the euro and our common monetary policy helped Europe 
to  face  the  financial  crisis.  The  quick  and  bold  decisions  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  were 
instrumental in containing the risk of a deep recession or even a depression. Since May last 
year  our  monetary  policy  delivered  an  average  overnight  rate  (EONIA)  of  just  0.4%  and  a 
three months Euribor of 0.8%. These low rates supported the income of indebted households 
and firms and were essential to shore up domestic demand. The unconventional measures 
taken in the area of liquidity provision were likewise fundamental to help the financial sector 
survive the test of a very serious market stress. In the end, academics and analysts had to 
agree that the ECB and the Eurosystem had performed well and strengthened its standing as 
a professional central bank. In this connection, I think it is of elementary justice to single out 
the  role  played  by  President  Trichet  in  leading  our  team  throughout  the  turmoil.  His 
leadership  qualities,  his  experience,  his  knowledge  of  the  markets  and  his  communication 
skills were essential to the overall performance of the system. I am therefore very glad that 
our President of the Republic has decided to decorate him tomorrow for his role in steering 
the euro area during this trying period. It is for me also a great honour to be able to work with 
him more closely in the near future in my new capacity and alongside all my colleagues on 
the Executive Board of the European Central Bank. There is much work to do to deal with the 
evolving  predicament  in  capital  markets  and  to  implement  the  reforms  stemming  from  the 
lessons that the financial crisis has compelled us to adopt.  
The  crisis  made  clear  that  monetary  policy  focused  on  price  stability  had  to  be 
complemented with new instruments of macro-prudential policies to ensure financial stability 
and asset markets less prone to price bubbles. The creation of the European Systemic Risk 
Board,  alongside  the  General  Council  of  the  ECB,  is  the  European  response  to  that 
requirement. 
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  will  have  to  rely  on  a  new  vision  of  the  transmission 
mechanisms  and  the  economic  models  used  to  help  the  decision  making  will  have  to 
integrate in a relevant way the role of financial markets in our economies. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2010
A  complete  overhaul  of  regulation  of  the  financial  sector  became  necessary.  We  must  be 
aware of the main lessons that must be drawn from the crisis: a) the financial sector is not 
self-equilibrating or self-correcting; b) an unfettered financial sector can generate crisis on its 
own; c) extended periods of high growth of credit and debt generate asset price booms that 
always end in a crisis; d) low inflation in the market of goods and services is not enough to 
guarantee financial stability.  
Human societies have learnt and forgotten these lessons several times throughout history. 
Misbehaviour by big financial institutions, deregulation and perverse incentives created this 
time the perfect storm that will continue for a long period of time to cause low growth and 
severe unemployment.  New regulation will have to contribute to the taming of the sector’s 
tendency to expand beyond proportion.  
Finally, a reform of the global monetary system is necessary to solve the recurrent problem 
of global macroeconomic imbalances that may lead to new crises in the future. 
Regarding  Europe,  besides  the  already  mentioned  changes  in  economic  governance  and 
crisis  management,  structural  reforms  are  required  to  create  new  sources  of  economic 
growth that are necessary to survive in a very competitive world and to keep essential parts 
of our social model in the face of Europe’s collective demographic suicide. 
Deep down, we all know that Europe is again in a defining moment and is going through an 
existential  crisis.  Last  year,  the  German  philosopher  Jurgen  Habermas  in  his  new  book 
“Europe, the faltering project” wrote: “For the first time in the process of European unification 
we face the danger of a regression behind the stage of integration already achieved.” This 
sense of impending crisis is recurrent in European history. In his great book The Europeans, 
Luigi  Barzini,  in  1983,  described  Europe  in  a  very  apt  way:”  It  is  pessimistic,  prudent, 
practical, parsimonious, like an old-fashioned banker. ... It always prefers to wait and see. It 
enjoys  delving  into  the  complexity  of  things;  the  more  complexities  it  can  find  the  better. 
Europe looks for nuances, the bad side of anything good, the good side of anything bad”. 
This does not mean that Europe is paralyzed. In moments of doubt we can always turn to the 
great  man  of  action,  one  of  Europe’s  founders,  Jean  Monnet,  who  reminded  us  that  “Men 
only act in a state of need and only recognize the need in a state of crisis”. In fact, we all 
know  that  Europe  has  progressed  through  the  process  of  overcoming  crises.  Like  the 
mythical bird, Europe has been reborn several times. I started with Rougemont talking about 
search  and  adventure.  I  conclude  now  that  Europe  as  adventure  continues.  In  this  place, 
thinking about the men who set sail from these shores in such small ships to go into truly 
unchartered  waters,  it  is  perhaps  easier  to  feel  this  sense  of  adventure.  To  face  our  own 
problems now, we must have their courage, their resolve and their hope. 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 5
