Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with The Wall Street Journal 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, with The Wall 
Street Journal, conducted by Messrs Brian Blackstone and Matthew Karnitschnig, published 
on 27 January 2010. 
 Question: As Davos approaches, what are your thoughts on where the global economy has 
come in the last year, what risks have receded and if there are any new risks that you see? 
Mr. Trichet: To me Davos is 2007, 2008, 2009 and now 2010.  
In  early  2007  it  was  before  the  start  of  the  financial  turbulences  I  said  publicly  that  my 
colleagues and I were warning against an under-assessment of the quantity of risks and an 
under-pricing on the unit of risk in global finance.  
In early 2008 we were in a situation which was obviously very demanding because we were 
experiencing  the  turbulences  which  had  started  since  August  2007  and  we  had  to  take 
already  some  unconventional  measures.  We  had  not  yet  to  cope  with  the  dramatic 
intensification of the crisis, namely the post-Lehman situation.  
In early 2009, in Davos last year, we were coping with the most demanding situation since 
more than 60 years. The financial crisis had turned into an economic free fall with the grave 
and immediate threat of having a depression which could have been as grave as 1929. This 
free fall lasted two full quarters: Q4 of 2008 and Q1 of 2009. We have avoided, thanks to the 
measures we took, the materialization of the depression.  
At this Davos meeting, we have a unique occasion to compare notes because you have here 
the  private  sector,  both  financial  and  non-financial,  as  well  as  the  public  authorities,  the 
executive  branches,  members  of  parliaments,  central  banks,  coming  from  both,  the 
industrialized and the emerging world. Comparing notes to better understand why the system 
the financial system was unacceptably fragile and to see together how to make the global 
economy much more resilient.  
Question: When you look at the current situation, where are the greatest risks in Europe and 
globally?  
Mr.  Trichet:  We  are  now  experiencing  a  modest  recovery  in  Europe.  And,  we  all  have  to 
make  the  financial  system  much  more  resilient  in  the  medium-  and  long-term  with  a 
management of the transition that would permit not to hamper the present recovery. In any 
case  we  cannot  afford  to  be  twice  in  such  a  dramatic  situation  at  the  global  level.  I  trust 
profoundly that our democracies will not accept twice to put between 25% and 30% of GDP 
of taxpayer risk on the table to sustain the financial sector. We have an absolute obligation to 
make the system much more solid.  
This is sometimes challenged by some financial institutions and market participants that see 
that the market is fortunately functioning again and have forgotten that governments put over 
25% of GDP of taxpayer risks on the table and that major central banks have engaged in 
non-conventional measures, which have been absolutely extraordinary. Those miss the point 
that  if  things  are  progressively  back  to  a  normal  functioning  this  is  not  thanks  to  the 
spontaneous behavior of the system itself, but very largely of the incredible engagement and 
commitment of public authorities which normally should not do that.  
Question:  Do  you  see  any  evidence  out  there  that  there  is  excessive  risk  taking  in  the 
financial system again? 
Mr.  Trichet:  One  of  the  major  lessons  we  have  to  draw  from  the  crisis  was  that  risk 
management by financial institutions had been unacceptably poor and a major improvement 
of risk management by private institutions is of the essence. This calls for not confusing very 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 1
short-term apparent profits, with the medium-term, real contribution to sustainable profits that 
should be the pertinent criterion for the remunerations: That being said the main message we 
have  for  our  banks  is  loud  and  clear:  “Reinforce  your  balance  sheets  by  the  appropriate 
means,  including  issuance  of  new  shares  when  and  where  possible,  putting  aside  a 
significant  proportion  of  your  profits  instead  of  distributing  it  and  being  highly  responsible 
when  fixing  up  remuneration  packages.”  All  what  central  banks  decided  to  do  as  regards 
non-conventional measures was done with the sole goal of permitting the financial sector to 
do its job, which is financing appropriately the real economy. Our message is crystal clear. 
Question: Do you think that the banks in Europe have been forthcoming enough about their 
potential losses? 
Mr. Trichet: The theory according to which the European banks would be less transparent 
than other banks in the industrialized world is not confirmed by what we know. We call upon 
our banks as well as all other banks to be as transparent as possible. That being said I think 
that  the  analysis  of  the  IMF  and  our  own  analysis  published  in  our  last  Financial  Stability 
Review,  stress  that  the  loan  provisioning  is  now  the  main  issue  for  most  institutions  more 
than the so-called toxic assets.  
Question: What kind of a grade would you give banks at this point? They have had several 
months since the economy has stabilized. Are you happy with their progress in taking these 
steps? Or do you think they have a lot left to do? 
Mr. Trichet: There have been many measures taken by financial institutions in the various 
market  places,  including  the  issuance  of  new  stocks,  which  we  consider  good  for  the 
resilience of the banks and encouraging because it proves that the market is recovering. But 
a lot remains to be done to be sure that our banks as I said are fully able to do their job, 
which is to finance the real economy. Credit demand is obviously still very weak because of 
the sharp recession which ended only a few months ago. So it is not surprising to see the 
outstanding  loans  to  the  non-financial  corporate  decreasing  somewhat.  But  we  must 
eliminate, as soon as possible, all remaining abnormal supply of credit constraints.  
Question: Do you worry that the global economy has become bubble dependent for growth, 
leading to crises? 
Mr. Trichet: I have been myself involved personally in numerous financial crises since the 
beginning of the 1980s: in particular the sovereign debt crisis in Latin America, in Africa, in 
the Middle East and in the Soviet Union. As Paris Club president at some point in the time in 
the 80’s I had to deal with around 55 countries that were in bankruptcy. The perception in the 
West  was  that  it  was  not  dramatic  because  the  industrialized  countries  were  not  directly 
touched, but, as you can see entire continents were very heavily financially hampered. In the 
1990s  we  had  the  burst  of  the  Mexican,  the  Asian,  the  Russian  crisis,  –  again  in  the 
emerging  countries  –  and  in  the  industrialized  world  the  LTCM  crisis  and  the  tech  bubble 
explosion.  Then  after  this  succession  of  very  demanding  episodes  we  have  the  present 
financial crisis, which started at the heart of the financial markets of the West. This was the 
first real test for two new entities, which are the integrated global financial system and the 
integrated global economy. Those entities are in particular the product of the conversion to 
market  economies  of  all  economies  in  the  world  and  of  the  remarkable  advances  of 
technology, in particular Information Technology (IT), but not only IT. The least we can say 
that this first real stress test of global finance has demonstrated a fragility that is absolutely 
unacceptable. We have to correct it.  
Question:  When  central  banks  recognize  that  a  bubble  is  developing  should  they  take 
corrective action to pop it before it becomes a big problem by raising rates? 
Mr. Trichet: No central bank today will say that central banks should remain passive when a 
significant financial bubble is developing. But that does not mean that this issue is not very 
complex. As regards the European Central Bank, we feel today vindicated in our monetary 
policy concept, which attaches importance to our monetary analysis and explores information 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2010
that can be drawn from the dynamics of the components and the counterparts of monetary 
aggregates.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  this  monetary  analysis,  which  is  part  of  our  two 
pillar  monetary  policy  strategy,  proved  very  helpful  in  a  period  of  growing  financial 
imbalances. When we increased rates at the end of 2005, 10 governments out of 12 were 
asking us not to increase rates. The IMF was telling us not to increase rates. The OECD was 
at the time also telling us not to increase rates. We had evidence coming from the monetary 
analysis that it was appropriate to increase rates. We increased rates. Today there is not the 
slightest criticism on what we did at the time. This is no time for complacency in any respect 
today. But we feel encouraged to continue to work very actively to broaden and to deepen 
our monetary analysis.  
Question: Are you worried about signs of political pressure on other central banks? 
Mr.  Trichet:  I  don’t  trust  this  is  serious.  We  are  in  a  world  where  if  households,  market 
participants  and  enterprises  would  lose  confidence  in  the  capacity  of  central  banks  of  the 
world to be solid anchors of price stability and, therefore of financial stability, in the medium- 
and  long-term,  the  economy  as  a  whole  would  not  function  correctly.  It  seems  to  me  that 
more than ever we have a need of independent institutions having the capacity to take fully 
into account longer-term horizon considerations.  
Question: What lessons have you learned from past crises as you deal with the fallout of the 
current one? 
Mr.  Trichet:  Lesson  number  one:  We  have  to  considerably  reinforce  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system.  I  understand  the  infuriation  of  our  public  opinion  because  the  global 
financial system was much too fragile. That being said I would guard against scapegoating. 
As a matter of fact the full system has to be improved and redressed and not only some parts 
and parcel of it. To fix a systemic failure, you have to fix the whole system.  
Another lesson of those crises is the necessity of rapid decisions when and where needed. 
The ECB proved a capacity to decide rapidly when the crisis started and I have to say hat the 
central banks all over the world avoided the depression because we, together did not lose 
time. It was a matter of weeks and, at certain moments a question of days.  
A third lesson valid for all crises and particularly for the present one is that institutions and 
individuals  have  to  remain  calm  and  never  to  lose  sang-froid.  Keeping  composure  in  very 
demanding circumstances is always necessary to handle correctly the unfolding of a crisis. 
Question: Do you think that it might make sense to have some kind of mechanism within in 
euro zone to allow the ECB or some other body in the EU to take more control of a country’s 
budget as a way of giving the markets more confidence and helping guide that country, such 
as the case of Greece? 
Mr. Trichet: The Governing Council of the ECB has always been very vocal, very strong in 
defending the Stability and Growth Pact at a time where some governments were opposing 
the Pact and wanted to dismantle it. We call for a rigorous implementation of the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  by  all  countries.  We  also  call  for  all  data,  facts  and  figures  to  be  audited 
appropriately at national and, when judged necessary, at the European level by Eurostat. I 
expect the European Commission to take very soon a number of proposals in that sense. 
As an example at the moment we see one government – the Irish government – is looking 
energetically at what it has to do. Ireland was in a situation that was difficult and a number of 
courageous and convincing decisions have been taken. 
I  expect  and  I  am  confident  that  in  the  demanding  situation  in  which  Greece  is,  its 
government will also take the right and necessary decisions to implement the goal which has 
been fixed, namely to have a public deficit below 3% (deficit as a share of GDP) as early as 
2012.  
BIS Review 8/2010 
 3
Question: Do you think that’s realistic? 
Mr. Trichet: It is what the Government has committed to do. I trust it is not only realistic but 
also necessary in the present demanding circumstances to take the right decisions to meet 
the goal. I approve the ambition. I approve the 2012 deficit target of below 3%. 
Question: Are you satisfied that we’re exiting this recession with global imbalances in better 
order? 
Mr. Trichet: This is absolutely key! One of the main causes of the present crisis has been 
the  accumulation  of  global  imbalances.  We  have  agreed  in  the  G20  to  organize  a 
surveillance of the macro-policies of the systemic economies to reduce this constellation of 
global imbalances. But to be a success this surveillance exercise requires three conditions: 
First,  that  the  IMF  would  produce  lucid  and  courageous  analysis.  Second  that  peer 
surveillance would be executed fairly without any complacency. Those two first conditions, I 
trust, are reasonably likely to be met. But there is a third condition, that the countries and 
economies  concerned  would  really  change  their  domestic  policies  accordingly  to  pave  the 
way for a better functioning of the global economy. There, I think, is the main issue. We have 
to  convince  our  democracies  that  there  are  situations  in  which  the  superior  interest  of  the 
stability and prosperity of the global economy calls for changes in domestic policies.  
A great media like yours know better than anybody how difficult it is to convey to the public 
opinion of a great democracy that we all have a stake in the stability and prosperity in that 
entity  which  is  the  global  economy  itself.  We  all  have  a  lot  of  hard  work  to  do  to  improve 
explanations and pedagogy in this domain. Finally the most important in our democracies is 
the quality of information, the overall lucidity of the large public opinion. Again, this, I think, is 
the main issue. We have created an entity which is the global economy, and our own people 
are  not  yet  necessarily  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  we  all  have  an  immense  stake  in  the 
stability and prosperity of this global economy.  
Question:  What  are  your  hopes  for  the  Basel  discussions,  and  in  particular  the  US’s 
willingness to sign on to that kind of accord? 
Mr.  Trichet:  We  are  all  engaged  in  working  out  the  appropriate  global  rules.  We  have  an 
agreement of all industrial and all systemic emerging countries. We are all committed to work 
out  together  these  new  prudentials  and  if  one  systemic  country  –  I’m  not  speaking 
particularly of the US but of all of them – is not applying the new prudential rules, then the 
whole  exercise  of  the  G20  would  appear  futile.  This  is  why  I  cannot  imagine  such  a 
hypothesis. It is our collective duty to explain why there is a single entity which is the global 
economy and why it is essential for that entity that we apply the same rules globally and have 
a  level  playing  field.  I  don’t  doubt  for  one  second  the  sincerity  of  the  US  friends  that  are 
participating in the exercise. 
Question:  Your  term  expires  in  October  2011.  You’ve  talked  about  all  the  financial  crises 
during your career. What would you like to see in terms of policies that might prevent your 
successor from having to follow the same path you have over the last 30 years? 
Mr.  Trichet:  First  let  me  reassure  you:  I  will  execute  all  my  inspiring  and  heavy 
responsibilities until the 31 October 2011! My colleagues and I, we have to do the job. To 
deliver  price  stability  in  the  medium  and  long-term  and,  by  doing  that,  contributing  to  the 
financial stability in the long run! I insist on the long run! A central bank is an institution that 
has to be credible in the long run. Some Treasuries are issuing Treasuries for 50 years. The 
corresponding very long-term interest rates depend on the independence and the credibility 
of the central bank.  
Question:  A  local  question  in  Germany:  the  Landesbanken  and  the  crisis  they’ve  gone 
through; do you feel that’s been taken care of or do you think public sector banks in Germany 
and elsewhere need consolidation as some people are calling for? What needs to happen? 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2010
Mr.  Trichet:  We  have  always  called  all  over  Europe,  in  all  countries,  for  getting  rid  of 
anomalies  we  were  seeing  in  the  market  in  this  domain.  It  is  not  the  case  of  Germany  in 
particular,  but  we  always  said  that  there  was  an  immense  stake  in  having  institutions  that 
would not be abnormally behaving for reasons that were due their own structure. I said that 
publicly before the crisis so I have no hesitation in confirming it. 
Question: What is your reaction to President’s Obama bank reform plan, which would set 
new limits on the size of trading activities of the largest banks? Do you think it would help to 
solve the too-big-too-fail problem and curb global systemic risk and whether any aspects of 
the plan would be suitable for consideration in Europe such as limits on proprietary trading 
operations of banks?  
Mr. Trichet: The reform proposals are relevant and interesting. We are examining them with 
great  care.  They  go  in  the  same  direction  of  our  own  position,  namely  ensuring  that  the 
banking  sector  focuses  on  financing  the  real  economy,  which  is  its  key  role.  There  is 
naturally an international coordination mechanism at the level of the G20 and the Financial 
Stability Board, where proposals should be coordinated globally to ensure that there are no 
loopholes in our integrated global financial system. I expect therefore that the international 
community will work actively on such ideas to improve our collective effort against systemic 
risks.  
Question: Ben Bernanke has faced a difficult confirmation process for another term as Fed 
Chairman  that  still  hasn’t  been  resolved.  Can  you  talk  about  the  actions  he  has  taken  in 
response to the financial crisis?  
Mr.  Trichet:  I  hold  Ben  Bernanke  in  very  great  esteem  and  very  much  appreciate  the 
cooperation  between  the  Fed  and  the  ECB,  which  became  particularly  close  as  the  crisis 
unfolded. I do hope and am confident that he will be confirmed by the US Senate. 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 5
