Petar Goshev: Some lessons from the crisis 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  23rd  Annual  Conference  of  the  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  from 
Central and Eastern Europe, Ohrid, 15 June 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Participants,  
It is an honor for me to share these moments with you exchanging thoughts about, today, the 
most important questions in the domain of financial intermediation. 
It is my special pleasure that my address will open the 23rd Annual Conference of the Group 
of Banking Supervisors from Central and Eastern Europe. 
There is no doubt that the key words for every supervisory body are liquidity and solvency, 
as  quantities  and  qualities  which  are  permanently  testing  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
system in its functioning. 
Therefore,  the  standards  for  liquidity  and  solvency  are  constantly  being  checked  from  two 
key aspects: (1) whether, amid various adverse shocks, they are set to maintain satisfactory 
resilience  of  the  banking  system  and  (2)  whether  the  points  of  calibration  of  these  key 
categories at the same time enable efficient, rational financial intermediation. 
The financial crisis that began in August 2007 clearly shocked the world with its sharpness 
and,  now  we  can  say,  its  length.  Liquidity  vanished,  many  institutions  turned  insolvent, 
financial intermediation as the key link in the economic reproduction chain in a lot of places in 
the  world,  especially  in  the  developed  countries,  at  certain  moments,  almost  entirely 
collapsed. 
Everything was put in question: the current economic theories; monetary and fiscal policies; 
micro and macroprudential policies; the whole financial regulation. 
Suddenly, no one was satisfied with the global financial framework. A gallop was started for 
its reexamining. The fear from recurrence of the crisis and its possible deepening, for almost 
three years has been keeping the eyes of the creators of the economic and financial policies 
wide open. 
Why did this happen to us? 
A lot has been written in search for the causes of the crisis, and a lot more will be examined 
and written. 
One part of the relevant experts say: 
(1) 
The  so-called  “great  moderation”  period  in  the  GDP  and  inflation  fluctuations  was 
the reason, for which a wrong sense of comfort and illusion was settled, that the crisis period 
is behind us. Some relevant economic minds convinced us in that. Paul Krugman, in “The 
Return  of  Depression  Economics”  (2008)  reminds  us  of  the  statement  of  the  Nobel  Prize 
winner Robert Lucas that “the central problem of depression-prevention has been solved, for 
all practical purposes” and the statement of Ben Bernanke in his famous speech named as 
“The Great Moderation”, where he claims more than Lucas that the modern macroeconomic 
policy has solved the business cycle problem or more precisely it has reduced the problem to 
a point that it is a mere shade rather than the most important economic question. 
(2) 
Daniel  K.  Tarullo,  member  of  the  FED  Board  of  Governors  finds  the  reasons  in 
replacing the basic regulatory framework established after the Great Depression 1929–1933, 
which mostly limited the commercial banks to traditional lending activities, with the regulatory 
framework  that  in  the  1970s  started  to  install  deep  changes  in  the  organization  and 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 1
regulation of the financial markets, culminating with the adoption of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
bill in 1999. 
He says that “with the innovations, the traditional commercial banking business model was 
put  under  strong  pressure  on  both  sides:  on  the  liability  side  in  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
banks in the form of more attractive savings instruments, such as the funds for investing on 
the  money  market,  and  on  the  assets  side,  with  the  growth  of  public  companies  and 
international competition”. 
Until the end of the century the restriction cluster on the commercial banks from the great 
depression  era  was  replaced  with  a  regulatory  setting  in  which  they  could  operate  on  a 
national level, to involve in a much broader set of activities and to practically join with every 
kind of financial companies. 
Tarullo says, that is how the highly complex financial holding companies were started... the 
independent  investment  banks  grew  in  a  group  of  big,  complex  and  highly  indebted 
companies...  the  financial  engineering  was  quickly  changing  the  character  of  the  entire 
financial  services  sector.  Securitization  and  accompanying  instruments  united  the  capital 
markets and traditional lending activities, fueling the growth of the so-called shadow banking 
system. 
(3) 
Allan Greenspan in his latest paper “The Crisis” wrote about the reasons for it: 
a. 
“it  was  the  global  proliferation  of  securitized,  toxic  U.S.  subprime  mortgages  that 
was the immediate trigger of the current crisis”. But, he says: “the roots of the crisis reach 
back, as best I can judge, to the aftermath of the Cold War”. 
Later  he  explains  actually  the  large  increase  of  the  aggregate  demand  which  came  from, 
formerly the third world nations, especially China, which replicated the export-oriented model 
of the so-called Asian tigers, argumenting it with data that “the savings rate of the developing 
world  soared  from  24%  of  nominal  GDP  in  1999  to  34%  in  2007,  far  outstripping  its 
investment rate”. 
b. 
that  “subprime  mortgages  in  the  United  States  for  years  had  been  a  small 
appendage  to  the  broader  U.S.  home  mortgage  market,  comprising  only  7%  of  total 
originations as recently as 2002”...that “most such loans were fixed-rate mortgages, and only 
a modest amount had been securitized...” that “..,. starting in late 2003, began to accelerate 
the  pooling  and  packaging  of  subprime  home  mortgages  into  securities...”  that  “subprime 
mortgages securities outstanding in 2007 totaled more than 900 billion USD, a more than six-
fold rise since the end of 2001”. 
c. 
that “a classic euphoric global bubble took hold”, “that by 2007, yield spreads in the 
overall debt markets hаd narrowed to a point where there was little room for further under 
pricing of risk”. 
... “that the bubble has reached such a size partly due to the fact that the dot-com bubble 
burst with very little footprint on global GDP”...that as late as April, 2007 the IMF noted that 
“global  economic  risks  have  declined,  the  overall  U.S.  economy  is  holding  up  well”;  that 
“many quantitative firms whose number crunching sought to expose profitable market trading 
principles were successful so long as risk aversion moved incrementally (which it did much of 
the time)”; that “the risk management paradigm nonetheless, harbored a fatal flaw” i.e. that 
“in  the  growing  state  of  high  euphoria,  risk  managers,  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  other 
regulators failed to fully comprehend the underlying size, length, and impact of the negative 
tail of the distribution of risk outcomes that was about to be revealed as the post-Lehman” 
that “for decades, with little, to no data, most analysts, in my experience, had conjectured a 
far  more  limited  tail  risk”  and  that  “this  is  arguably  the  major  source  of  the  critical  risk 
management system failures”. 
“In  despair,  says  Greenspan,  an  inordinately  large  part  of  investment  management 
subcontracted  to  the  ‘safe  harbor’  risk  designations  of  the  credit  rating  agencies.”  But  the 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2010
Oliver  Blanchard  and  other  authors,  in  their  paper  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic 
analysts  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  proved  no  more  adept  and  no  more  proficient  at 
anticipating the onset of crisis than the investment community at large. 
(4) 
Policy” stated: 
“With  the  neglect  of  financial  intermediation  as  a  central  macroeconomic  feature,  financial 
regulation and supervision focused on individual institutions and markets and largely ignored 
their macroeconomic implications. Little thought was given to using regulatory ratios, such as 
capital ratios, or loan-to-value ratios, as cyclical policy tools.” 
By analyzing the reasons we came up with many lessons, which it has delivered up to this 
moment. For some of the questions there is already a global consensus. For others, it still 
has to be constructed. For some questions there is a general consensus, but the devil is in 
the details and therefore there are and there will be confronting opinions that demand time 
for adjustment until they become operative and applicable.  
What lessons could be, at the moment, more relevant? 
I. 
There is an agreement that a global crisis in a highly interdependent world needs a 
global response. A global response needs global institutions, a global economic and financial 
architecture. Current institutions have proved to be insufficient and inefficient. 
Generally, the structure of that global architecture is already drawn and its shaping is moving 
in a good direction. 
 
The  G20  group  was  constituted  early  during  the  crisis,  as  a  main  forum  for 
international discussion on the global economic stability; 
Under  the  patronage  of  the  G20  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  previously  the 
Financial Stability Forum, increased the number of its member states from 12 to 24, 
and  the  area  of  competence  as  well.  Now  it  secures  unprecedented  degree  of 
international coordination in the field of the regulatory questions, as an addition to 
the  old  mandate  as  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  FSB  is  now  empowered  with 
additional assignments, including: 
(i) 
undertaking  joint  strategic  reviews  of  policy  development  of  the  international 
standard setting bodies;  
setting  guidelines  for,  and  supporting,  the  establishment  of  supervisory 
colleges;  
(ii) 
(iii)  supporting contingency planning for cross-border crisis management. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  has  refocused  its  activity  on  monitoring  the 
international financial system, identifying threats to the global financial stability; 
In  Europe,  based  on  current  draft  legislation,  the  financial  supervision  will  be 
characterized by a two-pillar structure. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) 
will be responsible for macro-prudent supervision of the European financial system 
as  a  whole,  while  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS)  will  be 
focused  on  micro-prudent  supervision.  ESRB  will  be  especially  focused  on  the 
potential  threads  to  the  financial  stability  arising  from  the  macro-economic 
developments, as well as the developments in the financial system as a whole. It will 
issue general warnings or warnings for specific aspects (e.g. on a country level or 
on a specific industry level, in every case when the risks seem significant). When 
necessary, it will give recommendations for action to deal with the risks and it will 
monitor the compliance with the given recommendations.  
ESFS  will  maintain  the  dialog  with  ESRB  and  it  will  deliver  the  recommendations  to  the 
national supervisors, who will adhere to the principle “act or explain”.  
BIS Review 90/2010 
 3
   After  the  crisis  there  is  a  strong  consensus  concerning  the  weaknesses  of  the 
II. 
prudential policy and the imperative for its fundamental improvement. Nobody disputes the 
fact  that  the  prudential  policy  should  be  characterized  by  two  dimensions:  the  micro-
prudential,  designed  to  limit  the  instability  of  the  individual  banks;  and  macro-prudential, 
designed to limit the risk of the financial stability as a whole, meaning, to limit the so-called 
systemic  risk.  The  macro-prudential  dimension  becomes  increasingly  important.  The  Bank 
for  International  Settlements  defines  the  macro-prudential  policy  as  “the  use  of  prudential 
tools with the explicit objective of promoting the stability of the financial system as a whole, 
not necessarily of the individual institutions within it”. (BIS Quarterly review, Мarch 2010) 
“The objective of macro-prudential policy is to reduce systemic risk by explicitly addressing 
the  interlinkages  between,  and  common  exposures  of,  all  financial  institutions,  and  the 
procyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  That  is,  systemic  risk  is  to  be  reduced  in  its  cross-
sectional dimension and its time dimension, respectively.” (Jaime Caruana, 2010)  
The  recent  BIS  papers,  designed  to  create  operating  macroprudential  approach,  suggest 
several leading principles for designing the macroprudential tools. 
Firstly, they need to be calibrated according to the contribution of each individual institution to 
the  potential  systemic  risk,  regardless  of  the  institution’s  legal  form,  meaning  that  every 
important company must be included in the perimeter of the regulation. 
Secondly, a way should be found to reduce the procyclicality of the financial system.  
Thirdly,  a  thorough  study  of  the  various  available  (macroprudential)  tools  should  be 
conducted,  to  their  potential  usefulness  and  to  the  empirical  evidence  of  their  impact  and 
effectiveness. 
The BIS analyses have registered many tools used by the Asian countries: 
(i) 
countercyclical  capital  buffers  linked  to  credit  growth  (China);  countercyclical 
provisioning (China, India);  
loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratios  (China,  Hong  Kong  SAR,  The  Republic  of  Korea, 
Singapore);  
direct  controls  on  lending  to  specific  sectors  (The  Republic  of  Korea,  Malaysia, 
Philippines, Singapore) oriented toward managing the aggregate risk throughout the 
business cycle (i.e. procyclicality);  
(ii) 
(iii) 
furthermore, 
(iv) 
capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important  banks  (China,  India,  Philippines, 
Singapore);  
liquidity requirements funding (India, The Republic of Korea, Philippines, Singapore ; 
limits on currency mismatches (India, Malaysia, Philippines);  
loan to deposit requirements (China, The Republic of Korea), as a tool for managing 
the aggregate risk in every point in time (systemic oversight). 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
These  examples  show  that  the  macroprudential  tools  could  have  an  effect  on  the 
vulnerabilities by increasing the financial sector resilience. 
The Basel Committee has already proposed the following tools:  
- 
countercyclical capital framework. This will require from the financial institutions to 
build up capital in good times, that can be drawn upon in periods of stress; 
forward looking provisioning. Banks are encouraged to allocate provisions based on 
expected losses, as opposed to allocating provisions on the basis of incurred loss. 
This  approach  is  less  procyclical  than  the  so-called  “incurred  loss”  provisioning 
model.  
BIS Review 90/2010
 4 
  capital conservation measures. This measure includes activities aimed at restricting 
oversized  payments  of  dividends,  share  buy  backs  and  generous  compensation 
payments by financial institutions. 
Capital requirements are undoubtedly the foundations of the microprudential regulation, but 
they also have a macroprudent dimension related to the procyclicality of the financial sector. 
Capital  buffers  which  should  confront  procyclicality  should  meet  two  objectives:  first,  they 
should help the banking system handle the risks which could materialize in periods of crisis, 
and  second,  they  should  mitigate  the  reduction  of  the  economic  activity  in  a  situation  of 
downward  movement  of  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  several  key  issues  remain  open  for 
discussion. Should the discretionary interventions on the buffers be reduced to the minimum, 
in order to prevent regulatory capture? On which geographical level should the aggregation 
be adopted in order to calibrate the buffers? ”For example (Giovanni Carosio, June, 2010) 
says, in the euro area should it be linked to area-wide variables (credit growth), to address 
level playing field concerns, or should we leave the door open to disaggregated measures, 
as I will argue below? And would market pressures allow banks to run down the buffer in a 
downturn?” 
As  for  the  systemic  risk  which  arises  from  the  liquidity  dry-ups,  Carosio  writes  that  no 
uncontroversial solution has been found yet. 
The Basel Committee proposed new standards (for example, The liquidity coverage ratio and 
Net stable funding ratio). 
It seems, Carosio says, that they are powerful instruments, but are still very micro-prudential 
in  nature  and  do  not  necessarily  address  the  “fallacy  of  composition”  that  is  typically  of 
liquidity...In  principle  (he  continues)  the  systemic  dimension  of  liquidity  risk  could  be 
addressed  by  designing  a  countercyclical  liquidity  buffer,  similar  to  the  capital  buffer  ..., 
possibly without raising overall liquidity requirements. An important advantage of this option 
would  be  to  eliminate  the  procyclicality  of  the  micro-prudential  liquidity  regulation  in  its 
current formulation; a disadvantage would be an added layer of complexity.” (Tobias Adrian 
and Markus Brunnermeier) 
According  to  Carosio,  another  solution  would  be  the  one  proposed  by  Perotti,  Enrico  and 
Javier  Suarez  (2009)  “to  levy  charges  on  banks  funding  maturity,  a  proxy  for  systemic 
liquidity risk” and the one proposed by Tobias Adrian and Markus Brunnermeier, “to tie levies 
to measures of systemic risk” or the one proposed by Nicoletti Alltimari, Sergio and Salleo 
(2010),  “to  devise  market  instrument  that  make  liquidity  available  on  a  contingent  basis, 
when a systemic trigger is activated”. Undoubtedly, these issues require additional analysis 
and work. 
In  the  area  of  the  microprudential  regulation,  the  Basel  Committee,  as  we  all  know,  in 
December  last  year  proposed  an  impressive  collection  of  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the 
resilience of the individual financial institutions in case of panic and stress. 
Without elaboration, I would only mention the following: 
First, increasing the quality and the quantity of the capital; 
Second, increasing the capital charges on the basis of the trading portfolio; 
Third, introducing of a leverage ratio for the financial institutions. 
Fourth,  improvement  of  risk  management  and  disclosures,  as  the  crisis  has  revealed  the 
weaknesses  of  the  so-called  “improved”  risk  management  techniques  on  the  basis  of  the 
internal risk models. 
Fifth,  special  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  so-called  counter  party  credit  risk  from 
OTC derivatives.  It  became  evident  that  these  markets  bear  risks  both  for  the  individual 
financial  institutions  (microprudential)  and  for  the  financial  system  (macroprudential). 
Namely, OTC derivatives are traded bilaterally between banks, other financial institutions and 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 5
corporations.  They  are  not  traded  through  the  stock  exchange,  making  difficulties  in 
discovering where the last risk is located, i.e. who bears the last risk. 
Another set of tools should find a solution for the systemically important financial institutions, 
extremely  complex  question,  extremely  important  for  the  systemic  stability  of  the  financial 
sector.  
Except  for  the  general  agreement  about  the  need  of  adequate  harmonization  of  the 
prudential regulation, as the systemically important financial institutions are almost all “cross-
border” by their nature, so far no higher consensus on solutions regarding this matter has 
been reached. 
In the current discussion, basically there are two distinctive approaches, starting from three 
key features of the systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs): their size, complexity 
and inter-linkedness. 
According to one of the approaches, no institution is too big, complicated or linked to fail. In 
this sense, there are proposals to limit the size of the banks and to separate commercial from 
investment banking, disintegrate conglomerates by living wills, etc. 
Some  argue  that  “this  reasoning  is  controversial  as  the  effectiveness  of  these  measures 
depends on the specific features of a relatively small number of SIFIs; different countries will 
probably come up with different solutions”. (Carosio)  
Although  it  is  possible,  he  says,  to  reach  an  agreement  on  some  of  these  proposals,  in 
particular on resolution mechanisms, others (e.g. breaking up institutions according to some 
criterion) would require a broad international political consensus, which seems unlikely at this 
stage. 
The second approach would be directed toward seeking additional capital requirement, or a 
tax, according to the measure for systemic relevance. Taxation seems, according to Carosio, 
more adequate in a burden-sharing perspective. 
“The solution, in my judgment”, says Greenspan “that has at least a reasonable chance of 
reversing  the  extraordinarily  large  ‘moral  hazard’  that  has  arisen  over  the  past  year  is  to 
require banks and possibly all financial intermediaries to hold contingent capital bonds, that 
is, debt which is automatically converted to equity when equity capital falls below a certain 
threshold”.  
“However,  should  contingent  capital  bonds  prove  insufficient,  we  should  allow  large 
institutions to fail, and if assessed by regulators as too interconnected to liquidate quickly, be 
taken into a special bankruptcy facility”. 
So,  he  supports  the second  approach,  and in that  light  is the  latest  legislation  in  the  USA 
which is about to be adopted, as well as the proposals in Europe which envisage measures 
of this kind. 
Namely, “Restoring American Financial Stability Act”, which was passed in the US Senate on 
May 20, would impose significant new obligations and restrictions for the SIFIs, envisaging a 
possibility for the FED to introduce rising strict rules for capital, leverage and liquidity. On the 
other hand, on May 26, the European Commission proposed the Member States to establish 
national  funds,  financed  from  taxes  imposed  on  the  financial  sector,  in  order  to  assist  in 
closing or reorganizing the unsuccessful banks.  
The  macroprudent  tools  mentioned  so  far,  do  not  by  any  means  exhaust  the  list  of 
suggestions. Exploring adequate instruments continues, and we are all waiting to see what 
will be delivered both in the form of ideas and in the form of operational tools. 
III. 
stability. 
The  crisis  has  proved  that  the  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  achieve  financial 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2010
Basically, with small exceptions that have no impact on the adoption of political decisions, 
the  dangerous  influence  of  the  growing  imbalances  in  the  financial  system  was  not 
conceived. The central banks were happy for registering low inflation rates, so it seemed to 
sidetrack the rapid credit growth; the lower risk aversion; the increase in asset prices, and 
consequently, the mounting vulnerability on the financial market. 
That  is  why,  O.  Blanchard  and  others,  (2010)  say  that:  “the  crisis  has  made  clear  that 
policymakers have to watch many targets, including the composition of output, the behavior 
of asset prices, and the leverage of different agents. It has also made clear that they have 
potentially  many  more  instruments  at  their  disposal  than  they  used  before  the  crisis.  The 
challenge is to learn how to use these instruments in the best way.” 
Recently, Petra M. Geraats (Mаy 2010), concluded in the same direction: 
“Recent financial crises have revealed that a ‘nice’ (non-inflationary, continuously expanding) 
economy can mask the build up of toxic imbalances that threaten the financial system. So it 
is  vital  for  policymakers  to  proactively  pursue  not  only  price  but  also  financial  stability. 
Although the pursuit of both objectives could give rise to uncomfortable trade-offs, these can 
be  bypassed  by  supplementing  the  main  instrument  of  monetary  policy,  with  tools  for 
prudential policy, in line with the Tinbergen rule.” 
Accordingly, asking whether the central banks should have double mandate and answering 
affirmatively, she (Petra M. Geraats) says: “Although the twin goals sometimes give rise to 
dueling demands, with an appropriate policy framework central banks can accomplish both 
and achieve a dual mandate of price and financial stability”. 
Definitely, the consensus for this point of view is mounting, since larger number of authors 
are basically on the same line.  
Тhis  highlights  the  importance  of  ongoing  efforts  to  strengthen  the  macro-prudential 
supervision role of central banks (de Larosiere, 2009).  
Macro-prudential  policies  could  aim  to  contain  the  build  up  of  financial  imbalances  and 
ensure that the financial system is sufficiently resistant to withstand a disorderly unwinding 
(Papademos, 2009). 
Considering the important informational synergies between micro-prudential supervision and 
systemic risk analysis, bringing micro-supervision under the same roof as other central bank 
functions  seems  an  attractive  proposition.  Central  banks  can  benefit  from,  and  rely  on, 
extended  access  to  supervisory  information  and  intelligence,  especially  on  systemically 
relevant  intermediaries,  in  order  to  better  assess  risks  and  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial 
system as a whole (A. Orphanides, May 2010).  
It is not necessary to say, because it is obvious, that I share the same opinion.  
IV. 
policy.  
The latest developments in Europe whetted this issue. The decisions of the governments, as 
one  of  the  basic  economic  actors,  have  enormous  influence  on  the  aggregate  demand. 
Therefore, the fiscal policy has key role as a shock absorber, contributing to the maintenance 
of the financial stability. However, we witness that many governments are ignorant to that. 
Why it is so, is not hard to guess, but watching this “sobering” in Europe, it is obvious that the 
crisis helped to firm up the following perspectives: 
1) 
balanced budget rules adopted; 
2) 
certain countries, it can be perceived that, there, it is far from that; 
The fiscal policy must not be a source of shocks. If looking over the fiscal deficits in 
The  fiscal  policy  should  be  countercyclical.  It  should  have  cyclically  adjusted 
The crisis also showed that there is no financial stability by pursuing profligate fiscal 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 7
As usual, the establishment of a new action framework is one thing, while whether 
Even when the source is identified, the history shows that there is no action at all, or 
That  is  why  the  old  ideas  for  the  need  of  establishing  independent  fiscal  agencies  and 
minimal framework which will guarantee independence to the statistical agencies competent 
for the national accounts, resurrected. 
It is impressive what Germany commenced. To incorporate fiscal stability through the highest 
act in the country, the constitution. 
V. 
this framework will become operational, functional, and to what extent, is another thing. 
It is obvious that the bunch of new ideas, new tools we talk about forced by the crisis, are 
focused  on  establishing  a  concept  for  managing  systemic  risk.  Therefore,  the  questions 
whether it will function, on what the result depends most, are logical.  
First,  the  systemic  risk  is  not  too  hard  to  define.  It  is  harder  to  provide  operative 
1) 
contents,  because  of  its  different  dimensions:  procyclicality;  contagion  risk;  the  spillover 
effects  of  a  single  institution’s  distress  to  the  rest  of  the  financial  system;  correlation  risk; 
concentration risk; then, due to the fact that the risk can originate from several sources, etc. 
2) 
the action is delayed, or the seriousness of the threat is underestimated. 
For example, the false reports of the Greek government for the real fiscal deficits were not 
unknown. And not only for theirs. 
It is not untrue that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have proposed to the Congress a 
gradual reduction or possible extinction of the GSEs portfolio (Fannie Mac и Freddy Mac), 
quite before 2004 when their assets were several times smaller than US Dollar 3.2 trillion at 
the end of 2007. 
I would like to say that the matters always crucially depended on the competence, potential 
and the positive political will of those who represent and manifest the people’s sovereignty. 
It will be so in future, as well.  
3) 
In the globalized world, when it became apparent that the systemic crises exceed 
the  borders  of  one  national  jurisdiction  easily,  the  issue  of the  global  financial  architecture 
and the issue of coordination, gain extremely high significance.  
The new regulatory architecture I spoke about at the beginning, the examples for cooperation 
of  the  concerned  governments  and  central  banks  during  this  crisis  are  truly  encouraging. 
However, this path is full of scyllas and haribdas. Many obstacles need to be overcome. The 
paradigm “think globally, act locally” was and it still is very much manipulated by the local 
leaders who need the votes of the local voters to be as they like it. This mentality guarantees 
no financial stability. This path needs a lot of work.  
VI. 
Our general policy is to adhere to the suggestions and the recommendations of the Basle 
Committee.  Regarding  the  modification  in  the  defining  of  the  core  capital,  the  current 
methodology  on  determining  the  banks’  capital  adequacy  already  contains  the  approach 
proposed by the Basle Committee as regards to the deductable items. The requirement to 
make analysis in the following period of the need of modification to the other elements of the 
own  funds,  the  capital  quality,  which  can  be  qualified  for  risk  coverage,  as  well  as  the 
introduction of countercyclical capital protection mechanisms remains. Also, the proposals for 
introducing the leverage ratio are in the process of analysis.  
The Basle Committee and the International Board for Accounting Standards in the MSFI 9 
proposal support the creation of impairment based on the anticipated loss principle, and not 
on the incurred loss principle, as the current International Accounting Standards envisage. In 
the  regulations  pertaining  to  the  credit  risk  management  we  apply  the  anticipated  loss 
principle.  
Where is the Republic of Macedonia with respect to these trends? 
8 
 BIS Review 90/2010
Despite  the  intentions  for  accepting  the  International  Accounting  Standards,  our  valid 
methodology  for  classifying  the  credit  risk  exposure  contains  prudent  filter,  which  requires 
from  the  banks  primarily  to  know  the  debtor’s  characteristics,  its  credit  history  and 
expectations regarding the payment of its liabilities.  
Such a solution in the regulations in line with the Basle recommendations, enabled our banks 
to  have  relatively  sufficient  amount  of  impairment  for  covering  the  incurred  credit  losses 
during the entire turbulent period, which prevented serious pressures on their capital base.  
The crisis showed that even well capitalized banks can be seriously affected, if they fail to 
have adequate level of liquidity. The Basle Committee developed two minimal liquidity ratios, 
short-term liquidity up to 30 days and second ratio with longer term character and represents 
structural liquidity ratio.  
As a supplement to the proposed minimal liquidity ratios, the Basle Committee published a 
revised version of the principles for safe management and supervision of the liquidity risk. 
We have proactive role also regarding this measure. Last year we prepared and adopted a 
regulation that requires from the banks to adhere to two liquidity ratios: (1) up to 30 days and 
(2)  up  to  180  days,  in  Denars  and  foreign  exchange,  individually.  In  that  way,  we 
encompassed both, the short-term and the long-term aspect of the liquidity.  
The  results  from  the  application  of  this  measure  are  good.  At  the  end  of  2009,  we  have 
registered  the  following:  the  volume  of  the  liquid  assets  is  significantly  over  the  level 
registered at the end of 2008; all liquidity indicators improved; the gap between the assets 
and liabilities from the aspect of their contractual maturity and the high percentage of stable 
deposits decreased.  
The history showed again that the financial stability is precious and it represents public good 
for society.  
Let us try to learn the true lessons from the latest crisis. 
I wish you a successful work and pleasant stay in Macedonia.  
References 
1. 
Blanchard  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paolo  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF. 
BIS Quarterly review, (March 2010). 
Caruana Jaime (2010), “Macroprudential policy: working towards a new consensus” 
(Remarks  at  the  high-level  meeting  on  “The  Emerging  Framework  for  Financial 
Regulation and Monetary Policy”, Washington DC, 23 April 2010). 
Caruana Jaime, “The great financial crisis: lessons for the design of Central banks” 
(2010), (Speech given at Colloquium in honour of L.Papademos, ECB, Frankfurt). 
Carosio  Giovanni,  (2010),  “Financial  Stability  and  Macro-Prudential  Supervision: 
Challenges for Central Banks” (OeNB – 38th Economic Conference). 
Geraats M. Petra (2010), “Price and Financial Stability: Dual or Duelling Mandates?” 
(Paper for the 38th Economics Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank). 
Greenspan Alan (2010), “The Crisis” (Second Draft paper). 
Hannoun Herve (2010), “Towards a Global Financial Stability Framework”, (speech 
prepared 
for  45th  SEACEN  Governors  Conference,  Siem  Reap  province, 
Cambodia). 
Haldane G. Andrew (2010), “The $100 billion question” Bank of England. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 9
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
instruments  and 
frameworks:  a  stocktaking  of 
Krugman R. Paul, The Return of Depression Economics and Crisis of 2008. 
Miles David (2009), Bank of England, “The Future Financial Landscape”. 
“Macroprudential 
experiences” (CGFS Papers, No 38, 2010). 
Orphanides Athanasios (2010), “Monetary Policy Lessons from the Crisis” (Paper for 
the 38th Economics Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank). 
Tarullo K. Daniel (2010), “Financial Regulatory Reform” (remarks given at the U.S. 
Monetary Policy Forum, New York). 
White William (2009), “Modern Macroeconomics is on the Wrong Track”, (Finance 
and Development, December 2009). 
issues  and 
10 
 BIS Review 90/2010
