Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Regional 
Business Leaders Forum, University of Southern Queensland and Toowoomba Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, Toowoomba, 23 April 2010. 
 Thank you for the invitation to visit Toowoomba. 
In  my  remarks  today  I  would  like  to  provide  an  update  on  economic  conditions  and 
prospects. This will be from a national perspective, and set in an international context.  
In so doing, I am mindful that next week we will receive some important data on prices. We, 
and everyone else, will have an opportunity to update our thinking on the current and likely 
future course of inflation. So my remarks today will be subject to that caveat. The Bank will 
publish a detailed overall analysis of the economy early next month.  
The global economy 
The latter part of 2008 and the first few months of 2009 saw what has come to be regarded 
as the most serious international recession in decades.  
Global growth has since resumed, but with a rather uneven pattern: it is being led, in the first 
instance, by the emerging world.  
It’s worth asking why that pattern exists. At least part of the answer lies in the nature of the 
downturn and in the policy responses to it.  
It  is  frequently  claimed  that  the  downturn  was  the  worst  since  the  1930s.  In  the  financial 
sectors of some major countries that seems clear, but for economic activity it is actually less 
clear  than  you  might  think.  For  several  important  countries  individually,  the  increase  in 
unemployment and loss of real output was certainly equal to those in the most severe post-
War recessions, but not significantly greater.  
Some respected scholars of US business cycles have suggested recently that it may be a bit 
soon to judge whether the recent period qualifies for the term “great recession”, at least in 
the US case. In east Asia, in most cases, the latest episode has turned out to be far  less 
traumatic than the 1997–98 Asian financial crisis.  
What was striking about the recent downturn was the simultaneity of the collapse in demand 
for durable goods around the world at the end of 2008. Suddenly, everyone, everywhere, felt 
much  more  risk  averse  –  understandably  so,  as  they  watched  governments  have  to  save 
major financial institutions in a number of countries. This affected consumption and saving 
decisions, firms’ investment plans, hiring intentions and so on.  
But equally remarkable was the simultaneity of the policy responses. There was a degree of 
formal co-ordination – for example, most G10 central banks reduced their interest rates by 
50 basis  points  on  8  October  2008.  Beyond  that  there  was  a  fairly  consistent  set  of 
responses stemming from a common assessment of the seriousness of the potential threat. 
So  the  global  downturn  could  have  been  much  worse  than  it  eventually  was,  but  policy 
makers everywhere supported financial systems where needed, eased monetary policy and 
eased fiscal policy, to support demand. The responses, by and large, were quite quick.  
In the countries at the centre of the crisis, these policy efforts have borne fruit. But they have 
been working against the powerful headwinds of private sector de-leveraging. Hence in those 
cases the recovery thus far has been quite hesitant. Economic activity remains well below 
the peak level seen in 2007 or 2008, and in some of these economies it may not regain that 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
level for another year or two. It is in this sense, actually, that the downturn in parts of the 
advanced world may well turn out to be the most costly in generations: the forecast slowness 
of  the  recovery  implies  a  very  large  cumulative  amount  of  lost  income  in  some  cases.  In 
other  episodes  of  serious  recession,  once  conditions  for  recoveries  were  in  place,  they 
proceeded  quite  strongly.  People  are  not  confident  of  those  sorts  of  outcomes  this  time 
(indeed  many  forecasters  and  financial  markets  will  be  seriously  wrong-footed  if  a  rapid 
recovery  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  does  occur). Observers  in  some  countries  even wonder 
whether their trend growth rate may have been impaired for a lengthy period by what has 
occurred.  
But most countries did not have a bank solvency crisis. They had an acute liquidity crisis for 
a couple of months in September and October 2008 when the global financial system went 
into  cardiac  arrest,  but  thereafter  those  problems  began  to  ease  –  mainly  due,  it  must  be 
said,  to  actions  of  governments  and  central  banks  in  the  major  countries.  Since  in  most 
countries banking systems were generally sound, the headwinds have not been blowing as 
strongly in Asia or Latin America as in some other regions. Accordingly, the policy stimulus 
applied in these countries appears to have been pretty effective in supporting demand. Once 
money markets and trade finance began to thaw, recovery proceeded at a very strong clip. In 
east  Asia  outside  Japan  and  China,  industrial  production  is  now  a  little  above  its  previous 
peak. In China, it surpassed the 2008 peak in the middle of last year and kept rising, while in 
India it never really fell.  
Despite the slow growth of Asia’s traditional export destinations – North America, Europe and 
Japan – trade in the region has bounced back remarkably strongly after a precipitous fall in 
late 2008. A large part of this rebound has been an increase in intra-region exports of final 
products,  particularly  to  China.  This  suggests  that  demand  within  the  region  is  playing  a 
bigger  role  in  this  upswing,  though  Asian  exports  to  the  United  States  and  Europe  are 
recovering too.  
Corresponding  differences  show  up  in  other  areas.  Inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  United 
States is still trending downwards, and spare capacity could be expected to dampen price 
changes for some time yet, though rising commodity prices will work the other way. For much 
of Asia, on the other hand, the period of disinflation caused by the downturn may be past. 
Asset  values  also  have  moved  up  most  quickly  in  these  countries.  Perhaps  this  is  not 
altogether  surprising  given  that  no  countries  in  the  region  have  had  seriously  impaired 
banking systems, but most have had very expansionary monetary policy.  
Australia and the “great recession” 
While  several  major  countries  have  had  one  of  their  most,  if  not  their  most,  serious 
recessions  in  the  post-War  period,  Australia  had  arguably  one  of  its  mildest.  We  had  a 
relatively sharp but very brief downturn in aggregate demand and economic activity late in 
2008, and then returned to a path of expansion during the first half of 2009. As most recently 
estimated  by  the  ABS,  real  GDP  grew  by  2¾  per  cent  through  last  year  –  a  bit  below 
average, but much higher than for most other high-income economies. This was supported 
by  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  the  recovery  in  Asia,  and  a  sound  financial  system.  The 
sorts  of  things  that  typically  accompany  downturns  –  such  as  higher  unemployment, 
increased loan losses for intermediaries, a fall in asset values – did happen to some extent. 
But because the downturn was brief, these deteriorations were rather mild, which meant that 
they  did  not  then  become  part  of  a  major  feedback  loop  back  to  aggregate  demand  and 
output. That in turn meant that the economy was able to get onto the recovery path more 
quickly. And so on.  
As  a  result,  the  rate  of  unemployment,  at  about  5¼ per  cent,  is  more  than  2 percentage 
points lower than we forecast a year ago. The level of employment is 3½ per cent, or some 
350,000 jobs, higher than we expected a year ago. GDP growth of 2¾ per cent through 2009 
compares with our forecast a year ago of –1 per cent. That is, the level of real GDP today is 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2010
nearly 4 per cent higher than had been anticipated. For 2009 as a whole, we estimate that 
nominal GDP was about $45 billion higher than our forecast a year ago.  
Measures of business confidence and conditions in most of the surveys carried out by private 
organisations  have  for  some  time  been  at  levels  that  are  suggestive  of  something  like 
average rates of economic growth.  
The Reserve Bank is of course aware that the picture is not uniform across every region or 
industry.  Moreover,  the  upswing  is  likely  to  have  particular  features  that  mean  that 
differences across sectors and regions may widen. Not everyone will feel its benefits in the 
same way or to the same extent, though this is true of all economic cycles. But it does not in 
any way diminish those concerns to say that there has been a good outcome for the national 
economy in a difficult international environment.  
Managing the upswing 
Our task now is one of trying to ensure, so far as we can, that the new economic upswing 
turns out to be durable and stable. There are many factors about which we can do little. The 
speed  and  composition  of  global  economic  growth  for  example,  or  the  behaviour  of 
international  financial  markets  as  they  grapple  with  uncertainty  and  risk  –  these  and  other 
factors may turn out to our benefit or detriment. We cannot change them; we can only try to 
be alert to them, and maintain some capacity to respond to them.  
For  the  time  being,  at  least,  the  global  economy  is  growing  again.  Forecasters  expect  an 
outcome  something  like  trend  global  growth  in  2010  and  2011,  which  is  much  better  than 
2009 but not as strong as 2006 or 2007. Those were exceptional years for growth and that 
pace could not have been sustained for long, even absent the crisis. In the region to which 
the Australian economy is closely linked, growth has been very strong over the past year. 
Almost certainly it will need to slow somewhat in the coming year.  
Demand for natural resources has returned and prices for those products are rising. We have 
all read of the recent developments in contract prices for iron ore. As a result of those and 
other  developments,  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  will,  it  now  appears,  probably  return  during 
2010 to something pretty close to the 50-year peak seen in 2008. As usual with these things, 
we cannot know to what extent this change is permanent, as opposed to being a temporary 
cyclical event. However, the fact that we will have reached that level twice in the space of 
three years suggests there is something more than just a temporary blip at work.  
Financial  markets  have  made  a  pretty  good  recovery  from  their  cardiac  arrest  18 months 
ago.  Despite  large  budget  deficits  in  major  countries,  long-term  rates  of  interest  remain 
remarkably low. Since risk spreads for most borrowers have also declined this means that 
overall borrowing costs for rated borrowers, corporate and most governments, are low by the 
standards of the past few decades. This has to be advantageous for well-run companies and 
countries looking to invest.  
Of course, risks to this outlook do remain. In the middle of the crisis, the international focus 
was on private creditworthiness. Now it is more on sovereign creditworthiness. The euro area 
is  working  on  a  response  to  the  problems  of  Greece,  but  we  can  expect  that  a  focus  on 
sovereign risk will be a feature for some time yet. Periodic surges in concern are likely to be 
a recurring theme, and not just about the sovereigns themselves but about banks that might 
have  exposures  to  them.  A  credible  path  needs  to  be  outlined  for  fiscal  consolidation  and 
debt  stabilisation  in  the  North  Atlantic  economies  over  the  years  ahead.  In  the  meantime, 
banks  in  the  countries  with  weak  economies  are  absorbing  the  normal  sorts  of  losses 
associated with recessions.  
A different challenge for countries in other regions is managing the flows of capital that result 
from, on the one hand, the very low interest rates in major economies and, on the other, the 
solid  growth  performance  in  Asia  and  parts  of  Latin  America.  Setting  monetary  policy  and 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 3
managing  exchange  rates  will  be  no  easy  task.  More  countries  in  the  Asian  region  are 
starting  to  change  policy  settings  to  be  less  expansionary:  at  last  count  central  banks  in 
India, Malaysia, Singapore and China had all begun this process.  
Having said all that, what sort of outcome might be expected for the Australian economy?  
If  the  outlook  involves  a  combination  of  solid-to-strong  growth  overall  among  trading 
partners, a high level of the terms of trade pushing up national income, reasonably confident 
firms and households and strong population increase, we are not likely to see persistently 
weak  economic  growth.  This  big  picture  view  is  why  we  expect  that,  short  of  something 
serious going wrong in the global economy, Australian growth in 2010 will be a bit faster than 
in  2009  –  at  something  close  to  trend.  The  reason  I  say  “a  bit  faster”  is  that  while  some 
factors are building up in an expansionary direction, and might be quite powerful, at the same 
time  the  impact  of  earlier  expansionary  policy  measures  is  starting  to  unwind.  So  what 
happens to growth depends on the net effect of the two sets of forces.  
It is noteworthy that, although measures of consumer and business confidence suggest that 
people are essentially quite optimistic about the future, a degree of caution still characterises 
consumer spending decisions. Some areas of retail sales are quite soft. In the period ahead, 
moreover,  we  might  expect  to  see  households  inclined  to  save  a  higher  share  of  current 
income, and perhaps to be more cautious about the amount of debt they take on, than in the 
preceding  upswing.  On  the  whole,  taking  a  longer-term  perspective,  this  is  probably  not  a 
bad thing.  
A similar caution is in evidence, at this stage, in some firms’ investment intentions, though 
overall investment as a share of GDP remained fairly high through the downturn.  
But of course there is also a once-in-a-century build-up in resource sector investment, which 
could see that investment, already high, rise by another 1–2 percentage points of GDP over 
the  next  four  or  five  years.  There  are  also  high  levels  of  public  sector  infrastructure 
investment  planned  in  coming  quarters  and  the  housing  needs  of  a  rapidly  growing 
population are likely to see demand for new dwellings remain quite strong over time.  
So the outlook for demand seems likely to be driven more by investment, both private and 
public, and less by consumption than in some previous periods. Even before the downturn, 
the relative share of consumer spending in total demand was tending to diminish and that of 
investment  spending  to  increase.  There  will  presumably  be  corresponding  shifts  in  the 
industry  composition  and  geographical  location  of  output  and  employment.  Such  effects 
could well be seen in and around Toowoomba itself, depending on the outcomes of proposed 
gas and coal projects in the region. The key will be, and not just in Toowoomba, to retain 
flexibility in the face of such changes.  
Let me now make some observations about inflation and monetary policy. Inflation has fallen 
from its peak of 5 per cent in 2008. Measured on a CPI basis it fell to about 2 per cent in 
2009,  but  that  figure  flatters  us  a  bit  as  it  was  partly  a  result  of  some  temporary  factors. 
Underlying  inflation  ran  at  around  3¼  per  cent  for  the  year,  and  at  an  annualised pace  of 
about 2¾ per cent in the second half of the year. Our forecast a few months ago for 2010 
was that inflation, measured either in headline or underlying terms, would be in line with our 
2–3 per cent  target.  Next  week’s  figure  will  provide  an  insight  into  how  things  are  tracking 
relative to that forecast.  
A year ago, when we thought we might be going into a significant recession, there seemed to 
be the possibility that inflation could fall noticeably below the target. That doesn’t seem very 
likely now, though, with a recovering economy, rising raw material prices, the labour market 
having stabilised and with some firms even beginning to worry again about skill shortages.  
Given all of the above, one would not expect the setting of interest rates to be unusually low. 
If the economy is growing close to trend, and inflation is close to target, one would expect 
interest rates to be pretty close to average. The Reserve Bank has moved early to raise the 
cash  rate  to  levels  that deliver  interest  rates  for  borrowers and  depositors  more  like  those 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2010
that have been the average experience over the past 10 to 12 years. Those interest rates are 
now pretty close to that average.  
These increases have been fairly close together but then so were the preceding reductions. 
It  is  important  to  recall  that  the  cash  rate  was  reduced  by  75  or  100 basis  points  at  each 
meeting  of  the  Board  in  late  2008  and  early  2009,  for  a  total  of  375 basis  points  in  five 
months after the Lehman failure in September. This was the biggest proportional decline in 
interest rates, delivering the biggest reduction in the debt servicing burden of the household 
sector, seen in Australia’s modern history. It was an appropriate response to the situation.  
These changes were newsworthy, as interest rate changes always are. But as I have said 
before, while the changes in interest rates make the news, it is the level of interest rates that 
matters  most  for  economic  behaviour.  Eighteen  months  ago,  the  Board  moved  quickly  to 
establish  a  much  lower  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  face  of  a  serious  threat  to  economic 
activity.  But  interest  rates  couldn’t  stay  at  those  “emergency”  lows  if  the  threat  did  not 
materialise. The aggressive reduction in interest rates needed to be complemented by timely 
movement  in  the  other  direction,  once  the  emergency  had  passed,  to  establish  a  general 
level of interest rates more in keeping with the better economic outlook. Hence the cash rate 
has risen by 125 basis points over seven months – which is still only about a third the pace of 
the earlier declines.  
The  Board’s  reasoning  for  those  decisions  has  been  set  out  in  the  various  statements, 
minutes and so on. The question of what happens from here, of course, remains an open 
one,  as  it  always  must.  The  Board’s  focus  will  be  on  doing  our  part  to  secure  a  durable 
expansion and on achieving the medium-term target for inflation of 2–3 per cent on average.  
Conclusion 
Australia has survived what some have labelled “the great recession” in the global economy. 
So, as it turns out, have a number of countries that are of importance to us in our region. The 
common ingredient seems to have been reasonably healthy financial systems accompanied 
by liberal doses of policy stimulus.  
Our  task,  and  theirs,  is  now  to  manage  a  new  economic  upswing.  This  will  be  just  as 
challenging, in its own way, as managing the downturn. But it’s a challenge plenty of other 
countries would like to have. 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 5
