Jan F Qvigstad: Lessons from the crisis for monetary policy and 
financial stability 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Annual Money, Macro and Finance Conference, Limassol, 3 September 2010. 
 First I would like to thank you for inviting me and giving me this opportunity to comment on 
lessons from the crisis. 
I  will  concentrate  my  talk  around  three  lessons  and  two  questions.  What  I  am  going  to 
highlight is by no means revolutionary, rather it reflects a growing consensus on experiences 
from  the  crisis.  20  minutes  only  allows  me  to  briefly  touch  on  the  different  subjects.  For  a 
more  in  depth  analysis  and  discussion  of  similar  issues  that  I  raise  here  today,  I  can 
recommend the Jackson Hole paper by Charles Bean et.al. 
Transmission mechanism was affected  
by the financial crisis 
 The first lesson is that monetary policy is more than setting the key policy rate. We also need 
to monitor the transmission mechanism closely.  
The  transmission  mechanism  was  affected  by  the  financial  crisis.  Constraints  on  banks’ 
access to funding and a heightened level of perceived risk led to higher lending margins and 
higher bond spreads.  
The chart shows developments in our key policy rate and banks mortgage lending rates from 
August 2007 to November 2008. The widening spread between these two interest rates was 
not unique to Norway, but occurred in several countries.  
Banks also tightened their credit standards in response to the crisis. In Norway, as in most 
other countries, this was particularly distinct for credit to enterprises.  
Both higher spreads and tighter credit standards can have potentially strong contractionary 
effects on the economy and needed to be counteracted. 
 
 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 1
Liquidity and capital support was necessary  
to restore credit flows 
 The contractionary forces from the financial sector were addressed by providing liquidity and 
capital  to  banks,  through  both  regular  and  unconventional  instruments  in  many  countries. 
Government  actions  enabled  banks  to  continue  to  provide  credit  to  households  and 
enterprises. 
The crisis demonstrated that the transmission mechanism is important for the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy.  It  also  demonstrated  that  the  relationship  between  price  stability  and 
financial stability must be given due attention.  
In  Norges  Bank  there  is  close  integration  between  the  two  areas  Norges  Bank  Monetary 
Policy and Norges Bank Financial Stability. Norges Bank Financial Stability participates at all 
meetings  in  the  monetary  policy  process.  This  ensures  that  sufficient  attention  is  given  to 
developments in the financial system. It also provided the necessary insight to make well-
informed assessments of the transmission mechanism during the crisis.  
Considerable revision of the interest rate  
forecast during the crisis 
The  second  lesson  is  that  inflation  targeting  seems  to  have  survived  the  test.  In  my  view, 
increased  transparency  and  the  efforts  made  to  improve  the  communication  of  monetary 
policy to the general public have been very valuable.  
 2 
 BIS Review 113/2010
The  chart  shows  the  baseline  scenario  for  the  key  policy  rate  with  fan  chart  from  October 
2008 and the baseline scenario for the key policy rate as of December 2008, only 2 months 
later. The large downward shift in the baseline scenario illustrates the size of the shock that 
hit  Norway  (and  the  global  economy).  Although  considerable  revisions  in  the  interest  rate 
forecast had to be made during the crisis, this did not lead to any change in the credibility of 
the central bank.  
Explicit  interest  rate  forecasts  were  introduced  in  Norges  Bank  in  2005.  The  decision  to 
publish the forecast was the next logical step in developing the Bank’s communication. When 
we  started  publishing  our  own  interest  rate  forecasts,  we  had  to  make  sure  that  financial 
market participants, journalists, banks and a broader audience understood the framework. A 
key issue was to convey the contingency and the uncertainty in the forecast. As one of the 
reasons  for  publishing  the  forecast  is  to  improve  the  general  understanding  of  the  Bank’s 
response pattern, it has been important to explain the logic behind the forecast. This includes 
shedding  light  on  the  considerations  underlying  each  interest  rate  forecast  and  what  their 
objectives and the trade-offs between them are.  
In general, interest rate forecasting has been effective. As market expectations tend to react 
to economic news largely in line with the Bank’s reaction pattern – there is little doubt that the 
contingency of the forecasts is well understood.  
Transparency eased communication: an account  
of the factors behind the revision 
  
In our Monetary Policy Report, the interest rate forecast is accompanied by a separate chart, 
shown here, that shows the revision since the previous report due to changes in exogenous 
factors.  
By  carefully  explaining  the  reasoning  behind  the  revisions  of  our  interest  rate  forecasts, 
financial market participants and other interested parties can make their own judgment as to 
whether the revisions seem justifiable. 
In general, interest rate forecasting has worked well. As market expectations tend to react to 
economic news largely in line with the Bank’s response pattern, there is little doubt that the 
contingency of the forecasts is well understood.  
BIS Review 113/2010 
 3
Interest rate forecast and exit strategy 
Another advantage of publishing our own forecast for interest rates is that the exit strategy is 
an  inherent  part  of  the  Bank’s  communication.  A  key  element  of  any  exit  strategy  is  that 
policymakers  must  guide  expectations.  An  exit  that  takes  markets  by  surprise  can  lead  to 
major reassessments of the yield curve. Publishing explicit interest rate forecasts is a very 
direct way of guiding financial market participants’ expectations.  
 Historical perspective I 
The decline in world trade during the crises of 1929–1933 
and 2008–2010 
The third lesson is the need for multilateral cooperation and collective action. As the global 
economic and financial crises unfolded, joint, massive and unprecedented policy responses 
were  put  in  place  around  the  world  so  as  to  avoid  another  Great  Depression.  A  financial 
meltdown was averted, economic activity was supported and protectionism was contained.  
The  chart  shows  the  decline  in  world  trade  during  the  Great  Depression  compared  to  the 
much quicker decline in the recent crisis.  
 4 
 BIS Review 113/2010
Historical perspective II 
The decline in world trade during the crises of 1929–1933 
and 2008–2010 
But in the 1930’s, it took 3–4 years before world trade stopped falling, and the pickup in trade 
was slow.  
This time, a fairly quick rebound of trade has taken place. Some two years after the crisis 
started, world trade was more or less back to the pre-crisis level.  
 IMF lending 
June 30, 2010 
Early  on,  the  IMF  advocated  forceful  and  coordinated  measures  that  the  G20  followed  up 
with  broad  international  efforts  to  stabilize  the  global  economy.  Without  such  prompt  and 
comprehensive action, the consequences of the crisis would have been far greater.  
 BIS Review 113/2010 
 5
It is in the interest of all that the large and systemically important countries discuss issues of 
common  interest.  Their  successful collaboration  benefits  not  only  themselves,  but  also  the 
rest of the world.  
G20, IMF and small countries 
 Among the G20 initiatives were the efforts to strengthen confidence in international financial 
institutions,  the  IMF  in  particular,  to  permit  these  institutions  to  play  an  effective  role  in 
tackling the crisis.  
Large financial resources were raised by IMF members, many outside the G20. Indeed, the 
G20 has used the IMF as an instrument of its policy implementation. And yet, the G20 lacks 
the legitimacy that has historically been associated with a truly multilateral framework. Other 
countries do not participate, directly or indirectly, but are called upon to contribute to efforts 
that  others  have  agreed.  The  vast  majority  of  the  members  of  the  IMF  have  no  voice  or 
representation in these discussions, including all low-income countries and most emerging 
economies.  
All in all, multilateral cooperation and collective action functioned reasonably well during the 
crisis. With the world recovering from the crisis, the G20 should strive for wider acceptance 
and legitimacy to make sure that the basis for strong multilateral cooperation and collective 
action is also in place when policies for reform and prevention are implemented. Truly global 
challenges  call  for  truly  global  solutions  anchored  in  a  multilateral  and  statutory-based 
system  of  representation  like  the  Bretton  Wood  Institutions.  All  countries,  large  and  small, 
rich and poor, should be represented, even if only indirectly through constituencies.  
General government fiscal balances 
As a percentage of nominal GDP, 2000–2011 
Projections from OECD for 2010–2011 
These are some lessons learned from the crisis. Still, several unresolved questions remain.  
 6 
 BIS Review 113/2010
The  chart  shows  general  government  fiscal  balances  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  in  selected 
countries.  Many  countries  had  negative  fiscal  balances  through  the  last  decade  despite 
moderate to high economic growth. Spain seemed to be in a different position with a positive 
fiscal balance, though this was mainly due to unsustainable high growth in the construction 
sector.  
This illustrates the first question, which is how to solve time inconsistency in fiscal policy. It is 
easier to follow the prescriptions of Keynes in bad times than in good times. This asymmetry 
may lead to an increase in budget deficits and sovereign debt over time, also referred to as 
the fiscal bias. As a result, many  countries (PIIGS, UK,)  have to tighten policy in a period 
when the real economy would certainly benefit from further stimulus.  
The  crisis  caused  fiscal  balances  to  deteriorate  by  8–10  percentage  points.  There  is  an 
immense difference between encountering a shock of this magnitude from a positive fiscal 
balance of 4 per cent and encountering it from a negative fiscal balance of 4 per cent. From a 
negative  balance  of  4  per  cent,  fiscal  balances  end  up  at  a  12  per  cent  deficit!  Then  it  is 
imperative to tighten policy. 
A similar time inconsistency problem, the inflation bias, has been a much debated issue in 
monetary  policy.  The  solution  has been  central  bank  independence. So  the  question  is,  is 
there something to be learnt from monetary policy?  
Ragnar Frisch 
 The  fiscal  bias  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  And  a  number  of  possible solutions  have  been 
tried. As far back as in the early 1930s, the Norwegian economist and Nobel Prize winner 
Ragnar Frisch had the following suggestion:  
“It  might  be  an  idea  to  establish  a  cyclical  council  to  make  such  decisions,  a 
council  that  could  operate  with  an  independent  status  similar  to  that  of  the 
Supreme Court. The council should comprise members who do not represent a 
political party, but a particular field of expertise: business, banking or economics.”  
One example of an existing body of this type is the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council, which was 
established  in  2007  as  an  agency  under  the  government.  In  the  UK,  an  interim  Office  for 
Budget  Responsibility  (OBR)  was  recently  set  up.  And  in  the  euro  area,  the  budgetary 
surveillance  of  the  European  Commission  is  referred  to  as  the  “preventive  arm”  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact.  
But, as highlighted by the commission itself:  
“In  order  to  function  effectively,  it  requires  a  common  understanding  of  the 
economic  and  fiscal  policy  challenges  in  the  European  Union,  and  a  strong 
political commitment to addressing them.”  
How to enforce a strong political commitment to address the fiscal bias is still very much an 
unresolved question.  
BIS Review 113/2010 
 7
The  second  question  is  how  to  secure  adequate  international  coordination  in  both  crisis 
prevention and crisis resolution.  
International coordination is important 
 As the chart shows, foreign banks’ share of the market in Norway is approximately 1/3. In 
some countries, foreign banks’ share of the market is higher or even 100%, with no domestic 
banks at all.  
Today a bank’s regulation is laid down and supervised by the authorities in the bank’s home 
country.  When  foreign  banks’  share  in  a  market  is  large,  this  challenges  the  concept  of  a 
level playing field insofar as national supervisory authorities do not coordinate their work.  
This  way  of  organizing  regulation  will  be  an  even  bigger  challenge  when  new  regulation 
designed to hinder the build-up of systemic risk is introduced, since a host country and the 
home  countries  of  banks  operating  in  the  host  country  may  be  in  different  stages  of  the 
business cycle.  
Output gap in the Nordic countries 
This  is  illustrated  in  this  chart  showing  output  gaps  in  the  Nordic  countries.  Today  most 
economies  are  closely  integrated  with  other  economies,  both  through  trade  and  through 
8 
 BIS Review 113/2010
 financial markets. Still there may be significant differences both in the timing (and amplitude) 
of peaks and troughs in the business cycle and in the functioning of financial markets.  
Asymmetries between countries mean that the appropriate regulatory parameters to dampen 
systemic  risk  will  not  necessarily  be  the  same  for  all  countries  at  the  same  time.  To  be 
effective,  regulatory  parameters,  for  instance  those  calibrated  to  ensure  the  buildup  of 
countercyclical buffers, need to encompass all banks operating in the same jurisdiction, as 
put forward in the July 2010 BIS proposal.  
Finally, I will say a few words on crisis resolution. Resolution actions taken in one country in 
response  to  a  crisis  can  have  effects  on  banks  in  other  countries  that  do  not  choose  to 
introduce the same resolution actions. For instance, issuance of government guarantees in 
one  country  can  weaken  banks  in  neighboring  countries  without  such  guarantees  (since 
government guarantees provide an incentive to move deposits to banks in these countries). 
This  shows  the  importance  of  international  coordination  also  when  it  comes  to  crisis 
resolution.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 9
