José Manuel González-Páramo: The European experience on  
macro-prudential regulation 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  I  Jornada  Financiera  Banco  Central  de  Bolivia,  La  Paz, 
29 September 2010. 
I am grateful to Inês Cabral and Fabio Recine for their contributions to this speech. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  today  in  La  Paz  to  participate  in  this  important  event 
organised by Banco Central de Bolivia. In the course of my presentation I will try to illustrate 
our approach to the concept of macro-prudential regulation and oversight, a new policy area 
where central banks are expected to play an important role. 
My remarks are organised in three main parts. I will start by justifying the need to develop a 
macro-prudential policy framework. I will then move on to reflect on what we mean by macro-
prudential oversight. Finally, I will elaborate more in detail on the establishment of the ESRB 
as part of the reform of the EU supervisory framework, and briefly touch upon other reform 
initiatives in Europe. 
Why we need to develop a macro-prudential policy framework? 
II. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  unearthed  fragilities  in  a  range  of  policy  areas  which  have 
prompted a careful review of main policy objectives and instruments. This applies to the field 
of  micro-prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  which  failed  to  ensure  that  financial 
institutions had sufficient capital and liquidity to cope with the financial shock.  
It  also  applies  to  the  field  of  tax  policy,  in  both  financial  and  non-financial  sectors  of  the 
economy,  which  might  also  have  contributed  to  the  build  up  of  imbalances  and  financial 
vulnerabilities that later on worked as amplifiers of the financial strains.  
Monetary policy, and the extent to which policy interest rates could be used to “lean against 
the wind” of financial market excesses in an effective manner, which is consistent with the 
preservation of price stability over a longer term horizon, has also been under debate.  
But the area which has been under the spotlight, as the financial crisis unfolded, has been 
the one of macro-prudential policy.  
The global financial crisis has disclosed the scale of the potential fallout from the failure of 
large financial institutions. It has revealed the fragility of the financial system to features and 
trends that cut across institutions, markets and infrastructures, namely in the form of financial 
imbalances.  And  it  has  illustrated  the  amplitude  of  the  consequences  of  the  adverse 
feedback  loop  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  In  a  nutshell,  it  has 
shown the potential devastating effects of systemic risks materialising in various forms.  
While  a  range  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities  were  identified  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  the 
translation  of  these  risk  assessments  into  policy  action  was  generally  missing.  Macro-
prudential policy aims at filling this gap. Financial stability analysis, regularly conducted by a 
number of central banks including the European Central Bank (ECB) and other institutions 
(such as the IMF and the Financial Stability Board (FSB)) , aims at detecting sources of risk 
and vulnerability, assessing the overall resilience of the system, and its aggregate ability to 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
withstand  shocks.  Macro-prudential  policy  adds  the  policy  component  to  this  oversight 
function. 
In broad terms, policy-makers tend to agree that the objective of macro-prudential policy is to 
limit  systemic  risk,  so  as  to  minimise  the  costs  that  financial  instability  can  impose  on  the 
overall economy. It is important to underline that macro-prudential policy is preventative in its 
orientation. It should not be confounded with crisis management policy, which is about the 
resolution  of  financial  crisis  once  systemic  risks  have  materialised.  It  aims  at  containing 
systemic  risk  by  strengthening  the  financial  system  against  shocks  and  at  addressing 
sources of risk and vulnerability as soon as these are perceived as potentially systemic.  
What is macro-prudential oversight? 
III. 
Let  me  know  drill  down  on  what  we  mean  by  macro-prudential  oversight  and  the  way  in 
which it can be made operational.  
The crisis has revealed the fundamental importance of systemic risk. The purpose of macro-
prudential oversight is to identify sources of systemic risk and promote remedial action. As 
such, a good understanding of systemic risk and its forms is at the core of macro-prudential 
analysis supporting policy decisions.  
Regarding  the  various  sources  of  risk  regularly  monitored  by  national  bodies  with 
responsibility for safeguarding financial stability, the surprise factor was perhaps the form via 
which systemic risk could be triggered by the collective behaviour of financial institutions and 
the ways in which they interact in national and international financial markets. The crisis has 
highlighted  the  importance  of  improving  our  understanding  of  interconnectedness  in  the 
financial system, both via the direct links between financial institutions and the indirect ones 
created in financial markets. 
Macro-prudential analysis has two main focuses: (i) risk surveillance with the view to detect 
sources  of  risk  or  vulnerability  within  and  outside  the  financial  system,  and  (ii)  risk 
assessment aiming at evaluating the potential severity of the identified risks.  
Risk  surveillance  should  aim  at  leaving  “no  stone  unturned”  in  reviewing  potential 
vulnerabilities and risks to the stability of the financial system. It relies on the continuous and 
rigorous monitoring of financial markets, financial institutions and the economy at large, with 
the goal of detecting potential vulnerabilities. It is important at this initial stage to cast the net 
as wide as possible to ensure that no risk is missed or overlooked. Early warning indicators 
and a broad range of financial stability indicators can also be useful in this analysis. A solid 
statistical information-base and market intelligence efforts are also of the essence in the risk 
identification process with the view to support.  
The second component of the analysis – risk assessment – aims at evaluating the potential 
impact or severity of the risks identified, should these crystallize, as well characterising the 
ability of the financial system to absorb the shocks. Both the likelihood, the probability of a 
risk  scenario,  and  the  severity  of  a  specific  risk,  need  to  be  considered  in  an  overall 
assessment. Macro stress-testing models are essential tools to assess the resilience of the 
financial system to risks identified in the surveillance process.  
This approach might sound mechanistic but the analysis can clearly not be fully technical. 
Both rigorous quantitative-based risk analysis and expert judgement should be seen as input 
to inform decisions of policy makers on how to address the risks identified as material.  
When it comes to macro-prudential policy to mitigate the risks to financial stability, a key part 
of  developing  macro-prudential  instruments  relies  on  the  adaptation  of  existing  micro-
prudential  tools,  such  as  prudential  standards  (relating  to  capital  requirements,  liquidity 
buffers) and limits on activities that increase systemic vulnerabilities and risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
In addressing the development of financial imbalances overtime, these standards and limits 
might need to be varied, or adjusted in a countercyclical manner, as proposed under the new 
Basel III regime in terms of regulatory tools addressing macro-prudential objectives. In this 
context, policy instruments would need to be adjusted dynamically in response to changing 
assessments  of  financial  risks.  Policy  instruments  could  aim  at  affecting  directly  financial 
firms’  balance  sheets  or  at  affecting  them  via  indirect  channels,  such  as  conditioning  the 
demand  for  credit  by  households  or  the  corporate  sector.  Setting  limits  on  loan-to-value 
ratios or adjusting collateral rules to secured lending could be some examples of measures 
that can effectively constrain the demand for housing credit. 
The  macro-prudential  policy  tool-kit  also  includes  instruments  that  target  components  of  the 
financial  system  other  than  financial  institutions.  Macro-prudential  policy  instruments  could 
include measures addressing vulnerabilities stemming from financial markets – e.g. measures 
relating  to  securities  markets  or  funding  instruments  such  as  margins  and  haircuts  on 
unsecured  lending.  They  could  also  comprise  measures  addressing  market  infrastructure 
vulnerabilities, such as encouraging a wider use of central counterparty (CCP) clearing houses 
for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives trading and making CCPs comply with sound prudential 
standards.  
More broadly, macro-prudential policy tools could address financial imbalances directly and 
need to liaise with other policy areas, should the sources of those imbalances not lie within 
the financial system. 
Being  a  new  policy  area,  progress  needs  to  be  made  on  a  number  of  fronts  before  the 
implementation of macro-prudential policy can take place in earnest, at the national or the 
supra-national  level.  A  number  of  specific  issues  need  special  consideration  in  this  policy 
field,  and  responses  to  some  of  the  issues  will  indicate  that  our  understanding  of  macro-
prudential policy is maturing. Let me mention in particular the following: 
1. 
transmission  channels.  The 
More thinking needs to go into defining the macro-prudential policy objective itself. 
On the one hand, aiming at containing systemic risk might be phrased in too vague 
terms; on the other hand, the specification of explicit (quantitative) targets might be 
inappropriate. Some experiences in introducing prudential policy instruments in the 
past seem to suggest that while these were congruent with micro-prudential policy 
objectives,  the  macro-prudential  dimension  may  be  missing  in  their  design  or 
calibration. 
Further  consideration  also  needs  to  be  given  to  enhancing  the  understanding  of 
macro-prudential  policy 
task  of  understanding 
transmission  channels  and  assessing  the  potential  impact  of  measures  poses  a 
number of challenges. For instance, it needs to take account of substitutability and 
competition  between  institution  and  market-based  sources  of  credit.  As  such,  the 
choice of the appropriate policy instruments may depend on country-specific factors 
such as the structure and features of the financial system. A better understanding of 
the transmission channels of macro prudential policy is critical, also on account of 
possible interaction with other policy areas, in particular with monetary policy.  
Consideration  also  needs  to  be  given  to  the  potential  for  regulatory  arbitrage. 
Pursuing  macro-prudential  policy  action  is  likely  to  require  a  great  degree  of 
international  coordination,  in  order  to  keep  the  scope  for  cross-border  and  cross-
sector arbitrage contained. This aspect is particularly important within the European 
Union (EU) which is characterised, among other things, by a high degree of policy 
harmonisation in the financial sector.  
Furthermore,  given  the  fact  that  the  framework  for  macro-prudential  analysis  and 
policy is presently only at a formative stage of development, the need for reflection 
on  the  risks  of  unintended  consequences  is  key,  as  formulating  policies  that  are 
aimed at safeguarding financial stability may create vulnerabilities further down the 
road. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 3
IV. 
The establishment of the ESRB as part of the reform of the EU supervisory 
framework 
One of the main lessons from the financial crisis concerns the necessity of a framework for 
monitoring  the  various  sources  of  systemic  risk  and  assessing  their  consequences  for  the 
financial system in a comprehensive and timely manner. Therefore, there is an agreement at 
international level about the need to strengthen the macro-prudential approach to regulation 
and supervision of the financial system as a whole.  
So  far  there  has  not  been  in  Europe  an  authority  able,  both  from  an  institutional  and 
operational point of view, to conduct a comprehensive financial stability assessment covering 
the  whole  EU  financial  sector.  Apart  from  the  financial  stability  assessment  conducted  by 
individual central banks, the only area-wide comprehensive assessment is contained in the 
Financial  Stability  Review,  which  is  prepared  by  the  ECB  and  focuses  on  the  euro-area. 
Moreover,  Europe  has  lacked  a  framework  that  could  allow  translating  warnings  about 
possible  building  up  of  systemic  risks  in  certain  components  of  the  financial  sector  into 
concrete policy actions by competent supervisory and regulatory authorities to address such 
risks.  
The need to address such gaps prompted important decisions in the EU with the objective of 
establishing a new framework for macro-prudential oversight at EU level. 
Following  last  week’s  approval  by  the  European  Parliament  of  the  relevant  legislative 
proposals,  this  institutional  lacuna  will  be  filled  at  the  beginning  of  2011  with  the 
establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  as  a  new  EU  body  responsible  for 
conducting  macro-prudential  oversight  at  the  European  level,  with  the  conferral  of  specific 
supporting tasks on the ECB.  
This  is  part  of  a  broad  comprehensive  review  of  the  EU  institutional  framework  for 
supervision,  which  includes  also  the  enhancement  of  micro-prudential  supervision  through 
the  establishment  of  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  –  ESAs  for  the  banking, 
securities and insurance sector respectively. 
The ESRB will be chaired by the ECB President. The membership with voting rights (37) will 
include  all  the  Governors  of  the  EU  central  banks  (27).  This  will  ensure  that  the  financial 
stability analysis of the ESRB will benefit from the macro-economic, financial and monetary 
expertise of the EU central banks. 
The ESRB will be responsible for the macroprudential oversight of the EU financial system 
and will have the following main tasks: (i) the identification and prioritisation of systemic risk: 
(ii) the issuance of risk warning and where appropriate recommendations for remedial action; 
(iii) the issuance of a warning to the Council of Ministers on the existence of an emergency 
situation, to trigger further action from national and EU authorities. The establishment of this 
new  body  in  charge  of  macro-prudential  oversight  is  expected  to  bring  significant 
improvements to the EU institutional framework for financial stability. 
The participation of the European Supervisory Authorities (with voting rights) and all the EU 
national supervisory authorities (without voting rights) will allow enhancing the capacity of the 
ESRB to identify systemic risks and to define areas for recommendations for policy action. 
Indeed, it is expected that the recommendations of the ESRB would primarily concern the 
supervisory and regulatory field. 
It is important to note that macro-prudential oversight should not be regarded as a substitute 
for the responsibilities of other authorities, namely supervisors. It should instead facilitate and 
complement  where  required  the  conduct  of  micro-prudential  supervision  by  the  competent 
authorities.  
The effectiveness of the ESRB warnings and recommendations will rely on their quality, the 
act  or  explain  mechanism  between  the  ESRB  and  the  addressees,  the  possibility  of  the 
ESRB  to  publish  its  warnings  and  recommendations,  and  also  the  possible  role  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2010
the 
in  supporting 
the  compliance  with 
the  European  Supervisory  Authorities 
Council  of  Ministers  and 
implementation of the warnings and recommendations. 
The combination of these elements should provide an adequate framework of incentives and 
mechanisms,  which  will  greatly  benefit 
risk  warnings  and 
recommendations. In this context, it has been considered not necessary to provide a legally-
binding  nature  to  the  ESRB  risk  warnings  and  recommendations,  as  this  would  lead  to  a 
certain overlap of responsibilities and tasks, particularly with micro-prudential supervisors. 
The  ECB  will  provide  the  secretariat  and  analytical,  statistical,  administrative  and  logistical 
support  to  the  ESRB.  As  the  ESRB  will  start  to  operate  from  1st  January  2011,  we  are 
intensifying the work needed for the definition of the activities that will underpin the ESRB 
analysis.  This  includes  several  strands  of  work.  First,  we  have  started  to  identify  the 
analytical  tools  and  methodologies  that  will  support  the  identification  and  surveillance  of 
systemic risk. This is quite a challenge in itself, as this is a new field in which further research 
is  needed.  Second,  the  risk  assessment  analysis  will  have  to  be  supported  by  adequate 
information, to be provided by central banks and by supervisory authorities. This will include 
information  both  at  aggregate  level  and,  when  necessary,  related  to  individual  institutions. 
The latter will be gathered through the European Supervisory Authorities. In particular, the 
ESRB  may  request  information  from  the  ESAs  in  summary  or  collective  form,  such  that 
individual financial institutions cannot be identified. The ESRB may also address a reasoned 
request to such Authorities to provide data that are not in summary or collective form when 
the latter are not sufficient. 
In fact, the establishment of a framework for efficient cooperation between the ESRB and the 
European  Supervisory  Authorities  is  of  utmost  importance  for  the  successful  pursuance  of 
the tasks assigned to the ESRB. This is recognised by the legislation that provides a duty of 
cooperation and reciprocal exchange of information between the ESRB and the ESAs. In this 
context, the ECB and the 3 Level 3 Committees, predecessors of the ESAs, are proceeding 
in a dialogue on issues of common interest. 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
Let  me  conclude.  The  ESRB  will  have  a  challenging  task  considering  the  high  level  of 
expectations  about  its  impact  as  well  as  the  difficulties  surrounding  the  area  of  financial 
stability which I mentioned earlier.  
The  success  of  the  ESRB  will  also  depend  on  the  commitment  of  all  stakeholders  to 
contribute effectively to its mission. The ECB, on its part, is fully committed to ensure all the 
necessary support to allow the ESRB to fulfil the important responsibilities assigned to it by 
the Member States. 
The ECB is committed to continue to invest on its analytical capabilities so as to enhance risk 
surveillance  processes  and  produce  high  quality  risk  assessments  with  a  view  to  inform 
ESRB  decisions.  It  is  also  committed  to  devote  efforts  to  develop  a  coherent  macro-
prudential policy framework, thereby contributing to the efforts being done at the global level 
in this domain, also well reflected in this conference.  
Having said this, let me recall that the most important contribution that a central bank can 
provide to the maintenance of financial stability is to preserve price stability. Maintaining price 
stability  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  the  primary  mandate  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  and  it  will  not  be  affected  at  all  by  the  assignment  of  new  responsibilities  in  the 
macroprudential area. 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 5
