Axel A Weber: Developing a long-term investment perspective favouring 
financial stability and growth 
Introductory  remarks  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  
at  the  Eurofi  Financial  Forum  plenary  session  16  on  “Defining  a  common  regulatory  
and  supervisory  basis  to  achieve  resilience,  growth  and  competitiveness”,  Brussels, 
29 September 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
The  financial  crisis  has  painfully  demonstrated  vulnerabilities  of  our  financial  system. 
Strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  that  is  of  financial  markets  and  their 
players,  is  therefore  the  top  priority  when  it  comes  to  learning  the  lessons  of  the  crisis. 
Closing  the  regulatory  gaps  which  the  crisis  has  revealed  –  however  important  that  is  – 
would  be  too  little.  Financial  reform  has  to  go  beyond  that  and  establish  the  necessary 
institutions and regulations to deal with systemic risks.  
Financial  reform  will  not  save  us  from  any  future  financial  crisis  but  it  can  significantly 
dampen the frequency and intensity of financial crises in the future. Reducing the likelihood 
of  individual  bank  failures  may  act  in  this  respect  as  a  first  line  of  defence.  The  most 
important  project  in  this  regard  is  the  revision  of  Basel  II.  This  reform  will  significantly 
increase the risk buffers of individual financial institutions by introducing stricter requirements 
regarding  the  quality  and  quantity  of  bank  capital.  While  the  new  rules  require  banks  to 
increase their capital, the provision of transition periods enables them to adapt to the more 
restrictive capital and liquidity requirements. Hence, I am not afraid that the implementation 
of  Basel  III  might  significantly  impair  the  lending  capacity  of  banks  or  hamper  economic 
recovery.  While  being  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty,  recent  comprehensive  impact 
studies  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  suggest  the  economic 
impact during the transition period will be moderate and that the long-term net benefits will be 
positive. Now it is up to the G20 Heads of State and Government to approve the package at 
their  Seoul  summit  in  November.  Its  global  implementation  afterwards  is  of  utmost 
importance in order to guarantee a level playing field and to prevent regulatory arbitrage.  
In addition, some elements of the package require further work in the process of finalising the 
whole.  In  particular,  the  extent  of  anti-cyclicality  of  capital  buffers  might  be  strengthened 
further,  and  the  requirements  of  the  liquidity  buffer  in  its  currently  proposed  form  warrant 
further adjustment as well: requirements for eligible assets of private issuers, for example, 
appear rather strict. 
While the new Basel rules will certainly help to make the financial system of the future safer 
and more stable, a second line of defence is required. The recent crisis has shown that a 
systemic  crisis  may  quickly  pose  a  threat  to  institutions  that  are  actually  sound.  Systemic 
risk,  however,  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  microprudential  supervision  alone.  Regarding  the 
establishment of an effective macroprudential toolset, important measures are still due. Our 
major concern in this respect is the too-big-to-fail issue. Efforts are being made by the FSB to 
present an approvable base solution to the G20 summit. Essential details, however, will have 
to  be  finalised  afterwards,  in  particular  the  formal  definition  of  “systemically  important 
financial institutions” (SIFI’s). In order to find a credible solution to the too-big-to-fail problem 
strong political commitment would act as a helpful support.  
Taking the time constraints into account, I want to conclude my remarks. Nevertheless, I do 
not want to fail to mention that macroprudential surveillance has to go beyond the focus on 
individual national institutions. Close cooperation at the European and international levels is 
indispensable in order to supplement microprudential supervision with a systemic view. The 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
establishment of the ESRB is an important step in the right direction. Now the challenge for 
its members is to make it a success. 
Thank you very much.  
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
