Muhammad Kamran Shehzad: Combating corruption in the banking sector 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad Kamran Shehzad, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of 
Pakistan, at the Seminar on Collaboration of Banking Sector and Financial Institutions with 
the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) in Combating Corruption, Karachi, 5 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  it is my pleasure and privilege to address this august gathering of 
eminent bankers, financial experts and other stakeholders. 
Let me first state clearly that coordination & co-operation of the Banking Sector as well as 
Regulator with National Accountability Bureau is of prime importance in combating corruption 
and corrupt practices in the banking sector. The majority of banking cases are white color 
crimes done in such a professional manner that their detection and subsequent preparation 
of strong cases is an uphill task. Even in the developed economies prevention of white colour 
crimes, remains a big issues to tackle. 
In Pakistan corruption is a major cause of concern in majority of public sector organizations 
which has weakened their strength and efficiency and thus they have become a burden on 
the  exchequer.  The  critical  factor  behind  such  failures  are  mis-management,  bad  Human 
Resource Management, immorality, in efficiency and greed. Corruption reduces the welfare 
activities of the society due to loss of efficiency and effectiveness, reduction of the revenue 
available for development work and thus weaken the system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  behavior  and  culture  of  banking  sector  has  altogether  been  changed  in  the  last  two 
decades. It has transformed itself from 85% in public sector in 1990’s, to present more than 
80% in private sector. This quantum change has been taken positively & supported by the 
State  Bank.  The  newly  transformed  private  banking  sector  is  performing  responsibly  and 
cooperating  with  regulators  and  investigating  agencies  for  eradication  of  banking  crimes. 
SBP  and  NAB  since  its  inception  in  collaboration  with  each  other  had  agreed  on  a  joint 
mechanism  through  which  information  required  for  investigation  purposes  from  banking 
sector,  under  section  19  of  National  Accountability  Ordinance,  1999,  are  obtained  through 
SBP in the greater interest of the fragile economic conditions of the country. Although NAB 
has absolute powers to obtain these information directly from the banking company yet the 
collaboration was made to repose confidence in banking community. A dedicated NAB Cell 
at SBP was established which effectively coordinates with banks/DFIs to ensure expeditious 
supply of information. The whole process is aimed at facilitating the Bureau in discharge of 
its responsibility of vital national interest, without unduly disrupting the financial institutions & 
creating any sort of panic amongst the borrowers or the clients of the banks. 
Several cases of delicate in nature were dealt with in close cooperation amongst SBP, NAB 
& concerned banking company in a professional way. SBP has been forwarding complaints 
received  from  the  banks/DFIs  to  Bureau  for  initiating  investigation,  under  the  provisions  of 
NAO,  against  those  entities/persons  which  had  cheated/deprived  the  public  of  their  hard 
earned  money  through  illegal  brokerage  and  banking  business.  SBP,  in  collaboration  with 
SECP, has been advertising a message titled “Public Warning” in print media to keep the 
general public aware of the fake schemes / scams launched by the fraudulent companies / 
noncorporate entities / individuals. 
State Bank of Pakistan has also been playing its role in facilitating the Banking Sector in their 
efforts to recover from borrowers their long outstanding defaulted loan amounts by referring 
such cases of Willful Loan default to NAB for inquiry, investigation and proceedings against 
them wherever required. About 100 such cases amounting to Rs. 17.5 billion approximately 
were processed & referred to NAB under section 31-D of National Accountability Ordinance, 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 1
1999. I appreciate the role of NAB  in speedy processing of these cases which helped not 
only  in  recovery  of  defaulted  amount  but  also saved  depositors  money.  The  names  of  the 
corrupt persons convicted by NAB under the provisions of NAO, 1999 are also shared with 
the Banking Industry. The persons convicted under 25(b) of NAO, 1999 are debarred from 
obtaining  any  fresh  loans  from  Banking  Sector  for  a  period  of  ten  year  from  the  date  of 
conviction.  Such  weeding  out  of  corrupt  elements,  from  the  potential  clientele  of  banking 
sector, has lead to more prudent lending decisions other than developing a critical data base 
for the sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Development of human resource in the banking industry on sustainable basis is a continuous 
process. Taking lead in this front on an ongoing basis and conducting workshops, seminars, 
awareness  programs,  training  sessions  internally  as  well  as  for  the  benefit  of  the  banking 
industry  has  become  an  integral  part  of  our  efforts  to  curb  corrupt  practices,  money 
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism. The financial institutions are now less 
proned  to  be  used  as  “the  safe  heavens”  for  the  corrupt  persons  owing  to  the  effective 
coordination  mechanism  developed  amongst  the  financial  institutions,  SBP  and  NAB.  The 
introduction of compliance culture and establishment of a separate compliance department 
manned with skilled and professional officers has also helped in eradication of unlawful and 
corrupt practices.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A strong regulator is needed to act as a vigilant watchdog on the banks and banking industry 
as  a  whole.  You  would  be  delighted  to  know  that  SBP  has  also  been  maintaining  a 
centralized database with multiple objectives of cross-matching the antecedents of persons 
being  appointed  on  Key  Positions  in  banks/DFIs  as  per  the  requirement  under  its  Fit  & 
Proper Test (FPT) Criteria. Such cross-matching at hiring stage may ensure the entry and 
presence of professionals with highest integrity and ethical standards in the banking industry. 
The  database  almost  contains  5000  records  of  persons  terminated/dismissed  from 
banks/DFIs  on  various  charges.  In  my  view,  50  percent  of  the  job  of  the  regulator  is 
completed if the right persons are appointed and the corporate governance guidelines are 
observed in letter and spirit. With such grid of human resources, we foresee a high comfort 
level  to  manage  the  common  irregularities,  procedural  lapses  and  financial  scams  in  the 
banking industry. On the other hand prudential regulations and their effective enforcement 
is one of the vital instruments which help regulator to keep a discipline in financial dealings. 
These  regulations  have  a  significant  long  lasting  impact  to  safeguard  the  interest  of 
depositors,  ensuring  prudence  in  lending  and  eradication  of  unlawful  banking  practices. 
Ensuring complete compliance of these prudent standards, a strong oversight of functions 
is  inevitable  from  Boards  of  Directors,  Chief  Executives  and  senior  management  of  the 
banks. 
State Bank of Pakistan is comfortable with its cooperation with NAB that has strengthened 
over  a  period  of  time.  This  has  also  been  instrumental  in  gradually  weeding  out  the 
irregularities  from  the  banking  system,  hence  facilitated  smooth  functioning  of  the  banking 
system. Looking to professional zeal, exhibited commitment and deliberations on the subject 
in this seminar, I am hopeful that the cooperation among SBP, NAB & the Banking Sector 
would further strengthen and go a long way to combat corruption from the banking industry 
and the society at large. 
While  the  NAB  is  performing  its  role  quite  satisfactorily  and  enjoying  the  confidence  of 
banking  industry  I  would  like  to  see  NAB  on  its  way  ahead  as  an  organization  with 
indigenous strength of technical staff fully equipped to investigate financial crimes, forensic 
investigation,  having  international  collaboration  with  key  investigating  agencies.  I  am  also 
confident that NAB on its part shall continue to retain the confidence of the banking sector 
built  over  the  years  and  achieved  through  quality,  integrity  and  professionalism  of 
investigator. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
At  the  end,  I  congratulate  NAB  for  conducting  such  a  successful  seminars  for  exploring 
further  options  to  improve  the  investigation  system  enhancing  cooperation  amongst 
stakeholders and eliminate corruption from society. I assure them that regulator and banking 
sector of Pakistan within their legal jurisdiction stands behind them to augment their noble 
cause. 
BIS Review 130/2010 
 3
