Gill Marcus: Monetary policy and financial stability in the post-crisis era 
Welcoming remarks by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
biennial conference of the South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 4 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the third biennial policy conference of the South 
African Reserve Bank. The aim of this conference series is to stimulate debate on current 
topical issues and to add value to these discussions. In order to ensure this, we have invited 
economists  from  the  policy  arena,  the  private  sector  and  academia.  Having  a  wide  cross-
section of economists with different perspectives in our midst should enrich a lively debate. 
We  are  particularly  fortunate  to  have  a  number  of  well-respected  local  and  international 
economists present, and we are grateful for the opportunity to interact with them. Allow me to 
also  welcome  participants  from  some  of  our  neighbouring  countries,  including  Governor 
Shiimi  of  Namibia,  Governor  Senaoana  of  Lesotho,  and  Deputy  Governor  Mdluli  from  the 
Central Bank of Swaziland accompanied by senior officials from their Central Banks. 
The  previous  conference,  held  in  late  October  2008,  took  place  a  few  weeks  after  the 
outbreak of the global economic crisis. At the time, the full implications were unclear. Two 
years later, the world has emerged from the recession, but is not out of the crisis, and the 
global outlook remains uncertain. Some advanced countries are still struggling to stimulate 
their economies: quantitative easing continues in the United States and Japan, and monetary 
policy  remains  accommodative  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  in  the  euro  area.  The  banking 
sectors in Europe and the US remain under pressure. 
Against the backdrop of fiscal austerity measures, monetary policy is likely to remain loose 
for  longer,  which  has  implications  for  emerging-market  economies  in  particular,  where 
significant  capital  inflows  have  put  pressure  on  their  currencies.  Unfortunately,  the  global 
imbalances  that  were  at  the  heart  of  the  crisis  in  the  first  place  are  still  with  us,  with  few 
prospects for an imminent resolution of the problems. 
Nevertheless, it is an opportune time to assess some of the implications of the crisis. Many 
questions are being asked: for instance, is there a changed role of Central Banks regarding 
Monetary Policy, Financial Stability and Regulation? This year the theme of the conference 
is: “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability in the Post-crisis Era”. Within this broad theme we 
will  be  focusing  on  three  important  areas,  namely  the  implications  for  banking  sector 
regulation,  for  emerging  markets  and  for  monetary  policy.  Three  plenary  sessions  will 
address these themes and I will make a few introductory comments on each of them. 
The regulatory response to the financial crisis 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  spurred  a  review  of  banking  regulations.  Much  of  the 
discussions in international forums, such as the International Monetary Fund and the Bank 
for  International  Settlements,  have  centred  round  the  appropriate  regulatory  responses  to 
prevent a recurrence of unfettered lending by banks in future. Achieving global consensus on 
these issues has not been easy, and while progress has been made, significant differences 
still remain.  
There is the risk that the crisis will result in excessive politicisation of regulatory issues in a 
quest to ensure that someone is seen to be responsible for the crisis. This has the potential 
to create a new moral hazard by giving the impression that with the agreement on Basel III, 
the system is safe. But the regulators do not run the institutions and there are no absolute 
guarantees of safety. Nevertheless, if things do implode, it would be the regulator that would 
be deemed to be responsible. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 1
The possibility also exists that there has been too much of a focus on banks, rather than on 
the broader financial system. Over-regulation of banks could not only reduce lending, but it 
could result in more disintermediation, thus preparing the ground for the next crisis. What the 
recent crisis has shown is the inventiveness of financial markets to come up with products or 
institutions  that  circumvent  existing  regulations.  Furthermore,  there  is  the  danger  that  the 
pendulum  could  swing  too  much  in  the  direction  of  an  excessively  tight  regulatory  regime 
which could, in turn, stifle the recovery of the banks and their ability to lend, with adverse 
consequences for the broader economic recovery. 
South Africa did not have a banking crisis, thanks to prudent management and appropriate 
regulation and supervision. Nevertheless, the country has not been spared the fall-out of the 
crisis, nor is its regulatory environment immune to the changes that are being implemented 
at the global level. 
implications 
Experience and implications of Europe’s economic policy challenges: lessons for 
emerging-market economies 
The  crisis  was  characterised  by  a  sharp  and  relatively  synchronised  global  downturn.  The 
recovery, however, has been varied across countries and regions. The euro area has been 
particularly hard hit. Its banking sector is still in recovery mode, and while there appears to 
be some stability currently, the sovereign debt issue that threatened the existence of the euro 
zone  as  a  single  currency  area  earlier  in  2010  remains  unresolved.  The  fiscal  austerity 
measures that have been adopted in response to the sovereign debt overhang are likely to 
result in a low growth scenario in the region, especially in southern Europe, for some time.  
These  developments  and  policy  challenges  have 
for  emerging-market 
economies, including South Africa. About one third of SA’s manufactured exports go to the 
euro area, so there are obvious implications for South Africa from a slow-growing region. The 
IMF has revised down its projections for euro area growth in 2011 to 1,5 per cent, a figure 
that is positively affected by the 2,0 per cent growth expected in Germany.  
There  are  also  important  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the  euro  area  for  future  economic  and 
monetary integration in Africa, where the euro was previously held up as the model to follow. 
The crisis, however, exposed two particular problems that were more easily hidden during 
periods of economic growth. 
First, there was a lack of an effective mechanism to ensure uniformity in fiscal policy. The 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  not  able  to  constrain  fiscal  deficits  and  in  2010  widely 
divergent  fiscal  deficits  were  apparent,  which  ultimately  led  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
According to the OECD, fiscal deficits in 2009 ranged from 3,1 per cent of GDP in Germany, 
to 13,6 per cent and 14,6 per cent in Greece and Ireland respectively. The associated debt 
build-up led to the sovereign debt crisis earlier in 2010 and the spreads on this debt indicate 
that the markets are not convinced that these issues have been fully resolved. This suggests 
that  in  order  to  have  viable  economic  and  financial integration,  there may  be  a  case  for a 
single fiscal authority, in the same way that there is for a single central bank. Such a move, 
however, is likely to be far more politically sensitive than reaching agreement on a common 
monetary authority.  
Second, the crisis in the euro area has shown that having a fixed exchange rate mechanism 
does  not  imply  that  a  country’s  international  competitiveness  is  automatically  maintained. 
Fixing a nominal exchange rate does not imply real exchange rate stability. This is a well-
known  fact,  but  generally  forgotten  by  the  proponents  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  including 
those  in  South  Africa  who  view  it  as  the  silver  bullet  to  solve  to  country’s  problem  of 
competitiveness.  
If exchange rates are pegged, or if countries adopt a common currency, differences in wage 
settlements,  productivity  changes  and  fiscal  stances  can  cause  real  exchange  rates  to 
diverge between different regions. In the euro area, for example, Greece’s unit labour cost 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2010
competitiveness declined by around 30 per cent in the course of the 2000s. Adjusting to this 
without  the  exchange  rate  as  an  equilibrating  mechanism  requires  standard  expenditure 
reduction  policies.  A  number  of  euro  area  countries  are  now  experiencing  such  pain. 
Professor  Desmond  Lachman’s  analysis  of  the  Eurozone  outlook  provides  a  thought-
provoking perspective on the challenges that lie ahead. 
Monetary policy and financial stability in the post-crisis era 
The crisis also had implications for how monetary policy is viewed. In particular, the role of 
monetary policy and its relationship with financial stability has come under intense scrutiny. 
During the 2000s, economists at the BIS were at the forefront of warnings against a singular 
focus on price stability at the expense of financial stability. The previous Economic Adviser 
and Head of the Monetary and Economic Department at the BIS, Bill White, argued that such 
a focus, in the presence of low inflation, was likely to lead to the emergence of asset price 
bubbles. While many of his predictions proved to be correct, there is still much debate about 
the  interaction  of  monetary  policy  and  price  stability,  the  practical  implementation  of  these 
policies, and appropriate policy instruments.  
It  is  clear  that  the  core  focus  of  central  banks  has  changed.  It  is  no  longer  the  case  that 
monetary  policy  can  be  conducted  in  a  vacuum,  and  there  has  to  be  a  focus  on  financial 
stability issues. The challenge is to determine how best this is done. One has to determine 
what central bank measures are and what are not, and ensure that the core responsibilities 
and independence of the central banks are not overwhelmed or compromised.  
Things  will  have  to  be  done  differently:  central  banks  need  to  create  better  levels  of 
knowledge and skill− perhaps also collect different data − or change the way in which they 
look at data. 
There  is  still  no  general  agreement  on  what  the  role  of  the  central  bank  should  be  with 
respect to financial stability or, indeed, what financial stability actually means. However, the 
discussions  raise  some  important  questions  about  the  changes  in  the  design  of  central 
banks,  and  possible  changes  in  the  relationship  between  a  central  bank  and  government. 
There needs to be an understanding of who is responsible for financial stability and how it 
should be executed. Clear parameters need to be set and formalised arrangements made. 
There can be little doubt that the central bank plays a key role in financial stability. In fact, 
most  central  banks  already  have  an  explicit  or  implicit  responsibility  in  this  regard.  The 
question is, however, should this be the sole prerogative of the central bank? During times of 
crisis, it is usually the case that the first port of call of banks that are in trouble is the central 
bank. This is the case even if the bank supervision function is not located inside the central 
bank. The central bank has a role of lender of last resort: it generally oversees the payment 
system,  it  has  the  ability  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  markets  in  general  or  into  specific 
dysfunctional sectors of the markets and, in many instances, it is responsible for the micro 
supervision of banks. But it does not necessarily follow from this that the macro prudential 
oversight or the financial stability mandate should be located solely within the central bank.  
Financial  stability  requires  a  national  response  influenced  by  political  priorities.  During  the 
crisis, the fiscal authorities in a number of countries made large capital injections into ailing 
banks  and  also  provided  government  guarantees.  Furthermore,  any  lender-of-last-resort 
activities have fiscal implications, even if they are initiated by the central bank. 
The  bottom  line  is  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  define  a  financial  stability  objective  for  the 
central  bank  alone,  and  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to  carry  out  the  financial 
stability  functions  on  its  own.  This  points  to  a  shared  responsibility  for  financial  stability, 
within clearly defined parameters. 
Therefore, a way needs to be found to co-ordinate with government as many of the policy 
options and their funding requirements blur the boundaries between the central bank and the 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 3
fiscal authorities. Financial stability decisions are generally more political and require more 
interaction with government. 
It is finding a balance of engagement with government with regard to financial stability, and 
maintaining the independence that is an imperative in conducting monetary policy, that will 
be important going forward. 
Both  Professor  Charles  Goodheart’s  paper,  and  that  of  Dr  Stephen  Cecchetti,  provides  a 
very challenging and thoughtful contribution to these deliberations. 
Conclusion 
These broad topics will broadly cover the theme of the conference, and we are honoured to 
have such a distinguished line-up of world authorities to present their perspectives on these 
issues. In particular, I wish to thank and extend a warm welcome to our presenters, Charles 
Goodhart,  Desmond  Lachman  and  Stephen  Cecchetti  for  their  participation.  I  also  wish  to 
thank the discussants and panel members who I am sure will encourage vigorous dialogue. 
And to all participants, please do not hold back on your thoughts and views. Although we will 
not  solve  the  problems  of  the  world,  hopefully  our  interactions  over  the  next  two  days  will 
contribute to a better understanding of the issues involved. 
4 
 BIS Review 166/2010
