Michael C Bonello: Time for a reality check 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  annual 
dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, Malta, 20 November 2010. 
 I would first of all like to thank the President and his Council for inviting me once again to 
address  their  annual  dinner.  Before  I  do  so,  I  would  like  to  commend  IFS  Malta  for  its 
unstinting  efforts  to  promote  higher  levels  of  expertise  in  our  financial  community.  The 
success of the foundation degree programme at MCAST and the new training programmes 
in Funds Administration, Anti-Money Laundering and Financial Crime Prevention are but two 
examples. I would also like to congratulate the Institute’s nominee, Mr Peter Calleya, for his 
election to the EBTN Executive Committee. 
The economic rebound should not give rise to complacency 
Last year I said that an improving external environment could benefit the Maltese economy. 
And indeed it has. The recession proved short and shallow, with a peak-to-trough decline in 
GDP  of  3.4%,  as  against  5.3%  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  GDP  contracted  by  just  2.1%  in 
2009. In the first half of 2010 the economy grew by 4%, which suggests that the outturn for 
the full year could top 3%. 
This  encouraging  performance  has  prompted  manifestations  of  the  “Malta  is  different” 
syndrome, with suggestions that belt-tightening and structural reforms are for others, but not 
for us. For a country that, with one exception, has not had a current account surplus or a 
balanced budget for at least fifteen years, this attitude betrays a poor understanding of the 
growth dynamics in a small, open economy and of current world realities. 
A more balanced assessment of the facts would recognize that the extent and speed of the 
turnaround demonstrate not only the undoubted resilience of the Maltese economy, but also 
its vulnerability. More specifically, since the rebound in good part reflects a recovery in the 
electronics  and  tourism  industries,  it  underlines  our  dependence  on  the  state  of  external 
demand. We ignore this reality at our peril. 
Medium-term prospects will be conditioned by slow growth abroad 
Now, given the pervasiveness of the recession abroad and the considerable uncertainty that 
still prevails today, we can expect only modest growth in export markets in the near future. 
According to the IMF, real GDP in the advanced economies will expand by only 2.2% in 2011 
compared with 2.7% this year.1 In Europe, the euro area is forecast to grow by just 1.5%.  
Given  these  subdued  global  prospects,  it  would  be  naïve  to  assume  that  the  current 
economic upswing in Malta will continue spontaneously without determined efforts to achieve 
faster growth. There is no other option if we aspire to converge to the higher living standards 
enjoyed elsewhere in Europe. The key to a better quality of life are rising incomes. In this 
respect,  there  is  considerable  potential  for  improvement.  Malta’s  GDP  per  capita  in  PPS 
terms has been stuck at around 77% of the EU average since 2003.2 
                                                 
1  
2   Source: Eurostat. 
IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2010. 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 1
The focus must be on productivity and competitiveness 
Faster  sustainable  growth  will  not,  however,  be  possible  unless  we  produce  goods  and 
services that meet the test of increasingly competitive and discerning markets. This, as the 
recent  Pre-Budget  Document  acknowledged,  requires,  among  others,  higher  productivity 
levels, which would then raise the rate of growth of potential output.  
Productivity has been improving recently, but against the backdrop of a relatively poor long-
term  record,  which  leaves  Malta  well  behind  the  best  performers  in  the  euro  area.3  Even 
more worrying, compensation levels have risen much faster than productivity.  
The  explanation  for  this  relatively  poor  outcome  should  be  sought  in  the  way  we  use 
productive resources, principally labour and capital. 
Malta’s labour resources are underused… 
To  begin  with,  not  enough  people  participate  in  the  formal  labour  market.  In  2009  the 
employment  rate  stood  at  55%,  compared  with  a  euro  area  average  of  nearly  65%.4  The 
activity rate among women and older workers in particular is especially low. 
Furthermore, long-term demographic projections suggest that, over time, the labour force will 
shrink.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  the  working-age  population  in  Malta  will 
contract by more than 20% by 2060.5 In the light of these trends, raising participation rates 
should be a priority. Several measures have already been taken, including in the Budget for 
2011,  such  as  incentives  for  women  to  re-enter  the  labour  market,  and  trying  to  remove 
“unemployment  traps”  that  arise  from  the  interaction  of  the  tax  and  welfare  system.  The 
gradual increase in the retirement age will also help. But this will not be enough. 
Efforts to get more people to work must, moreover, be accompanied by measures to raise 
their  productivity.  We  need  to  invest  more,  and  more  efficiently.  Malta’s  educational 
attainment levels in particular, though improving, remain low. In 2009 just over one quarter of 
adults aged between 25 and 64, much less than half the EU average, had completed at least 
an upper secondary level of education.6  
The solution here does not lie solely in allocating more resources. It is also a question of how 
the  money  is  spent.  According  to  a  recent  study,  public  spending  on  education  in  Malta 
amounts to around 5.5% of GDP, which is above the EU average.7 But the study also shows 
that this spending is not very efficient, especially in the case of tertiary education. Despite the 
significant  amounts  spent,  Malta’s  tertiary  educational  attainment  level,  at  21.1%,  is  well 
below the EU average of 32.3% and the Europe 2020 target of 40%.8 
This  situation  must  be  reversed  because  well-remunerated  jobs  cannot  be  created  in  the 
absence  of  high-quality  post-secondary  education.  As  the  recent  Browne  report  in  the  UK 
                                                 
3   Source: Eurostat. 
4   Source: Eurostat. 
5   European Commission, The 2009 Ageing Report: economic and budgetary projections for the EU-27 Member 
States (2008–2060), European Economy 2/2009, page 47. 
6   Source: Eurostat. 
7   Ebejer, Ivan and Ulrike Mandl, The efficiency of public expenditure in Malta, ECFIN Country Focus Volume 6, 
Issue 2. February 2009. 
8   The tertiary educational attainment level is defined as the share of the population aged between 30–34 years 
who  have  successfully  completed  university  or  university-like  education  with  an  International  Standard 
Classification of Education 1997 of 5–6. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2010
stresses, higher education drives innovation and economic transformation.9 The University of 
Malta, however, is short of funds. One way of tackling this deficiency would be to limit stipend 
support  to  students  who  are  truly  in  need.  This  would  ensure  that  access  to  a  university 
education  remains  open  to  everyone  with  the  potential  to  benefit  from  it,  while  releasing 
funds for improving its quality. It would also address an issue of equity: since a tertiary level 
education  is  the  key  to  better-paid  jobs  and  higher  lifetime  incomes,  it  is  appropriate  that 
those who benefit most from it should contribute at least part of the costs involved. 
… while investment has not been sufficient 
But enhancing the supply and quality of labour is still not enough. To produce output, labour 
has  to  work  with  capital.  Now  a  country’s  capital  stock  can  only  grow  through  investment. 
The  recent  performance  in  this  regard  has  been  inadequate.  As  a  share  of  GDP,  private 
investment amounted to 16% on average between 2000 and 2009, among the lowest ratios 
in  the  euro  area.  Given  Malta’s  track  record  in  attracting  foreign  direct  investment,  this 
shortfall is probably more a reflection of a relatively low level of domestic private investment. 
The latter is unlikely to be related to the cost and availability of finance. Interest rates are at 
historic lows and, contrary to the experience elsewhere, credit to the private sector continued 
to expand during the recession. As for possible structural factors, the diversification of the 
economy away from manufacturing towards services is also unlikely to have been a factor. 
Similar sectoral shifts elsewhere did not result in a declining investment share. 
Rather, the relatively low level of private investment could, in part, be a legacy of the past, 
when  firms  in  protected  sectors  could  survive  without  the  need  to  invest  to  face  up  to 
competition. In addition, in key sectors such as tourism and the wholesale and retail trades, 
the operating surplus has fallen, on average, over the past decade. Weak profitability, which 
is  partly  due  to  labour  costs  rising  faster  than  productivity,  reduces  both  the  incentive  to 
invest and the internal funds available to do so. Hence the emergence of a perverse cycle of 
weak profitability, low investment, poor productivity growth and a loss of competitive strength. 
These weaknesses are reflected in persistent current account… 
These  structural  weaknesses  show  up  in  a  persistent  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the 
balance  of  payments.  Shortfalls  have  been  recorded  in  every  year  but  one  since  at  least 
1995. The deficit widened again in 2009 to 6.9% of GDP from 5.7% the previous year. 
A current account deficit indicates that we spend more than we produce. It also implies that 
domestic savings are insufficient to finance investment, even though, as we have seen, the 
rate of investment is relatively low. The only way in which current consumption levels can be 
sustained, therefore, is by raising incomes. This, in Malta’s case, requires a more dynamic 
export performance. 
For  a  start,  this  means  that  efforts  to  attract  foreign  direct  investment,  much  improved  in 
recent  years,  need  to  become  even  more  focussed  and  supported  with  a  strengthened 
infrastructure.  The  domestic  private  sector,  meanwhile,  needs  an  incentive  to  switch  to 
producing for markets abroad. This incentive is relative profit. Export-oriented activity must 
become relatively more profitable than production for the domestic market alone. 
In a small island economy, where transport costs impose natural barriers to trade, it is easier 
to set up and defend monopolies. This was especially true before the liberalisation of product 
markets at the time of EU accession. But this is not to say that elements of monopoly power 
– and the attitudes this engenders – have not survived. For example, a survey carried out by 
                                                 
9   Securing a sustainable future for higher education, 12 October 2010, http:// www.independent.gov.uk/browne-
report. 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 3
the  Bank  on  price  and  wage  setting  in  Malta  shows  that  although  just  over  half  of 
respondents would cut prices if their competitors did so, 36% would not. Unsurprisingly, the 
most  flexible  firms  were  those  in  the  manufacturing  and  tourism  sectors,  where  foreign 
competition is strong. 
This  suggests  that  there  is  still  scope  for  increasing  the  degree  of  domestic  market 
competition. Sometimes, the connection between market liberalisation and exports may be 
indirect.  As  the  recent  experience  in  the  communications  sector  has  shown,  liberalisation 
drove  down  costs  and  prices.  This  opened  up  new  export  opportunities  outside  the 
communications sector itself, for example, in financial services and remote gaming. 
The importance of keeping costs under control cannot be overemphasized. Malta’s inflation 
performance over the last ten years illustrates this point. Whereas the euro area inflation rate 
averaged 2.1% between 2000 and 2009, domestic inflation averaged 2.5%. The record for 
inflation excluding energy prices shows a similar unfavourable trend. It is an established fact 
that in a currency union rates of inflation consistently above the average result in a loss of 
competitiveness.  
Apart from more competitive markets, containing domestic inflation implies a need for wage 
moderation.  For  many  years  employee  compensation  has  grown  faster  than  real  labour 
productivity. Whereas the former increased by around 31% since 2000, productivity rose by 
only 2.5%. The resulting rapid growth in unit labour costs, more than 28%, compares with an 
average of 20% in the euro area. 
In  order  to  make  up  for  this  lost  ground,  the  wage  determination  process  needs  to  be 
reformed.  While  wage  bargaining  at  the  enterprise  level  provides  flexibility,  the  automatic 
indexation  mechanism  through  which  current  wages  are  adjusted  to  past  inflation,  even  if 
partially,  increases  the  downward  rigidity  of  real  wages  and  thus  represents  a  permanent 
drag on Malta’s competitive position. 
...and government budget deficits 
The current account deficit is mirrored not only in the shortfall in private savings but also in 
the  budget  deficit.  Government  expenditure  has  exceeded  revenue  in  every  year  at  least 
since 1995, resulting in a steady rise in the public debt from less than 40% of GDP in the 
mid-1990s to 69% today. 
The  thrust  of  the  recent  Budget,  and  particularly  the  projected  cut  in  the  deficit  ratio  from 
3.9%  of  GDP  in  2010  to  2.8%  next  year,  is  therefore  a  welcome  development.  Continued 
vigilance is, however, necessary. Given the uncertain prospects for Malta’s export markets, 
for  example,  the  assumed  nominal  GDP  growth  rate  of  5.6%  on  which  the  tax  revenue 
forecast for 2011 is based could turn out to be optimistic. The medium-term objective of a 
balanced budget, moreover, must be kept well in mind. 
EU  rules  stress  the  importance  of  achieving  a  balanced  budget  over  the  cycle  precisely 
because  fiscal  prudence  responds  to  a  clear  economic  logic.  In  the  long  run,  a  persistent 
budget deficit contributes not only to a dangerous debt dynamic, but also to price pressures, 
a loss of market share and a trade imbalance. Only through the achievement of surpluses 
during a cyclical upswing can there be room for countercyclical deficits in a downturn. The 
retrenchment currently being experienced in many countries highlights the consequences of 
leaving fiscal imbalances unaddressed.  
Fiscal  consolidation  is  also  necessary  to  bring  the  debt  ratio  below  the  60%  limit.  For 
example,  if  the  deficit  ratio  does  not  shed  one  percentage  point  in  2011  as  planned,  the 
deficit would be some EUR65 million higher than the projected amount. At current interest 
rates, this would imply an addition of about EUR3.3 million to the annual interest charge on 
the  debt,  which  at  EUR  198  million  this  year  is  considerably  more  than  government 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2010
investment  in  the  infrastructure;  and  the  debt  ratio  would  rise  by  an  additional  percentage 
point to 70%. 
Improving  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances  assumes  additional  importance  in 
view of the expected doubling of the share of the elderly in the Maltese population by 2060. 
As  a  result,  age-related  spending  is  set  to  increase  by  more  than  10%  of  GDP.  Partly 
because of these demographic trends, Malta is among the group of EU countries facing the 
greatest challenge in terms of fiscal sustainability.10 
Since  this  task  can  only  be  addressed  gradually,  we  have  to  start  now.  Completing  the 
planned reform of the pension system must be part of the solution. In particular, introducing 
funded pensions promises to deliver benefits on several fronts. First, by boosting incomes in 
retirement it will help support a large share of the population as it ages, reducing the burden 
that currently falls on the unfunded pay-as you-go system. Second, if individual contributions 
are linked more closely to individual payouts, this will encourage private saving, which, as we 
have seen, is necessary to close the saving/investment gap. Finally, if individuals perceive a 
closer link between their contributions and their retirement income, this should help curb the 
evasion of social security payments. 
There is little room for tax increases 
Fiscal consolidation, therefore, is desirable to help correct the economy’s external imbalance; 
to put public finances on a sound footing while coping with the costs of population ageing; 
and,  above  all,  to  maintain  credibility  and  investor  confidence,  which  are  prerequisites  for 
growing the economy. 
Now deficit reduction is typically achieved through a combination of increased revenue and 
expenditure cuts. As for the former, relying mainly on higher taxation cannot be an option at 
this juncture; besides, it generally distorts the efficient allocation of resources. Higher indirect 
taxation tends to push up the price level and, hence, harms competitiveness, while higher 
taxes on income depress economic growth. Neither, of course, is this a time for cutting taxes. 
An option which is at once fiscally beneficial and socially desirable is to close remaining tax 
loopholes and to engage in a more aggressive pursuit of tax evasion and benefit fraud. 
We need to cut spending, while rebalancing it 
The only real alternative, however, is to cut public spending. There is a near-consensus in 
the  literature  that  expenditure  cuts  have  a  smaller  adverse  impact  on  the  economy  than 
revenue  increases.11  Fiscal  consolidation,  moreover,  produces  long-term  benefits  since  a 
smaller debt stock results in lower interest payments, and thus can eventually create room 
for growth-enhancing tax cuts.12 
General  government  expenditure  amounted  to  EUR2.5  billion  in  2009,  or  almost  44%  of 
GDP. The largest single item was the wage bill, equivalent to 14.5% of GDP. It was followed 
by spending on benefits, mainly old age pensions, which amounted to some 13% of GDP. 
Health care, excluding wages, absorbed a further 2%. These three items together account 
for more than two-thirds of government spending. In contrast, an amount equal to only 2.2% 
                                                 
10   See European Commission, Public Finances in EMU 2010, European Economy 4/2010. 
11   For  example,  according  to  the  IMF,  “spending-based  deficit  cuts,  particularly  those  than  rely  on  cuts  to 
transfers, have smaller contractionary effects than tax-based adjustments”. See IMF World Economic Outlook 
October 2010, Chapter 3, p. 113. 
12   See also European Central Bank “The effectiveness of euro area fiscal policies” Monthly Bulletin July 2010. 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 5
of  GDP  was  dedicated  to  investment.  A  substantial  increase  in  productive  investment, 
particularly in physical and human capital, is clearly necessary. 
The Budget for 2011 recognizes this need, projecting a marked increase of 15% in capital 
spending.  This  is  encouraging  because  in  recent  years  growth  has  mainly  occurred  in 
recurrent spending. Between 2004 and 2009, this expanded at an annual average of 5.3%. 
On the other hand, government investment remained broadly unchanged during this period 
and declined in the last two years, in part because actual outlays often fell short of targets.  
The  dual  challenge  of  maintaining  a  high  level  of  investment  spending  while  reducing  the 
budget deficit, therefore, implies that it is recurrent expenditures that must be cut. Progress 
has already been made by reducing subsidies, through the privatisation of the shipyard and 
by aligning utility rates more closely to production costs. For next year, however,  while an 
increase  of  less  than  1%  in  recurrent  spending  is  planned,  few  specific  cuts  have  been 
identified. In this context, the latest Annual Report of the National Audit Office suggests there 
is  ample  scope  for  controlling  expenditures  more  effectively  and  for  improving  revenue 
collection.13 
While taxpayers have every right to expect value for their money, a substantial, durable fiscal 
correction requires a fundamental reappraisal of the role of the state in providing services. 
The need to prioritize expenditure programmes has not been fully addressed. As a result, the 
most difficult challenges, such as how to ensure sustainable funding for tertiary education, 
pensions and health services, remain to be tackled.14  
Domestic consumption must return to a sustainable level. It is an inevitable adjustment for 
economies  like  ours  that  have  lived  beyond  their  means  for  far  too  long.  Fortunately,  we 
need to adopt much less drastic measures than those countries that have had to make deep 
cuts  in  public  sector  staffing  levels,  wages  and  social  benefits  in  order  to  stave  off  the 
financial collapse of the state itself. 
And yet, people in Malta continue to expect the Government to hand out money it does not 
have.  This  attitude  must  change,  for  not  only  can  it  lead  to  bankruptcy,  but  it  is  also 
indefensible  on  moral  grounds.  Politicians,  trade  unions,  NGOs  and  other  opinion  shapers 
must  explain  that  we  do  not  have  money  for  everything  and  that  you  cannot  have  gain 
without pain. The intelligent thing to do is to work together so as to minimize the pain and 
then ensure that it is equitably shared. 
In my view, the priority of the welfare state should be to provide equal opportunities for all, 
but a safety net only for those who need it most. Universality – dispensing free goods and 
services to all irrespective of income – is a wasteful and unaffordable principle. In the words 
of the renowned economist, Jeffrey Sachs, “Even playgrounds should collect tolls, when it is 
billionaires who are playing in the sandpit.”  
The social welfare system, including health care, has long been identified, including by the 
European Commission and the IMF, as offering the greatest potential for savings. Effective 
measures implemented elsewhere which could be adopted range from user fees for certain 
public services to policies designed to make work pay. We should also reassess the scope of 
                                                 
13   See  National  Audit  Office  (NAO),  Annual  Audit  Report  by  the  Auditor  General:  Public  Accounts  2008, 
December 2009. Examples of inefficiencies and improper practices range from 28,810 cases of social security 
contributions worth EUR 4.5 million being in arrears, to the number of hospital meals charged in one hospital 
consistently exceeding the number of in-house patients, to cases of payments to government suppliers not 
supported by VAT receipts. 
14   The welfare gap, i.e. the difference between all items of expenditure and contributions made in terms of the 
Social Security Act, 1987 has more than doubled in the last five years to EUR381.2million in 2010. The cost of 
pensions and related benefits is estimated at EUR 564 million and that of free hospitalisation and community 
care  EUR  306.5  million.  See,  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Economy  and  Investment  Financial  Estimates  2010, 
p. 294. 
6 
 BIS Review 156/2010
social benefits, to distinguish between those that truly help to combat poverty and social ills 
and others that are not so effective in achieving the desired outcomes. 
Finally, I believe the time has also come to consider how to strengthen the budget process, 
drawing on models tested successfully abroad. These typically involve fiscal rules providing 
for 
limits  on  supplementary  budgets,  multi-annual  expenditure  ceilings  and  more 
transparency  in  fiscal  policy  making,  as  well  as  an  independent  monitoring  agency.  The 
pursuit of fiscal sustainability along such lines requires a broad political consensus.  
Conclusion 
Mr. President, this evening I have argued that while the Maltese economy is headed in the 
right  direction  –  a  fact  that  has  been  recently  confirmed  by  its  33rd  place  in  the  Human 
Development  Index  –,  we  must  look  beyond  the  current  upturn  to  examine  structural 
weaknesses that are preventing the economy from exploiting its full potential, and thus from 
closing the income gap with our European peers. 
I  have  therefore  suggested  that  we  need  to  raise  labour  force  participation,  improve  the 
quality  of  the  work  force  and  increase  the  efficiency  of  public  spending,  particularly  in 
education. We also need to invest more, to upgrade the capital stock. Here, monetary policy 
is playing an important role: interest rates are at historic lows and bank credit continues to 
flow. The Eurosystem’s commitment to deliver price stability in the medium term is also a key 
factor in sustaining investor confidence and supporting economic expansion. 
Market mechanisms, underpinned by appropriate legal frameworks, must be allowed to work 
better.  In  general,  we  need  to  open  up  domestic  markets  to  an  even  greater  degree  of 
competition. 
In addition, fiscal tightening is necessary to correct current imbalances and begin to reverse 
the trend increase in public debt. This objective acquires added importance in the context of 
population ageing. Above all, durable consolidation requires a reappraisal of the role of the 
state and the tightening of fiscal rules.  
Finally,  we  need  to  further  improve  the  economy’s  resilience  to  external  shocks.  Over  the 
past decade unit labour costs and prices have shown a marked tendency to deviate from the 
euro  area  average,  thereby  eroding  competitiveness.  It  is  a  law  of  economics  that  the 
adjustment necessary to regain competitiveness inside a monetary union must take place in 
the real economy by ensuring that prices, wages and profit margins fall, or at least increase 
by less than the average, for a number of years. This requires the introduction of productivity-
enhancing measures and a wage-setting process in which wage increases reflect efficiency 
gains at the enterprise level rather than past inflation. 
In concluding, let me emphasize that what I am advocating is not austerity but enlightened 
self-interest.  It  is  a  commonsense  appeal  for  a  closer  alignment  of  our  priorities  with  the 
economy’s  strategic  objectives  and  for  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Against  a 
backdrop  of  weak  and  uncertain  global  growth  prospects,  the  policy  focus  must  be  on 
releasing resources to make the long-term investments needed for sustainable growth. There 
is indeed not much that economic policy can do to create well paid jobs in the short term. 
These are the combined outcome of high education standards, modern technology and an 
efficient  infrastructure.  This,  in  turn,  depends  on  farsighted  policies  and  years  of  wise 
investment  by  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  That,  I  believe,  is  the  path  we  should 
follow. 
BIS Review 156/2010 
 7
