 Eddie Yue: Hong Kong as an international financial centre – the China 
factor 
Introductory remarks by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  “Hong  Kong:  China’s  Global  Financial  Centre”  conference,  London, 
16 November 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
It is a great pleasure to be here today. This conference is taking place at an exciting 
time  as  there  is  growing  interest  in  the  investment  and  business  opportunities  in  Asia, 
particularly  in  Hong  Kong  and  Mainland  China.  Indeed,  we  are  already  seeing  more  and 
more  asset  managers  moving  from  the  West  to  the  East,  looking  to  set  up  their  regional 
operations in Hong Kong to capture these opportunities. I believe what we are seeing today 
is  only  the  beginning  of  a  period  of  exceptional  growth  in  Hong  Kong’s  financial  services 
industry. 
2. 
KC Chan and Martin Wheatley have already set out the key strengths of Hong Kong 
in serving as a financial hub in Asia. I will not repeat them here. I would like instead to focus 
on one unique competitive advantage of Hong Kong that is difficult for other financial centres 
to replicate. And that is the China factor.   
3. 
This China factor is growing in prominence as China continues with its path of very 
impressive growth: over the past three decades, Mainland China’s GDP has registered an 
amazing  25-fold  increase,  from  US$200  billion  to  US$5  trillion  last  year,  with  an  average 
annual growth rate of 10%. Today, Mainland China is already the second largest economy in 
the  world  and  the  single  biggest  contributor  to  the  world’s  economic  expansion,  creating 
nearly one-fifth of the world’s newly-generated economic activities.  
4.  
The  China  factor  creates  many  different  opportunities  for  Hong  Kong’s  financial 
services industry. Today I will highlight two aspects that I believe are key drivers for growth in 
the next few years. The first is the gradual financial liberalisation in Mainland China and the 
second is the wider external use of the renminbi (RMB).   
The gradual financial liberalisation in Mainland China 
5. 
In  the  gradual  financial  liberalisation  process  in  Mainland  China,  we  can  observe 
three key patterns: inflows being de-regulated before outflows, direct investment flows being 
liberalised  before  portfolio  investment  flows,  and  collective  investment  schemes  being 
relaxed before individual investors.   
6. 
Specifically, during the early stages of Mainland China’s reform process, in the late 
1970s and early 1980s, only Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) was encouraged. Hong Kong 
has  been  the  largest source  of  FDI  for  the  Mainland,  accounting  for  more  than  half  of  the 
total amount in 2009. In the opposite direction, Mainland China’s Overseas Direct Investment 
(ODI) has also been liberalised gradually over the years. Hong Kong has been the largest 
recipient of ODI flows from the Mainland. At present, about 60% of ODI from the Mainland 
has  gone  to  Hong  Kong  or  via  Hong  Kong  to  other  places.  The  significant  share  of  Hong 
Kong in Mainland0’s FDI and ODI underscores the unique role of Hong Kong as a gateway 
for  foreign  enterprises  to  access  the  Mainland  market,  while  at  the  same  time  being  a 
springboard for Mainland institutions to gain exposure to international markets. 
7. 
With  respect  to  portfolio  investment  flows,  Mainland  China  has  made  important 
progress  after  joining  the  WTO  in  2001.  Portfolio  inflows  were  allowed  through  the 
introduction of the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) scheme in 2002. A few years 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 1
 later,  portfolio  outflows  were  liberalised  by  introducing  the  Qualified  Domestic  Institutional 
Investor  (QDII)  scheme  in  2006:  this  allows  certain  qualified  banks,  insurers  and  fund 
management companies to invest overseas.  
8. 
At  present,  market  attention  has  been  focusing  on  portfolio  flows  from  advanced 
economies  towards  Mainland  China.  In  my  view,  portfolio  flows  in  the  opposite  direction 
 –  i.e. portfolio  outflows  from  Mainland  China  –  will  also  present  huge  opportunities  to  the 
asset  management  industry,  especially  given  the  fact  that  the  Mainland  economy  is  the 
single largest provider of savings in the world.  
9. 
Currently, outward portfolio investment (OPI) from the Mainland is only around 5% 
of its GDP, still far below 57% for East Asia, 42% for the US and over 100% for the UK. Our 
in-house  research  findings  show  that  an  economy’s  portfolio  investment  outflows  as  a 
percentage of GDP tend to grow along with the level of economic development measured by 
per capita GDP. As such, there remains enormous scope for Mainland’s OPI to increase.  
10. 
Japan’s experience in opening up its capital account in the mid-80s may also shed 
some light on the future path of Mainland’s OPI. Japan’s outward portfolio investment started 
off  with  5%  of  GDP,  then  rose  to  18%  in  10  years’  time,  and  then  further  to  over  40%  in 
another 10 years. If we assume that Mainland’s OPI follows a path similar to that of Japan, it 
is possible that their OPI could reach 18% of GDP in 10 years’ time. It is not difficult to get an 
idea of the potential scale of such flows by simply punching the calculator: this will give a 
good sense of why we say the potential is huge. 
11. 
So,  given  the  huge  potential  outward  portfolio  investments  from  Mainland  China, 
how  will  they  be  allocated  across  different  financial  markets?  Our  internal  research  shows 
that,  despite  the  advances  in  telecommunications  and  technology,  home  bias  is  still  very 
much there, and people do like investing in markets closer to their home countries. As such, 
Hong Kong is likely to be one of the key destinations of Mainland’s OPI. Apart from being the 
final destination for these investments, Hong Kong can also act as an ideal launch platform 
for these investment flows to reach other major global markets. 
12. 
Since the introduction of the QDII scheme, US$64 billion worth of investment quotas 
have been granted up to June this year. It is likely that a significant portion of these moneys 
is  managed  out  of  Hong  Kong.  In  fact,  over  40  Mainland  companies  providing  fund 
management, securities and futures, insurance, and other services have already established 
a presence in Hong Kong to manage the funds flowing out of the Mainland and engage in 
fund advisory businesses.  
13. 
So,  the  implications  from  the  gradual  liberalisation  of  Mainland  China’s  capital 
account are clear. Hong Kong is bound to be a key destination as well as the management 
hub  for  the  gradual  increase  in  the  portfolio  flows  from  Mainland  China.  This  trend  will 
present huge opportunities to financial institutions, private banks, fund managers, and other 
financial service providers looking to tap these funds.  
14. 
Having  said  that,  one  should  expect  that  the  process  of  financial  liberalisation  in 
Mainland China will be a gradual and controllable one, in a manner that will fit the Chinese 
saying  of  “crossing  the  river  by  feeling  the  stones”  so  that  one  can  adjust  the  speed  and 
tactics  of  crossing  the  river  without  fear  of  falling  in  and  getting  drowned.  It  is,  however, 
important  to  realise  that  this  process  has  already  begun:  this  is  something  that  global 
financial  firms,  especially  asset  managers,  should  not  ignore  in  their  business  planning 
process. 
The wider external use of the RMB 
15. 
RMB.  
Now, let me move on to the second important trend: the wider external use of the 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 From  Hong  Kong’s  perspective, 
Since the global financial crisis, Mainland China has taken steps to allow a greater 
16. 
use  of  RMB  outside  the  Mainland.  The  rationale  behind  this  policy  move  is  easily 
understandable.  At  present,  much  of  the  cross-border  trade  and  investment  between  the 
Mainland and other jurisdictions are conducted in US dollars. As the Mainland continues to 
expand  its  international  trade  and  investment,  and  becomes  more  economically  integrated 
with  the  rest  of  the  world,  Chinese  traders,  investors  and  financial  institutions  will  face 
growing foreign exchange risk if they continue to rely on the US dollar. Thus, it is a natural 
development for Mainland China to allow a wider use of RMB in its cross-border trade and 
investment.  
17. 
this  policy  move  presents  unprecedented 
opportunities to us, as we can leverage on our strengths as an IFC and our unique position 
as a gateway between China and the world to provide a premier testing ground for offshore 
RMB activities. 
18. 
Offshore RMB business has been conducted in Hong Kong since 2004. While the 
scope  of  RMB  business  was  limited  to  retail  banking  initially,  it  has  been  expanded 
substantially to cover bond issuance, trade settlement and further to wealth management this 
year.  These  developments  have  built  a  solid  foundation  for  developing  Hong  Kong  into  a 
RMB financing centre, RMB trade settlement centre and RMB wealth management centre. I 
will briefly cover these three dimensions. 
The first dimension is RMB financing. Hong Kong is the first and so far the only 
19. 
place outside the Mainland that has developed a RMB bond market. So far, 19 RMB bonds 
have  been  launched  in  Hong  Kong  with  a  total  issuance  size  of  over  50  billion  yuan.  The 
issuer  base  was  expanded  from  only  Mainland  Chinese  banks  at  the  start,  to  Mainland 
subsidiaries  of  Hong  Kong  banks  and  China’s  Ministry  of  Finance  in  2009,  and  further  to 
Hong  Kong  corporations  and  international  institutions  like  McDonald’s  and  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  this  year  following  an  important  elucidation  regarding  the  operation  of 
RMB business in Hong Kong in February.  
20. 
The  net  effect  is  that  any  issuers,  including  foreign  corporations  and  multilateral 
organisations, are now free to issue RMB bonds in Hong Kong, just as they can issue bonds 
in  any  other  currencies.  Of  course,  if  the  proceeds  are  to  be  used  on  the  Mainland,  the 
moving of funds into Mainland China will have to meet the requirements there. By the same 
token, banks can now also offer RMB trade finance, corporate loans, syndicated loans and 
project finance to their clients in accordance with Hong Kong’s existing banking practices.  
The  latest  developments  have  provided  more  flexibility  and  larger  scope  for  the 
21. 
further development of RMB financing activities in Hong Kong. As the pool of offshore RMB 
funds  in  Hong  Kong  continues  to  grow,  there  will  be  huge  opportunities  for  financial 
institutions to take part in RMB financing as well as in the origination, distribution, investment 
and trading of RMB bonds.  
The second dimension is RMB trade settlement. The RMB trade settlement pilot 
22. 
scheme was introduced in July last year. The initial scope of the scheme was rather limited. 
But  in  less  than  a  year,  the  pilot  scheme  was  already  expanded  to  cover  enterprises  in 
20 provinces and cities on the Mainland, and their trade transactions with any parts of the 
world  can  now  be  settled  in  RMB.  The  expanded  scope  has  led  to  a  rapid  growth  in  the 
transaction  volume  of  RMB  trade  settlement  in  Hong  Kong,  which  was  increased  from  a 
monthly average of 4.5 billion yuan in the first half of this year, to more than 26 billion yuan in 
the third quarter, representing an almost six-fold increase during the period. 
23. 
To date, more than 75% of Mainland’s RMB trade transactions with the world are 
handled by banks in Hong Kong. This clearly demonstrates the strong preference of market 
players  for  making  use  of  Hong  Kong’s  platform  for  RMB  trade  settlement.  The  highly 
efficient and reliable RMB Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in Hong Kong has 
played  a  significant  role  here.  We are  the  first  and  so  far the  only  place  outside Mainland 
China  that  has  developed  a  full-fledged  RMB  RTGS  system,  enabling  us  to  handle  the 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 3
 settlement of cross-border trade between the Mainland and other economies in a safe and 
efficient manner.  
24. 
The  potential  for  further  increases  in  RMB  trade  settlement  is  considerable  given 
that the current volume only accounts for a small fraction of total trade between China and 
the  rest  of  the  world.  RMB  trade  settlement  proceeds  will  represent  an  important  and 
sustainable source of growth in offshore RMB funds in Hong Kong. 
The  third  dimension  is  RMB  wealth  management  business.  The  RMB  wealth 
25. 
management business in Hong Kong took off this year after the RMB Clearing Agreement 
was  revised  in  July.  The  RMB  Clearing  Agreement  lays  down  the  framework  for  RMB 
business in Hong Kong. I will not bore you with the details but just to highlight two important 
changes made in the Agreement. First, the restrictions on the types of institutions that can 
open  RMB  bank  accounts  were  lifted.  This  effectively  means  that  securities  firms,  asset 
management  companies  and  insurance  companies  are  now  free  to  open  RMB  bank 
accounts. Second, the restrictions on RMB interbank transfers between personal accounts 
and corporate accounts were also removed.  
26. 
With these relaxations, the key hurdles that had previously limited the development 
of offshore RMB wealth management business have been eliminated. Market players have 
been  responding  to  these  relaxations  quickly  with  the  launch  of  a  wide  range  of  RMB 
investment  products.  These  include  RMB-denominated  insurance  policies  and  investment 
funds. Investor interest in these products has been phenomenal.  
27. 
In developing our offshore RMB business, I have to say that Hong Kong does not 
have a monopolistic power and we are also facing competition from other financial centres. 
However, Hong Kong does enjoy the first mover advantage over the others in a number of 
ways.  Over  the  years,  the  HKMA  has  built  up  a  very  good  working  relationship  with  the 
Mainland  authorities.  We  have  accumulated  a  wealth  of  operational  and  regulatory 
experience  in  RMB  business.  We  have  also  developed  the  most  advanced  financial 
infrastructure  for  RMB  transactions  with  cross-border  links  with  the  Mainland.  These  are 
some of our unique strengths, and it is not easy for others to replicate them, at least in the 
short term. 
With all these developments, where should we go next? At the policy level, I believe 
28. 
it would be important to build an effective two-way channel to increase interaction between 
the  RMB  onshore  and  offshore  markets.  A  potential  area  that  can  be  explored  is  to  allow 
such real economic activities as FDI and ODI to be possibly settled in RMB in a gradual and 
controllable manner. If this can be done, offshore RMB liquidity can be channelled back to 
the  Mainland  in  the  form  of  FDI  to  support  Mainland’s  economic  activities,  while  in  the 
opposite direction, Mainland enterprises can make use of RMB for the settlement of ODI to 
eliminate foreign exchange risk. Given the significant share of Hong Kong in Mainland’s FDI 
and  ODI,  building  such  a  two-way  channel  will  also  be  conducive  to  the  sustainable 
development of the offshore RMB market in Hong Kong. 
29. 
In addition to FDI and ODI, we have been in close communication with the Mainland 
authorities to explore other possible channels. In this regard, we welcome the announcement 
of the People’s Bank of China in August regarding the introduction of a pilot scheme allowing 
eligible  entities  in  Hong  Kong  to  make  use  of  their  RMB  funds  to  invest  in  the  Mainland's 
interbank  bond  market.  The  launch  of  this  scheme  has  opened  up  a  channel  for  offshore 
RMB  funds  to  invest  on  the  Mainland.  Market  responses  to  this  scheme  have  been  very 
positive.  
30. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  Mainland  China  is  now  the  second  largest 
economy  and  the  single  largest  source  of  new  economic  activities  in  the  world.  The 
increasing use of RMB in the international stage – although that will be a gradual process – 
will have profound implications on the global financial landscape in the years to come. 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2010
 Concluding remarks 
31. 
So,  the  trends  are  very  clear.  Now  is  a  critical  time  for  market  players,  including 
banks, financial institutions and asset management companies, to prepare themselves well 
for the unprecedented opportunities presented by these two important trends in China. 
32. 
Before I conclude, I would like to say a few words about the Linked Exchange Rate 
System in Hong Kong. As the offshore RMB business continues to develop in Hong Kong, 
there are views that the RMB may undermine the status of the Hong Kong dollar. Some have 
even  said  that  it  would  be  natural  to  consider  pegging  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  to  the  RMB 
instead of the US dollar. We do not agree with these views.  
33.  
Let’s  take  a  look  at  the  UK’s  experience  in  developing  the  Eurodollar  market. 
Despite the sheer size of the Eurodollar market in the UK, it has not undermined the role of 
the British Pound in serving the domestic economy. Likewise, in the eyes of local investors in 
Hong  Kong,  RMB  mainly  represents  an  attractive  investment  choice  in  addition  to  other 
foreign currencies, and does not create any problems at all to the Hong Kong dollar’s role as 
a locally-used currency. 
34. 
What about the idea of pegging the Hong Kong dollar to the RMB instead of the US 
dollar? In thinking about this question, it is important to recognise that the RMB can only be 
an anchor currency when it meets a number of important fundamental conditions.  
First,  there  should  be  a  high  degree  of  synchronisation  between  the  economic 
35. 
cycles  in  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland.  At  present,  Hong  Kong’s  economic  cycle  is  more 
affected  by  the  flows  of  trade  between  the  Mainland  and  the  advanced  economies,  rather 
than  domestic  demand  of  the  Mainland.  And  the  business  cycle  synchronisation  between 
Hong  Kong  and  the  US  continues  to  be  higher  than  that  between  Hong  Kong  and  the 
Mainland. Secondly, to make it technically feasible for the RMB to be a reserve currency, 
the  RMB  must  be  freely  convertible,  the  capital  account  control  on  the  Mainland  removed 
and  all  currencies  allowed  to  flow  freely.  Thirdly,  the  financial  and  asset  markets  on  the 
Mainland should be wide, deep and liquid enough to allow the Exchange Fund of Hong Kong 
– the backing for our Linked Exchange Rate System – to hold substantial amounts of RMB 
assets to support the Hong Kong dollar, preserve capital, grow in value and meet contingent 
needs.  
36. 
Obviously these fundamental conditions are not met, and the Hong Kong dollar Link 
to  the  US  dollar  remains  the  most  appropriate  policy  for  Hong  Kong.  So,  let  me  take  this 
opportunity to reiterate that we have no plan to change the Linked Exchange Rate System. It 
has  served  Hong  Kong  well  since  1983  and  is  the  pillar  for  the  monetary  and  financial 
stability in Hong Kong. 
37. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 153/2010 
 5
