Már Guðmundsson: The Icelandic economy two years after the crash 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a meeting of 
the Icelandic-American Chamber of Commerce, New York, 19 October 2010. 
 Chairman and honoured guests,  
It gives me great pleasure to be with you here today and give a speech at this meeting of the 
Icelandic-American Chamber of Commerce. In my remarks, I would like to take stock of the 
current  economic  situation,  two  years  after  the  collapse  of  the  bulk  of  Iceland’s  banking 
system, and assess the prospects for robust recovery. 
I  am  well  aware  that  this  only  gives  a  partial  picture.  The  saga  of  economic  and  financial 
developments  in  Iceland  during  the  last  decade  or  so  is  made  up  of  two  separate  but 
interrelated stories. On the one hand, there is Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with 
macroeconomic management in small, open, and financially integrated economies. This is a 
well-known story that has played out in other countries several times. On the other hand, we 
have  the  story  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  three  cross-border  banks  operated  on  the  basis  of 
European  Union  legislation  (the  European  “Passport”).  That  story,  at  least  for  smaller 
countries,  is  much  more  unique  than  the  first. Today  I  will  focus  on  the  first  story  and  will 
have to refer you to another speech1 and a forthcoming article2 for my views on the latter. 
However, I am willing to answer questions on both during the Q&A session. 
While  these  two  stories  are  different,  they  interact  in  important  ways.  The  unsustainable 
boom that Iceland experienced during the years 2005–2007 was fuelled by a combination of 
favourable  external  conditions,  macroeconomic  mismanagement,  and  aggressive  domestic 
bank lending. It may well be that the banks’ international activities and the easy access to 
foreign credit that came with those activities fuelled stronger growth in domestic bank lending 
than would have occurred in a more traditional small-country banking system. But we cannot 
be sure about the magnitude of this effect, as we know that unsustainable domestic credit 
booms  fuelled  by  capital  inflows  can  very  well  take  place  in  countries  that  are  not  home 
countries to international banks. 
As  so  often  occurs  in  great  tragedies,  the  two stories converged  in  a grand  finale  in  early 
October 2008, when nearly nine-tenths of Iceland’s banking system collapsed when its three 
large  cross-border  banks  –  Glitnir,  Landsbanki,  and  Kaupthing  –  were  taken  into  special 
resolution regimes on the basis of the emergency legislation that had just been passed by 
Iceland’s Parliament. By that time, however, the Icelandic economy was already on its way 
into  a  recession  as  a  result  of  the  inevitable  adjustment  of  the  economy  after  its  serious 
overheating in 2005–2007 and the currency crisis earlier in 2008. As a matter of fact, Iceland 
was struck by three negative shocks in 2008. 
The first was the currency crisis in early 2008, when the currency collapsed as capital inflows 
experienced  sudden  stops  and  the  banks  were  no  longer  able  to  refinance  their  foreign 
currency  liabilities.  The  currency  depreciation  had  strong  negative  effects  on  the  balance 
sheets  of  households  and  those  corporations  with  foreign  currency  debt  and  no  foreign 
currency income, which in turn contributed to a further drop in domestic demand. 
The  second  was  the  collapse  of  the  banking  system  in  October  2008,  in  the  wake  of  the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  when  cross-border  banks  in  many  countries  around  the  world 
                                                 
1   Gudmundsson, Már (2010). “The faults in cross-border banking.” Speech at the FIBE meeting in Bergen on 
7 January. Online source: http://www.sedlabanki.is/lisalib/getfile.aspx?itemid=7592 (access date: 18 May 2010). 
2   Gudmundsson,  Már  and  Thorsteinn  Thorgeirsson  (2010).  “The  fault  lines  in  cross-border  banking:  lessons 
from the Icelandic case”, forthcoming in SUERF Studies. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 1
the 
triggered 
the  post-boom  adjustment, 
Investigation  Commission.  The  banking  collapse 
faced  a  run  on  their  foreign  currency  liabilities.  The  Icelandic  banks  were  particularly 
vulnerable in this regard, as the foreign-denominated part of their balance sheets amounted 
to 7½ times Iceland’s GDP. By comparison, the reserves of the Central Bank of Iceland, a 
swap agreement with the Nordic countries, and committed credit lines amounted to just over 
one-third  of  GDP.  This  major  vulnerability  came  on  top  of  other  malignant  diseases  that 
plagued  the  banks  and  have  been  revealed  in  the  report  compiled  by  the  Parliamentary 
Special 
further  currency 
depreciation  and  contributed  to  a  significant  destruction  of  household  assets  (e.g.,  bank 
equity, mutual funds, and pension assets). 
The third shock was the international economic recession in the fourth quarter of 2008 and 
the first half of 2009. 
three 
The  subsequent  recession  was  shaped  by 
aforementioned shocks, and the policy responses of the authorities. It is an interesting topic 
for future research to try to quantify the relative effects of the three shocks on the subsequent 
recession. We cannot take it for granted that the banking collapse is the most important one 
in  that  respect,  although  it  commands  the  first  place  in  the  psyche  of  the  population.  The 
asset  destruction  that  was  associated  with  the  banking  collapse  took  place  in  several 
countries, mostly in Northern Europe, and in absolute terms the loss of the foreign creditors 
is  bigger  than  that  of  domestic  residents.  The  currency  crisis  and  the  banking  crisis  are 
linked, of course, as the banks exacerbated the former. However, with a floating exchange 
rate, the burst of the unsustainable macroeconomic boom was always going to be associated 
with a major depreciation, irrespective of what happened to the banks and whether Iceland 
had a cross-border banking system or not. 
The effects of the currency collapse and the associated outburst of inflation, which rose from 
below  4%  in  late  2007  to  18%  in  early  2009,  were  magnified,  as  it  hit  one  of  the  most 
indebted  private  sectors  among  advanced  economies,  with  a  high  share  of  foreign-
denominated  or  exchange  rate-linked  debt  (20%  for  households,  70%  for  businesses,  and 
40% for municipalities). In addition, households’ CPI-indexed debt amounted to 75% of their 
total debt and the pass-through of exchange rate depreciation to inflation was speedy due to 
the magnitude of the depreciation and the lack of credibility of monetary policy at the time. 
Having set the scene, I shall now turn to the policy responses. The framework for these was 
set by the two-year Stand-By Arrangement agreed with the IMF in November 2008. The total 
financing  associated  with  the  programme  amounts  to  around  USD  5  bn,  with  just  over 
USD 2 bn  coming  from  IMF  resources  and  USD  3  bn  provided  by  bilateral  loans  from  the 
Nordic  countries,  Poland,  and  others.  The  original  Stand-By  Arrangement  provided  for 
quarterly  reviews;  however,  the  first  review  was  delayed,  partly  because  of  the  deposit 
insurance  dispute  between  Iceland  and  the  Netherlands  and  UK,  relating  to  online  foreign 
overseas  branches  of  the  failed  Landsbanki.  The  first  review  was  completed  in  October 
2009, the second in April 2010, and the third on 29 September 2010. 
The  programme  had  three  key  policy  goals:  (i)  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rate,  (ii)  to  put 
government finances on a sustainable path and (iii) to rebuild a financial sector serving the 
domestic economy. The first goal was imperative in order to stop an adverse spiral of fading 
confidence, exchange rate depreciation, and increased inflation and inflation expectations. It 
was  also  needed  in  order  to  stop  the  negative  balance  sheet  effects  coming  through 
FX-denominated or FX-linked loans and CPI-indexed loans. The second, fiscal sustainability, 
was needed in order to stop adverse public debt dynamics from turning an external liquidity 
crisis into a potential solvency issue, which would have made it impossible to regain internal 
and  external  trust  in  the  Icelandic  economy.  The  third,  financial  sector  reconstruction,  is  a 
precondition for private sector debt restructuring and economic recovery. 
As  a  result,  exchange  rate  stability  became  the  first  priority  of  monetary  policy.  However, 
given the lack of confidence and the overhang of non-resident holdings of speculative ISK 
positions, estimated at the time to amount to ISK 600 bn, it would have required exorbitant 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2010
interest rates to stabilise the exchange rate through interest rate policy alone, and the room 
for manoeuvre to use monetary policy to support the domestic economy would have been 
non-existent,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  For  this  reason,  it  was  decided  to  introduce 
comprehensive capital controls, which allowed more space to lower interest rates in line with 
falling inflation and provide some support to the domestic economy. There were, of course, 
“cold turkey” alternatives, but they were considered too risky at the time. 
The Central Bank of Iceland’s effective policy rate peaked at 18% in early 2009 (at the time, 
the seven-day collateral lending rate) but has now been reduced to around 5½% (now the 
average  of  the  rates  on  certificates  of  deposit  and  current  accounts).  The  exchange  rate 
stabilised in the second half of 2009 with no supporting intervention since early November 
2009. So far this year, the exchange rate has appreciated by 11% in trade-weighted terms, 
again without any supporting intervention. This has alleviated pressures on impaired private 
sector balance sheets and contributed to relatively speedy disinflation. 
Fiscal  policy  was  set  within  a  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  programme  covering  the 
period  2009–2013.  The  programme  aims  at  a  primary  surplus  in  2011  and  a  substantial 
overall surplus in 2013, making it possible to reduce Treasury debt from that year onwards. 
The announcement of a medium-term plan made it possible for automatic fiscal stabilisers to 
work more or less unhindered in 2009, with fiscal consolidation taking hold in 2010. This was 
important in two respects. First, it limited the negative demand effects of fiscal consolidation 
precisely when the recession was at its steepest. Second, it sent a signal that adverse public 
sector debt dynamics would be addressed over the medium term, thus reducing risk premia 
in domestic and foreign interest rates facing the sovereign. Graph 1 shows the progress that 
has been made so far with fiscal consolidation and the plans embedded in the fiscal budget 
for 2011. Provided the plans are carried out, the consolidation involved will be impressive in 
both historical and international comparison, with a roughly 9 percentage point improvement 
in the non-cyclically adjusted fiscal balance from 2009 to 2012, even though there will be a 
significant slack in the economy for most of the period. 
Although it has been delayed and has faced obstacles on the way, the reconstruction of the 
domestic  financial  sector  is  far  advanced.  The  three  major  commercial  banks  have  been 
recapitalised,  with  foreign  creditors  taking  a  majority  stake  in  two  of  them  and  the  State 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 3
 holding a majority in the third. At the end of June, all three had capital ratios above 16%, 
most of it common equity. As a result, Iceland’s banks meet Basel III requirements more than 
two times over. The recapitalisation of the savings banks is in its final stages. In June of this 
year, however, question marks were raised about the capital position of the banking system 
when  the  Supreme  Court  of  Iceland  ruled  that  linking  ISK  loans  to  exchange  rates  was 
illegal. The banking system had a large number of such contracts on its books. The precise 
scope of the problem was uncertain, but more importantly, it was not clear what interest rates 
these loans should carry when they were no longer exchange rate-linked. Should they carry 
contractual foreign rates or some typical ISK rate, such as the benchmark rate published by 
the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland?  In  the  former  case,  the  blow  to  the  capital  position  of  the 
banking system would have been very serious indeed, requiring massive recapitalisation and 
possibly  jeopardising  the  overall  stability  of  the  system.  Those  responsible  for  financial 
stability gave a sigh of relief when the Supreme Court ruled in mid-September that loans with 
illegal  exchange  rate  linkage  clauses  should  carry  reference  ISK  rates  published  by  the 
Central Bank of Iceland. After this decision, it is clear that the blow to capital ratios should be 
well manageable and only a very limited recapitalisation will be called for, if any. 
The  reconstruction  of  the  domestic  financial  sector  paves  the  way  for  badly  needed  debt 
restructuring among households and businesses. This issue has remained unresolved due to 
delays  in  recapitalising  the  banks  and  the  uncertainty  following  the  first  Supreme  Court 
ruling. But it has also lagged because the framework for such debt restructuring has been a 
highly contested political issue. 
We have seen that Iceland has made significant progress on three main policy fronts. But 
before  investigating  how  this  progress  has  stabilised  the  economy,  let  us  turn  back  to  the 
recession  in  the  Icelandic  economy.  As  I  said  earlier,  Iceland  was  well  on  its  way  into 
recession in 2009 before the banks collapsed in the autumn of 2008, and actually before the 
currency crisis materialised earlier in 2008. In fact, the Central Bank had been predicting a 
recession in 2009 since at least 2006, as can be seen from the graph that shows predictions 
for 2009 GDP growth at different dates. The predicted recession was supposed to be a mild 
one, but then we need to bear in mind that recession forecasts tend to be dampened while 
the times are still good! 
4 
  BIS Review 139/2010
When  all  three  shocks  had  hit,  the  mood  changed  dramatically,  as  can  be  seen  from 
Graph 2. The bleakest forecast was made in May 2009, when GDP was predicted to contract 
by  11%  in  2009  and  unemployment  for  2010  was  forecasted  to  reach  11%.  However,  the 
outcome turned out to be much better – a contraction of 6.8% – and the prospects for peak 
unemployment have also improved markedly. I think this due not to ordinary forecast errors 
but to various factors that supported domestic demand and export production in 2009, some 
of  which  were  temporary.  These  included  temporary  permission  to  withdraw  a  specified 
maximum amount from third pillar savings, with use amounting to 1½% of GDP in 2009. This 
measure is akin to a fiscal stimulus of a similar size. But these factors also included other 
measures  to  support  households,  which  mitigated  the  decline  in  private  consumption. 
Furthermore, the delay in corporate and household restructuring, although detrimental in the 
medium  term,  postponed  some  of  the  short-term  contractionary  effects  that  tend  to 
accompany it. Finally, the low real exchange rate stimulated exports and other traded goods 
sector  activity.  Moreover,  the  composition  of  Iceland’s  exports  is  such  that  they  are 
somewhat  less  cyclically  sensitive  than,  for  example,  exports  of  motor  vehicles  and 
consumer durables. The net result was that Iceland’s exports held up well in comparison to 
world trade overall, as can be seen in Graph 3. 
 Some of these factors were temporary, however, and the price was paid this year. Contrary 
to  earlier  (probably  unrealistic)  expectations,  Iceland  did  not  recover  from  recession  in  the 
first of half 2010. That means that Iceland will emerge from recession later than most other 
countries, many of which began to recover in the second half of 2009. But given the huge 
imbalances  in  the  Icelandic  economy  during  the  boom  and  the  size  of  the  shocks  it 
sustained,  this  is  not  surprising  when  measured  against  the  broader  historical  record  of 
countries experiencing major financial crises. In both international and historical comparison, 
Iceland has gone through a deep and a somewhat drawn-out recession, as can be seen from 
the following graph. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 5
 Perhaps recovery has only just started, but the signs of stabilisation are all over the place. 
The huge current account deficit of the boom period has turned into a surplus if we exclude 
the accrued interest on the debt of the failed banks, interest that will probably never be paid. 
The underlying surplus, in this sense, gives support to the exchange rate, which has already 
appreciated significantly, as I mentioned earlier. As a result, the inflation rate has come down 
sharply, from 18% in early 2009 to less than 4% at present. We are now expecting to reach 
the Central Bank’s 2½% inflation target around the turn of the year, at least if we discount 
temporary effects of higher indirect taxes on the price level. 
At the same time, the Central Bank’s gross foreign exchange reserves have grown strongly 
as a result of the financing associated with the IMF programme and other transactions, such 
the purchase of offshore ISK assets held as collateral by the Central Bank of Luxembourg 
 6 
 BIS Review 139/2010
and the subsequent sale of those assets to Icelandic pension funds against foreign currency 
(the  so-called  Avens  deal),  and  the  sale  of  a  Danish  Bank  that  the  Central  Bank  held  as 
collateral  against  a  foreign  currency  lender-of-last-resort  loan  granted  to  Kaupthing  shortly 
before it failed. The foreign exchange reserves could reach EUR 3 bn before year-end if we 
draw  fully  on  the  IMF  and  bilateral  loans  available  after  the  third  review  of  the  IMF 
programme  –  and  this  is  after  deducting  short-term  foreign  currency  liabilities  such  as  the 
forex  deposits  of  the  failed  banks’  resolution  committees  (see  Graph  5).  Compare  that  to 
sovereign foreign debt payments initially amounting to EUR 1½ bn in 2011 and 2012 but now 
reduced by EUR 400 m through debt buybacks. It is therefore no wonder that concerns about 
Icelandic sovereign debt default have largely evaporated. This can be seen in the spread on 
Iceland’s  sovereign  credit  default  swaps,  which  has  fallen  significantly  this  year  and  is 
currently at 288 basis points, well below those of Ireland and Portugal. 
Before turning to the outlook and near-term policy challenges, let me mention two important 
problems  that  Iceland  will  not  face  if  present  policies  remain  on  course.  The  first  is  an 
unsustainable  public  debt  level.  As  Graph  6  shows,  the  gross  debt  of  Iceland’s  general 
government (central and local government) exceeded 100% of GDP at the end of 2009. That 
is  very  high,  of  course,  although  there  are  countries  with  higher  gross  debt,  as  the  graph 
shows. However, Iceland’s net public debt is significantly lower and is sustainable given the 
prospects for repayment of Treasury debt in net terms from 2013 onwards. In addition, if we 
factor  in  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  exchange  reserves,  the  bulk  of  net  public  debt  is 
denominated in Icelandic krónur. But what about the unsettled Icesave debt? The answer is 
that  it  will  not  fundamentally  change  the  picture,  as  present  estimates  of  the  amount  and 
speed of recovery of the assets of the failed Landsbanki and indications of what might be on 
the table in terms of financing costs in a new settlement suggest that the net present value of 
the settlement will be significantly lower than in previous agreements. 
The same applies to net foreign debt, where Iceland will be even more of a middle-of-the-
road country when the dust has settled and the failed banks have been wound up, as can be 
seen from Graph 7. 
 BIS Review 139/2010 
 7
 When the economy has stabilised and sovereign debt concerns have subsided, what are the 
key  economic  challenges  facing  Iceland?  At  the  most  fundamental  level,  they  could  be 
captured in one sentence: create the conditions for robust growth and reintegrate Iceland into 
international capital markets. But there are many elements that must fall into place if this is to 
happen. The Central Bank has been predicting that recovery will take hold in the second half 
of  this  year,  which  means  that  recovery  should  have  started  by  now.  There  are  actually 
signs, but not hard data, to support this. But it is not a strong or a robust recovery. If it is to 
turn  into  a  robust  recovery,  we  need  much  more  progress  on  internal  private  sector  debt 
restructuring  and  we  must  increase  business  investment  from  its  present  historically  low 
level. This, in turn, requires a lower level of uncertainty about future demand and businesses’ 
operating conditions, and more foreign direct investment would be very helpful as well. 
If successfully carried out, the removal of the comprehensive controls on capital outflows and 
the reintegration into international capital markets should also support growth going forward. 
The Central Bank has stated that there are three prerequisites for taking the next steps in 
lifting  capital  controls.  These  are:  (i)  macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  confidence  in  the 
sustainability of government debt; (ii) an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves; and 
(iii) a sound financial sector. After the third review of the IMF programme, the first two are in 
place and there are prospects that the third will be fulfilled before the end of the year. The 
8 
 BIS Review 139/2010
challenge  is  then  to  design  and  sequence  the  process  in  such  a  way  that  the  risk  of 
temporary exchange rate and domestic financial market instability is minimised to the extent 
possible, given the urgency of lifting the controls sooner rather than later. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  stabilising  the  Icelandic  economy  was  a  challenging  task. 
The next step is equally so. However, it is imperative for Iceland’s future prosperity that we 
be as successful in taking that step as we have been in stabilising the economy. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 139/2010 
 9
