Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: SEPA – a busy year is coming to its end and 
another exciting year lies ahead 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at 
the  Next  Generation  Cards  &  Payments  Conference,  Brussels, 
25 November 2010. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
Walking  across  the  Grand  Place  and  around  the  Bourse  you  can  see  busy  preparations 
under way for this year’s Christmas market. I have been told that it will be opened tomorrow 
and exhibitors from all over Europe will be selling their goods. The guild houses and Town 
Hall  will  be  beautifully  illuminated  and  decked  in  festive  garlands  and  I  am  sure  that  the 
Christmas  song  “Silent  Night”  will  be  played.  In  fact,  today  is  the  birthday  of  Franz  Xaver 
Gruber,  an  Austrian  primary  school  teacher  and  church  organist  who  composed  “Silent 
Night”  at  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century.  On  Christmas  Eve  1818  “Silent  Night”  was 
performed for the first time, in a chapel in Oberndorf, near Salzburg and subsequently made 
its way throughout Europe and to the rest of the world.  
Talking about Christmas reminds us that 2010 is slowly but surely coming to an end. As in 
every year,  the media  will soon be producing reviews of the year’s events. When we look 
back at what has happened in the field of payments, it is obvious that Europe has invested a 
great deal of effort and substantial progress has been made. All of us have contributed to 
and are familiar with what has been accomplished in 2010. I will therefore refrain from listing 
our past achievements but concentrate on the things that remain to be done. Let us therefore 
start to think about our New Year’s resolutions for 2011.  
New Year’s resolution number one: let’s define a SEPA migration end date 
There  is  a  consensus  that  an  end  date  is  needed  for  the  migration  to  the  SEPA  credit 
transfer (SCT) and SEPA direct debit (SDD). Throughout 2010 representatives from almost 
every  stakeholder  group  have  been  calling  for  a  defined  end  date.  Just  recently  a  study 
conducted by BearingPoint revealed that more than 80% of the banks surveyed consider a 
binding SEPA migration end date to be necessary. In fact, the majority are in favour of an EU 
regulation  to  set  one.1  Of  course  it  is  no  secret  that,  despite  this  general  agreement,  the 
details of such a regulation have been widely debated since the summer. For this reason, I 
had  welcomed  the  European  Commission’s  decision  to  organise  a  public  hearing  on  the 
issue, which took place last Wednesday.  
We in the Eurosystem have been very explicit in our comments on this topic and we have 
been calling for a regulation setting a migration end date for SCT and SDD. Indeed, we have 
gone one step further and have announced preferred dates, i.e. the end of 2012 for credit 
transfers  and  the  end  of  2013  for  direct  debits.  When  it  comes  to  the  question  of  which 
payment instruments should become the credit transfer and direct debit schemes used for 
euro payments in the EU, for me it is obvious that the answer is the SCT and SDD. This is, in 
fact, the position of the Eurosystem, which was clearly communicated in the seventh SEPA 
                                                 
1  The survey involved 42 European banks in nine countries. See the press release (in German) available at: 
http://www.bearingpoint.de/PMI_SEPA_081110.pdf 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 1
progress  report.  Of  course,  it  is  one  thing  to  set  a  goal,  but  it  is  far  harder  to  achieve  it. 
However,  I  am  confident  that  the European  Commission  will  make  this  possible  through  a 
legislative proposal. Despite the debate surrounding the end date in the past few weeks, we 
should not forget that we all share the same goal: we all want to make SEPA a reality. Of 
course, SEPA will only be a success story if it goes beyond credit transfers and direct debits. 
This brings me to my next New Year’s resolution: 
issue 
important 
New Year’s resolution number two: let’s establish the requirements for a competitive 
cards market 
Any  cards  market  should  meet  a  number  of  requirements  in  order  to  facilitate  competition 
and  efficiency.  The  principle  of  separating  card  scheme  management  from  processing 
entities is one of the core elements of SEPA that aims to guarantee open access. The SEPA 
credit transfer and direct debit schemes are built on this principle; it should be applied in the 
cards market too. This would give banks a range of options to choose from as regards the 
processing of card payments.  
To allow for the efficient processing of card payments in SEPA, the same set of message 
standards as used for the processing of direct debits and credit transfers should be adopted, 
i.e. ISO 20022. To bridge the gap that exists between this strategic vision and the reality, a 
framework for the processing of card transactions should be developed and the processing 
infrastructure providers must subsequently develop the rules and standards that are needed 
in order to establish technical interoperability for card payments. 
Another 
the 
is  cards  standardisation,  which 
interoperability and harmonised use of cards across Europe. In the area of standardisation, 
there is a clear separation of responsibilities. First, the European Payments Council (EPC) is 
responsible  for  the  strategic  vision  and  business  rules  for  cards.  Second,  the  Cards 
Stakeholders  Group  is  responsible  for  establishing  functional,  security  and  procedural 
requirements. Third, various market initiatives have developed implementation standards and 
specifications  for  the  various  domains  of  card  payments.  This  is  very  welcome;  however, 
work  on  the  implementation  of  these  specifications  is  lagging  behind  and  should  be 
accelerated. 
In  the  field  of  security  certification  for  cards  and  terminals,  a  set  of  implementation 
specifications  have  been  developed  by  the  Common  Approval  Scheme  (CAS).  However, 
governance-related  aspects  of  the  SEPA  security  certification  framework  are  still  under 
discussion.  Therefore,  we  urge  the  EPC  and  CAS  members  to  swiftly  agree  on  concrete 
proposals for a permanent governance structure with regard to security certification for cards 
and terminals. Last, but not least, I would like to stress that, from a European perspective, it 
is of strategic importance to adopt a more coordinated approach to global standard-setting 
bodies, such as the ISO and EMVCo.  
These  requirements  should  lay  the  foundation  for  a  competitive  European  cards  market. 
However, I personally believe that the European cards market would also benefit from the 
power of choice. Therefore, a duopoly in the European cards market is not the outcome that I 
would prefer to see for the SEPA project, which brings me to New Year’s resolution number 
three. 
to  ensure 
is  crucial 
New Year’s resolution number three: let’s move forward with an additional European 
card scheme  
The  Eurosystem  has  been  calling  for  an  additional  European  card  scheme  for  four  years. 
Therefore,  we  are  closely  monitoring  the  work  of  the  three  initiatives  that  have  been 
launched. It is important to emphasise that we have not selected any “favourite” out of the 
three  projects,  but  treat  all  three  equally.  All  three  face  some  of  the  same  challenges:  the 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2010
main challenge is certainty as regards the potential business case. Some clarity has been 
provided with regard to the sensitive issue of multilateral interchange fees (MIF) thanks to the 
agreements  reached  by  the  EU  Commission  with  VISA  and  MasterCard.  However,  the 
market asks for more certainty and it may be that this must ultimately be provided in the form 
of a regulation. I would strongly urge the appropriate authorities to work on this issue so that 
the  clarity  needed  at  the  European  level  can  be  provided.  An  additional  European  card 
scheme  –  which  is  as  safe  and  efficient  as  the  best  performing  schemes  today  –  is  a 
necessary element of an integrated and competitive cards market. 
New Year’s resolution number four: let’s innovate 
Europe  is  still  a  patchwork  of  national  online  markets,  and  Europeans  are  prevented  from 
enjoying the benefits of a single digital market. Traditional payment instruments still dominate 
payments for e-commerce. However, they were not designed to cope with the needs of the 
online world and often cannot be used for cross-border transactions. Among these payment 
instruments, cash on delivery, credit transfers upon receipt of an invoice and the provision of 
card credentials to merchants play an important role.  
In  all  but  a  few  countries,  card  transactions  based  on  secure  payment  protocols  and  
e-payments based on online banking are still in the minority or are only used for domestic 
transactions. We have to ensure that Europe does not lose any more ground in e-commerce, 
compared with the United States and emerging online markets. Therefore, there is a clear 
need for efficient, low cost, secure and readily available online payment solutions throughout 
Europe – and ideally beyond. The potential for online payment solutions is great enough to 
offer scope both for secure card payments and for e-payments based on online banking. The 
ECB  strongly  supports  the  emergence  of  SEPA-wide  online  e-payment  solutions,  such  as 
those  that  already  exist  at  the  national  level,  for  example  in  Germany,  Austria  and  the 
Netherlands.  In  my  view,  European  wide  implementation  of  such  innovative  ideas  is  very 
much needed. 
Both increased security for “card-not-present” transactions and the introduction, throughout 
Europe, of e-payments based on online banking will provide more payment options for users. 
And  such  developments  will  also  address  a  problem  that  greatly  concerns  central  banks: 
safety.  I  firmly  believe  that  for  “online  shopping”  the  payments  industry  needs  to  deliver  a 
solution  that  permits  customers  to  pay  for  their  purchases  in  a  safe  way.  This  brings  me 
directly to the last of my proposed New Year’s resolutions:  
New Year’s resolution number five: let’s not forget about security 
The security of retail payments is key to ensuring that consumers and businesses place their 
trust and confidence in SEPA. The risk-based approach applied by individual banks may not 
be sufficient to achieve the level of security that is required at the aggregate industry level. 
The reason for this is that commercial risk tolerance may differ from social risk tolerance. In 
the  seventh  SEPA  progress  report  we  dedicated  a  chapter  to  the  topic  of  security.  By 
sending a number of ambitious messages we have ensured that the necessary attention will 
be paid to this topic. One of these messages was our expectation that the cards industry in 
Europe  will  issue  “chip-only”  cards  from  2012.  But  if  the  industry  decides  to  retain  the 
magnetic  stripe  on  cards  for  practical  reasons,  we  would  ask  that  any  data  enabling  the 
processing  of  magnetic  stripe  transactions  should  be  removed.  This  should  ensure  that 
sensitive  account  information  can  no  longer  be  copied.  The  current  levels  of  fraud  clearly 
show that something needs to be done urgently in this respect. 
The increasing level of card-not-present fraud carried out over the internet can be addressed 
by  the  introduction  of  secure  payment  protocols  (e.g.  3D  Secure  or  virtual  cards).  To 
encourage  the  use  of  such  security  measures,  a  liability  shift  –  which  has  been  used,  for 
example, as an incentive for EMV migration – could be applied.  
BIS Review 159/2010 
 3
Clearly, SEPA requires a harmonised minimum level of security for retail payments to ensure 
transparency and a level playing field. In order to achieve this, we need to have more clarity 
about  the  security  requirements  as  well  as  about  the  actors  involved  in  setting  these 
requirements. We have recently launched the idea to set up a Forum for Security Issues and 
have  received  a  positive  feedback  from  banks.  Such  a  forum  would  monitor  market 
developments.  In  addition  it  could  enable  the  relevant  authorities,  including  banking 
supervisors  and  central  banks,  to  align  their  expectations  on  security.  The  Eurosystem  is 
currently investigating what could be the precise mandate and composition of such a forum.  
Conclusion 
I have to admit that these five New Year’s resolutions are quite demanding. But I believe they 
are essential for the SEPA project. If all of us continue to work on SEPA with the same level 
of dedication as this year, we can accomplish all of them.  
4 
 BIS Review 159/2010
