Caleb M Fundanga: Setting new standards for cellphone banking 
Opening remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Celpay 
2010 Mobile Payments Conference, Lusaka, 27 October 2010.  
 The Chief Executive Officer Celpay International BV  
The Managing Director – Zain Zambia Limited  
Managing Director, Celpay Zambia Ltd, Mr Miyanda Mulambo  
The Conference Chairperson, Mr Maxwell Banda  
Representatives of Commercial Banks and Financial Institutions present  
Representatives of International Organizations present  
Representatives of Zambian business associations  
Distinguished invited participants  
Members of the Press  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is an honour and privilege for me to officiate at the 2010 Mobile Payments Conference. 
This year’s conference follows the success of the inaugural 2009 conference and it is 
therefore my earnest anticipation that as in 2009, you will find the 2010 conference 
productive and beneficial. The conference provides an excellent opportunity for the exchange 
of views and sharing of ideas on how to continuously improve the functioning of our financial 
systems against the backdrop of the global financial turmoil.  
Mr  Chairman,  Allow  me  to  begin  by  commending  Celpay  Zambia  Limited,  for  making  the 
mobile banking conference an annual event. I hope that the Conference will provide a forum 
for  long-term  collaboration  in  the  area  of  Mobile  banking  to  provide  sustainable  banking 
solutions  to  our  people.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  applauds  this  initiative  which  is  collaborative 
and  consultative.  It  is  only  through  such  collaboration  and  consultation  involving  key 
stakeholders that we are able to improve our local situations as we seek to have a stable 
macroeconomic environment and an inclusive financial system. These are preconditions for 
achieving  economic  development  and  accordingly,  one  of  the  principal  tenets  of economic 
development  is  access  to  financial  services.  in  this  regard,  a  national  payment  systems 
development has a fundamental role to play to enhance access.  
Chairperson, I have noted that the theme for this year’s conference, “Setting New Standards 
for Cellphone Banking” is very fitting for Zambia as we face the challenge of ensuring that the 
majority  of  our  adult  population  has  access  to  formal  financial  services.  As  you  may  be 
aware,  a  large  component  of  the  work  being  undertaken  under  the  Financial  Sector 
Development  Plan  (FSDP)  and  the  National  Payment  Systems  Vision  and  Strategy  
2007–2011 is focused on improving financial access and contributing to the establishment of 
inclusive financial markets in general. The recent Finscope Survey revealed that only 37.3% 
of  the  adult  population  have  access  to  formal  financial  services  leaving  62.7%  of  adult 
population  financially  excluded.  Although  significant  strides  have  been  made  to  improve 
financial access and introduce more convenient services, more work needs to be done.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  state  of  affairs  hinders  people’s  ability  to  establish  financial 
transactions. Effectively, lack of financial access stifles entrepreneurship and holds back the 
country’s  economic  growth.  For  instance,  as  at  June  2010,  there  were  only  258  bank 
branches and agencies in the whole country. In most cases, these branches or outlets are 
located in urban centres, with rural areas having few if any branches. Conversely as at June 
2010 the three mobile phone operating networks in Zambia had a total of about 4.6 million 
subscribers.  
Distinguished  participants,  this  situation  grants  us  an  opportunity  to  develop  innovative 
approaches of extending financial services. It will no doubt involve remodelling of traditional 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 1
products,  service  delivery  channels  and  regulatory  frameworks.  It  is  important  that  all 
possible alternatives are critically examined for viability, safety and efficiency. Some of the 
alternatives that need urgent examination include bank partnerships with non-bank agents to 
provide wider distribution outlets for payments and other financial services, and leveraging 
new technologies such as a common national switch to extend financial services.  
Mr  Chairman,  the  Mobile  Money  Transfer  has  the  potential  to  act  as  the  fulcrum  of 
branchless  banking,  which  allows  provision  of  transactional  banking  services  without  the 
need of a “brick-and-mortar” branch. Individuals are allowed to remotely access cash using 
different technologies, which may include automated teller machines, point of sale devices, 
mobile phones, payment cards or other smart technologies. To ensure that payment service 
providers  take  full  advantage  of  the  benefits  that  come  with  implementation  of  a  Mobile 
Money Transfer, they must develop and embrace new business models. These models may 
be  built  around  the  existing  large  financial  flows  such  as  remittances,  salary  and  wage 
benefits, pensions and other government social benefits transfer system.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  although  Mobile  Money  Transfer  provides  a  solid  platform  upon 
which to anchor expansion in the coverage of financial services, this goal will not be realised 
unless  all  stakeholders  participate  and  play  their  respective  roles  effectively.  Accordingly, 
banks and other payment system businesses need to utilise this infrastructure to the fullest 
extent possible by ensuring that various products are developed to extend financial services 
coverage.  At  the  same  time,  households  and  businesses  need  to  change  their  attitude 
towards non-cash payment methods. It therefore goes without saying that financial education 
will be critical in shifting public attitudes and ensuring that the non-cash payment methods 
are widely utilised by the target market. In this regard, I am pleased to inform you that the 
FSDP has prioritised financial education so as to increase the level of financial literacy and 
awareness of alternative payment methods. I would like to urge all financial service providers 
to  not  only  take  advantage  of  this  initiative  but  also  to  design  their  own  programmes  to 
sensitise their customers of the innovative products they offer or plan to offer which promote 
financial inclusion.  
Furthermore,  as  Bank  of  Zambia  we  welcome  the  innovations  by  the  banking  sector  and 
other  financial  service  providers  aimed  at  enhancing  financial  inclusion.  However,  it  is  our 
responsibility to ensure that these services are provided in a safe and efficient manner. In 
this regard, the Bank of Zambia reviews these banking products before their introduction to 
ensure  that  they  comply  with  the  existing  prudential  and  statutory  financial  sector 
requirements. In particular, the Central Bank’s review process focuses on adherence to Risk 
Management Guidelines and the Anti-Money Laundering Regulations as well as Prudential 
Guidelines  that  detail  minimum,  “Know  Your  Customer”  requirements  that  financial 
institutions  should  adhere  to.  The  overarching  objective  of  all  this  is  to  ensure  that  our 
financial  system  is  safe  sound  and  stable.  In  a  nutshell,  there  is  an  existing  supervisory 
framework to ensure the safety of mobile banking solutions. This framework will continue to 
be reviewed in line with the changes in the mobile banking space. As you may be aware, 
some  of 
the 
telecommunication  sector.  As  such  it  is  our  intention  to  work  closely  with  the  Zambia 
Information and Communication Technology Authority in promoting safe and sound mobile 
banking services.  
Mr Chairman, it is also worth noting that since the last Mobile Banking Conference in 2009, 
a  number  of  positive  developments  have  occurred  in  the  telecommunication  sector.  For 
instance the partial privatization of the Zambia Telecommunications Company (ZAMTEL) will 
result in intensified competition in the sector. This will no doubt lead to better quality service 
for the consumer. Further, following the liberalization of the International Gateway, we have 
already seen mobile service companies reducing their rates significantly. This, coupled with 
the now affordable cell phone handsets, will enhance access to mobile phone services and 
an opportunity for many of our people to be financially served.  
innovations  may  require  collaboration  with 
the  regulators 
these 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2010
Finally,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  given  the  innovations  around  mobile  banking  and  its 
attendant  challenges,  it  is  our  expectation  that  this  workshop  will  encourage  dialogue 
between different market players in Zambia and within the region. This Conference provides 
an opportunity for such dialogue and I am glad that it takes cognizance of a dynamic market 
environment, paying special attention to innovation that may have significant macroeconomic 
benefits to all involved. We are therefore keen to draw on the policy debate arising from this 
Conference to move financial services in Zambia to new frontiers. As Bank of Zambia, we will 
play a catalytic role and facilitate private sector led developmental initiatives.  
I thank you. 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 3
