Patrick Honohan: Financial regulation – risk and reward  
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the International 
Financial Services Summit 2010, Dublin, 10 November 2010. 
 The topic of this morning’s session fits nicely with what I want to say about the way forward 
for the Irish banks.  
To  the  extent  that  the  global  banking  and  wider  financial  market  collapse  of  late  2008 
reflected both a sharp upward revision in market estimates of risk, combined with a sharp 
downward movement in risk appetite, it is not surprising that the global regulatory response 
has been in the direction of seeking to shift risk to where such reassessments and changing 
appetites  can  do  less  damage.  That  entails  de-risking  the  banking  sector  (as  well  as 
widening the scope of prudential regulation at least to some extent).  
I like to list the main sources of social risk from banking as credit, liquidity and complexity 
risk, as well as the constant tension of misalignment of private incentives with social welfare. 
The policy responses that have been adopted and proposed, both in international fora and in 
national regulatory policies here in Ireland and in most other jurisdictions have sought to deal 
with these four risk sources. For each there is a classical regulatory tool – some dating back 
to  the  Great  Depression  or  before  –  and  these  tools  have  been  intensified  or  ramped  up 
where they were still in operation, dusted down and modernized where they had fallen into 
disuse  during  the  long  period  of  deregulation  which  accompanied  the  macroeconomic  lull 
from the late 1980s known as the Great Moderation.  
Thus, to meet heightened credit risk, there have for years been capital requirements; to meet 
liquidity risk there were liquidity ratio requirements; to meet complexity risk there have been 
restrictions on scope of activity; and to meet incentive risk there is prudential supervision.  
The Basel 3 and Financial Stability Board discussions have focused on the first two of these. 
The greater reliance on going concern capital instruments, the higher overall risk-ratios, the 
counter-cyclical  mechanisms  and  the  more  restrictive  definitions  of  capital  all  move  in  the 
direction of better absorption of credit risk and other risks relating to asset values.  
The  two  liquidity  ratios,  one  to  lengthen  the  time  over  which  short-term  outflows  can  be 
reliably met and the other to reduce the scale of maturity transformation on a medium-term 
basis, clearly roll-back the egregious liquidity risks that were being taken four and five years 
ago.  
Complexity risk has also been addressed in discussions that range from the “Volcker Rule”, 
seeking to prohibit own-account or proprietary trading by regulated banks, to the suggestions 
from  the  Bank  of  England  that  narrow-banking  should  form  the  heart  of  the  protected  and 
regulated banking sector. (Complexity has not really been a major issue for the Irish banks 
and  we  have  not  had  to  address  many  issues  of  this  type  outside  of  the  export-oriented 
IFSC). 
Finally,  intensified,  intrusive  supervision  is  on  the  daily  agenda  of  every  regulator  I  have 
spoken to. 
Ireland – the problem  
All of this discussion is of much more than theoretical interest in Ireland, where it can be said 
that the banks as a group went into the downturn more exposed than most other systems, 
and have correspondingly had to cope with worse loan-losses than most.  
BIS Review 148/2010 
 1
The regulatory response over the past few quarters in Ireland has been fully in line with the 
need to de-risk the banks and make them less vulnerable to confidence shocks or adverse 
sentiment.  The  scale  on  which  capital  has  been  replenished  is  very  large,  though  the 
favorable impact on investor confidence has not yet been as strong as might be hoped for. 
Much of the reason for the slow return in confidence lies in the parallel weakness of the fiscal 
situation  – a  weakness  which  also  has  its  roots  in  the  credit-driven  property  bubble  which 
lulled the managers of the public finances into a false sense of security ending up with a tax 
and spending structure highly vulnerable to the downturn.  
With the government finances so stretched, the additional burden of recapitalizing the banks 
has reduced fiscal headroom and contributed to the concern of the financial markets. Still, I 
would like to remind you that this recapitalization burden is often over-stated as a contributor 
to the required fiscal adjustment. Indeed, the interest cost of servicing the notes injected to 
recapitalize  the  banks  only  accounts  for  about  one-tenth  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  now  in 
prospect over the next four years.1  
The plan  
Since it became evident last year that heavy loan-losses were inevitable at the banks, and 
that  the  Government  was  going  to  meet  the  losses  arising  from  the  bursting  of  the 
construction  and  property  bubble,  the  plan  has  been  to  divide  and  conquer  the  risks  by 
putting  the  banks  –  as  institutions  –  firmly  back  on  their  feet  without  being  dependent  on 
either future assistance or threats from government; thereby freeing the government finances 
from the apparent threat of bank-imposed costs.  
Achieving this separation requires actions to reduce and shift risk, so that, for example, the 
banks  are  seen  to  be  well-capitalized  and  sufficiently  de-risked  in  terms  of  their  loan 
portfolios.  It  also  requires  market  participants  to  be  convinced  that  this  action  has  been 
effective and sufficient. So far, not least because of the rest of the fiscal burden remaining 
such a challenging problem, investors are not yet fully convinced.  
Important  steps  in  the  process  are  still  under  way  but  nearing  completion,  namely  (i)  the 
purchases by NAMA of the big property-backed loans and (ii) the achievement – despite the 
very  sizable  loan  losses  crystallized  by  these  purchases  –  of  much  higher  capital  ratios. 
These capital ratios are calibrated to ensure that core tier 1 capital remains above 8 per cent 
through to 2012 (7 per cent equity) for the main Irish-controlled banks, taking into account 
the inevitability that the non-NAMA book will incur additional losses not yet brought to book 
during that time. (The new capital injected would keep the banks above 4 per cent core tier 1 
even  in  a  severe  stress  scenario  contemplated  by  the  Central  Bank  and  involving  much 
higher  loan  losses  across  the  loan  book  than  are  currently  expected  by  the  banks.)  The 
higher capital ratios have been achieved partly through the sale of sizable non-core assets at 
prices  above  book  as  well  as  by  the  acquisition  of  equity  stakes  by  the  National  Pension 
Reserve Fund and (in the case of Bank of Ireland) by the private sector.  
Scale of losses dealt with by the capital injections  
I’m not sure that it is widely recognized just how big the actual and prospective loan-losses 
taken  account  of  in  the  recapitalization  of  retail  banks  in  Ireland  has  been.  In  fact,  if  we 
include the losses of the 6 main foreign owned banks active in the domestic market, of which 
the largest have been Ulster (an RBS subsidiary) and BOSI (a subsidiary of Lloyds) as well 
as all six of the banks that were guaranteed at the end of September 2008, and if we include 
all loan losses that have been provided for in the accounts of the banks since 2007, as well 
                                                 
1   And this is the steady state cost, which would be true even if there were no interest free period. 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2010
as  the  Central  Bank’s  base  case  of  the  prospective  losses  through  to  2012  (against  the 
expectation of which the current capital requirements have been set), the total loan losses 
come to no less than €85 billion, or about 55 per cent of this year’s GDP. In addition to the 
State’s  share  in  injecting  funds  to  meet  these  estimated  losses  (which  has  already  been 
announced  and  widely  discussed),  the  remainder  has  in  effect,  been  absorbed  by  the 
shareholders. I mention this not so much to emphasize the scale of the problem as to dispel 
any  impression  that  the  policy  and  shareholder  response  in  restoring  capital  levels  might 
have grossly low-balled loss estimates.  
Yet  investor  confidence  has  been  slow  to  recover  fully.  In  part,  this  doubtless  reflects  the 
conventional  observation  that  credit  and  confidence  are  lost  quickly  and  recovered  much 
more  slowly.  It  will  not  have  helped  that  the  laborious  process  mandated  for  NAMA  loan 
valuations have taken such a long time and that the first NAMA haircuts, high though they 
were, unexpectedly proved to be less harsh on average than the rest, leading to a sequence 
of bad news events. Undoubtedly, the severity of these haircuts has led some observers to 
read across to the non-NAMA book (and indeed the Central Bank has applied such a read-
across  on  a  bank-by-bank  basis  in  respect  of  the  property  loans  in  the  €5–€20  million 
category that are no longer NAMA-bound, and banks are being required to hold that much 
more capital).  
A read across also from concerns in the US that American banks could experience further 
loan-losses  given  the  slow  recovery  of  the  property  market  there  may  also  have  caused 
observers to question the adequacy of loan-loss provisions in the Irish residential mortgage 
books especially given the downward revisions in some of the medium term macro forecasts 
for employment and GDP growth in Ireland (even though the stress case expected loss ratio 
to  2012  of  5  per  cent  used  by  the  Central  Bank  for  the  Irish  residential  loan  books  to 
determine  required  capital  levels  is  well  outside  historic  experience  in  Ireland).  Despite 
recent trends in arrears and reschedulings, there is as yet no hard indication that the stress 
levels  would  be  exceeded.  Undoubtedly  there  are  many  stressed  households  with 
burdensome mortgage debts, not least in the buy-to-let category; the policy challenges that 
this presents in terms of achieving workable and fair solutions are more complex than the 
mere issue of the likely loan-losses that might be involved, for which (as I have mentioned) 
an  allowance  well  in  excess  of  the  banks’  own  accounting  provisions  has  already  been 
made.  
Winning investor confidence  
In anticipation of next year’s update of the PCAR exercise, the Central Bank is embarking on 
a  more  granular  analysis  of  the  this  part  of  the  portfolio  in  particular  to  track  its  evolving 
performance and determine whether the expected loss amounts remain sufficient.  
This is a long-term book and its lifetime performance will not be precisely known for many 
years, nevertheless, it is important to have early awareness as possible of any deterioration 
resulting 
take  any  necessary 
consequential regulatory steps.  
the  evolving  macroeconomic  conditions,  and 
from 
Accelerating Basel 3 agenda  
As the Basel 3 programme is implemented for Ireland, both in terms of capital and liquidity, 
and supported by the intensified supervision process which we have been putting in place, 
the  underpinnings  of 
investor  confidence  will  be  strengthened.  Bank  boards  and 
management will be already thinking along these lines. The faster this can be achieved, the 
better, and – though that is more easily said than done – it is clearly desirable to aim for a 
earlier restoration of confidence.  
BIS Review 148/2010 
 3
Capital: Already the 7 per cent equity requirement imposed by the Central Bank resonates 
with the same percentage built into Basel 3, though the Basel definition of capital is rather 
more stringent. Presumably over-capitalizing the banks would also help build confidence, but 
this is not something which the State can be lightly asked to do, given the pressures on its 
finances. Indeed, the market’s perception of the stressed condition of the Sovereign is surely 
weighing also on the banks in terms of interest costs and ready access to funding; just as the 
banking problems have weighed on the Sovereign.  
Liquidity: In order to meet the Basel liquidity ratios, the banks will, over time, have to either 
find new sources of long-term funding, or – more likely – dispose of some of their assets. 
Packaging  sizable  blocks  of,  say,  residential  mortgages  and  selling  them  to  international 
investment  funds  (while  continuing  to  administer  the  loans  at  the  retail  level)  is  one 
conceivable way of achieving the Basel long-term stable funding ratio in a way that allows 
the  banks  to  de-risk  further  by  funding  a  much  higher  proportion  of  their  remaining  asset 
portfolio with their own retail and corporate customer deposits, and not be so dependent as 
they  are  at  present  on short-term  wholesale  funding  including  central  bank  funding.  To  be 
sure, any such operation would certainly have to be designed in such a way that the new 
structures did not bring additional moral hazard with them. Achieving such sales at realistic 
prices  in  the  current  market  climate  –  with  market  participants  distrustful  of  all  forms  of 
Residential Mortgage Backed Security would likely require some form of credit enhancement. 
As such, involvement of external equity in such a transaction would likely be necessary.  
Indeed, from a national point of view, the entry of foreign purchasers for some or all of the 
banks would help transfer both credit and liquidity risk to those in a better position to bear 
them.  This  is  not  as  far-fetched  a  scenario  as  it  might  appear  to  some;  astute  bankers 
recognize that there is profitable banking business to be done in Ireland in the years to come, 
though they will differ on the optimal timing and pricing of entry.  
We’ll be contributing to an intensified effort to identify viable measures along these lines to 
select and implement the most cost-effective of them, as it is clear that all will benefit from 
greater market confidence in the financial situation of the banks as in the sovereign.  
Towards a virtuous circle  
This  is  a  virtuous  circle  we  are  seeking  to  enter  and  exploit.  Even  if  moving  towards  a 
stronger banking system in terms of capital and liquidity has entailed costly outlays for the 
State, it is a prerequisite for ensuring the credit of the State.  
Likewise, healthier public finances are indispensible for keeping interest costs and ensuring 
that the banks have ready access to market funding. In the end, I believe it is the prospects 
for effective fiscal adjustment against the background of the global macroeconomic recovery 
that will most directly determine the degree to which investors will be fully convinced that the 
banks  have  been  de-risked  and  strengthened  in  the  manner  envisaged  by  the  Basel  3 
process, and thus able to contribute more effectively themselves to the consolidation of that 
recovery.  Besides,  even  if  there  is  a  negative  initial  demand  effect,  healthy  government 
finances are – like healthy banks – needed for job creation and economic recovery.  
4 
 BIS Review 148/2010
