Barbro Wickman-Parak: Reflections on recent monetary policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (SEB), Stockholm, 14 October 2010. 
 The  last  fixed-interest  rate  loan  granted  by  the  Riksbank  to  the  banks  when  the  financial 
crisis  was  in  full  storm  fell  due  on  6  October.  The  banks  have  not  needed  to  use  the 
Riksbank’s loan facilities to any great extent since the beginning of this year, and when we 
held the final auction of variable-rate loans just over a week ago, no bids were received. This 
means that the banks are now managing their short-term funding entirely in the private loan 
market. It also means that the banks have once again taken responsibility for the overnight 
market. There are some smaller outstanding loans that will be repaid during the winter. But 
on the whole, the Riksbank has now left behind what is called “extraordinary measures” and 
returned  to  “business  as  usual”  in  our  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  we  cannot  rule  out  the 
possibility  that  the  repercussions  of  the  financial  crisis  may  affect  us  in  some  way  in  the 
future. But it certainly seems as though we in Sweden can now turn the page and put the 
most acute chapter of the crisis behind us.  
Sweden has come through the crisis relatively unscathed  
So, where do we stand now? Looking back, it appears increasingly clear that the Swedish 
economy has come through the crisis relatively well. Although the fall in GDP was greater in 
Sweden than in many other countries, the recovery has gone more quickly and we are now 
on  much  more  stable  ground  than  most  others.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this.  But  I 
believe that one important explanation is the insights we gained from the deep recession at 
the beginning of the 1990s. We then realised the importance of building stable frameworks 
for both monetary policy and fiscal policy to create proper conditions for long-term stability. 
When  economic  agents  make  decisions  they  have  been  able  to  rely  on  inflation  being 
reasonably  stable  and  on  public  finances  not  being  weakened  to  an  extent  that  requires 
severe tightening. The latter in particular is now a problem in many countries.  
When things get difficult, as in the recent crisis, the fundamental faith in the economic policy 
framework  has  meant  that  we  could  stimulate  the  economy  strongly  without  anyone 
questioning  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  or  the  sustainability  of  Sweden’s  public 
finances. Our bank system has also managed better than those in many other countries. To 
some  extent  this  is  probably  due  to  lessons  learned  from  our  own  earlier  bank  crisis.  For 
example, the banks have avoided so-called structural products with elements of high-risk US 
mortgages, which were one of the causes of the crisis in the first place.  
The Riksbank’s assessment and decision in September  
At our most recent monetary policy meeting in September we could note that the situation in 
the world economy had continued to improve, although the strength of the recovery was still 
uncertain. The public finance problems in certain eurozone countries were still causing some 
concern  and  there  was  uncertainty  over  the  consequences  that  stricter  fiscal  policy  might 
have for growth in these countries. But compared with the situation in the spring and early 
summer, the unease on the financial markets had toned down, partly as a result of the stress 
testing of the banks by the EU during the summer. Growth prospects in the eurozone were in 
principle thought to be the same as at our meeting in June. However, we could note that the 
risk of slower growth in the United States had increased and we revised down the forecasts 
for  US  growth  this  year  and  next  year.  Nevertheless,  we  envisaged,  as  before,  that  the 
international economic climate would gradually improve.  
BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
We could also note at the meeting that the recovery in the Swedish economy had been more 
rapid than expected, and our assessment was that the Swedish economy would grow more 
quickly than, for instance, those in the eurozone and the United States. One reason for this, 
as I have just discussed, is that unlike many other countries, we do not need to tighten policy 
to correct large budget deficits and debt ratios. World trade had picked up again and this had 
shown an impact on our exports. Moreover, the strong optimism among both households and 
companies in Sweden indicated that domestic demand could be maintained over the coming 
years. Our forecast in September was for GDP growth in Sweden of around 4 per cent this 
year, to be followed by a slower growth rate. This would put GDP in mid-2011 back at the 
same level as at the end of 2007, that is, before it began to fall.  
In  September  we  could  once  again  note  that  the  recovery  in  the  labour  market  had  been 
surprisingly strong. The new forecast made entailed employment being at the same level as 
prior to the crisis as early as next year. Our assessment of unemployment was that it would 
fall relatively quickly over the coming quarters and then decrease at a slower rate.  
Given this, we adjusted up our assessment of resource utilisation in the economy in relation 
to  that  made  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  June.  We  foresaw  resource  utilisation 
continuing to rise over the coming years. The overall picture was that resource utilisation was 
still  at  a  low  level,  but  that  it  would  be  at  an  approximately  normal  level  at  the  end  of  the 
forecast period.  
We estimated in our forecast in September that underlying inflation measured as the CPIF 
would  continue  to  fall  in  2010,  and  then  increase  as  rising  resource  utilisation  made  an 
impact  on  inflation.  It  would  reach  2  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of  2013.  CPI  inflation  was 
forecast to increase quickly next year, mainly as a result of mortgage rates rising due to the 
repo rate increases. CPI inflation was expected to temporarily overshoot the inflation target in 
2012 and 2013, but to be around the 2 per cent target in the longer run when the repo rate 
has reached more normal levels.  
The majority of the Executive Board members made the assessment that it was appropriate 
to continue the process of normalizing monetary policy that had begun in the summer. The 
repo rate was raised to 0.75 per cent and the repo rate path was held unchanged from June.  
This is roughly the picture we painted in the Monetary Policy Update published in September. 
The statistics received recently have continued to point towards a rapid recovery in Sweden. 
The  GDP  outcome  for  the  second  quarter  has  been  revised  up  relatively  substantially 
compared  with  the  preliminary  outcome,  and  expressed  as  an  annual  percentage  change 
amounts to 4.6 per cent. The National Institute of Economic Research’s economic tendency 
survey  points  to  the  mood  among  households  and  companies  being  much  stronger  than 
normal, and the indicator is now only marginally lower than the peak listing from 2000. New 
international  statistics  present  a  mixed  picture. How  the  new  information  will  be  taken  into 
account is something we will return to at our next monetary policy meeting.  
My deliberations at the September meeting  
Let  me  now  discuss  in  slightly  more  detail  the  deliberations  that  lie  behind  my  personal 
stance with regard to monetary policy this summer and autumn. Part of the recent debate 
has  concerned  whether  the  repo  rate  path  advocated  by  the  Riksbank  is  too  high.  This 
debate has arisen partly because the market appears to believe that the Riksbank will not 
raise  the  repo  rate  as  quickly  and  as  much  as  we  ourselves  are  forecasting,  and  partly 
because the Executive Board members have recently had differing opinions on what level is 
appropriate for the repo rate now and in the coming period.  
I  have  noted  that  the  fact  that  I  have  advocated  increasing  the  repo  rate  has  meant  that 
anyone who now reads some reports in the media about the activities of the Executive Board 
may gain the impression that I am an inveterate “hawk”, perhaps even some form of iron lady 
who is ready to quash any tendency towards an economic upturn. To modulate this picture, I 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
would  like  to  point  out  that  immediately  prior  to  the  crisis,  in  summer  and  autumn  2008,  I 
actually  entered  reservations  against  what  I  considered  to  be  the  excessively  tight  policy 
advocated by the majority of my colleagues. So the idea of putting Executive Board members 
into compartments, or perhaps rather cages, and expecting us to stay there, is not usually 
wise, at least not with regard to me. I recall, by the way, that I said roughly the same thing 
two years ago, when I was regarded as being a dove.  
It may also be worth noting that I am not the only one who from time to time prefers a higher 
or  lower  repo  rate  path  than  the  published  one.  The  same  applies  to  market  expectations 
regarding the future repo rate. For instance, during most of 2009 market expectations were 
largely  above  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  forecast.  Since  the  beginning  of  2010  they  have 
instead been below our path.  
In  this  context  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  there  is  no  “true”  measure  of  market 
expectations  of  monetary  policy.  The  expectations  I  am  talking  about  here  are  the 
expectations  of  the  repo  rate  that  can  be  read  from  forward  rates.  To  produce  these 
expectations,  one  must  among  other  things  adjust  for  various  types  of  premium  in  the 
forward  rates,  and  there  is  no  obvious  way  of  doing  this.  So  one  should  remember  that 
discrepancies  between  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  forecast  and  market  expectations  as 
understood from forward rates could be due at least in part to measuring problems.  
Regardless  of  these  difficulties,  it  is  also  worth  emphasising  that  there  are  no  particularly 
strong reasons to believe that the market is always “right”, in the sense that the repo rate the 
market  is  expecting  is  the  one  that  will  be  realised.  If  one  looks  at  historical  patterns,  the 
actual repo rate has often shown a rather different development to what market agents were 
expecting, according to forward rates (see Figure 1). The fact that market expectations are 
now  below  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  for  the  repo  rate  is  of  course  worth  analysis  and 
consideration.  But  one  must  remember  that  this  is  just  a  snapshot  image,  and  that  it  is 
primarily  in  the  longer  run  –  where  uncertainty  is  greatest –  that  the  differences  are  really 
tangible. It is also worth mentioning that many forecasters are much closer to the Riksbank’s 
view of the repo rate.  
Figure 1 
The repo rate and forward rates  
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and the Riksbank. 
 It  should  be  added  that  the  Riksbank  is  of  course  also  “wrong”  sometimes,  and  that  the 
actual policy turns out to be quite different from what we had forecast. The repo rate path is, 
after all, a forecast and not a promise, as we often point out. It is not reasonable to believe 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
that we and market agents will always reach the same conclusions, and the differences do 
not  necessarily  express  any  form  of  confidence  crisis.  Inflation  expectations  are  well-
anchored  around  our  target,  which  in  my  opinion  is  the  most  important  indication  that  the 
market has confidence in monetary policy.  
So  why  did  I  support  the  repo  rate  path  we  published  in  the  September  Monetary  Policy 
Update? If inflation undershoots the target at the same time as resource utilization is lower 
than  normal,  should  it  not  be  possible  to  keep  the  repo  rate  lower  and  thus  have  inflation 
closer to the target during the forecast period and more quickly return resource utilisation to a 
normal level? As I have described, I think there are fairly convincing reasons for the repo rate 
path described in the September Monetary Policy Update. The Swedish economy is strong 
and  to  attain  the  target  a  couple  of  years  ahead  we  need  only  to  start  easing  up  on  the 
accelerator. Because this is exactly what we are doing. The repo rate is being raised from an 
extremely low level and the repo rate path implies that we will have a negative real interest 
rate for a good time to come. This cannot be regarded as a contractionary policy – we are 
not slamming on the brakes.  
I have expressed some concern at recent meetings over what a lower repo rate path might 
entail. One view that I have put forward on several occasions is that monetary policy must 
manage risk. In this context it may be important not to treat the forecast period as separate 
and  independent,  but  to  try  to  take  into  account  how  decisions  made  now  might  affect 
developments beyond the forecast horizon. Of course it becomes more difficult to comment 
with any great certainty on what will happen the further ahead one tries to look. But one can 
often nevertheless have some suspicion of what might happen, even if it may be difficult to 
quantify. My impression is that there are risks on the domestic side that are not conspicuous 
or visible yet but may build up.  
Although resource utilisation is low and unemployment is high at present, the labour market 
is constantly improving and we have had to revise our forecast for employment up several 
times. The shortage figures are also rising. The levels may not be alarming, but an upward 
trend is clear. And there is a clear risk that labour shortages may arise further ahead. During 
the  previous  economic  upturn  a  labour  shortage  arose  fairly  early,  despite  relatively  high 
unemployment, and it is easy to forget that the major theme before the crisis was the severe 
problems  in  obtaining  skilled  labour.  Although  structural  reforms  have  been  made,  it  is 
difficult to say how great an effect they will have, and at what range. If monetary policy is too 
expansionary  for  too  long,  and  the  wheels  are  allowed  to  spin  too  fast,  this  could  create 
problems with bottlenecks, if not during the forecast period then immediately thereafter.  
Household  borrowing  is  also  a  risk  factor,  and  perhaps  an  even  larger  one,  in  the  slightly 
longer run. A lower repo rate means there is a risk that the debt ratio will continue to build up 
from already high levels. This cannot go on for ever, and if there is a sudden turnaround it 
could have substantial negative effects on the real economy. This applies in particular if a 
situation  were  to  arise  where  house  prices  fall  and  households’  net  wealth  shrinks.  Once 
households have reached a situation where they consider that they need to consolidate their 
balance sheets by reducing their debts, it is difficult to break off this process with the aid of 
monetary policy. This can be clearly seen in the United States right now, for instance.  
I do not believe in a wait-and-see strategy that could mean that the repo rate needs to be 
raised even faster further ahead. A slightly higher interest rate now could make households 
begin  to  adjust  and  contribute  to  a  more  subdued  development.  To  me,  this  is  a  well-
balanced monetary policy.  
This is fairly self-evident, but let me nevertheless emphasise: My aim is of course as always 
to try to attain the Riksbank’s objectives – that inflation and inflation expectations should be 
firmly  anchored  around  the  target  and  that  developments  in  the  real  economy  should  be 
stable. But to achieve this, I would like to take into account risks that I perceive exist and to 
put them in a slightly longer perspective than the usual forecast horizon – as I currently see 
good reason to do this.  
4 
 BIS Review 134/2010
Reflections on judgements and monetary policy decision-making  
This leads me on to a slightly broader question regarding judgements and how they fit into 
the monetary policy deliberations. Let me therefore conclude with a few words on my views 
on this and how I approach a repo rate decision.  
It is sometimes claimed in the economic debate that we at the Riksbank rely too heavily on 
economic models and that this can lead us to make the wrong decision regarding the repo 
rate. My opinion is that economic models are important and absolutely necessary aids. They 
organise ideas and ensure that we have consistency in our analysis of inflation, production, 
interest rates, employment and so on. The models also help to identify weaknesses in one’s 
reasoning.  The  Riksbank  has  sophisticated  models  that  provide  good  forecasts  in 
themselves, but that also allow us to “experiment” with different repo rate paths and examine 
potential scenarios. Without these possibilities the preparation process would not function as 
smoothly as it does now.  
But of course this does not mean that we merely push a button, lean back and buy exactly 
what the models come up with. This is not how monetary policy decisions are made. And I 
don’t believe anyone would claim this was a good way of making these decisions. However 
good and sophisticated the models are, they are nevertheless simplifications of reality. They 
must therefore always be supplemented with judgements. The forecasts in our main scenario 
are always based on a combination of model analyses and judgements that take into account 
factors which the models either cannot capture at all or are unable to capture in a way we 
consider reasonable. These “hands-on” adjustments become particularly important when the 
historical correlations on which the models are based appear to have changed.  
The judgements may be of different types and opinion may be divided as to which factors are 
most  important  to  take  into  consideration  at  any  given  meeting.  My  view  is  that  the 
judgements should as far as possible be reflected in the forecast figures for inflation, the real 
economy and the repo rate that a monetary policy decision is based on. But I believe that we 
must learn to live with the fact that it is impossible to quantify all of the factors we monetary 
policy  decision-makers  consider  should  be  taken  into  account  in  the  monetary  policy 
decisions.  
As I see it, there is no point in trying to produce, at any cost, a quantified adjustment of the 
forecast  just  to  make  a  judgement  one  considers  relevant  fit  into  the  monetary  policy 
discussion. There must be scope to put forward arguments that appear reasonable, without 
necessarily  having  to  translate  them  into  exact  probabilities  or  quantifying  their  effects  on 
inflation and the real economy. As I see it, there is nothing wrong with having “misgivings” 
about a particular development and allowing this to affect the decision, without being able to 
exactly quantify the risks it entails. The kind of arguments that I have put forward at our most 
recent monetary policy meetings regarding the risks of an even more expansionary policy are 
of  this  type.  I  am  quite  convinced  that  most  central  banks’  monetary  policy  discussions 
largely consist of this type of more qualitative argument.  
By this I do not mean, of course, that “anything goes” in monetary policy. There must be a 
sufficient amount of structure and consistency checks in the monetary policy decision-making 
process. And I think there is today. The entire analysis process that precedes the monetary 
policy  decision  is  carried  out  in  an  orderly  and  structured  manner.  And  I  also  believe  that 
there  is  confidence  in  our  way  of  working.  Although  there  are  slight  differences  between 
different  forecasters’  views  of  future  economic  developments,  as  far as  I know  there  is no 
one who thinks our assessments are completely off the wall.  
The fact that we Executive Board members have had some differences of opinion recently 
has come under focus recently. But one thing that should be remembered is that dissension 
is hardly strange on a monetary policy committee like our Executive Board. It is intentionally 
assembled  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  consist  of  people  with  different  backgrounds, 
experiences and knowledge. We are not supposed to be cast in the same mould. The whole 
point of allowing monetary policy decisions to be made by a group of people and not one 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 5
individual can be summarised in the expression “many heads are better than one”. And this 
would not apply if we all thought in the same  way, if we  were all clones. Then one single 
decision-maker would be sufficient.  
It may be worth pointing out that the fact that we have been publishing our own forecast for 
the repo rate for a few years now has probably meant that it becomes more noticeable when 
we disagree. The repo rate path makes it necessary to have a deeper and more long-term 
discussion than if we were just making a decision on whether or not the current repo rate 
should be changed. My impression is that the repo rate path has increased the quality of the 
monetary  policy  discussion  both  internally  and  outside  of  the  Riksbank.  But  it  also  means 
that, to put it simply, we have more to disagree on.  
The  fact  that  members  of  a  monetary  policy  committee  have  different  backgrounds, 
experiences and knowledge means that they approach an interest rate decision from slightly 
different directions, and they analyse and argue in slightly different ways. These differences 
do make demands that one must find some form of “common denominator” in the monetary 
policy discussion so that members do not talk at cross-purposes. In other words, a monetary 
policy committee must not only agree that it can disagree, it must also agree on which way it 
is okay to disagree.  
But these differences also contribute to the diversity that leads to better decisions. There is 
no one who holds the key to the truth with a capital T, and when views and assessments are 
contrasted with one another there is less risk of bad decisions. There is some support for this 
in academic research, where one result is that a group of persons who process information and 
reach  their  decisions  in  different  ways  can  outperform  even  very  skilful  individuals  when  it 
comes to solving complex tasks.1 One could say that diversification trumps specialisation – it is 
the differences that create added value.  
                                                
 
1   See,  for  instance,  Alan  S.  Blinder,  “Monetary  Policy  by  Committee.  Why  and  How?”  European  Journal  of 
Political Economy 23 (2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2010
