 Paul Fisher: An unconventional journey – the Bank of England’s asset 
purchase programme 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  and  Member  of  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee of the Bank of England, based on a presentation to contacts of the Bank’s 
Agency for the South-West, Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, 11 October 2010. 
 In March 2009 the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (the MPC) embarked on 
an “unconventional” journey. Having cut Bank Rate to an historic all-time low of just half of 
one per cent, the MPC initiated a programme of asset purchases financed by the issuance of 
central bank reserves – commonly known as “Quantitative Easing” or QE.1 To date the Bank, 
in  line  with  MPC  decisions,  has  bought  £200bn  of  assets,  equivalent  to  some  14%  of  UK 
annual nominal GDP. 
In this talk, I would like to briefly recap on why we started the QE programme and how well it 
has worked. I then want to explain some of the details behind why it was done the way it was 
and some technical details on what we plan going forward. Let me be clear upfront that the 
purpose  of  this  is  to  share  some  of  our  broader  thinking  about  the  asset  purchase 
programme, not to drop any hints about the future direction of monetary policy. 
Why we did it and how well it worked 
The  global  financial  shock  associated  with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  AIG  in 
September 2008 triggered a sharp and synchronised downturn in the world economy. In the 
UK, GDP fell nearly 4% in 2009 H1 alone, and by the end of that year was some 10% below 
where it would have been, if growth had continued at its previous trend. This was one of the 
largest falls in output ever recorded in the UK. 
At its March 2009 meeting the MPC cut Bank Rate to just 0.5%, the lowest level in the Bank 
of  England’s  300  year  history.  While  that  represented  a  significant  loosening  of  monetary 
policy, the MPC agreed that more stimulus was required to mitigate the risk of depression 
and deflation. 
Given that Bank Rate was close to its lower-bound, the MPC decided to increase the supply 
of  money  in  the  economy  directly,  by  embarking  on  a  programme  of  asset  purchases, 
financed  by  the  creation  of  central  bank  reserves  (QE).  This  largely  took  the  form  of 
purchases  of  UK  government  bonds  –  “gilts”  –  but  included  small  purchases  of  corporate 
bonds and commercial paper undertaken in order to improve conditions in those markets. I 
won’t  say  any  more  about  the  latter  today.2  While  the  form  of  this  policy  was 
“unconventional”,  the  ultimate  goal  was  identical  to  any  normal  reduction  in  Bank  Rate  
– namely to stimulate nominal demand in the economy, and hence help the MPC achieve its 
remit  of  targeting  2%  CPI  inflation.  The  UK  was  not  alone  in  adopting  unconventional 
measures. Both the Federal Reserve Board in the United States, and the European Central 
Bank  undertook  a  range  of  alternative  measures  too.  Although  the  precise  nature  of  the 
                                                 
1  
In the central bank community, asset purchases are known as an example of an “unconventional” monetary 
policy. 
2   See  Fisher  (2010)  “The  corporate  sector  and  the  Bank  of  England’s  Asset  Purchases”  available  at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech423.pdf . 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 1
 programmes  differed  from  country  to  country,  all  three  central  banks  saw  their  balance 
sheets expand, funded by an increase in commercial bank reserves.3  
At the time we started the asset purchases, it was far from clear how successful the policy 
would be. None of those involved had ever personally experienced a financial crisis as big as 
this, nor a recession so deep. And no one had direct experience of conducting a major asset 
purchase  programme  in  the  UK.  In  the  press  and  amongst  other  economic  commentators 
there was a lot of scepticism expressed about the likely efficacy of the policy. 
It is of course, extremely difficult to know what would have happened in the absence of the 
asset purchase programme; not least because Bank Rate was at a record low and because 
other, major central banks also loosened policy sharply. There might never be agreement on 
a precise quantification of its effects but my own view is that the asset purchase programme 
was extremely successful in meeting its immediate objectives.4 In particular I would pick out 
the following points which were all consistent with the various channels through which QE 
can work: 
 
Broad  money  growth,  although  anaemic,  did  not  fall  by  as  much  as  should  have 
been expected given previous contractions in nominal GDP growth (Chart 1); 
Analysis  by  some  of  my  colleagues5  suggests  that  asset  purchases  may  have 
lowered long term interest rates on gilts at 5–25 years maturity by around 100 Basis 
points relative to what would otherwise have been the case; 
Demand for risky assets increased: spreads on corporate bonds fell markedly, and 
issuance  of  both  corporate  bonds  and  equities  picked  up  to  record  rates  in  2009 
(Chart 2 and Table 1); 
Inter-bank  borrowing  rates  fell  back  sharply,  most  likely  because  significant 
increases in commercial bank reserves reduced the need for banks to borrow from 
each other in the inter-bank market. For example, three-month sterling LIBOR6 rates 
fell from over 2% in late 2008 to under 1% during the course of 2009 (Chart 3). That 
was potentially a very important supportive step as a good proportion of businesses 
in the UK had floating rate loans which were linked to the LIBOR rate.  
   GDP stabilised by the end of 2009, and grew at close to trend rates in the first half of 2010. 
The prospect of deflation, which had been a hot topic during early 2009, now seems much 
less likely. Indeed, press commentary through 2010 has instead mostly been focused on the 
elevated rate of CPI inflation (which reflects the temporary impact of a series of short-term 
price level shocks).7 
Why we did it the way we did 
Although QE was an “unconventional” monetary policy operation, it was not totally without 
international  precedent,  having  been  tried  most  notably  in  recent  times  by  Japan.  The 
Japanese programme is generally considered to have been a mixed success at best. Such a 
judgement  is  perhaps  unfair  but  there  were  a  number  of  lessons  to  be  learned  from  their 
                                                 
3   For further discussion, see Cross, Fisher and Weeken, (2010), “The Bank’s Balance Sheet During the Crisis”, 
Quarterly Bulletin, 50, 1, pages 34–42. 
4   See Benford, Berry, Nikolov and Young (2009). “Quantitative Easing”, Quarterly Bulletin, 49, 2, pages 90–100. 
5   Joyce,  Lasaosa,  Stevens  and  Tong  (2010).  “The  Financial  Market  Impact  of  Quantitative  Easing”,  Bank  of 
England Working paper number 393. 
6   London Inter-Bank Offer Rate – see http://www.bbalibor.com. 
7   For  more  discussion  see  Fisher  (2010),  “Why  is  CPI  inflation  so  high”.  Speech  to  the  Merseyside  Young 
Professionals, June. Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech438.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 experience and those acted as a backdrop to our own operations. In the remainder of this 
speech, I want to discuss how we structured the UK’s asset purchases. 
One aspect of our policy design for QE was to act decisively to prevent the risk of deflation. 
In  Japan,  although  their  programme  of  outright  purchases  of  government  bonds  (JGBs) 
amounted to some 13% of nominal GDP, those purchases were conducted over a period of 
5 years (2001–2006). And they only began after deflation had already been observed. It is 
possible that this dampened the impact8 and other policies were being pursued at the same 
time.  In  the  UK  we  conducted  the  purchases  in  similarly  large  size  (14%  of  GDP)  but 
relatively  quickly  (over  10  months),  to  ward  off  the  threat  of  deflation  rather  than  as  a 
response to it. 
A second aspect of the design was to target our purchases at assets held by the non-bank 
sector.  The  proposition  is  that,  by  buying  gilts  from  pension  and  insurance  funds  (for 
example), those asset managers would have more cash in their portfolios than they desired, 
and would be incentivised to use that cash to invest in other, more risky instruments such as 
corporate bonds and equities. That “portfolio rebalancing” channel is thought to have been 
largely  absent  in  Japan,  where  most  of  the  Japanese  government  bonds  purchased  were 
held by the banks, which in turn used the proceeds to directly de-leverage without obviously 
increasing  the  demand  for  other  assets  (although  the  purchases  may  have  had  an  impact 
through other channels). 
Buying  assets  held  by  non-banks  was  relatively  straightforward  in  the  UK.  At  the  time, 
insurance companies and pension funds were the largest category of holders of gilts in issue. 
Although  commercial  banks  act  as  market-makers  for  gilts,  and  were  thus  the  immediate 
conduit  for  the  gilt  purchases,  they  typically  held  only  a  very  small  amount  on  their  own 
balance sheets as part of their liquidity portfolios. Market-makers had to source gilts in the 
market before selling on to the Bank. Moreover, because the banks’ own liquidity holdings 
were generally very short-dated, we were able to target our purchases by restricting them to 
be longer-dated: initially we only bought gilts over 5 years maturity.9 
We  were  also  conscious  of  the  pressures  on  pension  funds  and  their  need  to  match 
longdated  liabilities  by  buying  index-linked  and  longer-dated  nominal  gilts.  Real  yields  and 
ultra-long nominal yields were already being driven to low levels by that demand. Hence, we 
restricted  the  Bank’s  purchases  to  nominal  gilts  only  and  initially  capped  the  maturity  at 
25 years. The latter restriction was later relaxed as the purchase programme expanded. 
In order to deliver the high-level policy objective of the MPC to inject extra money into the 
economy, there were a number of operational objectives for Bank staff. First we wanted to 
make  sure  that  we  were  actually  able  to  buy  the  targeted  quantity.  There  were  market 
participants who told us that this would not be possible as the asset managers would not be 
able to move away from their benchmark holdings (the initial target being £75bn). Once the 
programme was announced, the Bank took steps to proactively discuss our operations with 
market  participants,  to  allay  that  initial  scepticism.  In  the  weeks  that  followed  the 
announcement  in  March  2009,  we  called  in  our  contacts  at  the  Gilt-edged  Market  Makers 
and many of the larger asset managers, to explain the operations and to encourage them to 
participate.  The  market  collectively  responded  very  positively,  and  the  total  value  of  offers 
exceeded the targeted purchases in every auction undertaken. 
A second operational objective was to ensure that purchases were at a fair market price. We 
had to consider this against the backdrop of a heavy UK Government issuance programme: 
we  were  alert  to  the  risk  that  market  participants  might  buy  direct  from  the  Government’s 
                                                 
8   For example, on timing see Shirakawa (2010) Uniqueness or Similarity? Japan’s Post-Bubble Experience in 
Monetary Policy Studies. Available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko1009c.htm. 
9   Subsequently relaxed to 3 years, once the Bank started to hold more than 70% of some of the gilts in issue. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 3
 Debt Management Office (DMO) and attempt to sell the same gilts to the Bank at a higher 
price. The first mitigant was that the MPC set a targeted rate of purchases initially three times 
faster  than  the  DMO  were  issuing.  In  addition  we  incorporated  several  features  into  the 
design of the operations: 
(i) 
We designed the operations as competitive (reverse) auctions that would deliver a 
clearing price close to the market. 
We offered to buy from a bundle of 8–10 individual gilts in each operation not just a 
single stock at a time. The selection of which gilts we then bought depended on the 
prices offered. In that way, the purchases were less vulnerable to a “squeeze” in any 
one particular gilt. 
We eliminated from the operations any gilts which we knew the DMO were about to 
issue or had issued in the previous week. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Maintaining the programme 
I don’t want to imply that implementing and maintaining our programme of asset purchases 
was  straightforward  operationally.  Far  from  it.  For  example,  the  gilt  market  became 
somewhat  more  dislocated  as  the  Bank  accumulated  a  large  percentage  of  some  of  the 
particular gilts in issue. To alleviate stress in the market, in August 2009 we started to lend 
out, via the DMO, a proportion of the gilts the Bank had bought, in exchange for others that 
had  readier  availability.10  The  market  responded  rapidly  to  that  development  and,  towards 
the end of the £200bn programme, some contacts were telling us that gilt market liquidity had 
actually improved relative to March 2009. 
One small point to clear up in relation to maintaining the programme is whether we should be 
re-investing the interest receipts earned on the gilts. In the United States, the Federal Open 
Market  Committee  recently  decided  that,  to  maintain  the  effectiveness  of  their  asset 
purchases they needed to re-invest the proceeds from maturing assets and interest receipts. 
That  reflects  the  fact  that  in  large  part  they  purchased  (pass-through)  mortgage-backed 
securities  where,  in  addition  to  receiving  coupon  payments,  a  proportion  of  the  underlying 
assets are constantly maturing or being pre-paid. Absent a re-investment programme, and 
making  assumptions  about  pre-payment  rates,  the  stock  of  assets  in  the  US  programme 
might have declined at a rate of around 17 ½ % pa. 
In the UK purchase programme we bought nearly all gilts11, with at least 3 years to maturity. 
The  earliest  gilt  redemption  won’t  occur  until  the  second  half  of  2012.  We  are  receiving 
dividend  payments  and  those  have  currently  cumulated  to  a  value  around  5%  of  the  total 
stock of purchases.12 These receipts were anticipated, are currently held in the Fund and will 
contribute to repaying the original funding of the programme. A good argument can be made 
that,  to  keep  the  monetary  stimulus  of  asset  purchases  constant,  this  cash  should  be  re-
invested  in  more  gilts.  We  have  taken  the  view  that  such  fine-tuning  is  an  unnecessary 
complication  at  this  stage.  If  the  MPC  want  to  undertake  further  purchases,  it  would  be 
straightforward to simply buy more gilts financed by issuing commercial bank reserves. 
                                                 
10   It was important that the gilts were not lent against cash, as that would have undone some of the intended 
impact of the initial asset purchases. 
11   The  3  month  commercial  paper  purchased  had  nearly  all  matured  by  the  end  of  the  programme,  and  had 
already been largely replaced by additional gilt purchases. 
12   The cumulated dividends are not the profits on the portfolio, even before funding costs. Depending on such 
factors as the yield curves at the date of issue and purchase, and the maturity of the gilts; the dividends and 
market prices of the gilts are connected. See the DMO website for more information on changes in gilt prices: 
http://www.dmo.gov.uk/documentview.aspx?docname=publications/investorsguides/pig201204.pdf&page=in 
vestor_guide/Guide. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 Eventual exit strategy 
At this time, it is not clear whether the next step with the asset purchase programme is most 
likely to be to sell the assets back or to buy more. The Bank is prepared for either but it might 
be particularly helpful to set out in advance a few thoughts on the eventual exit strategy. 
After purchasing £200bn of assets in just under a year, the MPC paused its programme of 
asset  purchases  in  February  2010.  The  bulk  of  the  medium-term  impact  from  the  asset 
purchases  should  come  from  the  stock  of  purchases  not  the  flow.  There  will  be 
approximately  £200bn  extra  money  stimulus  in  the  system,  until  the  MPC  decides  to 
withdraw it (or to increase it). 
When the time does come to unwind the purchases, the MPC will face a number of difficult 
decisions. First, it will have to decide at what point monetary policy should be tightened. That 
decision will, as with any decision to expand the purchases further, be judged on a month-by-
month basis, taking into consideration developments in the economy, and the outlook for our 
mandated target, CPI inflation. As the Governor said in June13, when the MPC does want to 
tighten policy, it is most likely to raise interest rates first. Gilt sales would be started later and 
conducted in an orderly programme over a period of time. That would leave Bank Rate as 
the active or “marginal” instrument of monetary policy. 
Second, the MPC will have to decide how fast to sell the gilts. Again, that would depend on 
the outlook for inflation at the time, so we cannot commit now to any particular scale or pace. 
But it is not in the interests of the UK economy to generate unnecessary volatility in the gilt 
market. We will therefore be working closely with the DMO14 so as to plan any extra sales 
operations  that  would  be  needed,  with  the  intention  of  creating  minimum  disruption  to  the 
market consistent with meeting the MPC’s desired exit path. 
A portfolio of £200bn of gilt purchases has a market value which constantly varies as market 
prices change. Currently there is a large “mark-to-market” positive accounting position, given 
the increase in gilt prices since the programme ended. But for the public sector as a whole 
such  fluctuations  wash  out:  the  (gilt)  assets  held  by  the  Bank  are  the  liabilities  of  the 
Government and fluctuations in the value of one exactly offset the other in terms of the public 
sector’s notional balance sheet. Nevertheless, once all the assets have been sold, the Asset 
Purchase Facility may end up with a cash deficit and I want to make a few points about that 
possible outcome. 
In conducting the buying operations, it was in part an intended policy objective that we would 
push up gilt prices and hence lower long-term interest rates. When we sell the gilts back to 
the  market,  we  will  be  tightening  policy  by  pushing  up  on  interest  rates  and  hence 
necessarily  making  gilts  cheaper.  The  net  effect  will  depend  on  the  path  of  interest  rates 
relative to those expected at the time of each buying operation but, given the policy objective, 
the result of the sales programme could easily be a cash deficit. But I want to emphasise that 
such an outcome would not mean that the public finances have been made worse off. The 
ongoing  dynamic  effects  of  the  programme  will  have  been  to  make  it  cheaper  for  the 
Government  to  issue  its  debt  in  the  interim.  More  importantly,  over  the  lifetime  of  the 
programme,  it  would  have  delivered  great  benefits  to  the  public  purse  by  stimulating  the 
economy and avoiding deflation: the increase in taxes received as a result of higher nominal 
GDP  should  be  an  order  of  magnitude  larger  than  any  financial  deficit  on  the  purchases 
themselves. To genuinely assess the impact on the taxpayer, one would have to take these 
and other factors into account. The counterfactual story will never be known precisely but the 
                                                 
13   Speech available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech437.pdf. 
14   The  DMO’s  objectives  include:  “to  conduct  its  market  operations,  liaising  as  necessary  with  regulatory  and 
other bodies, with a view to maintaining orderly and efficient markets and promoting a liquid market for gilts.” 
See page 31, “Debt and Reserves Management Report, 2010–11”, HMSO, March 2010. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 5
 scale of the boost to the economy means that the all-round financial benefits for the public 
finances should far outweigh any cash deficit that might be left at the end of the programme. 
The  gilt  sales  programme  will  not  be  the  only  technical  issue  surrounding  an  exit  from 
unconventional  policies.  The  Bank  is  also  likely  to  re-introduce  its  reserves  averaging 
framework for commercial bank reserves, for example. That will give the bank the ability to 
evaluate  and  then  drain  out  any  excess  liquidity  in  the  system.  Unlike  the  US,  we  do  not 
need to develop new techniques to drain cash. The Bank can do that, for example, by issuing 
one-week Bank of England bills as it did in 2008/09.  
Conclusions 
In this speech, I have commented  on why the asset purchases were undertaken and how 
well  they  worked.  I  have  described  some  of  the  complicating  factors  in  designing, 
implementing and maintaining the operations. Finally I have covered some of the issues we 
will face when we eventually come to sell the assets – noting that it is possible that we yet 
might purchase more. The unconventional journey is not over yet!  
6 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 BIS Review 135/2010 
  7
