 Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The state of Spain’s economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Parliamentary  Budget  Committee  in  relation  to  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2011,  Madrid, 
5 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  appear  before  this  Committee  in  connection  with  Parliament’s  discussion  of  the  State 
Budget for 2011. In my view, this Budget will be crucial for Spain’s economic future and it will 
be subject, more than on any other occasion, to in-depth analysis and close scrutiny not only 
by Spanish society as a whole but also by the main supranational agencies, by our European 
partners and by the international financial markets on which Spanish households, firms and 
governments obtain the funds they need to finance much of their activity. 
As is known, Spanish budgetary policy responded most forcefully to the global economic and 
financial crisis, in step with the support programmes for the financial sector, coordinated at 
European  level,  and  with  the  firm,  resolute  action  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  which 
drastically  cut  its  interest  rates  and  implemented  a  wide  range  of  conventional  and 
non-conventional  measures  to  prevent  liquidity  tensions  from  ultimately  shutting  down  the 
European financial system.  
The  fiscal  policy  response  undoubtedly  contributed  to  softening  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
crisis  on  the  Spanish  economy.  Set  against  this,  however,  the  surplus  on  public  finances 
rapidly turned into a burgeoning deficit and public debt moved into an accelerating dynamic 
which, had it not departed from relatively comfortable levels, would have also placed the debt 
ratio at excessively high levels.  
Such was the position of our public finances when the Greek fiscal crisis, which first became 
discernible in late 2009 and ultimately burst onto the scene in spring this year, shifted the 
focus of international economic and financial attention onto the situation of public finances in 
a broad set of countries.  
Investors  rapidly  took  stock  of  the  potential  problems  of  unsustainability  implicit  in  Greek 
deficit  and  debt  dynamics  and  they  began  to  closely  examine  the  possible  existence  of 
similar  risks  in  other  Member  States.  The  upshot  was  that the  instability  on  sovereign  risk 
markets spread to the European economies evidencing the greatest vulnerabilities, whether 
because of the speed of the recent deterioration in their public finances or because of the 
scale of the macroeconomic imbalances that had built up before the crisis. 
I honestly believe that the financial tensions in recent months in Europe, in general, and in 
our country, in particular, were largely due to an overreaction by the financial markets, which 
were unable to appreciate the strengths of our economy and of our public finances.  
But I likewise believe it would be a serious error to attribute the bouts of exceptional tension 
witnessed during these months solely to the gregarious behaviour of the financial markets. 
Indeed, 
institutional 
arrangements  and  by  the  prevailing  doubts  over  the  willingness  and  ability  of  national 
governments to tackle the structural and budget deficit problems of their economies.  
Evidently,  the  Greek  crisis  has  highlighted  the  incapacity  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
and,  more  generally,  of  the  European  economic  governance  framework  to  prevent  the 
excessive build-up of imbalances and to pursue timely corrective action. As you know, the 
European  authorities  have  reacted  to  this  need  by  initiating  a  deep-seated  review  of 
European governance mechanisms, some of the results of which are already coming to light. 
It can thus be said that as a result of this crisis, economic policies and, in particular, the fiscal 
policy  of  the  EU  Member  States,  will  be  subject  henceforth  to  closer  and  more  detailed 
the  weaknesses  of  European 
tensions  were  amplified  by 
the 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 control  by  the  European  institutions  so  as  to  anticipate  and  forestall  inconsistencies  and 
imbalances.  Any  build-up  of  the  latter  will  ultimately  entail  major  costs  not  only  for  the 
countries concerned, but also for the European single currency project.  
Further,  attributing  events  exclusively  to  market  excesses  would  mean  ignoring  the 
importance  of  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  activity  and  employment,  of  the  deterioration  in 
public  finances  and  of  financial  systems  on  the  possibilities  of  recovery,  and  the  major 
economic  policy  challenges  posed  thereby,  most  particularly  in  the  fiscal  realm  and  in  the 
field of structural financial reform.  
From this perspective, it is easy to understand how the Spanish economy was subjected to 
singular pressure. The deterioration in its public finances was evident not only because the 
budget deficit had climbed to an excessive level, but also because of the rapid increase in 
the public debt ratio, despite the fact that general government debt remained substantially 
lower than that in other European economies facing similar pressures.  
But there were also other factors amplifying the vulnerability of the Spanish economy in such 
exceptional  circumstances.  Firstly,  the  dysfunctionalities  of  our  labour  market,  which 
heightened  the  impact  of  the  shock  on  employment,  giving  rise  to  a  surge  in  the 
unemployment rate that called into question the possibility of reversing the course of public 
spending in the absence of reforms that would enable a significant and lasting reduction in 
unemployment.  As  I  stated  before  this  Committee  a  year  ago,  the  viability  of  any  credible 
budgetary  consolidation  strategy  would  require  the  adoption  of  labour  market  reforms 
providing for far-reaching change in employment behavioural patterns. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Spanish  economy’s  high  reliance  on  external  funding  made  it 
particularly sensitive to any loss of confidence blocking access to such financial resources, in 
particular  access  for  credit  institutions,  which  channel  the  bulk  of  these  resources  to 
households and firms.  
All  these  factors  contributed  to  the  contagiousness  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  to  the 
serious  external  funding  difficulties  experienced  from  May  to  July.  Had  this  situation 
continued,  it  would  have  jeopardised  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  the  vital 
funding of the economy.  
In order to break the dangerous dynamic unleashed and to restore confidence in the Spanish 
economy,  which  had  become  the  main  objective,  it  was  vital  to  set  new  bearings  for 
economic policy through the adoption of substantial fiscal, labour and financial measures. 
I previously had the opportunity to inform you of the numerous financial measures pursued to 
oversee the necessary restructuring of the Spanish banking system, an essential condition 
for the sound and sustainable recovery of the economy. Allow me today to refer to the role 
played  by  the  stress  tests  of  the  banking  system  in  late  July.  These  are  a  marker  of  the 
progress  made  in  restructuring  and,  above  all,  they  have  provided  for  an  exercise  in 
transparency, allowing us to break the vicious circle of lack of confidence that was building 
up on the basis of relatively unfounded assumptions and expectations.  
As you will recall, when I presented the Banco de España Annual Report for 2009 in June, I 
set out our intention to publish the stress tests of all Spanish banks and savings banks. This 
initiative was assumed at European level by the European Council under Spain’s presidency, 
and  the  results  of  the  exercise,  harmonised  by  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors, were published on 23 July. In Spain’s case, the stress tests covered virtually its 
entire  financial  system  and  were  conducted  in  great  detail  and  with  a  high  degree  of 
transparency,  providing  extensive  information  on  exposure  to  the  principal  asset  classes. 
The  results  showed  the  system  as  a  whole  to  be  sound,  whereby  their  publication 
undoubtedly contributed to dispelling the doubts over our financial system.  
The final piece in the far-reaching reform of the financial system has been the savings bank 
legislation  approved  by  this  House.  In  opening  up  savings  banks  to  private  capital,  the 
legislation  will  not  only  allow  savings  banks  to  move  ahead  without  having  to  request 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 assistance  from  taxpayers,  but  it  will  also  enable  them  to  meet  the  demanding  capital 
requirements set under the new international financial regulation known as Basel III.  
In the budgetary domain, the government reinforced and accelerated the implementation of 
the  fiscal  consolidation  programme  which,  in  compliance  with  Community  commitments,  it 
had  announced  in  January.  To  this  end,  it  approved  a  new  raft  of  measures  on  20  May 
entailing spending cuts of somewhat over €15 billion to be made between 2010 and 2011 
(around 1.5% of GDP), on top of the previously approved spending cuts and tax rises. The 
new deficit target path was thus set at 9.3% of GDP in 2010, 6% in 2011, 4.4% in 2012 and 
3% of GDP in 2013, which would steady the public debt ratio at a level slightly below 75% of 
GDP as from 2012.  
Adopting a package of adjustment measures to come into force immediately, for a significant 
amount,  in  sufficient  and  specific  detail,  and  affecting  items  as  sensitive  as  public-sector 
wages, welfare benefits and public investment, gave credibility to the commitment to reduce 
the budget deficit. Also contributing to this was the bringing forward of the fiscal adjustment 
targets, whereby almost two-thirds of the adjustment envisaged by 2013 would be completed 
in 2011.  
Finally,  having  noted  the  failed  negotiations  between  the  trade  unions  and  employers’ 
associations,  the  government  approved  a  labour  market  reform  on  16  June  aimed  at 
encouraging  permanent  hires  and  increasing  internal  flexibility  at  companies,  two  of  our 
labour market’s most serious shortcomings.  
The adoption of these measures, along with the publication of the banking stress test results, 
saw  the  tensions  on  financial  markets  abate.  There  was  a  significant  reduction  in  funding 
costs for the Treasury and a reopening of funding channels for credit institutions.  
Yet this does not mean that the period of instability is over, as the tensions still bearing down 
on other European countries show. Accordingly, following this initial response it is essential 
to maintain the credibility earned without losing sight of the fact that for a long time we will be 
subjected to very close scrutiny, and that episodes likely to spread suspicion and a lack of 
confidence may arise.  
This is the particular juncture we have reached and at which we are discussing this Budget. 
And these are the reasons why the recovery of the Spanish economy and employment will 
depend,  more  so  than  on  past  occasions,  on  a  suitable  budgetary  policy  mix  and  on  its 
interplay  with  other  economic  policy  tools,  most  particularly  with  supply-side  and  structural 
reform policies geared to improving employment-generation capacity, smoothing the switch 
to other productive activities and increasing the economy’s effectiveness and productivity.  
The  cyclical  juncture  at  which  the  Budget  for  2011  has  been  drawn  up  is  marked  by  the 
muted start of a phase of recovery which became discernible in the opening months of 2010 
and  which  will  foreseeably  continue  over  the  coming  year.  Nonetheless,  exceptional 
domestic and external factors of uncertainty are clouding the outlook.  
So far, the recovery is proving very subdued and dependent on temporary stimuli linked to 
the  government  plans  supporting  spending  and  to  the  possible  bringing  forward  of 
consumption and residential investment decisions by households and firms in the face of the 
rise in indirect taxes on 1 July. Moreover, funding conditions remain restrictive and both the 
public and private sectors have a pressing need to restore health to their financial position.  
In these circumstances it will be difficult for domestic demand to post the same figures it did 
in the first half of the year. The rate of increase of household consumption, one of the most 
dynamic items in that period, will foreseeably slacken, in line with the diminished growth rate 
of  earnings  and  the  lower  contribution  of  other  sources  of  income,  in  particular  those 
stemming from general government measures. The response of consumption is expected to 
be  consistent  with  a  declining  trajectory  of  the  saving  ratio,  in  step  with  the  changes 
observed since the start of the year, after almost two years of successive increases in this 
ratio.  It  is  very  likely  the  other  domestic  demand  components  will  continue  to  reflect  the 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 the  positive  effects  of 
weakness of their main determinants. In the case of investment in equipment, this will be due 
to  the  excess  capacity  built  up  during  the  crisis  and  the  still-prevailing  uncertainty  over 
financing  conditions;  and  in  that  of  residential  investment,  to  the  need  to  complete  the 
adjustment set in train back in 2006.  
In contrast, net external demand is expected to be more buoyant once the high growth rates 
of  imports  of  the  previous  quarters  ease,  rates  which  were  linked  largely  to  the  bringing 
forward of certain spending decisions, and exports continue on their rising course. For this to 
occur,  perseverance  will  be  needed  in  anchoring  the  cost-  and  price-competitiveness 
improvements  obtained  in  recent  quarters  and  entrenching  them  with  genuine  productivity 
gains.  
In sum, the outlook for the Spanish economy is one of gradual recovery which will take some 
time  to  attain  the  dynamism  proper  to  an  expansionary  phase  with  sufficient  capacity  to 
generate  employment.  The  restoration  of  confidence, 
fiscal 
consolidation on agents’ expectations and the lessening of uncertainty in the labour market, 
further to the reform under way, will need to be the essential ingredients of any sustained 
recovery.  The  private  sector  must  take  up  the  baton  from  the  public  sector  in  support  of 
activity, and net external demand should play a predominant role.  
The  success  of  the  fiscal  consolidation  programme  is  a  centrepiece  of  this  strategy. 
Correcting  the  budget  deficit  has  become  an  unavoidable  priority  for  Spanish  economic 
policy.  
The budget outturn data currently available suggest the targets set for 2010 will be met, at 
least as far as central government conduct is concerned. On this basis, it is therefore vital to 
design a budget for 2011 that is fully consistent with meeting the budget deficit target of 6% 
of GDP for that year.  
To ensure no deviations arise, monitoring and surveillance procedures for the budget outturn 
must be reinforced and, should deviations be detected, corrective measures must be rapidly 
applied.  The  availability  of  contingency  plans  designed  sufficiently  in  advance  would 
contribute greatly to the success of these measures.  
The draft State Budget details appropriately the revenue- and spending-side measures that 
should allow compliance with the State target set. In terms of its composition, moreover, the 
draft  Budget  has  most  of  the  adjustment  falling  on  public  spending.  And  this,  on  past 
experience, raises the effectiveness of the consolidation strategy.  
Yet  the  presence  of  risks  threatening  the  attainment  of  these  targets  should  not  be 
understated.  The  Budget  is  based  on  a  macroeconomic  scenario  of  significant  recovery 
which, if not confirmed, might lead to a revenue path worse than projected. As I said, if this 
were the case, offsetting measures should immediately be applied.  
But  perhaps  the  biggest  risk  to  general  government  meeting  its  targets  stems  from  the 
potential deviations that may arise at the regional and local government level. As known and 
reiterated on many occasions, the high decentralisation of public spending in Spain means 
that  the  collaboration  of  the  regional  and  local  governments  is  essential  for  achieving 
budgetary stability. At the end of this year it will be possible to make a full assessment of the 
consolidation  drive  made  by  the  regional  budgets,  but  my  impression  is  that,  as  matters 
stand  today,  the  measures  announced  by  most  regional  and  local  governments  far  from 
respond to the reduction in public spending needed.  
I  therefore  believe  formulas  must  be  sought  to  strengthen  regional  and  local  government 
commitment to budgetary stability and to encourage compliance. In this respect, we should 
not rule out a revision and strengthening of the national budgetary framework, in particular in 
the  case  of  regional  and  local  governments,  a  framework  that  resides  essentially  on  the 
Budgetary  Stability  Law.  Such  action  would  be  in  line  with  the  recommendations  recently 
made by the European Council for all European countries in the framework of the review of 
governance in Europe.  
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 A key element of the Budgetary Stability Law for achieving fiscal discipline is transparency. 
The  dissemination  of  data  relating  to  the  non-financial  activity  of  the  State  is  abundant, 
detailed and released with a relatively small lag. This is regrettably not the case for regional 
or  local  governments,  which  curtails  the  ability  to  control  their  activity  in  time  and 
accountability. In my view, these shortcomings must urgently be redressed. At a time such as 
the present, a lack of transparency may lead to a lack of market confidence that takes the 
form of a further premium on the cost of financing.  
Given the circumstances, all available instruments should be used to ensure compliance with 
the targets set. In particular, authorisation for regional and local governments to issue new 
debt  should  be  conditional  upon  compliance  with  consolidation  plans.  A  spending  ceiling 
might  even  be  considered  for  these  governments,  an  instrument  which  has  proven 
enormously useful in strengthening budgetary discipline in the case of the State.  
Along  the  same  lines,  medium-term  planning  necessitating  analysis  of  the  structural 
dynamics of the various public revenue and spending items and enabling those areas where 
the  scope  for  rationalisation  and  adjustment  are  greater  to  be  detected  may  prove 
appropriate, especially when adjustment measures going beyond a temporary correction of 
imbalances are required.  
In  this  setting,  the  reform  of  the  pension  system  currently  under  discussion  is  especially 
important. Indeed, it goes beyond the major goal of ensuring the long-term sustainability of 
our pensions system in the face of the challenge of population ageing. This reform may also 
have  significant  and  beneficial  short-term  effects  on  the  credibility  of  the  authorities’ 
commitment  to  budgetary  discipline  and  the  ability  to  see  through  far-reaching  structural 
reforms and favourably influence the risk premia on public debt.  
The  promptness  and  ambitiousness  of  the  reform  are  essential.  A  suitable  combination  of 
changes in certain parameters of the system, raising the legal retirement age, the minimum 
number of years necessary to qualify for a pension and the period over which the pension is 
calculated would help ease substantially the pressure on future public spending on pensions 
and resolve one of the Spanish economy’s major outstanding problems.  
Fiscal consolidation is an essential condition for ensuring future economic growth. The effort 
will no doubt be rewarded because it will place the Spanish economy in a sounder position to 
anchor  the  recovery.  Its  long-term  effects  will  in  any  event  prove  more  forceful  if 
accompanied by structural reforms that raise the economy’s growth potential. The elements 
interconnecting  both  policies  are  on  an  enormous  scale:  potential  growth  influences  the 
sustainability of public finances, while an appropriate distribution of adjustment efforts across 
the  various  spending  and  revenue  items  is  conducive  to  activity  and  has  expansionary 
effects  on  output  and  employment.  Harnessing  these  links  is  particularly  important  for 
absorbing high unemployment and correcting the imbalances built up during the boom years.  
Economic  policy  action  geared  to  strengthening  growth  foundations  is  of  vital  importance, 
particularly the reforms promoting job creation. Such action makes possible the achievement 
of  gains  in  competitiveness  and  enhances  the  economy’s  long-term  efficiency  and 
productivity.  And  it  is  also  essential  for  boosting  the  external  sector  and  providing  for  the 
rapid reallocation of resources towards potentially dynamic goods and services branches.  
As  I  have  reiterated  on  many  occasions,  labour  market  reform  is  pivotal  here.  Indeed, 
significant  progress  has  been  made  with  the  recent  approval  of  the  legislation  on  urgent 
labour market reform measures. Among the changes made that may contribute to improving 
the functioning of our labour market, I feel it is important to stress the greater possibilities 
available to firms to adjust working and wage conditions to the changes arising in demand or 
in supply-side innovations, thereby limiting the impact of these shocks on employment. It is 
now for employers and employees to take full advantage of the new opportunities provided 
by  labour  reform  so  that  the  necessary  gains  in  competitiveness  can  be  had  as  soon  as 
possible, swiftly ushering in a new phase of economic dynamism and job creation. Slowness 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 5
 in  harnessing  the  internal  flexibility  offered  by  the  reform  would  but  hamper  recovery  and 
delay the generation of new jobs.  
It  is  important  to  take  advantage  of  the  conditions  in  place  so  that  the  wage  moderation 
begun in the first half of the year may take root in the coming quarters, and so that ailing 
companies  may  maintain  employment  and  ensure  their  survival  by  drawing  on  the  new 
avenues of flexibility offered to them, through negotiations with their workers. The austerity 
measures  adopted  in  the  public  sector,  which  include  wage  cuts,  will  help  bring  about  the 
adjustments  the  private  sector  needs  to  entrench  its  competitiveness.  On  top  of  wage 
restraint in those companies that need it to restore competitiveness, there should be genuine 
productivity  gains  based  on  greater  efficiency,  since  so  far  their  expansionary  behaviour 
chiefly reflects the severity of the employment adjustment.  
A further key ingredient to ensure gains in structural competitiveness is the continuation of 
the current low-inflation scenario once the recovery firms. The return of the core inflation rate 
to its low level before the VAT rise, once the base effects are stripped out in the second half 
of next year, would be a good indicator that cost- and price-setting processes are moving in 
the right direction and are capable of surviving comfortably within an area of price stability. 
The  absence  of  indexation  clauses  in  wage  bargaining  for  2011,  as  stipulated  in  the 
agreement  in  force,  will  help  prevent  the  rise  in  VAT  from  exerting  second-round  and 
inflation-inertia effects. This experience is another example of the advantages to be had from 
abandoning indexation clauses, which are no more than a legacy of inflationary habits from a 
past  firmly  behind  us,  but  whose  continuing  use  has  been  a  source  of  problems,  as  the 
Banco de España has reiterated.  
Improving our economy’s productivity in the medium and long run will require seeing through 
other,  deeper  structural  reforms, 
the 
rationalisation  of  the  public  sector’s  role  in  economic  activity  and  improvements  to  the 
education system. These are reforms whose introduction needs time and whose effects will 
be deployed over a lengthy period; but the resolve to adopt them also has positive effects in 
the  short  run  by  improving  expectations  about  our  economy’s  economic  growth,  which  is 
particularly welcome in these testing times. 
Thank you. 
including  most  notably  sectoral 
liberalisation, 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2010
