 Jean-Claude Trichet: Cultural days of the ECB – Netherlands 2010 – 
interview in special edition of Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in special 
edition of Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ), published on 10 October 2010. 
 What do you spontaneously associate with Dutch culture? 
1.  
Was verbinden Sie spontan mit der niederländischen Kultur? 
For me, Dutch culture is impregnated with the openness and modernism that derive from the 
Netherlands’  history  and  that  characterise  Dutch  society  in  so  many  respects.  Pushing 
boundaries and  exploring  new  avenues  are  key  components  of  Dutch  society  and  culture. 
And these elements very often find their strongest expression in the field of the arts. Modern 
dance, architecture, design, literature and cinematographic production are just some of the 
many artistic disciplines in which Dutch creativity excels. I am particularly happy that all these 
disciplines – together also with high-profile musical and theatrical performances – are central 
to  this  year’s  programme  of  the  Cultural  Days  of  the  ECB,  which  has  been  developed  in 
close cooperation with De Nederlandsche Bank. And, of course, one cannot talk about Dutch 
culture without recalling the significance of the Dutch Golden Age in European history and 
arts. 
What role do the arts and culture play for your personal “well-being”? 
2.  
Welche Rolle spielen Kunst und Kultur für Ihr persönliches Wohlbefinden? 
Arts and culture are fundamental in understanding our roots and history, but they are even 
more important in helping us to deepen our knowledge and understanding of each other. In 
our increasingly complex and rapidly changing world, such understanding is essential if we 
are to address global challenges efficiently. And I find it fascinating to see how much new 
technologies have facilitated our access to the world’s immense cultural and artistic heritage. 
On a more personal note, I have always had a very strong interest in poetry and literature, 
and I am also very fond of music and stage performances, such as dance, opera and theatre. 
What are you especially looking forward to this year? 
3.  
Worauf freuen Sie sich in diesem Jahr besonders? 
Each edition of the Cultural Days of the ECB is unique and has its own spirit. It is the sheer 
variety  of  events  that  always  amazes  me.  And  it  is  a  repeated  pleasure  every  year  to 
discover new talents and welcome renowned artists to Frankfurt. I would like to pay tribute 
here  to  my  predecessor,  Willem  Duisenberg,  who  was  the  initiator  of  our  Cultural  Days 
programme.  
I very much look forward to all of the 22 events that reflect the many facets of Dutch culture. I 
am also particularly delighted that, for the first time in the history of the Cultural Days, the 
City of Frankfurt has made it possible for us to hold an event at the Frankfurter Paulskirche 
and  so,  on  30  October,  the  brass  and  string  ensemble  of  the  Royal  Concertgebouw 
Orchestra will perform at this prestigious and venerable venue. We are extremely grateful to 
the  City  of  Frankfurt  for  this  honour,  all  the  more  so  as  this  concert  will  also  be  a  charity 
event. 
BIS Review 133/2010 
 1
 In your opinion, what defines Europeans? 
4.  
Was macht Ihrer Meinung nach den Europäer aus? 
Europeans  share  a  common  history,  with  extraordinary  successes,  enormous  challenges 
over  time  and  dramas.  Europeans  have  decided  to  share  a  common  destiny  –  based  on 
profound friendship, peace and prosperity – which has guided European integration for the 
past 60 years. We at the ECB are proud to be responsible for delivering price stability to our 
330 million fellow citizens in the euro area and to contribute to the prosperity of the European 
Union as a whole. Faced with serious global challenges, we Europeans can only succeed 
and  progress  if  we  are  united,  in  line  with  the  European  ideal  and  its  leitmotif  of  “unity  in 
diversity”.  Raising  awareness  of  the  cultural  diversity  of  the  European  Union  and  fostering 
unity is what we aim to achieve through the Cultural Days of the ECB. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2010
