Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The development of Islamic finance 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Royal Award for Islamic Finance gala dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 25 October 2010. 
 It is my very great honour to welcome this distinguished audience to this special gala dinner 
organised  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Securities  Commission  to  commemorate  the 
presentation of the inaugural Royal Award for Islamic Finance. This gala dinner is also held 
in conjunction with the Global Islamic Finance Forum 2010 that is taking place this week, and 
which commenced this morning. 
Tonight, in commemorating this prestigious Royal Award for Islamic Finance, we are blessed 
and honoured to have Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuanku Haji Abdul Halim Mu’adzam 
Shah who will graciously confer the winner with the award. Bank Negara Malaysia and the 
Securities  Commission  are  proud  to  jointly  sponsor  this  award  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Malaysia  International  Islamic  Financial  Centre  initiative  (MIFC).  Allow  me  to  take  this 
opportunity, as Chairman of the MIFC Executive Council, to record our utmost gratitude to 
the Rulers’ Council of Malaysia for bestowing the Royal title to the award, giving it the highest 
distinction and recognition. 
Earlier this year, Malaysia launched a global search for the winner of this auspicious award 
which  seeks  to  honour  the  exceptional  individual  who  has  made  the  most  outstanding 
contribution to Islamic finance. Indeed, we have seen numerous individuals who have made 
significant efforts and contribution to make Islamic finance what it is today. In creating such 
an award which will be given once every two years, it is our fervent hope that the conferment 
of this award will be inspirational to such involvement and contribution to Islamic finance. 
Malaysia’s  experience  in  Islamic  finance  officially  began  with  the  establishment  of  the 
Pilgrimage Fund or the Tabung Haji in 1969 as an Islamic savings institution. Then, the first 
Islamic  bank  was  set  up  in  1983  and  in  the  following  year,  the  first  Takaful  operator  was 
established.  Today,  we  have  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that  operates  in 
parallel  with  the  conventional  financial  system.  Following  liberalisation  initiatives  in  this 
decade,  there  has  been  an  increased  foreign  presence  in  our  Islamic  financial  system.  In 
particular,  there  has  been  greater  foreign  participation  in  Malaysia’s  Islamic  financial 
markets. The diversity of market players has contributed to increased competitiveness of the 
Malaysian  Islamic  financial  services  industry.  To  ensure  the  sustainability  of  our  Islamic 
financial  system,  it  is  also  supported  by  a  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime,  legal 
and Shariah framework, and payment and settlement systems. 
In  this  decade,  greater  focus  was  particularly  given  to  the  institutional  arrangements  to 
develop the sukuk market. The sukuk market now accounts for more than fifty percent of our 
bond  market.  The  market  has  drawn  the  participation  from  a  wide  range  of  international 
corporations and multilateral agencies in raising funds and investing in the sukuk issuances 
out of Malaysia. More recently, there has also been continuous innovation and an increasing 
number of issuances in foreign currency. As Malaysia offers international participation in our 
Islamic financial system, we offer to be an international gateway, particularly in strengthening 
the link between the two important dynamic growth regions of Asia and the Middle East. 
Malaysia will also continue to collaborate with other regulatory authorities to ensure financial 
stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  This  will  be  through  our  active  involvement  in  the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  the  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum  (IFSF),  the 
initiatives  by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB),  and  finally  in  the  newly  formed 
International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation (IILM). 
In  the  area  of  capacity  building,  Malaysia  has  also  given  priority  to  two  areas:  one  is  in 
human  capital  development  and  the  second,  in  catalysing  mutual  recognition  of  Shariah 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 1
interpretations.  The  International  Centre  of  Education  in  Islamic  finance  (INCEIF)  was 
established in 2006 for advanced education for practitioners in Islamic finance, and in 2008, 
the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  (ISRA)  was  established  to  conduct  applied 
Shariah research on the contemporary Islamic finance issues and to provide a platform for 
active international engagement among Shariah scholars. 
Moving forward, Malaysia will continue its efforts in strengthening our international linkages 
in the global Islamic financial system through collaborative partnerships and cooperation with 
the objective of contributing towards greater international financial and economic integration. 
Let me conclude. On behalf of the MIFC Executive Committee, I would like to express my 
appreciation  to  the  members  of  the  panel  of  jury  for  the  Royal  Award  for  Islamic  Finance 
which is led by Yang Amat Berbahagia Tun Musa Hitam, former Deputy Prime  Minister of 
Malaysia  and  also  to  the  members  of  the  taskforce  that  was  chaired  by  Tan  Sri  Zarinah 
Anwar,  Chairman  of  the  Securities  Commission,  who  oversaw  the  establishment  of  this 
prestigious award. It is my sincere hope that this Royal Award will be an inspiration to the 
global development of Islamic finance. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2010
