Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the European Economic and 
Monetary Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Evangelische Akademie Tutzing, Tutzing, Bavaria, 13 November 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak here today.  
This is a crucial time for the European economy and for the global economy. Vital debates 
about the state of and interactions between the world’s major economies have been taking 
place  at  the  G20  meetings  of  Ministers  and  Governors  a  few  weeks  ago  and  at  the 
G20 summit in Seoul yesterday. Within Europe, there is a particularly vital debate about the 
framework of governance for Economic and Monetary Union.  
Both  debates  touch  on  the  importance  in  these  challenging  times  for  the  design  of 
appropriate policies. Throughout the global crisis, we have all striven to avoid a repeat of the 
economic policy disasters of the 1930s – and to foster a close cooperation between policy-
makers around the world. Working together towards a common goal must continue to guide 
our actions. Today, I would like to put some of the key issues into a broader context. 
First, I will focus on the experience of economic and monetary union in Europe. Second, I will 
briefly describe the origins and impact of the financial crisis and outline how the European 
Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  responded  to  the  crisis.  And  finally,  I  will  touch  on  the  current 
economic situation and conclude with the key challenges that lie ahead of us in achieving an 
effective economic governance policy in Europe. 
Price stability in the euro area  
Let me begin with price developments. The quality of a currency is reflected in its value. As 
you know, this is what in German is called Geldwertstabilität. There is one single benchmark 
to  measure  such  stability  within  an  economy  and  that  is  the  degree  of  price  stability  or, 
expressed the other way around, the rate of inflation.  
As  the  guardian  of  price  stability  for  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has  set  itself  a  very  clear 
numerical benchmark to measure the degree of price stability. It has defined price stability to 
be an annual rate of inflation of consumer prices in the euro area of below, but close to 2%, 
over the medium term – that is, over an average of several years.  
We now have almost 12 years of experience with the euro – enough time to judge whether 
the ECB has been successful in delivering its mandate. Over these 12 years, the average 
annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. We have achieved price stability in the 
euro area over what has already been quite a long horizon. It is the best result of any of the 
larger countries in the euro area for at least 50 years.  
The conditions for achieving price stability have not always been easy. In 1999, we began 
with  a  completely  new  institution  –  the  ECB  –,  a  new  currency  –  the  euro  –  and  a  new 
framework  for  monetary  policy-making.  Over  the  years  we  had  to  cope  with  highly  volatile 
developments in many components of the consumption basket – including oil prices of up to 
$145  per  barrel  –  considerable  variations  in  exchange  rates,  and  the  burst  of  the  internet 
bubble, to name but a few. Hence, the track record, with 12 years of price stability, is worth to 
take note of.  
For Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average in the euro area over 
the past 12 years: 1.5% per year on average from 1999 to September 2010. By comparison, 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 1
the average rate of inflation in Germany in the 1990s prior to the introduction of the euro was 
2.2%. In the 1980s, it was 2.8% and in the 1970s 4.9%.  
If  the  strength  of  a  currency  is  measured  by  the  degree  at  which  it  preserves  purchasing 
power,  the euro  is  stronger  than  the  most  stable  currency  that  preceded  its  inception.  Not 
stark wie die D-Mark but stärker als die D-Mark is the right characterisation of the euro in a 
historical context.  
The second element that is important for the solidity of a currency is its external value. The 
reason  is  simple:  a  significant  and  persistent  depreciation  over  time  will  ultimately  lead  to 
higher  import  prices  and  hence  inflation.  Therefore,  abstracting  from  the  large  swings  that 
foreign exchange markets are known for at times, over a longer period the exchange rate is 
an important ingredient in shaping domestic inflation outcomes.  
In 1999, the euro was introduced at an exchange rate of 1.18 vis-à-vis the US dollar. You 
know what is its value today. It needs no further commentary. 
But  the  euro  is  more  than  this.  It  is  the  uniting  monetary  element  of  no  fewer  than 
16 countries that together form a monetary and economic area of 330 million citizens. It has 
contributed to a further integration of Europe’s economies and I do not forget that as soon as 
1 January next year we will be 17 countries and more than 330 million fellow citizens.  
Challenges for Economic and Monetary Union 
But  as  its  name  indicates,  our  Economic  and  Monetary  union  rests  on  two  pillars:  an 
economic pillar and a monetary pillar. The fundamental concepts of the monetary pillar are 
the full independence of the ECB and its crystal clear mandate to pursue price stability in the 
euro area. 
The  fundamental  concepts  of  the  economic  pillar  can  be  summarised  as  follows:  first,  the 
need to determine macroeconomic policies in line with the rules governing the participation in 
a monetary union that is based on price stability; and second, the need to set fiscal policies 
in line with the requirements as laid out in the Stability and Growth pact.  
I  have  already  described  the  contribution  of  the  monetary  pillar.  Unfortunately,  the 
contribution of the economic pillar is at times much less flattering. Much of the problems we 
face  today  see  their  origins  in  insufficient  discipline  of  fiscal  policy  makers  and  an 
inappropriate setting of macroeconomic policies.  
For several years, fiscal policies in many countries have not been in line with the letter and 
the spirit of the Stability and Growth pact. The pact calls for balanced budgets over the cycle, 
maximum deficits of 3% and a debt level of below 60%. When a few years ago it became 
clear that fiscal policies would not be able to meet the rules of the Stability and Growth pact, 
it was not policies that were changed but the pact.  
In 2004 and 2005, several heads of states and governments were actively trying to dismantle 
the  Stability  and  Growth  pact.  One  of  the  countries  in  the  lead  of  these  endeavours  was 
Germany. It was supported by France as well as other countries. It was a very fierce battle at 
the time, and the ECB voiced publicly its grave concerns.  
The second area of policy slippage concerns macroeconomic policies. In a monetary union, 
national developments in prices and costs have to take account of the fact that the union is a 
union  of  monetary  stability.  Therefore,  national  price  and  costs  developments  significantly 
higher than the union average entail significant losses over time in competitiveness that are 
painful to reverse.  
By the same token, fiscal and structural policies – including appropriate supervisory policies 
(today we would say macroprudential policies) – need to keep domestic demand and credit 
growth  in  line  with  rates  of  sustainable  growth  and  price  stability.  Otherwise,  booms  and 
busts are the inevitable consequence.  
2 
 BIS Review 150/2010
Both  areas,  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  policies,  are  monitored  by  the  peers,  supported 
mainly by the Commission. The Eurogroup and Ecofin meetings of finance ministers are the 
fora  for  such  peer  monitoring.  Of  course,  effective  monitoring  requires  adherence  by 
members to the policy framework, it requires peer pressure and consequences to deal with 
deviant behaviour and it requires reliable statistics.  
It is in these areas that the biggest deficiencies have been revealed. Fiscal policy conduct 
has quite often not been in line with the pact, macroeconomic policies have been too loose 
and peer pressure has been too weak. These problems were visible well before the financial 
crisis, but the crisis has of course aggravated them, and massively so. 
I  will  come  back  to  how  we  deal  with  these  problems  in  a  moment.  But  first  let  me  turn 
directly to the crisis and say a few words about its origins and developments, and how the 
ECB has responded to it. 
The financial crisis: origins, development and policy responses 
Robert Merton – one of the architects of modern financial theory – once said that: “Any virtue 
can readily become a vice if taken to excess, and just so with innovations”.1 There is unlikely 
to be a more compelling proof of this dictum than the developments in financial innovation 
that led up to the crisis that started in 2007 and became most acute in the autumn of 2008. 
Historically, the financial industry has been at the forefront of economic progress because of 
its ability to offer funding to those who take on economic risk. Without credit, the innovation, 
production and trade of the real economy are severely constrained.  
But  in  the  recent  past  the  focus  of  finance  has  gradually  shifted.  From  helping  the  real 
economy manage economic risk, the focus of finance has quietly moved toward the creation 
of  financial  risk.  Financial  risk  is  different  from  economic  risk.  It  is  deliberate  exposure  to 
expected asset price changes.  
Building  exposure  to  changes  in  the  value  of  an  asset  is  not  bad  per  se.  But  we  have  to 
distinguish  between  arbitrage  and  directional  positioning.  Arbitrage  is  an  essential  market 
force. Indirectly, it supports production and trade.  
Directional positioning, instead, can amplify and even create gaps in asset prices. It does so 
by acting on expectations of future price changes. Unlike in the case of arbitrage, these price 
gaps  are  notional  –  indeed,  “speculative”.  They  are  often  large  only  because  they  are  not 
suitably discounted for risk.  
When  on  15  September  2008,  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy,  the  turmoil  that  had 
started a year earlier turned into an avalanche. In times of financial panic, banks and other 
financial  intermediaries  shed  risky  and  illiquid  investments  and  rush  to  liquidity.  In  the 
process,  banks’  intermediation  is  reduced,  and  loans  to  companies  are  curtailed.  If  the 
process  is  allowed  to  unfold  in  a  disorderly  manner,  it  can  create  severe  damage  for 
borrowers and for the broader economy.  
The  ECB  was  among  the  first  central  banks  in  the  world  to  recognise  the  severity  of  the 
situation  as  early  as  August  2007,  when  the  turmoil  began.  It  took  actions  well  before  a 
number of other central banks – to be precise: on the very first day the turmoil erupted.  
As the failure of Lehman precipitated the acute phase of the crisis, the ECB acted decisively, 
taking  several  measures  to  protect  against  a  disorderly  correction  in  credit  and  liquidity 
conditions for the euro area. We put banks in a position to maintain their crucial role in the 
financing of the real economy. Fears of a “Kreditklemme” have not materialised. At the same 
                                                 
1   See Merton (1992). 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 3
time,  we  could  start  to  phase  out  some  of  these  measures  and  reduce  the  amount  and 
duration of liquidity provision.  
A few months ago, in May 2010, the ECB decided on bold measures again. It was for similar 
reasons.  Increasing  market  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  led  to  a 
paralysis  in  the  secondary  market  for  government  paper.  Once  more,  private  financial 
intermediation was threatened.  
With the rapid increase in secured interbank lending in the euro area over the past years, the 
impact  on  money  markets  of  developments  in  government  bond  markets  has  grown 
substantially.  Government  bonds  have  traditionally  been  an  important  element  in  the 
transmission process because they serve as a benchmark, or floor, for the pricing of other 
financial contracts and fixed-income securities.  
In recent years they have also emerged as a prime source of collateral in interbank lending. 
As a result abrupt changes in the value or availability of these securities can imply a sharp 
deterioration in banks’ funding conditions – with adverse effects on both the supply of bank 
loans to the real economy and their prices. 
Therefore,  we  had  to  determine  further  non-standard  measures,  including  interventions  in 
debt markets. All our non-standard measures help restoring a more normal monetary policy 
transmission mechanism which is necessary to fulfil our primary mandate of accomplishing 
price stability in the medium term. It is not to be confused with “quantitative easing” policies 
that  aim  to  reduce  longer-term  interest  rates  by  expanding  the  monetary  base.  In  fact,  all 
Eurosystem purchases of debt securities are fully sterilised by conducting liquidity-absorbing 
operations. All our non-standard measures are temporary in nature.  
That being said we urge all governments to step up consolidation. There is a clear need to 
strengthen public confidence in the capacity of governments to return to sustainable public 
finances  and  thus  support  sustainable  growth  over  the  medium  term.  To  this  end,  it  is 
essential  that  countries  pursue  credible  multi-year  consolidation  plans  and  fully  implement 
the  planned  consolidation  measures.  Any  positive  fiscal  developments  that  may  emerge, 
reflecting factors such as a more favourable than expected economic environment, should be 
exploited to make faster progress with fiscal consolidation.  
Europe’s economy: the current situation and the challenges ahead 
Let me come to the third and final part of my remarks and turn to the latest developments in 
the euro area economy.  
Looking ahead, our quantitative definition of price stability and our medium-term orientation 
significantly reduce the likelihood of either deflation or inflation scares. The firm anchoring of 
inflation expectations – throughout a time of crisis – meant that we could maintain the rate on 
our refinancing operations at positive levels without having any materialisation of a deflationary 
risk or inflationary expectations.  
Indeed,  recent  data  releases  and  survey  evidence  confirm  our  view  that  expected  price 
developments  will  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon.  At  the 
same  time,  the  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area 
remains in place. In line with previous expectations, this implies continuing real GDP growth 
in the second half of this year.  
The  global  recovery  is  expected  to  proceed,  and  this  should  imply  a  continued  positive 
impact on the demand for euro area exports. Private sector domestic demand should also 
contribute  to  growth,  supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the 
measures adopted to restore the functioning of the financial system.  
4 
 BIS Review 150/2010
But  complacency  would  be  inappropriate.  The  European  leaders  recognise  that  our 
economic model is in need of a considerable strengthening. At their meeting in October, the 
Heads of State or Government agreed on the reform of the system of economic governance.  
The  proposals  put  forward  by  President  Van  Rompuy  represent  a  strengthening  of  the 
existing framework for fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance. But as I have said before, the 
Governing Council of the ECB considers that they do not represent the quantum leap in the 
economic governance that is needed to be fully commensurate with the monetary union we 
have created. 
One key area is surveillance of fiscal policies to prevent excessive deficits and unsustainable 
public debt. In our view we need shorter deadlines under excessive deficit procedures so that 
corrective policy action is taken in good time. We need quasi-automaticity in the application 
of sanctions, based on clearly defined criteria and with less discretion over outcomes. And 
we need ambitious targets for the reduction of public debt towards the 60% of GDP ceiling.  
The second key area is broader surveillance of macroeconomic policies in the euro area. We 
need a new system of mutual surveillance in the euro area, concentrating firmly on euro area 
countries  experiencing  sustained  losses  of  competitiveness  and  large  current  account 
deficits  as  these  countries  face  the  greatest  sustainability  challenges.  It  should  be 
determined  by  transparent  and  effective  trigger  mechanisms  and  specify  clearly  the 
sanctions  in  case  of  breach.  And  we  need  full  transparency.  The  assessments  of 
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  recommendations  for  corrective  action  should  be  given 
broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process.  
The  effectiveness  of  these  enhancements  to  the  governance  framework  will  in  part  be 
determined by the quality and independence of the economic analysis that underpins them. 
Without  reliable  statistical  data  we  cannot  be  certain  that  the  governance  framework  will 
provide the quantum leap forward that is necessary. It is therefore extremely important that 
the Commission services charged with conducting macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance for 
the  euro  area  be  sufficiently  independent,  ideally  supported  by  a  body  of  “wise  persons” 
providing external assessments. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The past 12 years have been very challenging, demanding and eventful 
years. The ECB has lived up to its responsibility and delivered what we promised to deliver: a 
stable  currency,  as  credible  and  confidence-inspiring  as  the  best  previous  currencies.  The 
euro  has  also  been  a  force  of  stability  in  what  is  now  a  more  than  three  year  period  of 
economic and financial instability. 
As  is  the  case  in  all  major  advanced  economies  which  all,  without  exception,  have  to  put 
under  sharp  review  their  previous  surveillance  framework  and  economic  models,  changes 
are  needed  in  the  euro  area  framework.  Not  the  kind  of  changes  towards  more  unilateral 
action, with dangers of lack of cooperation, but changes towards greater cooperation, greater 
cohesion  through  a  strengthened  framework  of  economic  governance.  To  sum  up,  more 
European unity, more responsible European unity. We must keep our sense of direction. 
We  are  now  at  a  stage  where  we  need  to  remain  bold  and  enact  those  reforms  that  we 
envisaged  when  the  crisis  was  at  its  deepest.  It  was  then  that  we  witnessed  the  clearest 
manifestation  of  risks  and  our  judgement  was  sharpest.  It  would  be  a  big  mistake  if,  with 
gradually improving conditions, we fell back into accepting the status quo. I therefore call on 
all parties to remain as bold in their reforms as they were when we were in the eye of the 
storm. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 5
