Hirohide Yamaguchi: Challenges for Japan’s financial system after the 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Hirohide  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
symposium co-hosted by the University of Tokyo and Development Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 
10 December 2010. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have an opportunity to speak at a symposium co-hosted by the Center 
for  Advanced  Research  in  Finance,  the  University  of  Tokyo,  and  the  Research  Institute  of 
Capital Formation, Development Bank of Japan. 
While the global financial crisis that erupted about two years ago, triggered by the failure of 
Lehman  Brothers  has  not  been  completely  over,  the  situation  has  significantly  improved. 
Progress has also been made in establishing an international framework for preventing the 
recurrence of the recent global crisis in the future. Meanwhile, Japan’s Financial System has 
been  relatively  stable,  compared  with  that  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  but  some 
challenges have become clear as the effects of the crisis reached here in various forms.  
In  those  circumstances,  it  is  indeed  topical  to  discuss  today  how  the  future  of  Japan’s 
financial system should be, and I am looking forward to the discussions by the experts. For 
my part, I will briefly review the financial crisis and talk about the future of Japan’s financial 
system and challenges for Japanese financial institutions. 
I. 
Global financial crisis and Japan’s financial system 
The international financial system after the Lehman shock 
A. 
These  two  years  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  have  been  indeed  a  tumultuous 
period for the global economy and the international financial system. Following the failure of 
Lehman  Brothers,  a  financial  crisis  erupted  on  a  global  scale,  and  the  global  economy 
deteriorated  simultaneously  and  rapidly.  Subsequently,  due  to  the  effects  of  exhaustive 
policy  responses  by  the  governments  and  central  banks,  the  global  economy  gradually 
started to recover around the spring of 2009 and profits and funding conditions of major U.S. 
and  European  financial  institutions  improved  significantly.  However,  against  a  backdrop  of 
European  fiscal  problems  including  those  in  Greece  and  Ireland  as  well  as  heightened 
uncertainty about the future of the U.S. economy, there have been phases in which financial 
markets  have  become  unstable  again  since  the  spring  of  2010.  In  the  United  States  and 
Europe,  amid  continued  balance  sheet  adjustments,  bank  lending  has  been  sluggish  and 
credit costs have been somewhat at high levels. The international financial system is still in a 
fragile state. 
Effects on Japan’s financial system 
B. 
Looking  at  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  Japan’s  financial  system,  there  was 
relatively a large decline in the functioning of CP and corporate bond markets. On the other 
hand,  the  direct  impact  on  financial  institutions  central  to  Japan’s  financial  intermediation 
remained  relatively  small,  compared  with  that  on  U.S.  and  European  financial  institutions, 
and the stability of the financial system as a whole was maintained. Three reasons can be 
pointed out. 
First,  and  probably  the  major  reason,  was  that  Japanese  financial  institutions  had  been 
generally cautious about taking risks based on the experience of the financial crisis since the 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 1
1990s.  Specifically,  their  investments  in  complex  financial  products  such  as  collateralized 
debt  obligation  had  been  low  and  they  had  not  adopted,  unlike  major  U.S.  and  European 
financial institutions, the originate-to-distribute business model in a full-fledged manner.  
Second,  in  terms  of  incentive,  there  was  relatively  low  pressure  from  shareholders  who 
pursued short-term returns and the remuneration system of financial institutions’ managers 
was also not conducive to short-term risk-taking activity. 
Third,  as  a  result  of  the  efforts  by  the  public  authorities  to  enhance  the  robustness  of  the 
financial  system,  including  an  establishment  of  a  resolution  framework  for  financial 
institutions, concern about the surfacing of systemic risk did not heighten among depositors 
and market participants. 
Nevertheless, the global financial crisis has also affected Japan’s economy in various forms 
such as a deterioration in economic activity, a fall in stock prices, and a decline in market 
functioning.  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  also  been  hit  accordingly  in  the  form  of 
impairment  due  to  a  decline  in  stock  prices  and  of  an  increase  in  credit  costs.  In  the 
meantime, the challenges Japanese financial institutions have been faced with, such as the 
weakness  of  core  profitability  and  vulnerability  against  stock  price  fluctuations,  have  been 
highlighted again. I will come back to the details later. 
II. 
Prospects for Japan’s financial system 
Changing environment surrounding Japan’s financial system 
A. 
The topic of today’s panel discussion is “Whither the Financial System?” It is quite a difficult 
question,  but  in  the  hope  of  providing  some  reference  to  the  discussion,  I  offer  some 
consideration of how Japan’s financial system should be after the financial crisis both from 
macro  and  micro  perspectives.  As  it  might  be  useful  to  consider  first  what  changes  are 
expected in the environment surrounding Japan’s financial system in the future, let me start 
with the following three points. 
Strengthening of global regulation and supervision 
First,  financial  regulation  and  supervision  will  be  strengthened  on  a  global  basis.  On 
regulations,  vigorous  discussions  are  ongoing  internationally,  and  the  issues  covered  are 
quite wide, ranging from banks’ capital adequacy and liquidity, leverage, remuneration, and 
accounting. In terms of supervision, the scope will be widened mainly to cover those which 
have  not  been  taken  up  sufficiently  in  the  past,  such  as  the  so-called  shadow  banking 
system. 
Let  me  talk  about  some  recent  developments.  For  example,  in  terms  of  banks’  capital,  an 
internationally  common  new  regulatory  framework,  namely,  Basel  III,  has  recently  been 
agreed  on.  Both  the  quality  and  the  quantity  of  bank’s  capital  will  be  enhanced,  albeit 
gradually, through increasing the ratios of common equities and Tier I that have a high loss 
absorbing capacity at the time of bankruptcy. Like the so-called “Volcker Rule” in the United 
States,  there  are  also  moves  to  directly  regulate  banks’  high  risk  businesses  such  as 
proprietary trading and investment in hedge funds. 
Through next year, the issue of moral hazard associated with systemically important financial 
institutions  (SIFIs),  namely,  the  “too-big-to-fail  problem,”  is  expected  to  be  discussed, 
including how to specify SIFIs and what responses will be necessary in preventing the failure 
of the specified SIFIs or in minimizing the impact once they fail. If I can offer my opinion on 
that issue, given the essence of the issue of avoiding moral hazard, it would be desirable to 
take  a  flexible  approach.  Namely,  in  accordance  with  the  situation  in  each  country, 
appropriate  responses  should  be  chosen  from  various  options  including  not  only  a  bank 
capital  surcharge  but  also  a  liquidity  surcharge  and  strengthening  of  supervision,  and 
establishment of a resolution framework. 
2 
 BIS Review 172/2010
Increase in new demand for funds 
Second, as the contents of demand for funds financial institutions are faced with at home and 
abroad change, there is a possibility that new demand for funds will increase. For example, 
emerging economies are expected to continue to be the driving force of the global economy, 
and thus fund demand for improving infrastructure and for firms’ business fixed investment 
as  well  as  for  asset  management  associated  with  an  accumulation  of  personal  financial 
assets in those economies, is expected to further increase. Turning to the domestic areas, in 
the  process  of  firms  exploring  new  growth  strategies  and  rebuilding  the  supply  system  for 
goods and services, there could be new fund demand for research and development as well 
as business relocation. Moreover, as the industrial structure is expected to change further, 
there will be increased importance of fund demand associated with corporate rehabilitation 
and realignment such as M&A finance and DIP finance and of fund demand from emerging 
companies  that  challenge  new  areas.  Moreover,  needs  for  asset  management  mainly  by 
elderly people are expected to diversify and increase.  
Changes in business models for globally active major financial institutions  
Third,  business  models  of  globally  active  major  financial  institutions  might  change. 
Specifically,  the  originate-to-distribute  business  model  that  had  been  actively  used  prior  to 
the  crisis  will  relatively  decrease  in  number  and  the  proportion  of  commercial  banking 
business that put more emphasis on the relationship with customers is likely to increase: that 
is called “back to basics.” Moreover, as business regulations such as the Volcker Rule will be 
implemented and regulation and supervision will be reviewed in order to restrain “too-big-to-
fail,” it is likely that the moves toward mere scale expansion and toward excessive risk-taking 
will  be  restrained.  In  terms  of  funding,  as  awareness  about  liquidity  risk  heightened 
considerably through the experience of the financial crisis, more emphasis would be put on 
retail  deposits,  which  have  more  stability  than  short-term  wholesale  funding  such  as  repo 
transactions. Such changes in business models of globally active major financial institutions 
could have an impact on the business models and the competitiveness of Japanese financial 
institutions. 
Future of Japan’s financial system: macro perspective 
B. 
I  will  next  touch  on  how  Japan’s  financial  system  should  be  in  the  future  from  a  macro 
perspective,  namely,  a  perspective  of  financial  system  structure.  Needless  to  say  again, 
Japan’s financial system has long  been characterized by financial intermediation centering 
on banks. In this situation, from a perspective of improving the functioning and stability of the 
financial system, many have argued as follows. It is desirable to have not only bank-based 
financial intermediation but also financial intermediation through the capital market, inclusive 
of  the  so-called  market-based  financial  intermediation.  To  that  end,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
increase the supply of risk money and eventually enhance the diversification of households’ 
asset  investment.  In  fact,  many  policy  measures  have  been  taken  to  bolster  such  moves, 
including  enhancement  in  market  infrastructure,  improvement  in  market  transparency,  and 
investor protection. 
If  we  revisit  the  discussions  based  on  the  experience  of  the  recent  crisis,  it  can  be 
summarized as follows. 
First,  the  complementarity  of  functioning  between  banks  and  capital  market  is  important. 
While  the  functioning  of  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets  declined  significantly  in  Japan 
during  the  crisis, bank  lending  substituted  the  financial intermediation  function  during  such 
phase  and  underpinned  the  rapidly  deteriorating  firms’  funding.  Subsequently,  when  the 
functioning of the capital market was restored, bank lending started to decline. Therefore, it 
became  clear  again  that  the  existence  of  multiple  financial  intermediation  channels  is 
important for the availability of firms’ funding and the robustness of the financial system. 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 3
Second,  the  existence  of  multiple  financial  intermediation  channels  alone  would  not  be 
sufficient  to  ensure  financial  system  stability.  Former  Federal  Reserve  Board  Chairman 
Greenspan  once  pointed  out  that  one  reason  for  Japan’s  protracted  crisis  was  that  its 
financial intermediation was concentrated on banks, and the financial system like that in the 
United States, which has a variety of financial intermediation channels, would be more robust 
against shocks to the financial system and the real economy. However, the fact that the crisis 
deepened  in  the  United  States  implies  that  such  view  is  not  necessarily  correct.  What  is 
important  is  that  each  financial  system  participant  maintains  business  soundness  and 
pursues solid risk management, and, at the same time, that the regulatory and supervisory 
authorities and central banks recognize where the risks lie in the financial system as a whole 
from  a  macro  perspective  and  take  proper  responses.  Namely,  I  believe  it  is  critical  for 
financial system stability to maintain not only the robustness of the financial system structure 
but also self discipline of financial system participants and the risk capturing capability of the 
authorities at a high level as a whole.  
Challenges for Japanese financial institutions: micro perspective  
C. 
I will next talk about two specific challenges for Japanese financial institutions. I will touch on 
the challenges for the authorities in the final part of my speech.  
Selecting business models and sustained improvement in profitability  
The  first  and  the  biggest  challenge  for  Japanese  financial  institutions  is  to  raise  their 
profitability in a sustained manner. Looking at the recent business performance of Japanese 
financial institutions, core profitability has been trending down due partly to a narrowing profit 
margin and declining lending outstanding. For that reason, an increase in profitability is an 
imminent challenge. In doing so, while it applies to every industry, it is essential to choose 
the optimal business model that utilizes an institution’s respective realms of expertise. As I 
have  mentioned  earlier,  competition  in  commercial  banking  business,  in  which  Japanese 
financial  institutions  are  mainly  engaged,  is  expected  to  intensify  at  home  and  abroad. 
Japanese  financial  institutions  that  receive  domestic  stable  personal  deposits  have  an 
advantage,  including  funding  for  overseas  activities,  in  terms  of  resilience  against  liquidity 
risk.  Moreover,  a  characteristic  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  that  traditionally  put 
emphasis  on  the  customer  relationship  is  an  important  element  in  terms  of  “information 
production,”  which  is  a  key  to  conducting  lending  business,  and  could  serve  positively  for 
businesses not only in Japan but also in overseas including Asian countries. Furthermore, 
Japanese  firms  and  households,  which  are  the  main  customers  of  Japanese  financial 
institutions, are not in need of balance sheet adjustments like those in the United States and 
Europe.  Therefore,  in  terms  of  the  competitiveness  of  Japanese  financial  institutions 
compared with that of the U.S. and European financial institutions, I believe there is nothing 
to be pessimistic. 
With that recognition, what is necessary for Japanese financial institutions is, at first, to hone 
their  skills  in  identifying  firms  with  growth  potential  and  continue  to  strive  to  find  new 
borrowers and also tap new fund demand from the existing borrowers. While a fundamental 
problem  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with  is  a  decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations,  to  overcome  such  problem,  it  is  important  that  private  firms  promote  their 
innovative activities and pursue a new source of growth at home and abroad. It is essential 
that financial institutions also firmly support such moves. In that regard, looking at the recent 
efforts by Japanese financial institutions, there have been proactive developments to utilize 
their respective characteristics, which is quite assuring. The major banks have been further 
expanding their businesses in Asian and other emerging economies regardless of customers’ 
nationality,  and  the  regional  banks  have  been  making  efforts  to  tap  growth  areas  in  the 
regions, including distinct local firms. I hope that Japanese financial institutions will establish 
their  respective  business  models  and  pursue  proactive  efforts  including  tapping  new  fund 
4 
 BIS Review 172/2010
demand, while skillfully gauging various changes in the business environment at home and 
abroad. 
Second,  it  is  also  important  to  raise  the  core  profitability  of  the  existing  borrowing  firms 
through  enhancing  their  governance.  It  has  often  been  said  in  Japan  that  corporate 
governance that raises a firm’s profitability has been weak. There are many views that, one 
way to overcome such weakness is to use equity funds, which have a strong tendency to 
search  for  yields,  as  leverage  to  strengthen  corporate  governance  from  outside.  Financial 
institutions can play a significant role in that regard by being involved in creating investment 
funds. Moreover, the role of a financial institution as a lender is also not insignificant. Many 
Japanese financial institutions appear to have been relying too much on real estate collateral 
and  personal  guarantees  when  providing  loans  especially  to  medium  and  small  firms,  and 
governance after loan provision has not necessarily been sufficient. Financial institutions are 
required to bolster firms’ growth constantly through deepening the ongoing relationship with 
them.  In  complementing  such  support,  lending  that  uses  movable  assets,  such  as 
inventories,  or  accounts  receivables  as  collateral  –  the  so-called  asset-based  lending  –  or 
that utilizes covenants for medium and small firms can be useful options. 
Third,  it  is  intrinsically  important  for  financial  institutions  to  play  a  role  in  encouraging 
metabolism, for example, corporate realignment. At the same time, it is also important that 
financial institutions also aim at metabolizing themselves through mergers, consolidation, or 
unbundling, in accordance with their own business models. For example, financial institutions 
that aim to be globally active could pursue the advantage of scale or scope through mergers 
and acquisitions. By contrast, for financial institutions that aspire to enhance their presence 
in  niche  markets,  limiting  functions  and  concentrating  resources  could  be  an  important 
option.  Those  financial  institutions’  behavior  is  expected  to  not  only  improve  management 
efficiency of individual financial institutions through increased competitiveness but also lead 
to  increased  profitability  of  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole  through  efficient  resource 
reallocation. 
Proper risk management 
The second challenge for Japanese financial institutions is proper risk management. In that 
regard,  there  is  an  increasing  awareness  among  financial  institutions,  including  those 
overseas, of the importance of the following: to gauge risk comprehensively, for example, by 
way of stress testing, without relying too much on specific quantitative methods such as VaR, 
and  to  share  the  recognition  of  risks  not  only  in  the  risk  management  section  but  also 
including top management. In addition to such general challenge, a reduction in market risk 
associated with stockholdings, in particular, would be a specific challenge for the future. 
As for market risk associated with stockholdings, many Japanese financial institutions have 
recognized  the  magnitude  of  price  volatility  associated  with  stockholdings  and  have  been 
taking  steps  to  reduce  such  risk  as  a  management  priority.  Nevertheless,  the  pace  of 
reduction in stockholdings has somewhat slowed recently due partly to sluggish stock prices 
and  thus  the  due  amount  of  market  risk  associated  with  stockholdings  still  remains.  Of 
course,  stockholdings  could  have  implications  as  a  part  of  corporate  governance  or  could 
play  a  role  as  a  tool  to  gain  total  profits  including  fee  revenues.  Even  in  those  cases, 
however, it is important to firmly identify the risks and returns. On that basis, if it is judged 
that the risk is larger, financial institutions are required to steadily promote efforts toward the 
reduction of their stockholdings. 
Concluding remarks 
While I have been talking about the challenges for Japanese financial institutions, the recent 
crisis  left  various  lessons  for  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  as  well  as  central 
banks.  In  relation  to  ensuring  financial  system  stability,  one  lesson  might  be  that  “it  is 
important  to  gauge  with  a  sharp  distinction  between  micro-level  risks,  such  as  risks  of 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 5
individual financial institutions, and risks of the financial system as a whole.” By taking that 
point  into  account,  the  importance  of  the  so-called  macroprudence  –  which  aims  at 
accurately gauging the risks of the financial system as a whole, with due recognition of the 
relationship  between  economic  activity,  financial  markets,  and  financial  institutions,  and 
taking necessary policy responses – has been increasingly recognized on a global basis.  
In that regard, the Bank of Japan has been, from a standpoint of conducting monetary policy, 
monitoring a wide range of economic and financial developments at home and abroad and 
making  in-depth  research  and  analyses,  as  well  as  striving  to  improve  infrastructure, 
including  financial  markets  and  the  payment  and  settlement  system.  In  addition,  the  Bank 
has been gauging business conditions of individual financial institutions through on-site bank 
examination and off-site monitoring, and information and perspectives obtained through such 
processes have been utilized in gauging the condition of the financial system as a whole and 
in  risk  analyses,  and  published  in  the  Financial  System  Report.  Also,  the  Bank  took 
measures  such  as  purchases  of  banks’  stockholdings  and  provision  of  subordinated  loans 
aiming at ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole. The Bank has thus been 
making various efforts on the macroprudence front.  
Nevertheless, such efforts are only half done. For example, gauging macro risks is still not 
sufficient. From a viewpoint of strengthening macroprudential analysis, the Bank has been 
trying in the Financial System Report to broaden analyses to businesses other than banks, 
for  example,  insurance  companies,  to  gauge  macro  financial  imbalances,  and  to  expand 
stress testing, but those efforts still remain at a stage of trial and error. In addition, the Bank 
is aware that, even if the macro risk is properly gauged, it still remains as a future challenge 
to examine what specific policy measures would be desirable to address the risk.  
The Bank will, including the responses to the challenges I have mentioned, continue with the 
efforts to ensure stability of the financial system. 
6 
 BIS Review 172/2010
