Ewald Nowotny: Catching-up strategies after the crisis 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewald  Nowotny,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Austria,  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2010,  Vienna, 
15 November 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  our  annual  Conference  on  European 
Economic  Integration.  The  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (OeNB)  has  been  hosting  this 
event  for  many  years,  offering  a  forum  for  lively  debates  between  distinguished  panelists 
from  national  and  international  institutions,  politics,  banking  and  academia.  I  am  glad  that 
such  a  sizeable  number  of  participants  and  speakers  show  an  interest  in  this  year’s 
conference theme. 
Implications of the financial crisis for CESEE countries 
As you all know, the last two years have been characterized by the global financial crisis. In 
its early stage, the crisis had been confined to advanced economies. Local and foreign banks 
in Central, Eastern and Southeastern European (CESEE) economies held only a negligible 
amount of so-called toxic assets. Nevertheless, excessive risk-taking put the global financial 
system under serious stress, which had an adverse impact on the world economy. 
The  CESEE  economies  were  particularly  affected  by  output  declines.  These  were  also 
caused by accumulated vulnerabilities in the region, especially the credit boom (Backé and 
Wójcik, 2008, Fidrmuc and Hainz, 2010) and foreign currency lending (Dvorsky et al., 2010). 
The output loss, with average GDP decline amounting to –3% in new EU Member States and 
to –6% in all CESEE countries in 2009 (IMF, 2010), was deeper than we expected. In turn, 
we can see slight improvements in this region this year. Therefore, as reflected in its title, this 
year’s conference is forward looking, dealing with catching-up strategies after the crisis. The 
beginning  of  2010  actually  featured  developments  which  were  better  than  expected  and 
fueled the hope that the crisis was already passing away. Nearly all CESEE countries (with 
the  exception  of  Bulgaria  and  Romania)  are  expected  to  grow  during  this  year  (Schreiner 
et al.,  2010).  However,  the  growth  is  fueled  mainly  by  restocking  and  external  demand. 
Moreover,  the  forecasts  for  2011  and  2012  remain  modest.  The  growth  prospects  are  still 
fragile and there are significant downsize risks. The growth path will remain below the pre-
crisis trend for the coming years. 
Light at the end of the tunnel, but challenges remain 
After the positive trend in the first half of 2010, we can now begin to see the light at the end 
of tunnel, but we have still much to do. The previous output declines have to be taken as an 
incentive  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  in  the  region  and  to  continue  economic  and  structural 
reforms. Fiscal stabilization will represent an extraordinary challenge for the next few years. 
Fiscal debt has increased in all countries during the last two years. Prior to the crisis, the new 
Member States had a relatively low level of public debt (37.4% of GDP), but it increased by 
nearly 10% of GDP on average alone in 2009 (IMF, 2010). Although this level is still lower 
than  the  public  debt  of  the  euro  area  (87%  of  GDP),  we  have  to  return  to  a  sustainable 
growth path. The new Member States will have to increase their efforts in order to stabilize 
public finances and fulfill the Stability and Growth Pact. We have to use every possibility of 
financial stabilization, while at the same time keeping in mind also the global fragile growth 
prospects. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 1
the  euro  and  demand 
Exchange  rate  developments  represent  another  important  challenge.  We  can  see  that 
currently,  the  euro  is  gaining  strength.  This  has  also  important  implications  for  CESEE 
economies  where  both 
from  euro  area  countries  play  an 
overwhelmingly important role. Exchange rate appreciations may have negative implications 
on Europe’s external – but indirectly also on internal – trade. 
The  development  of  CESEE  has  important  implications  for  the  Austrian  economy  due  to 
strong  linkages  through  trade  and  FDI.  Austria  has  been  deeply  rooted  in  the  Central 
European  region.  We  are  part  of  the  Central  European  family.  Actually,  Austria  has  made 
effective  use  of  its  geographic  location  during  the  two  decades  since  the  fall  of  the  Iron 
Curtain.  It  has  become  one  of  the  most  important  investors  in  the  neighboring  Central 
European countries. Despite the recent financial crisis, Austria increased its market shares 
especially in Central Europe, for example in countries like Slovenia and Slovakia which have 
adopted the euro (Ritzberger-Grünwald and Wörz, 2010). During the financial crisis, Austria’s 
links  to  CESEE  economies  have  been  seen  as  a  potential  source  of  vulnerability  of  the 
Austrian economy, especially with regard to Austrian banks investing intensively in CESEE. 
These concerns did not materialize. 
In September 2010, the international banking regulations were revised as part of the Basel III 
agreement. The Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the Austrian Financial Market Authority 
(FMA) participated in these preparations from the beginning. The new regulations will ensure 
improved financial stability. However, there are also potential risks related to these regulatory 
changes. The banks in our region are characterized by relatively low capitalization. This may 
force some banks to reduce credit volumes to comply with the new regulations. 
Monetary union contributes to financial stability 
During the financial crisis, the euro has kept and improved its position as a global currency 
(ECB  2010).  In  addition,  the  euro  has  acted  as  a  shelter  not  only  for  the  participating 
countries, but also for a broader European region. This was impressively documented by the 
CEEI  2009  on  “The  Euro’s  Contribution  to  Economic  Stability  in  CESEE”  (Nowotny  et  al., 
2010). 
After the accession of Estonia in January 2011, the euro area will consist of 17 countries with 
an overall population of approximately 330 million. Thus, the European Union has showed its 
ability  to  make  important  decisions  also  during  hard  times.  This  also  proved  that  the 
European Union is based on the equal treatment principle. 
Policy challenges for catching-up countries 
Several issues should be discussed during the next two days: 
First,  the  financial  crisis  brought  about  also  a  liquidity  trap  and  a  credit  crunch.  Not  only 
emerging economies have faced capital flights and sudden stops. These features were not 
unique to this financial crisis, but their impact on selected CESEE countries was much higher 
than before. The question is whether this will have negative implications on growth rates. In 
turn,  countries  have  to  introduce  structural  policies  aiming  at  reducing  vulnerabilities: 
Although  the  new  Member  States  already  reduced  their  external  deficits  to  an  estimated 
1.7% of GDP in 2010, these deficits are expected to rise slightly in 2011 (IMF, 2010). 
Second, the CEESE economies will most likely face lower capital inflows because investors 
have become more risk averse. Therefore, the CEEI 2010 should also address the question 
whether there will be alternative sources of growth. In turn, lower capital inflows might also 
have positive effects. Sustainable growth appears superior to a boom-bust cycle, which was 
fueled by capital inflows in the past. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2010
Third,  budget  consolidation  is  an  important  issue  in  all  CESEE.  However,  infrastructure 
needs  also  further  investment  in  this  region.  This  confronts  economic  policy  with  the  old 
problem of squaring the circle. Some programs can be supported by the structural funds of 
the EU, but these funds are limited, and they also require rare domestic cofinancing funds. 
Possible solutions include e.g. public-private partnerships. 
Finally,  the  fiscal  crisis  again  underlined  the  importance  of  competitiveness  (Feldkircher 
et al.,  2010),  which  has  to  be  supported  especially  by  wage  developments.  However,  the 
wage level remains above the level in CIS countries and China. This puts the CESEE region 
under significant pressure. 
Let me conclude and stress that catching-up strategies after the crisis represent an important 
policy  challenge  for  the  next  few  years.  Having  successfully  weathered  the  storms  of  the 
worst financial and economic crisis of postwar history, the euro has been and will continue to 
be  an  important  anchor  of  growth  in  a  broader  European  region.  This  conference 
demonstrates  readiness  to  open  a discussion about  future  growth  models.  We  will  have  a 
unique  possibility  to  compare  views  from  countries  that  have  not  yet  joined  the  EU  or  the 
euro  area  with  the  experience  of  EU  and  euro  area  members.  I  am  looking  very  much 
forward to hearing, discussing and learning from the opinions of policymakers, bankers and 
academics over the next two days. 
It is now a great pleasure for me to welcome our first keynote speaker, Vítor Constâncio, the 
Vice President of the European Central Bank. 
Mr. Constâncio, the floor is yours! 
of 
the 
The 
Role 
ECB, 
(2010): 
Frankfurt, 
International 
References 
Backé,  P.  and  C.  Wójcik,  (2008):  “Credit  Booms,  Monetary  Integration  and  the  New 
Neoclassical Synthesis”, Journal of Banking & Finance, 32, 458–470. 
Dvorsky, S., Scheiber, T. and H. Stix (2010): “Real Effects of Crisis Have Reached CESEE 
Households: Euro Survey Shows Dampened Savings and Changes in Borrowing Behavior.” 
Focus on European Economic Integration, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, No. 2, 79–90. 
ECB 
Euro. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/euro-international-role201007en.pdf. 
Feldkircher, M., Martin, R., and J. Wörz (2010): Measuring Competition in CESEE: Stylized 
Facts  and  Determinants  across  Countries  and  Sectors.  Focus  on  European  Economic 
Integration No 3, 38–62. 
Fidrmuc, J. and C. Hainz (2010): Default Rates in the Loan Market for SMEs: Evidence from 
Slovakia, Economic Systems 34 (2), 133–147. 
IMF  (2010)  Regional  Economic  Outlook:  Europe,  Building  Confidence.  IMF,  Washington, 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2010/eur/eng/ ereo1010.pdf. 
Nowotny, E. (2010): “The Euro’s Contribution to Economic Stability in CESEE.” In: Nowotny, 
E.,  Mooslechner,  P.,  Ritzberger-Grünwald,  D.  (eds.),  The  Euro  And  Economic  Stability, 
Focus on Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham: Edward 
Elgar, forthcoming. 
Ritzberger-Grünwald, D., Wörz, J. (2010) Wechselkurse und österreichischer Außenhandel. 
FIW Policy Brief Nr. 5, Research Center International Economics, Vienna. 
Schreiner, J. et al. (2010) Developments in Selected CESEE Countries. Focus on European 
Economic Integration No. 4, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 150/2010 
 3
