Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss monetary policy and Target2-Securities 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2010. 
 My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  three  topics.  I  will  start  by  looking  at  the  situation  on  the 
international  financial  markets.  I  will  then  speak  about  the  SNB’s  own  financial  market 
activities in connection with the two core tasks of monetary policy implementation and foreign 
exchange  reserves  management.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  the  planned  pan-
European securities settlement system, Target2-Securities. 
International financial markets 
The  situation  on  the  international  financial  markets  reflects  the  gradual  global  economic 
recovery.  At  the  same  time,  these  markets  continue  to  be  affected  by  the  fallout  from  the 
financial  crisis  and  by  doubts  as  to  whether  the  current  global  economic  recovery  will  be 
robust enough to reduce the existing financial imbalances. 
On  the  stock  markets,  volatility  has  trended  downwards  over  the  past  half-year,  but  has 
remained  high.  Shares  and  corporate  bonds  have  benefited  from  investors’  growing  risk 
appetite, the ongoing expansionary monetary conditions and good corporate results. On the 
bond  markets,  by  contrast,  uncertainty  has,  if  anything,  grown.  With  the  global  economic 
recovery,  yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  have  picked  up  from  their  low  levels.  In 
Europe risk premia for heavily indebted sovereigns have risen markedly. The imbalance in 
many government budgets has taken problematic proportions. Wide-ranging cuts have been 
announced  in  the  affected  countries,  and  international  rescue  packages  have  been  put 
together, first for Greece and latterly also for Ireland, in order to prevent the situation from 
escalating. The markets will, however, be monitoring the effectiveness of the announced cuts 
and  support  measures  very  closely.  The  problem  of  sovereign  indebtedness  in  Europe 
remains a source of considerable uncertainty. 
A  high  level  of  uncertainty  also  remains  on  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  The  continuing 
high volatility is coupled with strongly divergent exchange rate developments. Over the last 
few  years,  a  number  of  currencies  have  appreciated  substantially  against  the  two  major 
world currencies: the euro and the US dollar (cf. chart 1). These currency shifts do not just 
negatively affect the export capability of the countries whose currencies have appreciated; 
they  also  have  a  heavy  impact  in  monetary  terms.  This  is  because,  in  order  to  keep 
appreciation in check, some countries have intervened in the foreign exchange markets, with 
some others even resorting to restrictions on the movement of capital flows. The result has 
been  a  global  rise  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Indeed,  they  have  almost  doubled  in  the 
past four years (cf. chart 2). The high level of foreign exchange reserves ultimately reflects 
substantial global economic imbalances. 
As we know, the Swiss franc also appreciated substantially in the wake of the financial crisis. 
Looking at how the Swiss franc’s real and trade-weighted external value has changed over 
the long term (cf. chart 3), we can see that, historically, periods of Swiss franc strength have 
alternated with periods of weakness. The fact that the current Swiss franc strength is proving 
particularly  burdensome  for  the  Swiss  economy  is  due  partly  to  the  rapidity  of  the 
appreciation, but also to the uncertain economic climate. 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 1
Diversification of foreign exchange reserves 
As you will be aware, our foreign exchange interventions since March 2009 have resulted in 
the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves expanding to over CHF 200 billion. As we were primarily 
buying euros, euro holdings accounted for 70% of foreign exchange reserves at one point. In 
the  meantime,  we  have  reduced  the  euro’s  share  in  the  foreign  exchange  reserves 
substantially, to 55%. Moreover, we have diversified foreign currency risk further by investing 
for the first time in Australian and Singapore dollars, as well as Swedish kronor and Danish 
kroner. Together, these currencies make up 3% of the foreign exchange reserves. The majority 
of non-euro holdings continues to be in US dollars (25%), Japanese yen (10%), Canadian 
dollars  and  pounds  sterling.  Finally,  we  have  increased  the  proportion  of  the  foreign 
exchange reserves that is made up of equities, from 4% back to 10%. This comprehensive 
repositioning was carried out gradually, and the market had no problem in absorbing it. We 
were  thus  able  to  considerably  reduce  the  risk  concentrations  in  the  foreign  exchange 
holdings.  An  examination  of  further  diversification  measures  forms  part  of  our  annual 
investment strategy formulation process. 
Normalisation of the Swiss franc money market 
The effect of the monetary policy crisis measures introduced in recent years was also felt in 
the area of monetary policy implementation. By buying foreign currency against Swiss francs, 
we  created a  structural liquidity  surplus  on  the Swiss  franc  market.  We  have  since  largely 
reabsorbed  this  excess  liquidity  via  a  set  of  instruments  that  are  already  well  established. 
Liquidity is absorbed, on the one hand, through weekly issuance of the SNB’s own money 
market bills (SNB Bills) with terms of 4, 12, 24 or 48 weeks, and on the other through daily 
one-week repo transactions (cf. chart 4). We are currently using both instruments to absorb 
around CHF 140 billion of liquidity, of which some CHF 110 billion is accounted for by SNB 
Bills. This brings banks’ sight deposits, which ultimately determine the level of interest rates 
on the money market, to around CHF 20 billion. Compared to the period prior to the financial 
crisis,  this  level  of  liquidity  is  still  high.  However,  our  experience  with  liquidity-absorbing 
operations shows us that we can reabsorb the excess liquidity at any time. This allows us to 
manage the three-month Libor. 
There is a liquidity overhang in the banking system as a result of the interventions. This does 
not pose a problem for monetary policy, as we reduce the monetary base directly through the 
liquidity-absorbing operations. Since the absorbed liquidity is tied up in the form of securities, 
the  banks  cannot  use  it  either  as  a  means  of  payment  (like  cash  or  sight  deposits)  or  to 
satisfy their minimum reserve requirements. To the extent that SNB Bills are purchased by 
non-banks, customer deposits in the banking system decrease, thereby directly reducing the 
broader  monetary  aggregates.  The  decisive  factor  in  determining  the  degree  of  monetary 
policy restrictiveness remains the level of interest rates on the money market. And we are 
able  to  control  this  level  by  tailoring  the  scope  and  conditions  of  our  liquidity-absorbing 
operations accordingly. 
The  shift  in  the  liquidity  regime  has  brought  about  a  certain  number  of  changes  in  SNB 
central bank operations with banks. For instance, we now normally only conduct operations 
with  banks  that  need  to  place  excess  liquidity.  The  group  of  these  banks  is  fairly  large, 
consisting of 80 mainly domestic banks. Something that we no longer offer, by contrast, is 
regular refinancing. Banks now have to cover their refinancing needs via the money market. 
Refinancing through the SNB is available only in exceptional circumstances via the liquidity-
shortage financing facility, at a higher rate of interest. Access to this facility should thus be 
part of domestic banks’ own liquidity arrangements. A further effect of the regime shift on the 
money  market  is  that  the  SNB  pays  the  banks  interest  for  liquidity-absorbing  operations, 
whereas previously it received interest payments for providing liquidity. The SNB’s additional 
interest costs – which amount to some CHF 100 million for the current year – are offset by 
the  additional 
foreign  exchange  reserves. 
the  correspondingly  higher 
income 
from 
2 
 BIS Review 173/2010
Experience  shows  that,  in  the  longer  term,  the  income  on  diversified  foreign  exchange 
holdings  will  exceed  the  interest  costs  on  the  Swiss  franc  money  market,  even  after  any 
exchange  rate  losses  are  taken  into  account.  However,  as  we  can  clearly  see  from  this 
year’s income statement, the fluctuations in income can be very large. 
Swiss market considers participation in Target2-Securities, the European securities 
settlement system 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  the  planned  pan-European  securities  settlement 
system. Target2-Securities (T2S) is designed to replace, either totally or partially, the existing 
domestic  settlement  systems  of  the  national  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs),  and  to 
drastically  reduce  the  cost  of  cross-border  securities  settlement  in  Europe.  The  European 
Central Bank (ECB) regards T2S as a contribution to the harmonisation and integration of the 
European market. T2S is scheduled to go into operation in 2014. The ECB’s project will also 
have an impact on the Swiss financial centre. The question of how the Swiss financial market 
infrastructure will be connected is important for both the banks and the SNB. In 2009, with 
the agreement of the SNB, SIX SIS AG – the Swiss CSD and a subsidiary of SIX Group – 
signed a memorandum of intent to participate in T2S with euro-denominated securities. This 
would allow banks in Switzerland to settle securities transactions in euros more cheaply. T2S 
has a multicurrency dimension, and the ECB is very interested in integrating other currencies 
into  the  system.  Consequently,  the  SNB,  in  agreement  with  SIX  Group  and  the  banks,  is 
currently investigating the suitability of T2S for settling Swiss franc-denominated securities. 
For  this  to  happen,  the  SNB  would  have  to  permit  SNB  accounts  in  Swiss  francs  to  be 
maintained in T2S (similar to Swiss Interbank Clearing SIC), and allow the banks to hold part 
of  their  central  bank  deposits  (sight  deposits)  on  their  Swiss  franc  accounts  in  T2S.  The 
management  of  SNB  accounts  within  a  foreign  system  would  be  a  significant  change  that 
needs  to  be  investigated  thoroughly.  These  investigations  are  currently  underway,  and  a 
decision by the SNB on whether to settle Swiss franc transactions in T2S is expected by mid-
May 2011. 
 
 BIS Review 173/2010 
  3
  4 
   BIS Review 173/2010
  BIS Review 173/2010 
 5
