Andrew Sentance: Sustaining the recovery 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England, at the British American Business Council in association with RSM Tenon, London, 
13 October 2010. 
 I would like to thank Tomasz Wieladek and Abi Hughes for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
I am delighted to be giving this speech this evening here in the heart of Westminster and I 
am  grateful  to  the  British  American  Business  Council  for  hosting  this  event  and  to  RSM 
Tenon  for  sponsoring  it.  As  an  active  member  of  the  Church  of  England,  I  am  also  very 
pleased  to  be  giving  this  speech  at  its  headquarters  in  Church  House.  The  Church  of 
England plays a vital role in supporting the spiritual health of our nation, just as the Bank of 
England has a key responsibility in underpinning its economic and financial health.  
A  healthy  economy  is normally  a  growing  economy.  So  ensuring  the right  conditions  for  a 
sound and sustained recovery is a key challenge for UK monetary policy at present. And it is 
that challenge that I want to discuss in my speech to you this evening.  
The current recovery in context  
The UK economy has been recovering for about a year now. So it is relatively early days to 
pass judgement on how the current recovery is proceeding. However, the performance of the 
British  economy  over  the  first  year  of  this  recovery  does  provide  some  grounds  for 
encouragement. 
The recovery has been somewhat uneven. As Chart 1 shows, after a couple of quarters of 
rather subdued growth at the end of last year and early this year, GDP picked up strongly in 
the second quarter – producing the largest quarterly rise in GDP for nearly a decade. 
 BIS Review 134/2010 
 1
We  do  not  yet  have  an  official  estimate  of  growth  for  the  third  quarter,  but  the  National 
Institute of Economic and Social Research estimates that GDP rose by 0.5% in this period. 
That  would  produce  an  annual  growth  rate  of  2.5%  for  the  first  year  of  the  economic 
recovery – in line with the historical average growth trend and somewhat stronger than the 
rebound we saw in the early stages of the previous two economic recoveries, in the early 
1980s  and  early  1990s.1  The  fact  that  growth  has  been  uneven  from  quarter  to  quarter 
should not be a great surprise as uneven growth is not unusual as an economy begins to 
recover from recession. 
This  return  to  economic  growth  must  be  seen  against  the  background  of  a  sharper  fall  in 
output than we experienced in previous post-war recessions. But two more positive aspects 
of the early stages of this recovery are worth highlighting. First, employment has been more 
resilient than in past recessions and appears to have turned around more quickly than in the 
previous recoveries. The total number of people in employment in the UK has increased by 
over 300,000 since last winter, according to the official Labour Force Survey.2 
 Chart 2 shows this contrast with previous economic cycles very clearly. Employment is down 
by not much more than 1% on its level at the peak of the cycle in 2008, compared with a 
decline of around 5% at the equivalent phase of the early 1980s and early 1990s cycles. This 
employment  picture  points  to  a  rather  mild  recession  in  terms  of  the  labour  market,  which 
contrasts with the much larger fall in GDP relative to previous UK downturns. 
The  resilience  of  employment  through  the  recession  should  help  to  sustain  consumer 
confidence.  It  is  also  a  positive  indicator  about  medium-term  economic  prospects  –  as 
companies  would  not  be  retaining  and  taking  on  workers  if  they  were  not  reasonably 
                                                 
1   UK  economic  growth  averaged  2.5%  in  the  sixty  years  1948  to  2008.  In  the  year  to  1982Q1,  GDP  in  the 
United Kingdom grew by 2% and in the year to 1993Q2, it grew by 2.1%. However, if growth is measured from 
the trough of output in 1991Q3, growth in the first year of the 1990s “recovery” would be just 0.5%. 
2   Between  the  three  months  Dec  2009  to  Feb  2010  and  the  period  June  to  August  2010,  total  employment 
increased by 315,000 according to the Labour Force Survey. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2010
optimistic about their future business prospects. The recent growth of employment has been 
driven  by  the  private  sector  and  that  should  also  give  us  encouragement  that  the  private 
sector  can  generate  job  growth  that  will  more  than  offset  the  public  employment  cuts  that 
may be in prospect following the spending review. I will come back to this point later. 
 A  second  positive  feature  of  the  early  stages  of  this  recovery  is  that  we  have  seen  some 
evidence  of  rebalancing  in  the  UK  economy.  Manufacturing  output  is  growing  much  more 
strongly than the services sector, reversing the pattern of services-led growth that prevailed 
in the decade before the financial crisis. Over the last year, we have seen the strongest rate 
of growth of manufacturing output that the UK has experienced in over 15 years – as Chart 3 
shows.  According  to  the  latest  data,  manufacturing  production  is  5%  up  on  a  year  ago 
compared with growth of just 1.5% in the services sector over the same period.3 
While some of this rebound in the manufacturing sector may reflect temporary factors – such 
as the turnaround in the global stock cycle – it also shows that British industry is able to take 
advantage of the recovery in the global economy with the additional support of a competitive 
exchange  rate.  The  ability  of  British  manufacturing  industry  to  provide  strong  impetus  to 
private  sector  growth  will  be  an  important  offset  to  the  drag  to  domestic  demand  from  the 
rebalancing of  public  finances  over the  next  few  years.  There  is  also evidence  that  strong 
growth in the global economy is benefiting parts of the services sector. Earlier this week, the 
airport operator BAA reported a 7.6% annual rise in traffic volumes at Heathrow Airport in 
September – driven by strong business travel growth to Asia and other emerging markets. 
From the position a year ago – when demand had fallen sharply at home and abroad in the 
wake of the financial crisis – this turnaround is impressive. So my  verdict on the recovery 
would be “so far, so good”. But we have to recognise that we are still at an early phase of the 
upswing. It is not surprising, therefore, that growth is uneven across sectors and from quarter 
to quarter, and that confidence is still somewhat fragile. 
The  state  of  confidence  is  not  helped  by  the  negative  tone  of  much  of  the  economic 
commentary  at  present  –  which  seems  to  reflect  a  high  degree  of  nervousness  about  the 
                                                 
3   Data is latest available: for manufacturing it relates to the three months to August and for services to the three 
months to July. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 3
progress of the recovery. But this raises the obvious question: if things are so good, why do 
they feel so bad – to some people at least? 
There  are  three  elements  which  appear  to  be  underpinning  these  concerns  about  the 
sustainability  of  growth  in  the  current  economic  climate:  the  prospects  for  the  global 
economy; the prospective impact of the government’s fiscal tightening; and the legacy of the 
financial  crisis.  I  will  discuss  these  three  issues  in  turn  before  coming  back  to  the  crucial 
issue of how the Bank of England’s monetary policy can best support the recovery. 
The global economic outlook 
A serious setback for the global economy would have major repercussions for the growth of 
the  UK  economy.  Our  economy  has  a  very  international  focus,  and  exports,  international 
business activity and the financial sector all play a part in creating strong linkages from the 
UK  to  other  major  economies  elsewhere  in  the  world.  The  sharp  drop  in  business  and 
financial  sentiment  across  international  markets  in  late  2008  and  early  2009  –  and  the 
ensuing  downturn  in  the  global  economy  –  played  a  major  part  in  tipping  the  UK  into 
recession two years ago. Similarly, the rebound in the global economy has helped to support 
our recovery over the last year or so. 
 However,  a  serious  downturn  in  global  growth  does  not  seem  very  likely  at  the  moment. 
According to the IMF, global growth this year is now projected to be nearly 5%, compared to 
a projected growth rate of less than 2% just eighteen months ago.4 As Chart 4 shows, this is 
a return to the strong growth rates seen in the mid-2000s, which was regarded at the time as 
a period of robust growth across the world economy. Though the IMF expects growth to slip 
back to 4.2% in 2011, this is still above the average global growth rate in the 2000s prior to 
the recession. 
                                                 
4   The IMF World Economic Outlook forecast projected world GDP growth of 1.9% in April 2009. This forecast 
was uprated to 2.5% in July 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2010
An  important  driving  force  behind  this  global  recovery  has  been  growth  in  Asia  and  other 
emerging  markets.  As  Chart  5  shows,  annual  growth  in  the  seven  largest  Asia-Pacific 
economies, an economic bloc on a par with the US and the European Union in economic 
size, has averaged around 7–8% in the first half of this year, slightly ahead of the pre-crisis 
rate of growth in this region. Growth in the more mature advanced economies of the US and 
the European Union has also picked up – though not as strongly as in Asia, reflecting the 
greater  maturity  of  these  economies  and  hence  their  lower  potential  for  productivity  and 
labour force growth. In the past year, growth in the US and the European Union has been 3% 
and 2% respectively. These rates of growth are broadly in line with the trend growth rates we 
experienced in the US and Europe before the crisis.5 
 The  latest  evidence  suggests  that  the  strong  momentum  of  growth  in  Asia  and  other 
emerging  markets  is  being  maintained.  In  Asia,  there  are  many  indications  that  domestic 
demand has been a powerful driver of its recovery and that growth in this region is becoming 
more autonomous and less dependent on export demand from the western economies. 
In the US and Europe, the indicators are more mixed. Within the European Union, Germany 
grew  very  strongly  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  recording  the  biggest  rise  in  GDP  since 
unification in the second quarter and more recently the lowest rate of unemployment since 
1992. German unemployment has been falling since the mid-2000s, with the exception of the 
recession  period,  which  points  to  an  improvement  in  the  structural  performance  of  its 
economy,  which  should  help  to  sustain  consumer  spending  and  investment.  Some  of 
Germany’s neighbouring economies – including the Benelux countries – are also sharing in 
this pattern of healthy growth. A strong performance from these “core” European economies 
should help to offset the dampening effect of financial and fiscal problems in countries on the 
European periphery, including Ireland. 
                                                 
5  
In the decade to 2007, annual GDP growth averaged 3.1% in the United States and 2.3% in the European 
Union. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 5
Currently, the United States appears to be in a “soft patch” where growth is disappointing. 
But the most recent indicators – including the widely followed Purchasing Managers’ Indices 
(PMIs)  –  still  point  to  continued  growth.  Indeed,  the  latest  readings  from  the  non-
manufacturing PMI last week showed a surprising pick-up in growth. The latest US data on 
retail sales and industrial production are also reasonably positive and help offset some of the 
more downbeat indicators from the housing market. In the US, just as in the UK, we have to 
recognise  that  the  data  may  be  somewhat  variable  at  this  stage  of  the  cycle.  We  should 
therefore  beware  of  interpreting  this  variability  in  the  economic  indicators  as  a  sign  that 
the  recovery  is  seriously  faltering  in  the  United  States,  or  anywhere  else  in  the  global 
economy. 
There  is,  however,  a  flip  side  to  the  strong  rebound  we  have  seen  in  the  global  economy 
since the middle of last year. While the growth of the global economy is helping to sustain the 
recovery  in  UK  economic  activity,  it  is  also  putting  upward  pressure  on  global  energy  and 
commodity prices, along with the impact of a number of weather-related events affecting the 
supply  of  commodities.  And  in  a  world  affected  by  climate  change,  we  may  expect  to 
experience these weather-driven upward price shocks more often. 
These upward shocks to UK inflation from import prices – amplified by the relative weakness 
of  the  pound  –  have  contributed  noticeably  to  the  recent  experience  of  above-target  UK 
inflation.  With  commodity  price  inflation  running  at  over  25%  annually  in  sterling  terms,  a 
renewed surge in the oil price and evidence that manufacturers’ input costs are picking up 
again, I believe we are likely to see continued upward pressure on inflation from global price 
pressures as the recovery in the world economy continues. 
Fiscal tightening and financial restructuring 
So  while  we  should  not  rule  out  further  volatility  from  the  global  economy,  the  most  likely 
outcome is that the world economy is likely to provide a helpful backdrop to UK growth, with 
Asia and emerging markets contributing particularly powerfully, though with the associated 
risk  of  more  upside  shocks  to  inflation.  However,  the  UK  recovery  also  faces  domestic 
headwinds  from  the  rebalancing  of  public  finances  and  the  continued  restructuring  of  the 
financial sector. Here too, however, it is important to put current concerns in perspective. 
In relation to the prospective fiscal tightening, the first point to make is that the overall public 
spending  plans  appear  much  less  draconian  than  the  view  projected  in  the  media  debate 
over  the  summer  –  when  25%  or  even  40%  departmental  cuts  were  being  discussed. 
Individual areas of public spending may face a significant squeeze to allow growth in areas 
where commitments to increase spending have been made – such as pensions and health. 
But taking all these swings and roundabouts into account, the total amount of government 
spending is still set to increase over the next five years in cash terms. Using the broadest 
measure, Total Management Expenditure – which captures all areas of public spending, the 
Budget  projects  an  average  spending  increase  of  1.7%  per  annum  in  the  five  years  to 
2015/16. Should inflation remain at around the 2% level over the next five years, that would 
imply that government spending in aggregate is likely to be broadly flat in real terms. While 
that  represents  a  change  from  the  very  significant  increases  seen  over  the  last  decade,  it 
points to a milder drag on growth than some of the more lurid headlines about the spending 
review have been suggesting. 
On the detail for individual spending areas, we will learn more next week following the public 
spending  review  that  has  been  going  on  over  the  summer.  And  that  will  hopefully  help  to 
remove  some  of  the  current  uncertainty  around  future  public  spending  which  has  been 
affecting business and consumer confidence in the UK recently. 
A second point to note about the impact of the government’s deficit reduction plan is that all 
previous recoveries in the UK economy – in the late 1970s and in the 1980s and 1990s – 
have taken place against a background of fiscal austerity and public spending restraint. It is 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2010
true  that  the  level  of  public  borrowing  has  now  reached  a  higher  level  than  in  previous 
downturns – peaking at 11% of GDP, compared to just under 8% of GDP in the early 1990s 
and  5%  in  the  early  1980s.  But  the  planned  reduction  in  the  deficit  set  out  in  the  Budget 
plans is comparable with the fiscal consolidation we saw in the mid-1990s, when the public 
spending  share  of  GDP  was  also  cut  significantly  as  the  economy  recovered,  as  Chart  6 
shows. 
 Though the latest Budget plans imply a somewhat bigger fall in the public spending share of 
GDP than in the mid-1990s, this is offset by a smaller rise in the tax burden. Taking tax and 
spending  together,  the  projected  impact  is  broadly  similar.  Public  borrowing  fell  by  over 
8 percentage  points  of  GDP  between  1993/4  and  1998/9,  compared  with  a  9  percentage 
point fall projected in the latest Budget over the next five years.6 
That  period  of  public  spending  squeeze  in  the  mid-1990s  was  also  accompanied  by  a 
significant reduction in employment in the public sector, not dissimilar to the figures currently 
being discussed in the context of the current spending review.7 However, the UK economy 
grew reasonably healthily over that period, with annual GDP growth averaging nearly 3.5% a 
year  in  the  five  years  1994  to  1998.  Unemployment  also  fell  because  the  private  sector 
generated many more jobs than were lost in the public sector. As Chart 7 shows, the private 
sector created around 2 million extra jobs in the mid-1990s, dwarfing the reduction in public 
sector employment. The challenge facing the UK economy in the years ahead is to ensure 
that the private sector can once again become an engine of job creation and growth as the 
public sector rebalances, repeating the positive experience of the 1990s recovery. 
                                                 
6   Public sector net borrowing was 7.7% of GDP in 1993/4, moving towards a surplus of 0.5% in 1998/9, a swing 
of 8.2% in the public sector financial balance as a share of GDP. The Budget plans show a 9 percentage point 
swing – from borrowing of 10.1% in the current financial year to 1.1% in 2015/6. 
7   From Q3 1991 to Q4 1998, public sector employment fell by 827,000 – a fall of around 14% of the total. The 
Office for Budget Responsibility projects a fall in 600,000 over the present consolidation, a fall of around 10%. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 7
 There is, however, one important difference between the situation now and the mid-1990s in 
that the flow of finance to support the growth of private sector businesses has been affected 
by  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  banking  sector.  For  many  businesses  and 
individuals,  the  terms  on  which  they  can  access  lending  are  much  less  favourable  than 
before the crisis. In one sense, this is very appropriate in that credit was too freely available 
in some parts of the financial system in the mid-2000s and this created the conditions for the 
global credit boom which preceded the financial crisis.8 But if the pendulum swings back too 
far and access to credit becomes too restrictive, that could become an impediment to growth 
over this recovery. 
In terms of the cost of funds, monetary policy has provided a powerful offset to any lending 
constraints.  As  Chart  8  shows,  the  cost  of  mortgage  finance  for  households  and  the 
average  rate  on  business  borrowing  has  come  down  significantly.  The  current  level  of 
interest rates – even allowing for higher spreads on mortgage and business loans – is much 
lower than those prevailing over the recovery in the 1990s and at the current inflation rate the 
average loan rates shown in Chart 8 are close to zero in real terms.9 
There have been concerns registered about access to finance by individual businesses and 
business  groups,  though  the  banks  also  point  out  that  the  demand  for  new  lending  is 
subdued because of the natural caution of businesses about investment at present. In recent 
visits  I  have  undertaken  to  businesses  around  the  country,  the  general  picture  for 
manufacturing  and  services  companies  appears  to  be  that  they  can  get  the  finance  they 
need,  but  it  is  more  difficult  and  is  taking  longer  and  absorbing  more  management  time. 
Lending  related  to  property  and  construction  appears  more  constrained,  with  some  of  the 
major banks seeking to substantially reduce their exposure to these sectors. 
 
                                                 
8   See  Hume,  M.  and  Sentance,  A.,  (2009)  “The  Global  Credit  Boom:  Challenges  for  Macroeconomics  and 
Policy”, Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee Unit Discussion Paper no.27, June 2009. 
9   The effective loan rate on mortgages is 3.5% and on business loans 2.9%, compared to CPI inflation of 3.1% 
at present. In the early stages of the 1990s recovery, bank base rates fell to 5.25% in early 1994 but rose to 
over 6% at the end of the year. Typical loan rates would be 1-2% above this level. 
8 
 BIS Review 134/2010
 I believe it is an open question on how serious a constraint the financial sector will prove to 
be on the recovery. But there has been some recent encouraging evidence. Over the last few 
quarters,  the  Bank’s  regular  surveys  have  been  pointing  to  an  easing  of  credit  conditions. 
And  the  CBI’s  quarterly  Industrial  Trends  Survey  has  showed  a  sharp  fall  back  in  the 
proportion of companies citing access to external finance as a constraint on output, exports 
and investment. As Chart 9 show, these indicators have returned to around pre-crisis levels 
from the very elevated and unprecedented levels we saw at the peak of financial crisis in late 
2008 and early 2009. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
  9
The importance of the supply side 
All these factors – the global economy, the impact of fiscal tightening and the effects of the 
continued adjustment in the financial sector – will have a bearing on the growth of the UK 
economy through the recovery and hence on monetary policy. But there is another element 
which is crucial to the progress of the recovery which we need to acknowledge. This is the 
flexibility and health of the supply side of the UK economy. Key issues relating to the supply-
side  performance  of  the  economy  include:  how  efficiently  labour  markets  operate;  how 
dynamic  and  entrepreneurial  UK-based  firms  are;  how  various  forms  of  regulation  affect 
investment plans and the climate for doing business; and how efficiently the economy can 
reallocate resources away from declining activities to new areas of growth. 
I have been generally impressed by the supply side performance of the UK economy through 
this  recession  and  the  early  phases  of  the  recovery.  Most  businesses  have  showed 
resilience in the face of a big shock to demand, and the flexibility of wages and hours worked 
was used to protect jobs. Company failures have been lower than we have seen in previous 
recessions.10 And the economy has turned round from the very worrying situation we faced 
in  the  middle  of  last  year  and  has  generated  over  300,000  new  jobs  since  last  winter, 
according to the latest Labour Force Survey results. 
 But  there  are  some  puzzles  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  too,  and  these  have  an 
important  bearing  on  the  judgements  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  making  at  the 
moment.  Capacity  utilisation  appears  quite  high  given  the  early  phase  of  the  recovery. 
Chart 10 shows the responses from the CBI’s Industrial Trends Survey on capacity utilisation 
in manufacturing, where it is perhaps easier to assess than in the services sector. Currently, 
the amount of spare capacity appears to be close to historical averages, which is not what 
we might expect when the economy is in such an early  stage of recovery from  recession. 
This, and other evidence, casts doubt on the degree of spare capacity in the economy and 
on how significant this factor will be in dampening inflation from its currently elevated level. 
                                                 
10   Business failures in the recent recession peaked at below 1% of firms, compared with 2.6% in the early 1990s 
and 1.8% in the early 1980s. 
10 
 BIS Review 134/2010
Another  puzzle  is  a  surprising  drop  in  productivity  we  have  seen  over  the  recession. 
Unusually,  the  decline  in  output  appears  to  have  been  much  bigger  than  the  decline  in 
employment  when  normally  we  observe  the  opposite  result.  In  terms  of  the  impact  on 
unemployment, this has been a good thing, helping to dampen the cost of the recession in 
terms of lost jobs. But this raises further questions about how much slack there is in the UK 
labour  market  as  the  economy  begins  to  grow  and  generate  new  jobs.  The  behaviour  of 
productivity in the recession also raises the question of whether the UK productivity growth 
trend  over  the  medium  term  has  shifted.  If  it  has,  we  may  make  big  mistakes  basing  our 
assessment of underlying growth on past productivity trends. 
In my view, these puzzles mean we should be particularly circumspect and cautious at the 
moment about the assumptions we make about the growth of the supply-side potential of the 
UK  economy  and  the  related  issue  of  the  margin  of  spare  capacity.  The  late  1990s  and 
2000s  saw  a  wave  of  supply-side  optimism  about  UK  economic  performance  –  but  in  my 
view this reflected one-off shifts in labour market performance rather than an improvement in 
the underlying trend rate of productivity.11 Given the evidence of weaker productivity growth, 
it makes sense for policymakers to make relatively conservative estimates of UK medium-
term growth potential going forward. 
Inflation and current monetary policy 
At  the  beginning  of  this  speech,  I  said  that  a  healthy  economy  is  normally  a  growing 
economy. And that raises the issue of how UK monetary policy should best play its part in 
sustaining the recovery by contributing to the underlying health of our economy.  
Monetary policy can help sustain and support the emerging economic recovery in two main 
ways.  The  first  is  through  the  impact  of  the  current  settings  of  policy  on  the  growth  of 
demand. It clearly does not make sense to tighten monetary policy dramatically in the current 
climate in a way which totally undermines the growth of the economy. However, if interest 
rates were moved up gradually from current levels, in a well-communicated strategy that was 
understood  by  the  public,  the  business  community  and  financial  markets,  the  cost  of 
borrowing would still be low in real terms and  I do not believe that the recovery would be 
seriously  damaged.  Indeed,  for  the  many  UK  households  which  rely  on  the  income  from 
savings and investments, this could provide a powerful boost to confidence by signalling the 
beginning of a return to more normal economic conditions. 
The  other  very  important  way  in  which  monetary  policy  can  support  recovery  is  by 
maintaining  confidence  in  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  mandate  for  the 
Monetary Policy Committee makes clear that the best contribution that the MPC can make to 
sustained economic growth is by maintaining price stability – which is specified in terms of a 
2% target for CPI inflation under our current remit. 
There  are  good  reasons  why  low  and  stable  inflation  remains  the  focus  of  our  monetary 
policy.  The  effects  of  high  inflation  are  damaging  in  their  own  right  –  eroding  the  value  of 
savings, hitting pensioners on fixed incomes and creating an uncertain and volatile business 
climate.  After  inflation  got  out  of  control  in  the  UK  in  the  mid-1970s,  we  experienced  two 
decades of economic volatility and high unemployment, including three major recessions. 
Fortunately, there is little risk today of a return to that era of double digit inflation rates. Since 
the 1990s, the UK’s monetary policy framework and the actions of the MPC operating within 
                                                 
11   See “Inflation and the Supply Side of the Economy” Speech by Andrew Sentance on 16 January 2007 – my 
(available  at 
first  speech  as  a  member  of 
wwww.bankofengland.co.uk). In this speech, I argued that labour supply increases – including a drop in the 
equilibrium unemployment rate and higher immigration were the main factors leading to improved UK supply 
side performance between the mid-1990s and mid-2000s. 
fuller  discussion  of 
the  MPC, 
for  a 
issue 
this 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 11
that framework has built confidence that low and stable inflation will be maintained. But it is 
important that this confidence is not eroded by a perception that the MPC has taken its eye 
off the ball and is becoming more tolerant of higher inflation. 
 I believe this medium term confidence in a world of stable prices is an important anchor for 
the private sector when there has been so much instability in recent years. If we continue to 
experience above-target inflation, while the MPC sets policy to head off the opposite risk – of 
deflation, confidence in the inflation target and the credibility of the MPC risk being eroded. 
And the longer the period of above-target inflation goes on without any policy response, the 
greater this risk becomes. 
Unfortunately, the risk of such a loss of confidence and credibility appears to be increasing. 
As Chart 11 shows, we have seen two major spikes in CPI inflation within the last two years. 
And it is possible that another one is in prospect when higher VAT comes into effect early 
next year, particularly if this is accompanied by a continuation of the recent surge in energy 
and  commodity  prices.  These  repeated  episodes  risk  eroding  confidence  that  UK  policy-
makers  remain  committed  to  low  and  stable  inflation,  with  a  knock-on  effect  on  inflation 
expectations in financial markets, among the business community and the public which could 
be self-fulfilling. 
In the depth of the recession in the first half of last year, we could be fairly relaxed about 
upward pressures on inflation. At that time, the MPC was worried about the opposite trend – 
a  lurch  into  deflation  with  prices  and  wages  on  a  downward  spiral.  But  these  deflationary 
fears have not been realised. Instead, inflation has run above the target and wage freezes 
introduced to help businesses weather the storm of the recession are coming to an end. The 
current period of above-target inflation risks being prolonged by monetary policy which is too 
lax – creating a climate in which higher inflation is not just the product of one-off shocks but 
becomes more deeply ingrained. 
12 
 BIS Review 134/2010
 The economy is now recovering at home and abroad. The world economy is growing above 
its pre-crisis trend, and domestic spending in money terms is also following the same pattern, 
as Chart 12 shows. Inflation has been above target, not below it – and is expected to remain 
so for some time. Because of these changes in economic conditions, I have voted for a rise 
in interest rates at recent MPC meetings – as a start to a gradual movement away from the 
exceptional  level  of  monetary  stimulus  put  in  place  to  combat  very  difficult  economic 
conditions last year. And I continue to believe that this the right policy for the situation the UK 
economy currently faces. 
In the years ahead, we will see much tighter restraint of public spending as the large deficit 
which built up over the recession is reined in. That process of deficit reduction is necessary 
to ensure longer term confidence in the future stability of the economy in financial markets 
and more generally. In this environment, it is the private sector which will be the engine of 
growth  for  the  UK  economy  –  just  as  it  was  in  the  1990s  recovery  and  the  previous 
recoveries we have experienced here in the UK. Confidence that inflation is being kept under 
control is a key factor in sustaining that private sector engine of growth. 
My view remains that we should be starting now to make a gradual adjustment of monetary 
policy. The improvement we have seen in the economy over the last year and the above-
target inflation we have experienced point to the need to begin the process of withdrawing 
the  very  substantial  level  of  monetary  stimulus  which  was  put  in  place  to  counter  the  big 
financial shocks we experienced in late 2008 and early 2009. 
Such a policy should not be a threat to the recovery. In my view it is the key to sustaining the 
recovery. It is the right response to an economy which is growing but experiencing persistent 
above-target  inflation.  It  would  reduce  the  risk  of  a  future  shock  to  confidence  if  current 
above-target inflation does become more deeply embedded and interest rates then need to 
rise more sharply to combat it. And it would provide more confidence to the public and the 
business community that the MPC takes its remit seriously and is determined to ensure that 
this recovery is built on the solid foundation of price stability. 
BIS Review 134/2010 
 13
