Emsley D Tromp: The importance of integrity for the development of a 
country 
Speech  by  Dr  Emsley  D  Tromp,  President  of  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  at  the 
conference “Integrity – the foundation of good government”, Willemstad, 31 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
It was with pleasure that I accepted the invitation to address you during the Sixth Biennial 
Conference of the Caribbean Ombudsman Association (CAROA). I am pleased to participate 
in this forum, not only because of the importance of transparency and good governance, but 
also  because  it  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  express  my  appreciation for  the  work  you  are 
doing in the Caribbean. By helping to enhance public sector accountability and transparency 
and developing greater public awareness of the requirements for and the importance of good 
governance, your organization is performing a vital service to individual countries and to the 
Caribbean economy in general. 
That Curaçao was chosen to host this conference provides us with a platform for discussing 
the  importance  of  integrity  for  this  newly  formed  country.  As  the  theme  of  the  conference 
correctly indicates, integrity should be the foundation of good governance. As President of 
the  Central  bank,  my  address  will  focus  first  on  the  issue  of  integrity  in  the  context  of  the 
work we have been doing in this field and second on the importance of good governance as 
a foundation for macroeconomic stability.  
The  Bank’s  role  in  governance  issues  has  been  evolving  over  the  years,  and  good 
governance  has  taken  on  increasing  importance  in  our  primary  function  of  promoting  the 
stability of the guilder and our supervisory tasks. The Bank, as well as the institutions under 
its  supervision,  have  awakened  to  this  concern,  although  with  varying  degrees  of 
enthusiasm. Indeed, as recently as a few years ago, there was little support for the Central 
Bank  becoming  more  actively  involved  in  governance  issues.  Some  people  feared  that  in 
taking  on  such  issues,  the  institution  would  become  politicized  and  lose  its  effectiveness. 
Others  attached  higher  priority  to  other  issues.  Today,  however,  governance  issues  have 
moved to the forefront of our policy agenda. This shift in focus is the result of the growing 
perception of what constitutes sound economic policy.  
More  and  more  evidence  has  emerged  concerning  the  adverse  consequences  of  bad 
governance on economic performance – among them, losses in government revenue, lower 
quality  public  investment  and  public  services,  reduced  private  investment,  and  the  loss  of 
public confidence in government. With such evidence has come a broader consensus on the 
central importance of transparency and good governance in achieving economic success.  
Numerous  studies  have  shown  that  where  governance  is  poor,  domestic  investment  and 
growth  suffer.  In  a  world  in  which  private  capital  has  become  more  mobile,  mounting 
evidence  suggests  that  corruption  undermines  the  confidence  of  investors  and  adversely 
affects private capital inflows, an important source of economic growth.  
Going  back  to  the  theme  of  this  conference,  I  want  to  reiterate  that  accountable  and 
transparent  government  is  an  important  milestone  on  the  path  to  creating  the  most 
prosperous and productive economies – economies that allow individuals, businesses, and 
governments to create the highest possible standard of living for the largest possible number 
of people.  
Ladies and gentlemen, there is now universal consensus that promoting good governance is 
essential to creating an environment in which countries can achieve lasting prosperity. As I 
will  discuss below,  important  aspects  of  good  governance  include  insuring  the  rule  of  law, 
improving the efficiency and accountability of the public sector, and tackling corruption.  
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
Please allow me to share with you five conditions essential to good governance.  
1.  
The  first  condition  necessary  for  economic  efficiency  and  the  eradication  of 
corruption  is  strong  management  of  public  resources  and  establishment  of  a  stable  and 
transparent regulatory environment for private sector activity. The lack of transparency about 
underlying economic and financial conditions can feed market uncertainty and trigger large 
capital outflows that can, in turn, threaten macroeconomic stability.  
2.  
The  second  condition  is  transparent  government  financial  operations.  Maximizing 
this transparency can be achieved by creating systems that limit the opportunities for making 
decisions  on  an  ad  hoc  basis  and  for  giving  preferential  treatment  to  individuals  and 
organizations. For example, we have to simplify our tax systems, labor laws, and business 
legislation and strengthen tax and customs administration by eliminating special exemptions 
that  apply  to  a  privileged  few;  this  is  the  best  way  to  ensure  that  adequate  revenues  are 
received  to  finance  essential  public  services  and  that  such  services  are  accessible  to  the 
general population.  
3.  
The third condition for good government is transparent budgetary procedures. We 
have  to  strengthen  and  increase  the  transparency  of  budgetary  procedures  to  ensure  that 
government  revenues  are  fully  accounted  for  and  used  as  agreed  in  the  budget.  We  also 
have to improve the quality of government expenditures by reducing outlays for unproductive 
purposes. The savings that result will make room for spending on primary health care, basic 
education,  vocational  training,  and  essential  infrastructure.  In  this  regard,  the  recently 
achieved fiscal consolidation in the context of the debt forgiveness program should not mask 
the vulnerabilities of our fiscal situation. 
4.  
The  fourth  condition  needed  is  more  effective  and  accountable  economic  and 
financial institutions. To this end, the adoption of the “Harmonisatie wetgeving”, which has 
been  submitted  to  parliament,  is  essential  to  improving  the  quality  of  financial  sector 
regulation and supervision and enhancing the transparency of financial sector operations.  
5.  
The  final  requirement  is  to  have  better  data  available  to  the  public  on  domestic 
economic and financial policies and performance. I cannot overemphasize the importance of 
high quality statistical data; such data are an important factor in improving economic policy 
and  an  essential  aid  to  potential  investors  in  evaluating  countries’  economic  policies  and 
performance.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  governance  is  essential  for  countries  at  all  stages  of 
development – from the recently autonomous Curaçao and Sint Maarten, which are still in 
the process of building up domestic institutions and undertaking the basic reforms needed to 
accelerate economic growth, to advanced countries such as the Netherlands. 
In the past few months, the world has been shocked to see how quickly countries renowned 
for outstanding economic performance have been engulfed in crisis.  
Although the causes of the crisis are varied and complex, many of the problems that lie at 
the  heart  of  the  difficulties  are  lack  of  transparency  about  government,  corporate  and 
financial  sector  operations.  Therefore,  the  issue  of  good  governance  is  not  limited  to  the 
public sector. Just as activities in the public sector must be more open and transparent, so 
too must those in the private sector.  
Private  sector  governance  should  include  measures  to  improve  the  transparency  of 
corporate balance sheets through independent external audits, disclosure, and publication of 
consolidated statements for businesses so that markets can monitor corporate performance. 
At the same time, a more level playing field is needed for private sector activity. 
CAROA’s initiative in organizing this conference could not have been more timely. Integrity is 
essential  to  a  country’s  success  and  development.  Integrity  is  the  foundation  of  good 
governance, protecting a country from debilitating behavior such as corruption, while at the 
same time helping the country achieve its goals. The topics that will be discussed here, will 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
provide  valuable  lessons  especially  for  the  new  countries  of  Curaçao  and  St.  Maarten  in 
building strong and prosperous societies. 
Ladies and gentlemen, turning to the institution for which I am responsible, the Central Bank 
has  long  recognized  integrity  and  compliance  as  fundamental  to  the  soundness  of  the 
financial institutions subject to its supervision. Indeed, integrity is the core value in our vision. 
We strive to instill integrity in our staff and ensure that it becomes the guiding principle in all 
our operations and actions.  
To  make  integrity  the  norm  rather  than  the  exception,  the  Bank  has  introduced  and 
implemented  various  measures.  We  have  been  very  active  in  promoting  good  corporate 
governance in the financial sector of the Netherlands Antilles since 1994. In August 1996, the 
Bank issued Guidance Notes for the Board of Directors of Supervised Financial Institutions 
on  Corporate  Governance  and  a  Summary  of  Best  Practice  Guidelines  on  Corporate 
Governance,  which  were  revised  in  October  2001  and  November  2006,  respectively.  The 
guidance notes describe, among other things, the general responsibilities of the Board, the 
legal obligations of directors, and the role of auditors.  
To encourage the practical implementation of the guidelines, the Bank requires the Board of 
Directors of all supervised financial institutions to provide to the Bank annually a “Statement 
of Compliance” with the Bank’s Summary of Best Practice Guidelines. These statements are 
reviewed by an external auditor.  
The  Bank  also  has  institutionalized  periodic  integrity  tests  of  policymakers  and  qualified 
holders of institutions subject to its supervision.  
These  guidelines  have  significantly  increased  awareness  of  the  importance  of  sound 
governance  and  integrity  by  the  supervised  financial  institutions,  some  of  which  are 
government-owned.  
Concerning the Bank itself, the appointment procedures of the board of directors are clearly 
specified  in  the  Bank’s  charter.  Needless  to  say,  appointees  should  meet  certain 
requirements, including professional and personal qualifications. Furthermore, the members 
of the board of directors should abstain from activities that would create conflicts of interest 
with their role as central bankers. Additionally, an independent and expert supervisory board 
is part of the governance structure of the central bank. The supervisory board plays a crucial 
role  in  ensuring  the  effective  administration  of  the  Bank.  The  supervisory  board  is 
responsible  for  approving  the  institution’s  operational  budget,  reviewing  and  approving  the 
annual  accounts,  and  overseeing  the  audit  process.  In  addition,  the  supervisory  board 
promotes the use of structured planning and management frameworks.  
Last, but not least in importance, the Bank has institutionalized a recruitment program that 
enables  it  to  hire  highly  qualified  and  professional  staff.  The  program  also  provides  for 
periodic integrity testing of personnel. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the goal of my remarks today was to focus our attention on some of 
the  key  issues  that  relate  to  integrity  and  good  governance  –  both  in  the  public  and  the 
private sectors. While much progress has been achieved in the area of integrity and good 
governance, we should not forget that integrity is a fluid concept. What may seem harmless 
today may not be acceptable tomorrow.  
Given the high and lasting cost that lack of good governance can inflict on a nation, we have 
to be unrelenting in our efforts to make further advances in this area. Therefore, let me close 
with a renewed call to continue to establish clear guidelines for strengthening integrity and to 
strictly adhere to these guidelines. While we may sometimes be constrained by our limited 
resources, we should intensify cooperative efforts both in the kingdom and in the region to 
continue  to  meet  and  promote  the  best  internationally  accepted  practices.  Given  our  track 
record in this area as the Netherlands Antilles, I am convinced that Curacao will continue to 
meet those challenges as an autonomous country. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
Let  me  once  again  express  my  support  for  and  admiration  to  our  Ombudsman  for  the 
organization of this seminar, and thank you all for your attention. I wish you a very fruitful 
conference. 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2010
