 Andreas Dombret: Deutsche Bundesbank – Financial Stability Review 2010 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 25 November 2010. 
 The situation 
I. 
The  stability  situation  in  the  German  financial  system  continued  to  be  dominated  by  risks 
stemming from the international environment. The focus here is on two key topics which will 
continue to occupy us for the foreseeable future: first, the European sovereign debt crisis that 
has persisted since the early summer of this year and, second, the potential inherent risks of 
an extended period of low interest rates. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  note  that  the  stability  of  the  German 
banking system has shown a marked improvement since the publication of the last Financial 
Stability  Review.  Its  resilience  has  increased  thanks  to  more  stable  earnings  and  better 
capitalisation;  the  situation  with  regard  to  risk  has  eased  slightly,  especially  in  domestic 
lending.  Nevertheless,  the  German  banking  system  still  has  vulnerabilities  and  structural 
shortcomings. 
Above  all,  the  revised  regulatory  provisions  for  more  capital  and  for  a  more  appropriate 
liquidity reserve will bring about a longer-term gain in stability. One key challenge that still 
has to be resolved, however, is how to deal with systemically important financial institutions. 
Risks of high sovereign debt and persistent low interest rates 
II. 
The European debt crisis has been the crucial event of the past few months. Its onset in the 
early summer of this year placed European financial stability in acute danger. The response 
of  governments  and  central  banks  was  rapid  and  on  a  massive  scale,  thus  preventing  an 
escalation  of  the  crisis.  Our  “heat  map”  shows  the  increasing  risk  in  the  European 
government  bonds  segment  (Figure  1):  since  the  previous  year,  the  “traffic  lights”  have 
jumped from green to red. Yet, it is possible to identify positive developments, too. Tensions 
in  the  interbank  market  have  eased,  for  example,  not  least  because  the  banks  are  now 
hoarding significantly less liquidity. 
The problem of high sovereign debt is still active, however, and will keep us busy for some 
time to come. It will also be important to tackle the longer-term challenges and ensure the 
long-term sustainability of public finances. 
There are three key approaches to this. First, the fiscal rules have to be hardened. Second, 
macroeconomic developments in the member states have to be monitored more closely in 
future.  Both  of  these  points  of  approach  are  designed  to  prevent  government  debt  crises. 
However, such crises cannot be ruled out entirely in the future either. Therefore, third, it will 
be necessary to establish a crisis management and resolution mechanism as a prudent and 
necessary supplement to the existing regulatory framework. Given strict compliance with the 
“no  bail-out”  principle,  assistance  to  individual  member  states  linked  to  strict  conditionality 
and a very limited timeframe should be possible if stability of monetary union as a whole is at 
risk. In a well-regulated crisis mechanism of this kind, private debtors should not be allowed 
to escape their responsibility. It should be stated explicitly, however, that such a mechanism 
should  be  established  only  after  the  end  of  the  crisis  and  not  interfere  with  existing 
agreements and obligations. 
In addition to the risks of the debt crisis, it is crucial not to lose sight of the risks inherent in 
an extended period of low interest rates. This includes, in particular, the possibility of new 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 bubbles being formed in some markets for assets as part of a resurgent “search for yield”. 
This is not a problem at present, but could become an issue in the medium term. 
Persistently low interest rates incite, furthermore, the entering of liquidity risks and thus put 
banks at the whim of market sentiment. Expanding banks’ short-term refinancing was more 
or  less  unavoidable  in  periods  of  strong  mistrust;  the  correction  of  this  expansion  has  not 
taken place so far. This means that the banks may be on a collision course with the large 
financing needs of general government, since large issuances of government bonds are to 
be expected over the next few months. 
Finally, an abundant supply of liquidity may incite banks to defer a necessary clearing-up of 
their balance sheets. Major legacy problems in the loan portfolios may lead to banks holding 
back longer in granting new loans. 
Aspects of the risk situation in the German banking system 
III. 
Beyond  the  risks  emanating  from  the  global  setting,  the  risk  and  stability  situation  in  the 
German financial system looks more positive than it did a year ago. Banks’ profitability has 
recovered since its slump in 2008 and their capital adequacy has improved. Between the first 
quarter  of  2008  and  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  large  complex  financial  institutions 
increased their Tier 1 capital ratio, on average, by 2.4 percentage points to 10.4%. Finally, 
the German banking system has remained fully functional at all times and the credit crunch 
that was feared for a time did not materialise. 
Our  financial  system  is  currently  riding  a  tailwind  from  the  pick-up  in  economic  activity  in 
Germany. There is a strong upturn with growth at over 3% this year, which is bolstering the 
creditworthiness  of  domestic  borrowers.  Moreover,  confidence  in  the  German  banking 
system is also benefiting from the fact that government budgets in Germany are deemed to 
be comparatively sound. 
Vulnerabilities  and  structural  weaknesses  in  the  German  banking  system  nevertheless 
continue to exist. The differences in the performance of individual institutions or categories of 
institutions have, if anything, become greater. It will therefore also be a matter of reducing 
excess capacity and, where necessary, developing future-oriented ad sustainable business 
models. This is due to the fact that the tailwind generated by positive developments in the 
economy as a whole may one day subside. 
In my following remarks, I shall enlarge on individual aspects of the overall picture of risks in 
the German banking system. 
The international trend towards shorter-term financing is also a fact of life in Germany. The 
share of outstanding domestic bank debt securities with a residual maturity of less than one 
year used to be fairly stable at 22%. At present, the figure is 30% and is at a persistently high 
level (Figure 2). Even so, the German banking system is well on the way to achieving a more 
stable composition of its wholesale funding sources. For example, the share of non-banks’ 
deposits  in  total  liabilities  has  gone  up  from  37%  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis  to  40%  at 
present. The deposits of non-banks are comparatively stable and thus reducing refinancing 
risks. The banks should maintain their efforts to make their refinancing structure more stable. 
The  market  risks  in  the  trading  portfolios  of  German  banks  have  fallen  markedly  since 
mid-2009, even though they have not fallen as sharply this year (Figure 3). In line with this, 
the  capital  requirements  of  institutions  (with  their  own  market  risk  models)  went  down  by 
more than one-third between June 2009 and June 2010. Declining volatility played a part in 
this, but the reduction in formerly significant credit trading positions also made a contribution. 
The outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in the early summer of this year nonetheless had 
systemic potential – something that can be surmised from the accelerating co-movement of 
the trading results. Evidently, in terms of their proprietary trading positions, the banks were 
exposed to the crisis in a very similar way. 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 German banks’ exposures, especially to foreign institutions, still contain segments that are 
vulnerable.  These  include  the  financing  of  commercial  real  estate  and  legacy  holdings  of 
structured products. 
The situation in the international commercial real estate markets has remained tense. Above 
all,  market  prices  have  fallen  sharply,  especially  in  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom,  but  also  in  Spain  and  Ireland.  In  spring  of  this  year,  the  Bundesbank  surveyed 
11 large  German  banks  on  the  financing  of  commercial  real  estate.  Their  overall  lending 
volume  was  roughly  €325 billion,  with  the  USA  accounting  for  15%  and  the  UK  just  under 
9%. Yet, 90% of the loans do not exceed the value of the property. In some 44% of cases, 
the loan-to-value ratio is 60% or lower. This means that the risks from commercial real estate 
are, on the whole, manageable. 
Since the outbreak of the crisis, the spotlight has been on structured securities. Substantial 
amounts  of  these  can  still  be  found  in  German  banks’  portfolios.  At  mid-year  in  2010,  the 
book value of securitised real estate loans stood at €82 billion and the book value of CDOs 
was  some  €62 billion.  Securitised  student  loans  were  just  under  €34 billion  and  CMBS 
around €22 billion. The overall volume was declining only slightly in the first half of the year. 
It should be noted, however, that exchange rate effects had a strong impact on these figures. 
The risk situation in German banks’ business with non-residents has diverged. There are still 
some difficult segments, for example, such as the construction sector in the countries where 
the real estate markets are under price pressure. But, overall, the credit standing of large, 
global  enterprises  has  benefited  from  the  upturn  in  the  world  economy.  Elsewhere,  the 
deleveraging  via  external  assets,  which  could  be  observed  in  some  cases  last  year,  has 
come  to  a  standstill.  The  share  of  foreign  business,  measured  by  loans  granted  to 
non-banks, has remained fairly constant this year at just under 21%. 
Domestic credit risks have stabilised. This has been assisted by the pick-up in the economy 
as  a  whole  and  by  the  stability  of  the  German  real  estate  market,  in  which  there  were  no 
detectable exaggerations. German banks’ need for write-downs is likely to be already past its 
peak. In 2009, write-downs amounted to roughly €37 billion. For this year, we expect a clear 
decline to €23 billion (Figure 4). For the two-year period of 2009 and 2010, this means that, 
altogether,  there  were  write-downs  of  some  €60 billion.  In  the  2009  Financial  Stability 
Review, we estimated a figure of between €50 billion and €75 billion. The actual write-downs 
are therefore in the lower half of the expected range. 
The  Stability  Review  also  contains  a  stress  test  on  the  profitability  of  German  banks  in 
interest  rate  business  and  commission  and  fee  business  (Figure  5).  The  relevant  risk 
scenario assumes a marked flattening of the yield curve  (decline of 55 basis points in the 
spread between the three-month interest rate and the yield in ten-year Bunds) and a severe 
economic slump (4% decline in GDP). In the current economic situation, this is undoubtedly 
a very sceptical assumption. Operating income (excluding the trading result) shows a distinct 
fall  in  this  scenario:  Net  interest  income  for  the  German  banking  system  as  a  whole 
(measured by total assets) will go down by almost 8%; cyclically driven commission and fee 
income  will  fall  by  10%.  Added  to  this  are  large  write-downs  in  the  event  the  assumed 
recession materialises. According to our estimates, these would surge to around €35 billion 
again; in other words, they would be €9 billion higher than the average of the past five years. 
Monitoring systemic risk 
IV. 
Central banks, including the Bundesbank, are facing new challenges. They have to identify 
systemic  risks  at  an  early  stage,  which  places  high  demands  on  analytical  skills.  Any 
systemic risks that are identified have to be rigorously contained. 
The  refinements  of  the  international  regulatory  framework  that  have  already  been  put  in 
place represent a gain for financial stability. The course has been set for an improvement in 
banks’ capitalisation and liquidity. These measures will pay off in the long run and significantly 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
 enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  I  do  not  share  the  often-voiced  fears  in  this 
connection about an excessive burden being placed on the banking sector. 
Nevertheless, there remains much to be done. This mainly has to do with the treatment of 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  and  the  financial  system’s  tendency  towards 
(pro)cyclical behaviour. We, too, have to keep a closer eye on the limitations of the areas 
covered by regulation. After all, stricter regulation is of little use if activities are transferred to 
unregulated  sectors  and  become  concentrated  there.  For  that  reason, we  have  to  throw  a 
suitable amount of light on the shadow banking system and make it accessible to supervisory 
coverage,  so  that  we  can  identify  risks  as  soon  as  possible  in  the  peripheral  areas  of  the 
financial system, which are significant in terms of volume. 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
   BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
   6 
 BIS Review 161/2010
   BIS Review 161/2010 
 7
