Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: Enabling environment for capacity building 
Opening speech by Mrs Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of 
the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  at  the  Center  of  Excellence  in  Finance  (CEF)  coordinators 
meeting, Skopje, 1 December 2010. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear  CEF  coordinators,  distinguished  representatives  of  central  banks  and  ministries  of 
finance in the region, dear representatives of the International Monetary Fund, International 
Labor Organization and, last but not least, dear organizers of this event, representatives of 
the CEF (Center of Excellence in Finance), I wish you all a warm welcome. I am delighted 
that this year the traditional meeting of the CEF-coordinators takes place in the Republic of 
Macedonia and it is focused on a very important topic: “Enabling environment for capacity 
building”. 
No doubts that the knowledge does not have boundaries. All of us, during our lifetime do 
try to compile as much wisdom as possible, to broaden our knowledge horizon and augment 
what  we  already  know.  In  our  professional  life,  we  face  a  constant  intellectual  and  public 
debate, which tries to challenge the existing paradigms, to offer new insights and to establish 
new  norms.  All  of  this,  of  course,  for  the  purpose  of  building  stronger  intellectual  and 
analytical capacity for efficiently coping with forthcoming professional challenges.  
Sometimes,  unprecedented  events  are  needed  to  reveal  the  deficiencies  in  the 
currently  accepted  system  of  knowledge.  These  types  of  events  underscore  the 
weaknesses  and  pinpoint  the  missing  parts  of  the  puzzle.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  out  of 
turmoil, we all come out with new ideas, new concepts and new lessons to be learned and 
followed.  Or,  to  be  more  illuminating  let  me  quote  Christopher  Adam  and  David  Vines  – 
Oxford University: “… The Great Depression led Keynes to write his General Theory, thereby 
creating macroeconomics as a basis for national macroeconomic policy-making. The Second 
World  War  led  –  via  the  Bretton  Woods  Conference  –  to  the  creation  of  international 
macroeconomics,  and  to  the  birth  of  the  IMF…  The  present  global  financial  crisis  will,  we 
think,  most  likely  lead  to  a  major  shift  in  our  understanding  of  the  role  of  finance  in 
macroeconomics,  in  both  theory  and  in  policy-making”.  The  recent  global  economic  and 
financial crisis indeed created a room for upgrade of what we knew or what we thought we 
knew.  It  clearly  illustrated  how  fragile  our  knowledge  can  be  emphasizing  the  need  for  a 
continuous capacity building. 
Bearing  all  these  in  mind,  one  cannot  be  oblivious  to  the  role  which  the  training 
centers, such as the CEF, do have in building the architecture of knowledge. In fact, the 
global crisis accentuated even more their importance. They embrace and combine the latest 
theoretical and practical views, trying to spread the new ideas and help policymakers deliver 
optimal policy responses. 
The CEF has proved to be a leading institution in helping policy makers to improve 
institutional  capacities.  Main  instruments  used  to  achieve  this  objective  are  training,  to 
promote  awareness  of  international  standards  and  best  practices  in  public  financial 
management and central banking, as well as provision of technical assistance. Also, it serves 
as  a  platform  for  exchange  of  information  and  for  discussing  and  learning  about  different 
policy  challenges.  By  closely  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  reforms  and  mapping 
further reform needs, it designs up-to date and demand-driven capacity building programs. 
The  CEF  serves  as  a  regional  network  that  focuses  on  the  regional  issues  offering 
regional  solutions,  to  the  extent  possible.  At  the  same  time,  as  one  shock  does  not 
always symmetrically affect all of us, and not all the policy responses are alike, by gathering 
all  of  us,  sharing  of  valuable  experiences  is  enabled.  Looking  forward,  the  EU  integration 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
remains a main anchor for the macroeconomic policies in the region. We are all facing similar 
problems  and  challenges  in  our  efforts  to  bring  our  national  economies  up  to  the  EU 
standards. The convergence process appears to be a bumpy and thorny road, but worthy as 
it will finally lead to better living standards of our nations, which is a final objective of each 
government. In this light, I strongly believe that the CEF will continue to play a crucial role on 
our way towards the EU integration. 
This event will be focused on a topic that emphasizes the importance of human capital 
as  one  of  the  essential  assets  of  each  institution.  For  the  institutions  that  are  socially 
responsible and work for the benefit of all citizens, the most important indicator for measuring 
the success in achieving their strategic goals, is the quality of the policies. One of the biggest 
and toughest tasks of the HRM function, is probably managing the knowledge and building 
the  expertise  of  intellectual  force  of  the  institution,  through  continuous  training  and 
professional development. In order to be effective, organisations must be able to understand 
that human capital alone will not create value. People have to be motivated and managed by 
the use of good human resource practices and given the opportunity to develop and use their 
skills to create valuable goods and services. If the knowledge cannot be embedded in goods 
and  services  that  are  in  demand,  then  this  human  capital  will  have  no  value  to  the 
organization. 
I hope that this workshop will contribute for creating better environment for capacity building 
in  all  our  countries  in  the  region.  Also,  it  is  my  strong  belief,  that  this  meeting  of  the 
coordinators, apart from being useful for exchange of information in the process of prioritizing 
and  creating  the  future  visionary  training  programmes,  will  lead  to  strengthening  of  the 
regional cooperation among national authorities. 
Let me finish my address by quoting Mr. Gary Matthews, Consultant with UK Government’s 
Investors  in  People,  which  I  believe  reflects  the  actual  economic  rationale  of  training  and 
development  of  human  capital:  “People  are  the  only  asset  that  appreciates,  through 
training and development. All other assets depreciate”.  
Dear guests, I wish you a successful work and a pleasant stay! 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
