Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Retail sales from a euro area perspective 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the World Retail Congress, Berlin, 25 October 2010. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Berlin today at the World Retail Congress.  
Retail sales constitute about 45 percent of private consumption, which in turn amounts to a 
share  of  almost  60%  of  GDP.  Thus,  retail  sales  alone  explain  around  30  percent  of 
aggregate demand in the euro area.  
These impressive figures are enough to underline the importance of the retail sector for the 
overall  economy.  As  you  know,  the  primary  objective  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  to 
maintain  price  stability.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  aims  at  keeping  inflation  rates 
below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  In  order  to  reach  this  objective  we  must 
assess the inflation outlook continuously.  
We  form  our  view  on  future  inflation  by  closely  following  and  monitoring  a  wide  range  of 
indicators that affect inflation and the economy’s output of goods and services. Retail sales is 
one of those indicators and certainly – as the figures above show – an important one.  
In my presentation I would like to briefly touch on three questions: 
1. 
2. 
How was the retail trade sector affected by the crisis? 
How  do  –  in  general  –  financial  variables  and  monetary  policy  affect  private 
consumption and retail trade? 
And, what is – in our view – the future outlook for the retail trade sector? 
3. 
Let me turn to the first question on how sales in retail shops and stores were affected by the 
crisis. 
In  Chart  1  you  see  the  annual  rate  of  change  in  the  volume  of  euro  area  retail  sales 
alongside  with  private  consumption  and  GDP.  You  see  that  retail  sales  move  clearly  in 
tandem with private consumption and GDP. As GDP and consumption declined in the recent 
recession,  so  did  retail  sales.  During  the  crisis,  households  drew  back  on  consumption, 
hence  private  consumption  growth  slowed  down  on  the  basis  of  lower  growth  in  incomes, 
reflecting mainly weak employment growth. 
We can see in Chart 2 that the low growth in real disposable income was mainly driven by 
the decline in overall employment. Real compensation per employee, in contrast, contributed 
positively in 2009 – mainly due to the low inflation rates during that time – before stagnating 
again  in  the  beginning  of  this  year.  In  addition,  financial  wealth  declined  in  2008,  thereby 
further depressing consumption growth.  
Another key determinant of aggregate demand are consumers’ expectations. Chart 3 gives 
additional evidence on how consumers’ expectations and confidence declined in parallel with 
private  consumption  during  the  recession  period.  More  recently,  consumer  confidence  has 
increased  while  the  indicator  on  major  purchases,  which  is  an  indicator  for  durable  goods 
consumption, has declined reaching a record low level.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  question:  How  do  financial  variables  and  monetary  policy 
affect private consumption decisions and retail trade?  
Loans  to  households,  whose  developments  are  presented  in  Chart  4,  are  an  important 
indicator  for  the  analysis  of  consumer  spending.  Hence,  the  ECB  regularly  monitors 
household loans as they are a key channel for the transmission of monetary policy.  
BIS Review 140/2010 
 1
Allow me to elaborate a little bit more on this point. Loan developments in the euro area can 
be  explained  by  their  main  determinants,  such  as  house  prices,  various  interest  rates  and 
real income. In line with this, we saw that the annual growth rate of loans to households – 
after some months in negative territory – has turned positive towards the end of 2009 and 
since then has continued to increase steadily [ last observation: 2.9% in August 2010]. This 
positive  annual  growth  of  loans  to  households  reflects  mainly  developments  in  lending  for 
house  purchase.  Loans  for  consumer  credit  are  still  contributing  negatively  to  overall  loan 
growth.  These  latest  developments  in  loans  to  households  confirm  the  broad  consistency 
with business cycle regularities, which suggest that the turning point in the growth of loans to 
households takes place early in the economic cycle. 
The  loan  development  needs  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  current  low  level  of  interest 
rates. Indeed, bank lending rates for loans to households for house purchase declined further 
in  the  second  quarter  of  2010  –  still  to  a  lesser  extent  than  in  the  previous  quarters.  The 
levels of lending rates for loans to households we are currently seeing are comparable to the 
levels observed in 2005. For shorter-term maturities, the interest rates are even lower than in 
2005.  Still,  at  the  same  time,  the  net  percentage  of  banks  reporting  a  tightening  of  credit 
standards  for  loans  to  households  remained  unchanged  in  the  second  quarter  of  2010, 
compared  with  the  previous  quarter.  Overall,  we  can  see  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
since  the  onset  of  the financial crisis  has  been  very  much  supporting  private  consumption 
demand, and thereby retail sales, while keeping a clear orientation to preserve price stability 
in the medium term. 
During the crisis also fiscal policy was used to stabilise consumers spending and retail sales. 
This raised obviously the question on whether fiscal policy in a period of recession should 
take  a  more  forceful  orientation  to  stimulate  consumption  or  a  more  prudent  approach  to 
discretionary  fiscal  policy  making.  In  my  view,  while  the  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers, 
whose  impact  on  activity,  income  distribution  and  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  is 
reasonably  well  understood  and  comparatively  easy  to  predict,  discretionary  changes  – 
particularly  if  they  are  temporary  –  have  mostly  a  short-living  effect  on  demand.  The  car-
scrapping schemes implemented in several countries are a good example. Schemes geared 
towards car purchases certainly stimulated demand in a period of high uncertainty. But such 
influence has not affected the underlying trend of demand of automobiles.  
In Chart 5, which shows the level of car registrations in the euro area, Germany and Spain 
illustrates that indeed car sales have benefited initially from these schemes. However, it is 
also  visible  that  the  increase  of  demand  for  cars  was  mostly  an  anticipation  of  future 
demand. It may however have contributed to the swift recovery of the industry.  
So  far  I  discussed  the  main  determinants  of  private  consumption  demand  on  a  euro  area 
aggregate level. Let me, however, also mention that the aggregate developments in the area 
mask heterogeneous and even divergent changes in different member countries that have 
been subject to shocks of a diverse nature. Chart 6 shows that, while the downturn of retail 
trade was a common feature of most euro area countries, there were significant differences 
across countries  between  the  levels  of  retail  sales  in  2010Q2  compared  with  the time  just 
before the financial crisis in the autumn of 2008. Although it is clear that retail sales have 
contracted  in  most  countries,  it  is  also  clear  that  differences  across  countries  are  quite 
significant. [ The volume of retail trade in Greece, for instance, stood almost 20% below its 
level in 2008Q2, which compares with a fall of 2.0% in the euro area as a whole.] 
Before  coming  to  an  end,  let  me  touch  on  my  final  question  on  the  future  outlook  of  the 
overall economy and consumption and retail in particular. 
[Slide 7] Recent statistical releases and survey evidence continue to be consistent with the 
picture  of  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  The  global 
recovery is expected to continue. At the same time, private sector domestic demand should 
gradually strengthen further, supported by the accommodative monetary policy stance and 
the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  However,  the 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2010
recovery in activity is expected to be dampened by the process of balance sheet adjustment 
in various sectors.  
We expect private consumption to grow at relatively moderate rates in the coming quarters 
before starting to gradually strengthen again. This can be explained by: 
First,  still  weak  labour  markets  and  moderate  growth  in  compensation  per  employee  are 
likely to continue to prevent any significant rebound of disposable income. Nevertheless, real 
incomes are expected to benefit somewhat from improved corporate profitability.  
Second, even though the saving ratio may decline slightly more, it wouldn’t surprise me if it 
remained above its pre-crisis level over the coming years as a result of heightened economic 
uncertainty.  
And  third,  a  further  strengthening  in  the  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  may  still  be 
contained  by  continued  high  debt  levels  and  subdued  developments  in  euro  area  house 
prices.  At  the  same  time,  the  results  of  the  latest  bank  lending  survey  indicate  that  banks 
expect a lower degree of net tightening of credit standards for loans to households for house 
purchase in the third quarter of 2010. The same holds regarding credit standards for loans to 
households for consumer credit and other lending, where banks still expect a net tightening 
but somewhat less so in the third quarter of 2010. 
In conclusion, let me summarise my main points: 
 
The development in retail sales and hence also total demand in the economy were 
affected negatively the recent financial crisis. 
EU  governments  and  the  ECB  have  reacted  to  the  crisis  in  a  swift  and  effective 
manner, avoiding worse outcomes and bringing the economy back on track. 
With regard to the future, I am confident that the economy is on a good recovery 
track.  Now  is  the  time  to  ensure  that  recovery  and  to  make  the  growth  prospect 
sustainable for the future. For this I see three major policy challenges ahead:  
  First, it is important to engage in sound fiscal policies. Indeed, a number of countries have to 
meet  major  challenges,  and  immediate,  ambitious  and  convincing  corrective  actions  are 
required. It is crucial to strengthen public confidence in the capacity of governments to return 
to sustainable public finances. If such a consolidation process is pursued in a credible way, 
short-term  effects  on  economic  growth  could  be  followed  by  the  positive  effect  of 
consolidation on confidence and the expectations for future growth.  
Second, the urgent implementation of far-reaching structural reforms is essential to enhance 
the prospects for higher sustainable growth. Major reforms are particularly needed in those 
countries that have experienced a loss of competitiveness in the past or that are suffering 
from high fiscal and external deficits. Reforms are needed in the area of labour markets in 
order to strengthen productivity growth. We also need increased product market competition 
and greater investments in education to facilitate restructuring and to foster innovation and 
the adoption of new technologies. 
And  third,  we  at  the  ECB  have  the  responsibility  to  continuously  ensure  low  and  stable 
inflation.  This  will  support  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households,  facilitate  price 
comparisons  and  lower  the  real  cost  of  credits.  As  we  have  delivered  on  this  in  the  past 
11 years, I am confident that we will continue to do this in the future.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 
 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 3
  4 
   BIS Review 140/2010
 BIS Review 140/2010 
   5
 6 
   BIS Review 140/2010
  BIS Review 140/2010 
 7
