Enrique Marshall: Central banks’ contribution to financial stability –  
the experience of Chile  
Speech by Mr Enrique Marshall, Board Member of the Central Bank of Chile, at the Central 
Bank of Bolivia’s First Financial Workshop “Macroregulation and Financial Stability”, La Paz, 
29 September 2010. 
I  am  indebted  to  Kevin  Cowan  and  Jorge  Cayazzo  for  their  valuable  comments  on  an  earlier  version  of  this 
presentation but the opinions expressed here are the exclusive responsibility of the author. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Financial stability has been a concern for central banks since their very origins. The functions 
for which they were created – to regulate money and credit markets and to serve as lenders 
of last resort – have a direct bearing on the objective of financial stability and this relationship 
has been further reinforced by the fact that many central banks have also undertaken a role 
in regulating and supervising the banking system. 
Both  the  economic  literature  and  historical  experience  provide  sound  grounds  for  this 
concern for stability, clearly demonstrating that the functioning of the real economy requires 
an  efficient  and  stable  financial  system.  The  hardest  lesson  of  history,  however,  is  that 
financial  crises  have  occurred  time  and  again,  with  a  very  high  cost  in  terms  of  both  their 
fiscal impact and the associated losses of output.1 
Financial  stability  has,  as  a  result,  emerged  as  a  paramount  objective  of  public  policy. 
However, the transformation of this general intention into specific objectives and policies has 
been, and remains, a complex  matter that often involves options or dilemmas that are not 
always easy to resolve. 
To start with, the concept of financial stability is difficult to define precisely, nor do we have a 
sufficiently  solid  analytical  framework  equivalent  to  that  used  to  conduct  monetary  policy. 
Moreover,  responsibility 
is  normally  shared  among  different 
for  preserving  stability 
authorities, each with its own approach to the issue. 
As a result of the current global financial crisis, financial stability is very much at the center of 
debate,  prompting  an 
institutional  arrangements,  authorities’ 
responsibilities, policies and the instruments that can be used for this purpose. In developed 
countries, where the crisis had its origin, financial reforms are underway in a bid to overcome 
the weaknesses that were detected. Emerging economies, although they did not experience 
the  same  problems,  must  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  review  their  own  situation, 
draw lessons and advance in perfecting their financial systems. From this point of view, the 
exchange  of  opinions  that  is  the  purpose  of  this  seminar  may  help  in  drawing  up 
recommendations. 
review  of 
in-depth 
The Central Bank of Chile and financial stability  
2. 
The concern of the Central Bank of Chile (BCCH) for financial stability is anchored in its legal 
responsibilities and the powers or instruments assigned to it. An organic law in force since 
1989 establishes that the BCCH’s objective is to “safeguard the stability of the currency and 
the normal functioning of domestic and external payments”. 
                                                 
1   See Table 1 at the end of this document. 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 1
The first part of this objective is interpreted as the maintenance of price stability or, in other 
words,  low  and  stable  inflation.  For  the  past  ten  years,  the  BCCH  has  applied  a  policy 
framework with an inflation target of 3% and a 1% tolerance range.  
The second part of its objective is directly related to financial stability. For payments to be 
made normally, the banking system, money and credit markets and supporting infrastructure 
must  all  function  properly.  The  reference  to  external  payments  seeks  to  highlight  the 
importance that trade and financial flows with the rest of the world have for an open economy 
such  as  Chile.  Financial  stability  is,  in  other  words,  an  essential  part  of  the  BCCH’s 
responsibilities, very much in line with what we see in most of the world’s economies. 
In the eyes of BCCH, the two parts of its objective are different and separable, but affect and 
reinforce  each  other.  The  management  of  monetary  policy,  which  seeks  price  stability, 
requires that money and financial markets work well while financial stability requires, among 
other  conditions,  that  inflation  remains  low  and  stable.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has 
underlined the interrelations between these two objectives. 
The powers with which the BCCH is endowed also have a clear relation to financial stability. 
The  BCCH  can  provide  the  system  with  liquidity  under  normal  terms  and  conditions  and, 
although  forming  part  of  the  management  of  monetary  policy,  this  simultaneously  fulfills 
functions  related  to  financial  stability.  Liquidity  can  also  be  provided  in  extraordinary 
circumstances  and  the  BCCH  is  empowered  to  make  emergency  loans  to  banks  suffering 
temporary liquidity problems. Moreover, if a bank is forced into liquidation, the BCCH must 
provide the funds to pay deposits guaranteed by the State, which include all sight deposits 
and those of small savers. 
In  addition,  the  BCCH  has  powers  to  regulate  the  money  market  and  the  system  of 
payments. It establishes norms for deposits and bank borrowing and regulates the working of 
large-value clearing houses and payment systems and also has some powers of prudential 
regulation.  It  regulates  market  risks  and  relations  between  banks’  active  and  passive 
operations as well as the operations of saving and loan cooperatives and bank and non-bank 
credit card systems. On these same lines, it sets some norms with systemic implications that 
refer to pension fund investments such as, for example, the percentage of their portfolio that 
they  may  invest  abroad.  In  addition,  it  participates  in  some  decisions  in  the  sphere  of 
prudential regulation for banks, issuing a prior opinion or giving its agreement. 
For prudential reasons, the BCCH can impose restrictions on foreign exchange operations. 
In the case of foreign trade, it can require the repatriation and liquidation of export revenues 
and set a term for import coverage while, in the case of financial flows, it can impose reserve 
requirements as it, in fact, did in the 1990s. 
The BCCH is also authorized to accumulate and maintain international reserves. This has a 
direct impact on the country’s international liquidity position and, in the last instance, on the 
stability of cross-border financial flows and, therefore, the normal functioning of the domestic 
financial system. 
Since  the  BCCH’s  origins,  banking  regulation  and  supervision  have  been  entrusted  to  the 
Superintendency  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  (SBIF)  which  depends  on  the 
government  through  the  Finance  Ministry.  There  is  also  a  supervisor  for  securities  and 
insurance and for pensions. This institutional arrangement has, in general, worked well over 
the  years.  In  order  to  ensure  the  necessary  coordination  and  communication  between  the 
different  authorities,  a  committee  was  created a  few  years  ago  that  brings  together  all  the 
financial  sector  supervisors  and  in  which  the  BCCH  also  participates.  It  has  allowed  the 
BCCH to make its view on issues of systemic importance known to the supervisors. 
Numerous  initiatives  implemented  by  the  BCCH  over  the  past  decade  underline  its  firm 
commitment to financial stability. These include:  
a)  
creation  of  a  large-value  payment  system  based  on  real  time  gross  settlement 
(2004);  
2 
 BIS Review 142/2010
b)  
c)  
d)  
e)  
f)  
publication of a Financial Stability Report as from 2004;  
stress  tests  for  the  banking  system  and  disclosure  of  their  results  which  are 
published in the Financial Stability Report;  
incorporation of non-bank credit card systems into the regulated system, although 
with looser norms than those applying to banks (2006);  
implementation of a household financial survey, carried out countrywide for the first 
time in 2007 and followed by panel studies for Greater Santiago in 2008 and 2009, 
gathering information that has served as the basis for numerous research projects;  
participation, along with other authorities, in an initiative to modernize the system for 
clearing and paying financial securities, which will lead to the creation of a clearing 
house and central counterparty in line with international standards (2009–10). 
During the recent crisis, the BCCH was decisive in exercising its powers as regards financial 
stability and these proved effective in maintaining the normal functioning of the system. In 
April 2008, it announced a program of accumulation of international reserves for US$8 billion 
with the aim of strengthening the country’s international liquidity position in a context of great 
uncertainty about the outlook for the international economy and a significant appreciation of 
the  Chilean  peso.  This  measure  was  successful  in  achieving  its  objectives.  Subsequently, 
due  to  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  September/October  2008,  the  BCCH  took 
extraordinary  measures  to  provide  liquidity  in  pesos  and  dollars  and  ensure  the  normal 
functioning of the financial system. Through these measures, it was able to dissipate internal 
financial tensions and bring about a fairly quick return to full normality. 
Compared with other central banks, the BCCH faces some limitations in managing situations 
of tension or crises. It is expressly forbidden to provide financing, directly or indirectly, to the 
government  and  state  institutions  or  enterprises.  It  cannot,  therefore,  acquire  securities 
issued by the Public Treasury as part of its monetary operations. This does not, at present, 
represent a significant restriction because these operations are carried out using the BCCH’s 
own securities but, in a critical situation, could limit its ability to inject liquidity into the system. 
Similarly, it can only provide liquidity to banks and cannot intervene directly in the financial 
markets  by  buying  securities  from  other  types  of  institutions  or  investors,  nor  can  it  make 
direct or indirect capital contributions to institutions in difficulties. 
However, the BCCH has not been alone in seeking to ensure financial stability. Fiscal policy, 
prudential regulation and banking supervision have also made a very positive contribution. 
Fiscal policy has, in general, been noted for its responsibility during this period. Moreover, 
since  2000,  the  government  has  applied  a  policy  rule  that  sets  effective  spending  as  a 
function  of  permanent  fiscal  revenues.  This  has  made  fiscal  policy  predictable  and 
sustainable over time as well as making it possible to keep public debt low. Indeed, thanks to 
a significant increase in copper revenues, this has dropped to a historically low level in recent 
years and gross central government debt is currently running at around 6% of GDP. All these 
factors have contributed to financial stability. 
Prudential  regulation  has  been  another  key  pillar  of  financial  stability.  It  was  completely 
redesigned  after  the  severe  financial  crisis  of  the  1980s.  The  lessons  of  this  crisis  were 
learned and then incorporated into banking law and, although this has since been subject to 
updates  and  modernization,  it  has  maintained  the  hallmark  strictness  it  acquired  in  this 
period. 
Some of the recommendations put forward in the light of the recent crisis have, in fact, been 
part of Chilean regulation for some time. For example, it includes:  
a)  
regulatory  incentives  for  banks  to  maintain  capital  in  excess  of  the  required 
minimum  so  that  their  effective  capital  represents  more  than  10%  of  their  risk-
weighted assets;  
BIS Review 142/2010 
 3
b)  
c)  
d)  
e)  
f)  
g)  
prudential  standards  to  preserve  the  quality  of  capital  (hybrid  instruments  cannot 
exceed 50% of basic capital);  
explicit limit on gross leverage as a complement to capital adequacy rules based on 
Basel recommendations (basic capital cannot be less than 3% of total non-weighted 
assets net of required provisions);  
special  regulatory  requirements  for  larger  banks  (capital  requirement  can  reach 
14%);  
robust provisions regime with a forward-looking approach;  
quantitative norms on the match of the terms and currencies of banks’ assets and 
liabilities;  
preventive  capitalization,  regularization  and  resolution  systems  for  banks  in 
difficulties. 
Supervision has also played a key role. In recent decades, this evolved from a formal and 
passive approach to one that is significantly more intrusive and proactive. Supervision now 
focuses on the governance and, above all, management of institutions. Supervisors seek to 
be familiar with all the aspects or issues that can be important in an institution’s behavior, 
rather  than  merely  verifying  compliance  with  regulation  or  simply  reviewing  financial 
indicators from previous years. The ultimate aim is to induce changes or corrections in the 
management of an institution when weaknesses are detected. This approach, known in the 
literature as risk-based supervision, is the one that has been recommended in the light of the 
recent crisis. 
On several occasions, supervision has ventured into what is today termed macroprudence. 
At the end of the 1990s, the SBIF issued recommendations urging that due attention be paid 
to  the  concentration  of  risks  in  the  real  estate  sector,  beyond  what  each  institution  might 
have on its books. Applying this same logic, it also issued instructions for the treatment of 
lending to individuals, particularly consumer loans, in the context of the rapid growth of these 
operations. Then, in the early 2000s, it instructed supervised institutions to carefully assess 
their clients’ exchange-rate risk, regardless of whether their own positions were well hedged. 
When  mergers  and  acquisitions  intensified  a  few  years  ago,  it  also  took  the  initiative  of 
introducing  stricter  regulation  for  banks  of  a  larger  relative  size  so  as  to  guard  against 
systemic risks. 
Although  a factor  of a different  nature,  the  development  of  Chile’s  capital  market has  also 
contributed to financial stability. The creation of a private pension system brought with it the 
appearance  of  institutional  investors  as  well  as  new  sources  of  medium  and  long-term 
financing. At the end of 2008, when international markets became tense, Chilean companies 
were  able  to  replace  external  financing  with  placements  on  the  domestic  market  on 
convenient terms and conditions. 
Remarks in the light of recent experience  
3.  
The  paramount  objective  of  central  banks  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  price  stability. 
Recent decades have brought notable achievements in this area. They were possible thanks 
to  the  institutional  strengthening  of  central  banks,  including  statutes  of  autonomy  and 
advances  in  the  design,  implementation  and  communication  of  monetary  policy.  It  is 
important  to  persevere  on  these  lines  whilst  also  bearing  in  mind  possible  adjustments  or 
improvements. 
Central banks, however, also have an important responsibility for financial stability. Although 
this responsibility had lost prominence over time, the experience of recent years has clearly 
underlined  its  importance.  Moreover,  because  of  their  monetary  policy  tasks,  they  are  in 
direct contact with the markets and, therefore, have access to first-hand information about 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2010
the functioning of the financial system. This puts them in a privileged position to undertake 
tasks related to financial stability. 
Central banks must, however, be realistic in setting their objectives. It is critical to ensure that 
they do not result in a more than reasonable level of protection for the financial system since 
this  would  encourage  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  take  excessive  risks.  The 
responsibility  of  central  banks  as  regards  financial  stability  must  be  geared  principally  to 
strengthening the reaction capacity of the system as a whole. If problems occur in specific 
institutions – which cannot be ruled out – the aim must be to minimize their systemic impact. 
Central  banks  must  have  a  set  of  instruments  that  allow  them  to  contribute  effectively  to 
financial  stability.  Many  of  these  instruments,  such  as  providing  liquidity,  are  inherent  or 
traditional  while  others,  such  as  regulating  and  watching  over  payment  systems,  have 
developed in recent decades. The experience of the last few years has suggested a need to 
review  or  update  the  available  instruments  and  to  generate  the  operational  conditions  in 
which they can be used without delay when needed. During this latest crisis, for example, 
many  central  banks  were  not  operationally  prepared  to  receive  collateral  that  was  not  in 
habitual use. It has also been suggested that there is a need to incorporate new instruments, 
principally  with  a  macroprudential  approach.  However,  in  the  case  of  some  of  these 
instruments  –  specifically,  the  use  of  regulation  for  countercyclical  purposes  –  evidence  is 
scarce and debate as yet inconclusive. 
However, beyond the contribution that a central bank can make, financial stability requires a 
comprehensive framework of financial institutions, policies and practices. The solidity of this 
framework and its consistency are crucial. Regulation and supervision, whether or not in the 
hands of the central bank, are critical, but so too are monetary and fiscal policy. The recent 
sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe,  for  example,  has  demonstrated  the  importance  of  fiscal 
conditions for financial stability. 
Market discipline and institutions’ management, although discredited by the crisis, are factors 
that can, with an appropriate regulatory framework and incentives, contribute to stability. The 
efficiency of regulation and supervision should, in the end, be reflected in good behavior by 
institutions and the proper functioning of markets. 
Discussion as to the institutional arrangements that are most appropriate from the point of 
view of financial stability remains open. One key question is who should be responsible for 
the tasks of prudential regulation. Another, although perhaps slightly less important, is who 
should do the supervision. There are arguments in favor of different policy options, but any 
specific recommendation must take into account the experience and circumstances of each 
country. Until the crisis, the prevailing trend was for a body different from the central bank to 
be responsible for regulation and supervision whereas now the wind seems to be blowing in 
the  opposite  direction.  In  this  context,  one  piece  of  practical  advice  is  not  to  significantly 
change something that has worked well. 
In any case, the decisions that are taken may have significant implications for central banks’ 
institutional insertion, the scrutiny to which they are subject, and internal organization of their 
activities. These implications become particularly important if it is decided to give the central 
bank  broad  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  In  this  case,  it  may  be  advisable  to  adjust 
internal governance so as to ensure the necessary separation of the objectives of financial 
stability and price stability. 
Under  any  institutional  model,  coordination  and  communication  between  the  different 
authorities  with  functions  related  to  financial  stability  will  always  be  very  necessary.  Even 
under a model that assigns all the relevant functions to the central bank, coordination and 
communication between it and the government will still be essential because it is the fiscal 
authority  that  is  responsible  for  the  use  of  public  resources.  In  a  globalized  world,  it  is, 
moreover, necessary to develop mechanisms for coordination and communication with the 
authorities of other relevant jurisdictions. In many emerging economies, this is a key issue 
because  of  the  significant  presence  of  international  banks  in  these  markets.  In  addition, 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 5
the  recommendation 
stronger  coordination  and  communication  between  authorities  is  vital  for  progress  towards 
comprehensive or consolidated supervision of financial groups and for avoiding some of the 
problems detected in the recent crisis. 
One recommendation on which there is fairly broad agreement is to periodically review the 
perimeter  of  regulation  and  supervision.  The  traditional  view  that  this  should  include  only 
institutions taking deposits from the public has been superseded by events. The consensus 
view  that  has  emerged  from  the  recent  crisis  is  that  all  institutions  of  systemic  importance 
must be regulated and supervised. This also includes the obligation to provide information 
and  disclose  positions  in  order  to  ensure  that  markets  function  properly.  The  practical 
implications  of  this  recommendation  may  vary  from  country  to  country,  depending  on  the 
characteristics of their financial systems. 
There  is  also  broad  consensus  that  minimum  capital  requirements,  applied  on  permanent 
bases, must be raised and strengthened as stated in the recent agreement reached by the 
Basel  Committee.  However, 
that  a  capital  component  of  a 
countercyclical  nature  be  introduced  raises  a  number  of  questions.  What  does  seem 
interesting, although it is not explicitly included in the recent Basel proposal, is the idea of 
having some component of contingent capital. This could be established by issuing bonds 
that would, under certain circumstances or conditions, become capital as, for example, if an 
institution’s capital falls below 8% of its risk-weighted assets. 
Another point on which there is a considerable agreement is the need to review norms and 
practices on liquidity management and bank funding. These had become quite lax in many 
jurisdictions.  Liquidity  and  refinancing  risks  were  underestimated,  particularly  in  the 
environment  that  preceded  the  crisis.  The  recommendations  that  have  subsequently  been 
put  forward  include  a  redefinition  of  liquid  assets,  the  establishment  of  a  minimum  global 
liquidity standard, norms using time bands for the match of assets and liabilities, and higher 
requirements for liabilities that show greater volatility. In all these cases, there is much that 
central banks can contribute. The Basel Committee has recently undertaken to advance in 
defining a global liquidity standard and has fixed a calendar for this process. 
A robust system of provisions, based on a forward-looking rather than a backward-looking 
approach,  can  make  a  significant  difference  to  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  This  is 
illustrated  by  the  experience  of  emerging  economies  where  this  policy  instrument  is  used 
most often and with the greatest intensity. During discussion of the Basel II agreement, it was 
suggested that provisions should be its fourth pillar but this idea was, in the end, rejected by 
the developed countries because of potential conflicts with accounting norms. After the crisis, 
there  is,  however,  renewed  interest  in  provisions  as  a  prudential  instrument.  The  idea  of 
applying  some  countercyclical  rule  has  gained  ground.  Several  Latin  American  countries 
have advanced in this direction and their experience should be followed with attention. 
Mortgage operations, which are very closely related to the origins of the crisis, will need to be 
reviewed. The volumes and amounts committed to this activity are growing and have, without 
doubt,  acquired  systemic  importance.  This  has  implications  both  for  the  banking  system, 
where these operations tend to originate, and for the securities market which provides the 
financing. The recommendations that warrant attention include the application of a prudent 
loan-to-value ratio taking into account cyclical fluctuations in the price of the dwelling, stricter 
requirements  for  institutions  in  the  business  of  originating  to  sell,  and  the  use  of  covered 
bonds  to  finance  these  loans  so  as  to  leave  credit  risk  in  the  hands  of  the  issuer  while 
transferring  market  risk  to  the  investors.  This  latter  recommendation  is  backed  by  several 
successful experiences including that of Chile with covered bonds. 
Because  the  origins  of  the  recent  crisis  appear  to  have  been  closely  related  to  lax  credit 
policies in the personal banking segment, commercial practices that lacked transparency and 
excessive household borrowing, it has brought the issue of consumer protection to the fore. 
Although also a broader issue, consumer protection is related to the proper functioning and 
stability  of  the  financial  system,  particularly  if  it  is  understood  to  include  such  important 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2010
matters  as  financial  education,  transparency  with  clients  and  market  behavior,  It  can, 
therefore, not be ignored when deciding within which institutional framework and with what 
policies to address this issue. 
Final remarks  
4.  
Concern for financial stability is at the origin of central banks. It can, in fact, be said to be in 
their DNA. Although this concern had faded over time, the experience of recent years has 
again brought it very much to the fore. As a result, there is now broad agreement that central 
banks  have  an  unshirkable  role  in  this  field  and  debate  centers  rather  on  the  instruments 
they need to have.  
The crisis has left important lessons, especially for the developed economies where it had its 
origins.  They  have  already  begun  to  implement  financial  reforms  in  a  bid  to  remedy  the 
weaknesses that were observed. The emerging economies, although they did not experience 
the same problems, must take advantage of this opportunity to review their own situation, to 
draw lessons about what worked well or not, and to advance in the task of perfecting their 
financial systems. 
Chile’s institutional arrangements as regards financial stability have generally worked well in 
recent decades. This is borne out by the present strength of its financial system and the way 
in  which  it  came  through  the  recent  crisis  without  major  problems.  But  there  are  pending 
tasks and challenges. Large financial reforms may not perhaps be required but there is room 
for  improvements  in  various  areas.  They  include  the  need  to  create  a  mechanism  for 
coordination  and  communication  at  the  highest  level  with  a  focus  on  financial  stability  in 
which the government, the BCCH and the different financial sector supervisors participate. 
This  would  allow  the  BCCH  to  make  its  points  of  view  known  formally  to  the  relevant 
authorities. 
Similarly,  in  a  context  in  which  financial  activities  have  become  increasingly  complex,  the 
bodies responsible for supervision need to be strengthened institutionally. From this point of 
view, particular attention should be paid to the resources assigned to them and their capacity 
to  issue  norms  and  regulation  in  a world  that  calls  for  constant  adjustments  and changes. 
Finally, it would be advisable for the BCCH to have a more active role in defining prudential 
regulation. In some cases, this role already exists but could be extended to other norms with 
systemic  implications.  For  coordination  with  the  SBIF,  a  mechanism  similar  to  that  which 
already exists requiring a prior report or authorization from the BCCH when the supervisor 
exercises its regulatory power, could be used. 
BIS Review 142/2010 
 7
 8 
  BIS Review 142/2010
