Muhammad Al-Jasser: Small and medium enterprises 
Opening speech by His Excellency Dr Muhammad Al-Jasser, Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary Agency (SAMA), at the symposium on “Small and Medium Enterprises”, organized 
by  the  Institute  of  Banking  in  cooperation  with  the  International  Financing  Corporation, 
Riyadh, 2 November 2010. 
 Excellencies and honored audience, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all in the headquarters of the Institute of Banking. 
I’m  delighted  to  receive  an  invitation  to  deliver  the  opening  speech  for  the  symposium  on 
“Small and Medium Enterprises” before this distinguished elite of participants and audience. I 
would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the colleagues at the Institute of Banking 
and International Finance Corporation (IFC) for organizing this symposium. I will try in this 
speech to shed light on some ideas related to the importance of the role of these enterprises 
in the national economy, challenges facing their growth, and provision of appropriate funding 
for them. 
Dear audience, 
The national economy consists of an integrated wide range of public and private enterprises 
which  utilize  available  material  and  human  factors  of  production  for  providing  continuous 
flows of goods and services to meet the needs of the domestic society and part of external 
demand.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  sizes  of  local  firms  vary  according  to  the  size  of  labour, 
capital, sales…etc. It is mistakenly believed that large-scale enterprises are the main impetus 
for economic activity. Such belief has stemmed from the attention paid to these entities by 
different mass media. However, the true state of affairs emphasizes that small and medium 
enterprises  (SMEs)  play  an  important  role  in  the  economic  activity  in  both  advanced  and 
developing  countries  through  their  massive  absorption  capacity  to  employ  labour  force, 
including those with modest and average training and scientific qualifications, apart from their 
role in the daily movement of goods, services and commercial activity. For instance, small 
and  medium  enterprises  in  the  Euro  area  account  for  99.8  percent  of  total  business 
enterprises,  60  percent  of  value  added,  and  70  percent  of  total  employment.  Such 
percentages are not confined to the Euro area only, but many other countries in the world 
may  have  similar  percentages  as  well.  Small  and  medium  enterprises  are  considered  the 
most  efficient  and  capable  instrument  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  economic  and  social 
development, especially in remote areas with less opportunity to benefit from development. 
Apart  from  being  the  nucleus  of  large-scale  enterprises,  small  and  medium  enterprises 
provide  a  fertile  environment  for  training  workers  and  developing  their  skills;  and  help  in 
speeding  up  the  turnover  of  small  amounts  of  invested  funds.  Based  on  this  perspective, 
governments have long since paid great attention to such enterprises and enacted laws to 
provide the infrastructure that would contribute to their growth and development, particularly 
after  having  proved  their  capacity  to  reduce  pressure  on  the  public  sector  as  regards  the 
provision  of  job  opportunities.  Moreover,  small  and  medium  enterprises  serve  as  a  wide 
arena  for  developing  workers’  technical  and  management  skills.  They  also  assist  large 
enterprises in the marketing process and providing crude materials and primary commodities 
throughout the phases of production.  
Most regional and international donor institutions and organizations have a growing tendency 
to  provide  financial  resources  and  technical  assistance  to  these  small  and  medium 
enterprises to be self-dependent and play their necessary role in the economy.  
Dear audience, 
Some  may  wonder  what  small  and  medium  enterprises  are,  how  we  can  differentiate 
between them and do they have an international definition. In fact, there is much difference in 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
that  small  enterprises  are 
those  with  annual  sales  ranging 
their definition at the international level, and it is difficult to reach a uniform definition. If we 
depend on the capital criterion, for example, we will find that an enterprise with a capital of 
10 million  Euros  is  considered  a  small-sized  enterprise  in  the  European  Union  while  it  is 
regarded as a medium or probably large enterprise in some developing countries. Moreover, 
“small” and “medium” are two comparative words and have relative concepts that vary from 
one  sector  to  another  and  from  one  country  to  another.  However,  the  general  practice  in 
every country or region is to depend on a number of criteria, including manpower numbers, 
capital,  volume  of  annual  sales  and  total  financial  position  at  the  end of  the  period.  In  the 
European  Union  region,  small  enterprises  are  defined  as  those  having  50  workers and  an 
activity volume of 10 million Euros, while medium ones are those with 250 workers and an 
annual  activity  volume  of  50  million  Euros.  In  the  kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia,  the  Saudi 
Industrial Development Fund adopts the criterion of the annual sales for defining small and 
medium enterprises whose annual sales do not exceed Rls 20 million for financing purposes 
according  to  “Kafallah”  program.  The  World  Bank  has  distributed  a  questionnaire  to 
commercial banks to determine a definition for small and medium enterprises. The result of 
the questionnaire has showed that there is difference in banks’ definitions. However, it may 
be  concluded 
from 
Rls 100 thousand to Rls 5 million and workers from 2 to 49. Medium enterprises are those 
with annual sales from Rls 5 million to 50 million and workers from 50 to 200. 
Dear audience, 
SMEs are characterized by many features including, simplicity of their establishment due to 
the  low  value  of  the  capital  needed  for  their  foundation  and  operation,  simplicity  of  their 
establishment procedures, and low cost of their establishment and administration because of 
the  simplicity  of  their  administrative  structure.  Moreover,  SMEs  are  featured  by  the 
independent  management  by  their  owners  who  seek  as  much  success  as  possible.  Their 
other features are: low administrative and marketing cost, and labor wages, simple routine 
procedures,  highly  efficient  communications  and  readily  available  information  needed  for 
work  therein,  the  usage  of  uncomplicated  production  and  operation  methods,  the  ability  to 
cope with new changes with regard to meeting consumers’ preferences and tastes, the ability 
to  change  the  composition  of  labor  force,  production,  marketing  or  finance  polices  to  face 
quick  changes  without  any  hesitation,  helping  them  to  overcome  economic  cycles  and 
changes.  In  addition,  SMEs  are  also  characterized  by  the  freedom  to  enter  and  exit  the 
market because of the modest ratio of their liabilities to fixed or full assets, and the easiness 
to convert small enterprises into liquidity in a short time without incurring a significant loss. 
Furthermore, the exit of a SME will have no significant impact on the market. Finally, SMEs 
are  flexible  to  move  and  spread  geographically.  In  spite  of  these  features,  the  growth  of 
SMEs is facing a variety of challenges which may be similar to a great extent not only at the 
level of one country only, but also at the global level. The most prominent challenges are the 
high cost of capital as a result of high interest rates compared to large enterprises (LEs), the 
difficulty of obtaining proper finance due to shortage of guarantees and modest credit record, 
inability to compete and affect the market’s powers and making advantage of economies of 
scale as is the case with LEs, weak capacity to face and facilitate governmental procedures 
to expand their work, and low spending on development research works. 
Dear audience, 
Business  enterprises  in  the  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia  have  witnessed  notable  growth  over 
the last years. The enterprises subscribing to the Social Insurance system have increased 
from  121.5  thousand  in  1426AH  to  218.4  thousand  in  1430AH,  with  an  average  annual 
growth  of  16  percent.  Individual  enterprises  represent  93.1  percent,  limited  partnership 
enterprises  4.7  percent,  and  joint  enterprises  0.6  percent  of  the  total  number.  These 
enterprises’  economic  activity  is  concentrated  in  three  areas,  namely,  commerce  with 
34.3 percent, construction and building with 32.3 percent, and manufacturing industries with 
14.6 percent. Small enterprises employing less than five persons have accounted for the bulk 
share, representing 45.5 percent of total enterprises at the end of 1430AH, enterprises with 
2 
 BIS Review 171/2010
5–59 employees constitute 42 percent, while the remaining 3.8 percent has been accounted 
for by enterprises with more than 60 employees. These data show that most enterprises in 
Saudi Arabia are small ones, based on the number of employees. The SME’s contribution to 
total  GDP  is  low.  The  share  of  private  sector  gross  product,  which  SMEs  are  part  of,  is 
33 percent, while the share of SMEs in GDP is 57 percent in Japan, 64.3 percent in Spain, 
56 percent in France, 44 percent in Austria, 43 percent in Canada, 33 percent in Australia 
and more than 50 percent in the United States. The SME’s modest contribution to GDP in 
Saudi Arabia could be ascribed to the immensity of the oil and public sectors, being the main 
catalyst for economic activity. 
SMEs coverage in the national income accounts might be low. 
Dear audience, 
Small and medium enterprises are facing clear challenges to obtain the necessary funding to 
meet  their  expansion  needs  because  of  several  reasons;  one  of  which  is  the  lack  of 
guarantees  for  granting  credit.  To  overcome  this  problem  in  the  Kingdom,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, in cooperation with Saudi banks, has established “Kafalah Program” for financing 
small  and  medium  enterprises.  It  is  a  program  administered  by  the  Saudi  Industrial 
Development Fund with a capital of Rls 200 million to cover a proportion of the risk of the 
funding entity in case the guaranteed enterprise fails to repay the finance or part thereof, and 
to encourage banks to finance viable small and medium enterprises, which cannot provide 
the necessary guarantees or accounting records that prove their eligibility for funding. The 
program  has  been  performing  well  since  its  inception  in  2006  up  to  the  end  of  2010.  The 
number of guarantees approved during the period amounted to 1,668 with a total value of Rls 
644 million against loans to the tune of Rls1.6 billion granted by banks under the umbrella of 
the program, which benefited about 1,113 small and medium enterprises. This is in addition 
to  loans  provided  by  the  Saudi  Credit  and  Savings  Bank,  for  financing  young  people  and 
small  enterprises,  as  well  as  the  Centennial  Fund,  and  Abdul  Latif  Jameel’s  “Finance 
Program” that provides material support for youth’s projects and training courses. 
Dear audience, 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  emphasize  that  the  status  of  small  and  medium  enterprises  in  the 
Kingdom still needs a lot of care and an appropriate environment to perform their required 
roles in the economy, especially in the field of Saudization of jobs. This important symposium 
may,  hopefully,  discuss  this  topic  from  its  different  aspects  and  provide  the  necessary 
recommendations  to  assist  competent  authorities  in  making  appropriate  decisions  for  this 
important sector. 
Thank you all for listening and wish you success. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
