Nout Wellink: Rebuilding the financial sector 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on Banking Supervision, at the Colloquium of the Centre for Financial Studies, 
Frankfurt am Main, 8 December 2010. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the financial crisis that has raged since July 2007 is a many-
headed  monster.  At  its  core  is  a  lack  of  market  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and  in 
some countries. I will speak about the background to the global financial crisis, its impact, 
and  about  the  current  situation  in  some  European  countries.  I  will  elaborate  on  some 
challenges we face for the future. In particular, I will focus on strengthening the resilience of 
the banking sector, including the approach towards too-big-to-fail banks. I will conclude with 
the initiatives to enhance macro-prudential supervision. 
Causes of the global crisis 
Global fire fuelled by interdependencies, … 
2.  
After  the  first  signs  of  difficulties  with  subprime  mortgages  in  the  United  States 
emerged in the summer of 2007, they were long thought to be a specific US problem that 
would  only  indirectly  affect  other  parts  of  the  world.  That  proved  an  illusion:  the  mortgage 
problem  in  the  US  was  the  spark  that  set  the  system  on  fire  worldwide.  The  flame  was 
kindled  by  the  negligent  contracting  of  mortgage  loans,  via  risky  constructions  and  poor 
documentation.  The  popularity  of  financial  innovations  generated  an  opaque  pyramid  of 
financial risks that became steadily more unstable. 
… and insufficient buffers 
3.  
The  innovations  enlarged  the  net  leverage  in  the  system,  because  they  enabled 
banks to operate with an ever slimmer capital position; the ratio between assets and capital 
at large banks before the crisis averaged out at more than 30. The supervision of liquidity 
risks at banks was inadequate and fragmented, also in Europe. In addition, the innovations 
deepened  the  interdependencies  between  financial  institutions,  and  hence  the  pace  and 
scope of contagion channels. In other words: the fuel to start a great fire was omnipresent. 
The crisis eventually erupted with great force after the collapse of the US investment bank 
Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008.  The  losses  caused  by  that  collapse  and  the  major 
uncertainty about who exactly was hit, led to a disappearance of market confidence and a 
full-blown systemic crisis. 
Global imbalances contributed to indiscipline 
4.  
Although the relative importance of the various causes is subject to debate, there is 
now  a  rather  broad  consensus  about  the  developments  that  led  to  the  crisis.  The 
globalisation  and  integration  of  some  parts  of  the  global  economy,  like  China  and  Eastern 
Europe, that had thus far been isolated was coupled with the build-up of global imbalances. 
Excessive  debt  build-up  in  Western,  notably  Anglo-Saxon,  countries  went  in  tandem  with 
huge  surpluses  in  oil-exporting  countries  and  Asian  countries.  Asian  countries  stuck  to  a 
stable  currency,  causing  the  imbalances  to  continue  and  their  currency  reserves  to 
accumulate. The investment of these reserves in the US kept US interest rates low, the so-
called global savings glut, contributing to financial indiscipline in that country. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
Loose monetary policy another cause 
5.  
The accommodating monetary policy, particularly in the US, sowed the seeds for the 
imbalances. In the years before the crisis, money supply growth well outpaced potential GDP 
growth. This was not reflected in mounting inflation, because the supply of relatively cheap 
products from Asia kept price rises moderate. Nonetheless, the monetary expansion resulted 
in  an  acceleration  of  asset  prices  and  credit  aggregates.  Before  the  crisis,  lending  in 
industrial countries grew by around 10% annually. The low interest rates and the abundant 
availability  of  credit  encouraged  a  search  for  yield.  Risks  were  underpriced  and  bubbles 
could easily arise, especially in real estate. This was the case in the US but also in some 
European  countries.  With  hindsight,  the  interest  rates  were  too  low  to  tame  the  monetary 
expansion  and  other,  more  macro-prudential,  instruments  should  have  been  deployed  to 
contain the credit expansion. 
What has been the impact of the crisis? 
Serious damage in financial sector, partly at governments’ expense 
6.  
Writedowns on securitisation products and on ordinary loans led to huge losses in 
the banking sector. Banks worldwide have written down around USD 1,400 billion. This blew 
big holes in their capital base, and in order to uphold confidence in the sector, governments 
rigged  up  extensive  support  programmes.  Some  USD  500  billion  was  pumped  into  the 
banks,  while  bank  debts  and  asset  risks  were  guaranteed  and  deposit  guarantees  were 
extended. Large amounts were required to stabilise institutions, relative to GDP especially in 
Ireland, Belgium and the UK. 
Real economy hit hard 
7.  
The  current  economic  downturn  is  deeper,  more  prolonged  and  more  widespread 
than those occurring after 15 previous crisis periods in history, according to a multi-country 
study by Reinhart and Reinhart (2010). This reflects the radical deleveraging in the financial 
system. The study shows that deleveraging after a financial crisis is often initially postponed 
and is a lengthy process of on average seven years. The revival following a financial crisis 
hence tends to be very slow. A rapid recovery in the global economy set in over a year ago. 
As  of  the  end  of  last  year,  that  recovery  has  gradually  flattened  out  somewhat,  but  the 
likelihood of a double dip in the US seems slight. 
The European debt crisis: imbalances underpin negative momentum 
8.  
Let me mention some words on the debt crisis that is currently plaguing Europe, on 
the causes and on the policy response. It was clear when establishing EMU that the currency 
union did not satisfy the ideal conditions. A currency union should preferably be coupled with 
a political union, and the latter – notwithstanding the continuing European integration – is still 
not in place. Large balance-of-payments imbalances had been built up, with Germany and 
the  Netherlands  running  surpluses  of  around  5%  of  GDP  and  the  so  called  peripheral 
countries reporting deficits of 5% of GDP or more. The current account deficits were a signal 
of major structural imbalances, such as in public finances. When investors became reluctant 
to finance the deficits, the debt crisis unfolded. This threatened financial stability Europe-wide 
because the countries in the euro area are highly interdependent financially. 
Decisive action by governments required 
9.  
In  the  market  turbulence  last  May,  Greece  was  the  epicentre.  With  drastic 
intervention,  government  leaders  and  the  ECB  temporarily  managed  to  turn  the  tide  and 
2 
 BIS Review 171/2010
market  turmoil  abated.  However,  owing  to  concerns  surrounding  Ireland,  the  market 
turbulence flared up again recent weeks, with market participants fearing potential contagion 
to other peripheral countries. To maintain market and public confidence, it is essential that 
countries make every effort to introduce a credible consolidation programme and reforms to 
bring public finances onto a sustainable path. The primary responsibility for improving public 
finances  lies  with  the  authorities.  Moreover,  Europe  and  the  IMF  have  set  up  an  ultimate 
safety net that could also be resorted to if need be, while the Eurosystem provides enhanced 
credit support with the aim of safeguarding monetary transmission and preventing tight credit 
rationing in the private sector. In November, Ireland concluded a program with the European 
Commission  and  the  IMF,  in  liaison  with  the  ECB.  This  program  will  deliver  an  important 
contribution to restoring financial stability in the country. 
Lessons learned and challenges 
10.  
The  worldwide  crisis  has  exposed  some  fundamentally  weak  spots  in  the 
international economy and the global financial system. In many cases the efforts to address 
them have only just got under way, while there is still much uncertainty about the effects of 
the measures. I will focus on two main challenges, first strengthening the banking sector and 
second enhancing macro-prudential oversight. 
Strengthening the resilience of banks 
11.  
Banks  were  at  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis.  After  the  wave  of  bank  collapses, 
nationalisations, conversions, break-ups, sales, bailouts – all of which impacted on the real 
economy – the financial and banking system seems to have stabilised and to be on its way to 
recovery. However, reforms are essential to make the financial and the banking system truly 
resilient  during  periods  of  stress.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has 
announced a comprehensive package of measures to strengthening the banking sector. The 
contents of what we now call Basel III were endorsed by the G20 World leaders, in Seoul 
beginning of November. Basel III contains bankspecific reforms, the goal of which is to make 
banks  more  resilient  to  shocks.  It  also  addresses  system  wide  risks,  as  a  bank-specific 
approach will not be enough. 
Bank specific reforms 
12.  
The  core  of  the  bank-specific  reforms  is  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  regulation. 
Raising the quality of the capital base has been one of the primary objectives of Basel III. In 
the future, the emphasis will be on core capital, that is common equity and retained earnings, 
and banks will have less incentive to attract lower quality capital. In line with these qualitative 
improvements is the increase in the minimum quantity of regulatory capital. For the first time, 
a hard minimum requirement has  been set for core capital, namely 4.5% of a bank’s total 
risk-weighted  assets.  In  addition,  the  Committee  has  improved  risk  coverage  of  the 
regulatory framework and more improvements are on the way. The goal is to ensure that all 
material risks are captured. During the crisis, many risks were not reflected in the risk-based 
regime.  Capital  requirements 
for  complex 
securitisations  and  exposures  to  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  will  be  increased  substantially, 
about three to four times the old capital requirements. 
13.  
An additional element to the capital framework is a leverage ratio, which will serve 
as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirement. In the lead-up to the crisis, many banks 
reported very strong risk-based capital ratios while, at the same time, managed to build up 
high levels of on- and off-balance sheet leverage. The use of a supplementary leverage ratio 
will  help  contain  the  build-up  of  excessive  leverage.  It  will  also  serve  as  an  additional 
safeguard against attempts to “game” the risk-based requirements and it will help address 
model risk. A minimum leverage ratio of 3% will be tested during an observation period. 
trading  book  exposures  as  well  as 
for 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
The  proposed  liquidity  framework  will  also  have  a  profound  effect  since  a  global 
14.  
liquidity standard does not currently exist. During the crisis, funding remained in short supply 
for an extended period. In response, the Committee has proposed global minimum liquidity 
standards  to  make  banks  more  resilient  to  potential  short-term  disruptions  in  access  to 
funding  and  to  address  longer-term  structural liquidity  mismatches  in their  balance  sheets. 
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio will require banks to have sufficient high-quality liquid assets to 
withstand  a  30-day  stressed  funding  scenario.  This  is  complemented  by  the  Net  Stable 
Funding  Ratio,  which  is  a  longer-term  structural  ratio  designed  to  address  liquidity 
mismatches. 
Addressing system-wide risks 
15.  
However,  this  firm-specific  approach  by  itself  will  not  be  sufficient.  Broader 
macroprudential measures to strengthen the entire banking system are equally important. An 
essential element in addressing system wide risk is the build up of buffers in good times that 
can be drawn down in periods of stress. The Committee has introduced two capital buffers. 
First a capital conservation buffer, which will increase the minimum capital requirements with 
2.5%. As bank’s capital levels move closer to minimum requirements, the conservation buffer 
will  impose  a  constraint  on  its  discretionary  distributions,  like  dividend  payments,  share 
buybacks and bonuses. Secondly, the countercyclical buffer, which would be imposed when 
excess credit growth is associated with an excessive build-up of system-wide risk. This buffer 
can vary between 0 and 2.5%. 
16.  
In  order  to  give  banks  time  to  adjust  to  the  new  requirements  and  to  support  the 
ongoing economic recovery, Basel III will be implemented gradually. From 2013 onwards, the 
increase of the minimum requirement for core capital will be phased in three years’ time. And 
only thereafter the capital conservation buffer will be introduced step-by-step in four years’ 
time. The new liquidity standards will be implemented after an observation period to ensure 
their effectiveness. 
Too important to fail 
17.  
But  an  effective  system  wide  focuses  also  addresses  problems  related  to 
interconnectedness  and  the  perception  that  some  banks  are  too  important  to  fail.  Some 
institutions  have  grown  so  vital  for  financial  stability  that  they  have  become  systemically 
important  and  their  failure  is  not  a  socially  acceptable  option.  During  the  financial  crisis, 
government authorities had no other choice then to save these institutions. At the same time 
losses of external capital providers were kept to a minimum. Let me explain the concept of 
systemically important financial institutions, the so called SIFIs, and discuss the international 
policy response to address the problems related to “too important to fail”. 
18.  
There  are  roughly  three  characteristics  that  make  an  institution  systemically 
important: its size, interconnectedness and limited substitutability. Size measures the volume 
of  financial  services  provided  by  a  financial  institution.  Interconnectedness  increases  the 
extent to which problems at an institution may affect the financial system. This may happen 
via an institution’s direct links with other institutions as well as indirectly, via its role in the 
financial infrastructure or financial markets. The third factor, limited substitutability, indicates 
that if crucial functions or services cannot be quickly and easily taken over by another party, 
the system can become seriously disrupted. 
19.  
Aside  from  these  structural  characteristics  of  institutions,  two  other  factors  may 
accelerate  the  spillover  to  the  entire  financial  system.  First  of  all,  the  complexity  of  the 
organisation structure. Complex and internationally active banks cannot be easily wound up 
nor  can  their  crucial  functions  be  easily  transferred  to  another  party.  Secondly,  in  a  crisis 
situation, confidence effects and herding behaviour of market participants play a reinforcing 
role. 
4 
 BIS Review 171/2010
FSB Framework for SIFIs 
These contagion channels made bailouts of systemic institutions during the crisis inevitable. 
Such intervention, however, carries a number of problems, like a burden on fiscal position, 
creating moral hazard by making government guarantees explicit, and undermining the level 
playing-field  between  institutions.  Therefore,  steps  have  been  taken  to  tackle  the  too-
important-to-fail problem. The Financial Stability Board has developed a policy framework to 
deal  with  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  which  the  G20  World  leaders  ratified 
last month. This framework is designed to reduce the probability and impact of a failure of a 
SIFI.  It  rests  on  more  intensive  supervision,  higher  buffers  for  SIFIs compared  to  Basel  III 
and an increased resolution capacity of national authorities. 
The case for macro-prudential oversight 
On top of these new standards and regulations, enhancing supervision is also vital. 
20.  
Macro-prudential  oversight  is,  to  put  it  simply,  the  missing  link  between  the  different 
approaches  of  a  central  bank  and  a  financial  supervisor.  A  central  bank  significantly 
promotes  financial  stability  by  aiming  at  low  inflation,  sound  payment  systems  and 
sustainable  credit  growth.  Supervisors  exercise  their  responsibility  for  the  stability  of 
individual  financial  institutions  by  ensuring  that  they  have  adequate  buffers  to  withstand 
shocks.  The  problem  is  that  both  responsibilities,  although  closely  interrelated,  have  been 
poorly attuned. Let me explain. 
21.  
In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  most  central  banks  warned  against  the  risks  to  the 
financial system. But these warnings did not prove meaningful, as they were not effectively 
translated  into  mitigating  action  by supervisors.  Likewise, most  supervisors  believed  that  if 
individual institutions were sound, the financial system as a whole would be too. However, 
the financial crisis has shown that supervision of individual institutions is important, but not 
sufficient to preserve financial stability. 
22.  
The message is clear: the supervision of the financial system as a whole should be 
strengthened to lower the chance and impact of future crises, and this requires central banks 
and supervisors to join forces. One important added value of macro-prudential oversight is 
that it looks at the interactions between financial institutions and their environment. A single 
bank, say, can exercise only a limited influence on housing prices. But, if many banks eased 
their  credit  standards  for  mortgage  loans,  housing  prices  could  soar,  possibly  causing  the 
housing market to overheat. A housing market crash can entail huge losses for the banking 
sector and the real economy. Thus, by monitoring the interactions within the financial system, 
including  the  dynamics  behind  a  build-up  of  imbalances,  macro-prudential  oversight  can 
identify threats to financial stability. In light of these lessons, the EU political authorities have 
decided to establish a new European Systemic Risk Board per 1 January 2011 to strengthen 
macro-prudential oversight in the EU. 
Conclusion 
23.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me come to an end. I have talked about one of the most 
sweeping  crises  the  financial  world  has  been  confronted  with  since  a  long  time. 
Governments,  supervisors  and  the  financial  sector  worldwide  have  replied  to  this  with 
ambitious  measures  and  reforms.  I  am  sure  that  many  people,  maybe  even  some  among 
you,  will  question  whether  all  these  measures  and  initiatives  will  in  the  end  improve  the 
world?  It  is  a  simple  and  fair  question,  with  no  easy  answer!  And  though  I  am  no  fortune 
teller,  I  firmly  believe  that  these  reforms  will  make  the  financial  sector  healthier,  stabilise 
economies and so improve the world. 
24.  
And  the  need  for  these  reforms  is  evident.  A  recent  IMF  study,  for  instance, 
estimates  the  costs  of  a  financial  crisis  at  around  15  percent  of  GDP,  while  research  that 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 5
factors in the long-term impact of a crisis might easily arrive at a multiple of this figure. With 
the measures we discussed, future crises will become less probable. At the same time we 
should  realise  that  this  objective  is  not  presented  to  us  on  a  silver  platter.  All  the  parties 
involved will have to work hard to meet all the requirements now that implementation is the 
next challenge. So let us not wait too long, and start making plans instead. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 171/2010
