Vítor Constâncio: Economic reforms – European and Chinese challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  The 
Hamburg Summit: “China meets Europe”, Hamburg, 25 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
Relations between China and Europe are currently closer than ever before. This is ultimately 
a result of the growing interdependence between these two partners and the ensuing need to 
address common policy challenges through cooperation in today’s global environment. 
The strength of the economic links between China and Europe is undeniable. In my capacity 
as a euro area central banker, let me provide some evidence pertaining to this vast region of 
Europe, which in around one month’s time will span 17 different countries. The euro area is, 
alongside the United States, the main destination for Chinese exports, with an export share 
of 15% in 2008. But it is equally impressive – when looking, in turn, at euro area exports – 
that euro area exports to China tripled between 2000 and 2009, at a time when the share of 
the United States in total euro area exports was decreasing from 17% to 12%. The pace of 
this  development  has  been  particularly  striking  during  the  financial  crisis:  China’s  share  of 
total  euro  area  exports  rose  from  3.8%  to  6.2%  between  the  first  quarter  of  2007  and  the 
second  quarter  of  this  year,  increasing  by  an  extraordinary  70%  since  the  first  quarter  of 
2009. It is also interesting to note that Chinese foreign direct investment in the euro area, 
while  still  at  a  relatively  low  level,  has  shown  consistently  strong  growth  since  2004.  The 
people of Europe have now become used to the idea of some of their firms being owned by 
companies located in China. 
It  is  therefore  no  surprise  that  our  countries  have  significant  shared  interests.  The  point  I 
would  like  to  make  today  is  that  our  common  strategic  concerns  pertain  not  only  to  the 
continuance  of  a  bilateral  and  global  free  trade  environment,  but  also  to  the  pursuit  of 
domestic models in terms of growth and economic governance that prove sustainable and do 
not  exacerbate  macroeconomic  or  financial  stability  vulnerabilities  over  time.  This  would 
place the close relationship between our two economies on a solid footing in the long term.  
Such  relations  must,  in  turn,  be  seen  against  the  broader,  multilateral  background  of  the 
upgrading  of  the  G20  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis,  which  has  been  crucial  in  further 
involving  all  systemically  important  countries,  including  China,  in  international  policy 
cooperation. In particular, the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth 
is  a  promising  means  of  fostering  collective  action  at  the  global  level.  If  this  goal  is  to  be 
achieved, the ECB considers it vital that all G20 members fully live up to the commitments 
made within the Framework.  
Against this backdrop, I will first discuss the policy challenges currently confronting euro area 
authorities  and  the  responses  that  are  being  adopted.  I  will  then  talk  about  those  factors 
which  –  both  in  my  understanding  and,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  in  the  view  of  the  Chinese 
authorities – make the pursuit of economic reforms a central objective in China, too. 
Euro area 
1. 
There  has  recently  been  a  tendency  among  commentators  to  regard  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  (EMU)  as  being  in  need  of  far-reaching  reform.  This  view  has  been 
encouraged  by  the  emergence  of  tensions  in  certain  euro  area  sovereign  debt  markets  in 
2010, which has caused some observers to reappraise the prospects for the single currency. 
These criticisms stem from three challenges currently facing the euro area: 
 
first, the excessive debts and deficits in a number of member countries; 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 1
  the  considerable  divergence  across 
second, 
competitiveness and member countries’ sizeable current account imbalances; 
third, the challenge of preventing and managing crises, given the lack of a clear euro 
area framework for this purpose. 
the  euro  area 
terms  of 
in 
These challenges refocus attention on certain indispensable aspects of what it means to be 
part of a single currency area.  
The challenge of excessive public debts and deficits serves as a reminder of the need for 
countries  in  EMU  to  pursue  sustainable  fiscal  policies.  Fiscal  sustainability  is  a  must  in  a 
union with a centralised monetary policy, but decentralised fiscal policies, and a central bank 
which  –  for  very  good  reasons  –  is  prohibited  by  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European Union from engaging in the monetary financing of public deficits. Moreover, fiscal 
policy  has  to  be  geared  towards  maintaining  domestic  demand  in  line  with  sustainable 
growth and price stability. 
The  challenge  of  intra-euro  area  imbalances  underscores  the  importance  of  countries 
keeping nominal price and cost developments in line with those of the euro area as a whole. 
Otherwise, losses in competitiveness will ensue which cannot be offset by the exchange rate 
or the single monetary policy, which by definition can only be geared towards price stability in 
the euro area as a whole. This also underscores the importance of avoiding unsustainable 
current account imbalances, which imply vulnerabilities such as excessive credit growth or 
dependence on external financing. 
The challenge of preventing and managing crises draws attention to the need for euro area 
countries to genuinely treat their economic policies as a “matter of common concern” – as 
they  are  obliged  to  by  the  Treaty  –  and  exercise  effective  peer  pressure.  Intrusive  mutual 
surveillance is a necessary precondition for participation in a highly integrated economic and 
financial area. As we have seen this year, a failure in terms of surveillance can quickly result 
in a crisis in a member country which – no matter how small the country – spills over to the 
rest of the area via cross-border holdings of that country’s sovereign debt and more general 
confidence effects. 
While  these  challenges  are  genuine  and  serious,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  conclusions  that 
some commentators have drawn. Such criticisms overlook two very important aspects of the 
euro area that tell a different story about its resilience. 
 
First,  the  euro  has  been  successful,  in  its  first  12  years,  in  many  important  areas 
which do not require reforms. The euro has brought stability, with inflation averaging 
1.98%  and  inflation  expectations  remaining  solidly  anchored.  The  euro  has 
facilitated  economic  integration,  with  financial  integration  increasing  by  around  
25–30%  in  those  EU  countries  that  first  adopted  the  euro  and  trade  integration 
increasing by an average of 5–10% since 1999. Those countries that have remained 
more  competitive  have  benefited  significantly  in  terms  of  trade  in  view  of  the 
absence  of  exchange  rate  fluctuation.  The  advent  of  the  euro  has  also  been 
associated  with  the  stronger  correlation  of  business  cycles  and  a  reduction  in  the 
dispersion  of  annual  inflation  rates  and  real  GDP  growth  rates  across  euro  area 
countries. Indeed, nowadays such dispersion is comparable to the dispersion seen 
across  the  various  US  states.  And  the  euro  has  established  itself  as  the  second 
international currency. Given these achievements, it would be distressing to imagine 
a  world  without  the  euro.  What  would  have  happened  to  individual  euro  area 
economies during the deepest economic and financial crisis in decades? 
Second, the major efforts that are already being made to address the root causes of 
the  euro  area’s  challenges  are  sometimes  overlooked.  Euro  area  countries  are 
currently leading the way in prioritising a swift return to fiscal consolidation, which 
will  have  important  confidence  effects.  The  IMF  currently  predicts  that  the  euro 
area’s aggregate fiscal deficit will be 5.1% of GDP next year. This compares with 
BIS Review 159/2010
 2 
 That said, there are still areas of that reformed governance framework where the ECB would 
like to see further progress. We would like to see greater automaticity in the implementation 
of  fiscal  surveillance  procedures.  We  would  also  like  to  see  stronger  sanctions,  such  as 
financial sanctions, under the macroeconomic surveillance procedure. This procedure should 
concentrate firmly on euro area countries experiencing sustained competitiveness losses and 
large  current  account  deficits.  It  should  be  based  on  transparent  and  effective  trigger 
mechanisms and give its assessments and recommendations a high degree of publicity at all 
stages of the surveillance process.  
The euro area is undeniably facing many challenges. But these challenges do not invalidate 
our achievements to date or the steps that are being taken to reform economic governance 
and address them at the source. I am confident that euro area authorities will do whatever is 
necessary  to  steer  the  single  currency  through  its  current  difficulties,  ensuring  its  future 
stability. 
China 
2. 
Turning to China, I very much welcome the fact that the Chinese authorities have placed the 
gradual rebalancing of growth at the heart of their policy objectives. The 12th five-year plan, 
due to be finalised in March next year, testifies to these efforts, which should not be seen in 
isolation, but as part of the broader efforts made by systemically relevant G20 members with 
a view to rebalancing their economies. In Pittsburgh last year, G20 members with significant 
external deficits pledged to implement policies to support private saving and/or embark on 
fiscal consolidation, while members with significant external surpluses committed themselves 
to  strengthening  their  domestic  sources  of  growth,  as  well  as  allowing  greater  flexibility  in 
their exchange rate policies, as decided in Toronto. One year later, in Seoul a few days ago, 
G20 leaders pledged to “pursue the full range of policies conducive to reduc[ing] excessive 
imbalances”, the “timely identification” of which will be facilitated by “indicative guidelines to 
be agreed by […] Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors” in the first half of 2011. 
It  is  against  this  backdrop  that  we  have  to  look  at  the  Chinese  growth  model.  This  model 
began  three  decades  ago,  when  the  country  embarked  upon  a  courageous  process  of 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 3
In 
investment  and 
low-cost  exports. 
reforms,  and  relies  upon  a  large  pool  of  domestic  savings  and  cheap  labour,  with  growth 
being  driven  mainly  by 
this  context,  China’s 
macroeconomic  policy  framework  is  built  on  three  mutually  consistent  pillars:  a  managed 
exchange rate; a closed capital account; and the pursuit of some degree of monetary policy 
autonomy, mainly via administrative measures.  
The  achievements  of  this  model  over  the  past  three  decades  are  unquestionable.  First, 
China’s  output  has  grown  by  an  average  of  around  10%  per  year  since  those  economic 
reforms  began  in  1978,  with  the  economy  showing  remarkable  resilience  even  during  the 
recent global financial crisis. In terms of levels, China’s GDP now accounts for less than 40% 
of US GDP in market exchange rate terms, but around two-thirds of it in terms of purchasing 
power parity. Looking ahead, some observers expect China to surpass the United States as 
the world’s largest economy as early as 2020.  
Strong  and  sustained  economic  growth  has  fuelled  an  eightfold  rise  in  per  capita  income. 
And as a result, the poverty rate – the percentage of the population that has an income of 
less  than  USD  1.25  per  day  –  has  declined  to  less  than  16%,  down  from  85%  when  the 
reforms began. In other words, China has managed to lift more than 600 million people out of 
poverty in the last three decades. 
China’s export development is equally outstanding. It has increased its world market share 
from less than 1% in 1980 to 8% today, and in 2009 it dethroned Germany as the world’s 
largest exporter.  
However,  the  apparent  successes  and  resilience  of  the  Chinese  economic  model  do  not 
necessarily mean that this model will prove equally sustainable over, say, the next 15 years.  
Indeed,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  some  of  the  major  long-term  factors  that  have  been 
driving China’s strong economic performance may reach a turning point in the not too distant 
future.  These  are  (i)  the  continuous  growth  of  demand  for  Chinese  exports,  (ii)  favourable 
demographic  developments,  and  (iii)  the  sustained  accumulation  of  physical  capital.  As 
regards  the  first  factor,  it  seems  unlikely  that  China’s  export  growth  can  continue  to 
persistently  exceed  15%  per  year,  given  projected  domestic  demand  trends  in  advanced 
economies.  Also,  historical  experience  with  export-led  economies  suggests  that  there  are 
limits  to  the  process  of  gaining  market  share.  The  turning  point  on  the  demographic  side 
looks  to  be  further  off,  but  is  even  more  critical.  China’s  dependency  ratio  –  the  ratio  of 
people of non-working age to people of working age – is expected to start rising again by 
2015  at  the  latest.  This  means  that  the  number  of  people  who  cannot  save  and  can  only 
consume – the youngest and oldest sections of the population – will increase. This, coupled 
with the progressive drying-up of labour supply from the agricultural sector, will reduce the 
saving rate and the resulting domestic funding of investment. It will probably also bring about 
wage  increases  that  impinge  upon  the  cost  competitiveness  of  Chinese  exports.  Finally, 
historical experience with industrialised economies also tells us that the marginal return on 
capital  diminishes  as  countries  grow  richer  and  accumulate  more  capital  per  worker.  This 
means that in China a transition is needed from an economy driven by growth in factor inputs 
to one driven by efficiency and productivity improvements.  
The declines in these long-term structural factors are a fundamental reason why economic 
reforms are also very important in China, even if in the short run these developments may 
not  result  in  immediate  challenges  to  the  long-standing  economic  model.  The  Chinese 
authorities have, however, identified other, partly related developments – the emergence of 
domestic and external imbalances – as key factors calling for more urgent reforms. 
First, the share of private consumption in GDP has declined further. In the first nine months 
of 2010 the contribution made by consumption to GDP growth fell to 34%, down from the pre 
crisis  average  of  39%,  while  the  contribution  of  investment  picked  up  to  stand  at  59% 
(against  a  pre-crisis  average  of  49%).  Second,  overcapacity  in  some  segments  of  the 
economy and the limited efficiency of capital – especially in the public sector – have been 
additional sources of concern. More than half of the RMB 4 trillion stimulus enacted during 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2010
the  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  investment  in  public  infrastructure,  which  has  further 
increased the already sizeable role played by the public sector in the economy. Third, the 
share  of  the  service  sector  in  GDP  has  remained  small.  Given  that  the  service  sector  is 
considered to be the most labour-intensive of the three major sectors, its underdevelopment 
has had negative implications for overall employment. Fourth, income inequality has been on 
the rise. Average urban income is now three times higher than average rural income. And the 
income gap between urban households with high incomes and those with low incomes has 
also been increasing.  
Of course, given the complexity of the structural reforms involved, China cannot become a 
consumption economy overnight. This will take time. And for this very reason it is important 
to start now in order to ensure that the transition process is as smooth as possible.  
However, the benefits of these structural reforms could be substantial. To give you an idea of 
just how substantial, I would like to quote a recent study by the Asian Development Bank1. It 
estimates that without policy reforms China’s real annual GDP growth will slow to an average 
of 5.5% for the period 2010-30 as a result of less favourable developments in the structural 
factors 
just  described,  namely  export  demand,  demographics  and  capital 
accumulation. According to the findings of the ADB study, policy improvements in areas such 
as education, research and property rights could instead increase GDP growth by at least 
1 percentage point over that period. 
Chinese measures to achieve more balanced growth have also included, over the past five 
years, very important exchange rate reforms. Both in July 2005 and in June 2010, the ECB 
and  other  euro  area  authorities  publicly  welcomed  China’s  moves  towards  a  more  flexible 
exchange rate regime. The potential for exchange rate adjustment implied by these decisions 
needs to be further exploited. Given the importance of China’s role in the global economy, 
further  flexibility  of  the  renminbi  would  be  another  element  conducive  to  more  balanced 
growth. Greater exchange rate flexibility could help in achieving the objective of improving 
economic  efficiency  and  market-based  resource  allocation.  It  would  allow  greater  control 
over domestic monetary policy and help to adjust the policy stance in line with GDP growth in 
a timely manner in order to prevent the emergence of inflationary and asset price pressures.  
I  have 
 In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  once  again  that,  given  the  global  nature  of  the 
challenges at  stake,  all  major  economies  should  do  their  part  by  striving  to  implement  the 
policy measures collectively agreed in order to rebalance global growth patterns.  
Multilateral  cooperation  is  not  the  easiest  way  forward.  However,  in  the  absence  of 
cooperative policy action, the pain that purely market-driven adjustment would bring about in 
the  transition  phase  could  prove  too  severe  for  us  to  simply  dismiss  this  course  of  action 
today.  
Given their size and importance, Europe and China both have a key role to play in the global 
resolution of the crisis. It is important to understand that a stronger, more sustainable and 
balanced  global  economy  –  which  is  in  all  our  interests  –  can  only  be  achieved  if  policy 
makers from all countries work together.  
We  still  cannot  be  sure  that  the  G20  Framework  will  be  implemented  effectively.  It  is 
therefore  paramount  that  the  systemically  most  relevant  countries  fully  live  up  to  the 
commitments made in Pittsburgh, Toronto and Seoul. 
                                                
 
1  Lee, J.W. and Hong, K., “Economic Growth in Asia: Determinants and Prospects”, ADB Economics Working 
Paper  Series,  No  220,  Economics  and  Research  Department,  Asian  Development  Bank,  Manila,  2010 
(forthcoming). 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 5
