 Subir Gokarn: Managing the growth-inflation balance in India – current 
considerations and long-term perspectives 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Private Equity International India Forum, Mumbai, 5 October 2010. 
 The inputs of Sitikantha Pattanaik, Bhupal Singh and Sangita Misra in preparation of this address are gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Introduction 
I would like to thank the Private Equity International India Forum for inviting me to deliver this 
Keynote  Address.  I  believe  that  channels  of  finance  like  venture  capital  will  play  an 
increasingly  significant  role  in  India.  Sustaining  the  current  growth  momentum  over  a  long 
period  of  time  will  clearly  depend  heavily  on  the  ability  of  new  business  ideas  to  first,  find 
start-up  funding  and  then,  grow  to  scales  at  which  traditional  funding  sources  can  be 
accessed.  Historically,  this  role  was  played  in  the  Indian  economy  by  the  Development 
Finance Institutions. In the current and future scenario, the function has shifted to companies 
like  the  ones  represented  at  this  forum,  whose  business  model  depends  on  successful 
navigation  of  the  start-up  to  listing  phase  of  the  businesses  that  they  finance.  In  turn,  the 
likelihood of success depends on a stable and predictable macroeconomic environment.  
The  long-term  growth  prospects  of  the  Indian  economy  provide  an  enormously  attractive 
investment  environment  for  a  range  of  businesses  and,  consequently,  for  the  people  who 
would finance them. However, as attractive as the opportunity may seem, the assessment 
would not be complete without a full understanding of the risks. In my address this morning, I 
will focus on the risk of macroeconomic instability, with particular emphasis on the issue of 
inflation:  what  drives  it  and  whether  it  threatens  to  get  out  of  control.  An  unavoidable 
consequence of runaway inflation, however we define it, is that drastic action by the central 
bank and also by the government is needed to rein it in, which is bound to disrupt the growth 
process.  The  challenge,  therefore,  is  to  keep  inflation  in  check  over  long  periods  of  time, 
allowing the economy to grow at its potential rate with minimal disruptions and deviations. 
This is the best way in which the macroeconomic environment can contribute to a positive 
business climate. 
I will begin by discussing the current inflationary scenario in India, which, as we have been 
saying in our recent assessments, is not very reassuring. I will then place this scenario in a 
broad historical context, with the intention of demonstrating that India has a good record of 
reining inflation in, regardless of what has driven it. The structure of the domestic economy 
and the financial system may have changed and the global context may be different, but the 
effectiveness of inflation control over the decades has not diminished. 
The current scenario 
As you well know, the predominant policy concern in the Indian economy as recently as one 
year  ago  was  the  significant  slowdown  in  growth  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the 
advanced economies. As Slide 1 shows, the inflation rate, which was briefly negative in the 
middle  of  2009,  began  to  accelerate  rapidly  later  in  the  year.  This  upward  momentum 
continued  into  the  first  half  of  2010,  with  double-digit  inflation  persisting  for  a  few  months. 
The rapidity of the transition was surprising, given the fact that the recovery in growth was 
just getting under way and, importantly, the global situation was still very uncertain. However, 
as Slides 2 and 3 indicate, the reason for the sharp increase was that all the possible drivers 
of inflation were simultaneously contributing. Each one by itself may not have resulted in the 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 outcome that we saw, but all three working together resulted in a rather sharp acceleration. 
Slide  2  displays  the  pattern  of  supply-side  pressures,  as  manifested  in  the  food  and  fuel 
components of the Wholesale Price Index. Food prices rose sharply because the monsoon of 
2009 was deficient in most parts of the country, impacting agricultural production. However, 
there are, I believe, longer term forces at work on food prices, which are a matter of concern. 
I  shall  address  these  later  on  in  the  speech.  Fuel  prices  also  rose  as  the  prospects  of  a 
global recovery improved and, particularly, the Emerging Market Economies actually saw a 
sharp acceleration in growth. 
However, what was most significant from the monetary policy perspective was the growing 
visibility of demand-side pressures. Slide 3 tracks the price dynamics of the manufacturing 
sector  –  overall  and  without  the  food  processing  component.  The latter  has  been  used  by 
many  analysts  as  a  reasonable  proxy  of  demand-side  inflation,  which  is  the  phenomenon 
that monetary policy can and should influence. Both graphs in the slide and, particularly the 
one  displaying  non-food  manufacturing  inflation,  show  a  tremendous  acceleration  from  a 
significantly  negative  rate  of  inflation  during  2009  to  reach  rather  worrisome  levels  by  the 
middle of 2010.  
Slide  4  compares  the  relative  contributions  of  the  supply  and  demand  drivers.  The  graph 
shows quite clearly that food and fuel prices, reflecting supply-side forces and the prices of 
manufactured goods, reflecting demand-side ones, all contributed significantly to the recent 
rise  in  inflation.  If  we  look  back  a  little  at  the  inflationary  surge  immediately  preceding  the 
crisis, we can see that the pattern is quite similar. This leads me to a broader point about the 
drivers of inflation in India. Whenever we see worryingly high levels of inflation, both supply 
and demand pressures seem to be at work. 
The final point in the discussion on the current scenario is with reference to monetary policy 
responses.  Slide  5  shows  displays  the  movement  of  the  overnight  call  money  rate,  which 
reflects  the  combined  actions  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  policy  rates  and  liquidity.  To 
place the recent policy actions in perspective, we must remember that the response to the 
crisis involved an enormous reduction in both policy rates and the cash reserve ratio in late 
2008 and early 2009. Along with this, a number of ad hoc measures were also taken. As the 
crisis abated, even if inflationary pressures had not manifested as they did, the need to exit 
from the crisis management stance would have motivated some actions on rates and liquidity 
– of course, at a pace that would not derail the still incipient recovery.  
This process began in October 2009, with the withdrawal of most of the ad hoc measures, 
but  gained  momentum  in  January  2010,  with  an  increase  in  the  cash  reserve  ratio  and, 
further, in March 2010 with the first of a series of rate hikes. The pace and sequencing of 
actions  was,  as  we  articulated  in  our  various  assessments,  determined  by  the  need  to 
balance a number of potentially conflicting factors. First, we needed to address the rapidly 
mounting  demand-side  inflationary  pressures  while  ensuring  that  the  recovery  was  not  cut 
short by a surge in interest rates. Second, while the domestic economy was doing well, the 
global  environment  remained  uncertain,  with  a  number  of  new  stress  points  emerging 
periodically. 
Third,  apart  from  everything  else,  it  was  imperative  that  we  normalize  the  monetary  policy 
stance from where it had moved during the crisis management phase. Not doing so would 
have put us in the situation of being unable to respond to another negative shock, were it to 
materialize. In sum, our policy actions over the past several months were motivated by the 
twin objectives of sustaining the recovery while reining in inflation and normalizing the policy 
stance as quickly as possible. In our mid-quarter assessment last month, we indicated that 
the normalization process is now close to being complete and that further actions on rates 
and liquidity will be driven more significantly by what the growth and inflation numbers tell us, 
both domestically and globally. 
Of course, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Do we believe that our actions are having 
the desired effect? On the growth front, while there is a certain amount of volatility visible in 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 industrial production, by and large, there is no significant indication of the recovery stalling. 
On the inflation front, as was visible in the slides that I showed earlier, there are distinct signs 
of a deceleration of inflation over the past couple of months. The turnaround coincides with 
our expectation that inflation begins to respond to monetary actions after a six month lag. To 
examine  this  more  closely,  we  look  at  the  Seasonally  Adjusted  Month-on-Month  rates  of 
inflation, which give a sense of the momentum of inflation. Slide 6 displays the pattern of this 
indicator. It clearly suggests that the momentum is currently negative. While the turning point 
on the overall index is early in 2010, the sharp deceleration in recent months may reflect the 
impact  of  monetary  actions  and  gives  us  confidence  that  the  inflation  rate  will  moderate 
significantly by the end of the fiscal year 2010–11. 
I would like to conclude this discussion by emphasizing the point that the current episode of 
inflation posed a significant challenge to policymakers by virtue of its timing. Monetary policy 
responses  had  to  be  calibrated  to  the  needs  of  dealing  with  inflation  while  sustaining  a 
growth  recovery  in  a  still  uncertain  global  environment.  The  choices  on  the  magnitude, 
sequencing and timing of actions were driven by the need to find a balance between these 
factors. 
Long-term perspectives 
Let me now take a longer term view of the growth-inflation balance in the Indian economy. To 
begin  with,  we  do  have  a  fairly  explicit  statement  of  what  we  see  as  a  desirable  rate  of 
inflation, consistent with the economy growing at its potential rate on a sustained basis. Our 
policy  reviews  say  that  we  would  like  inflation  to  be  in  the  4–4.5  per  cent  range  in  the 
medium-term, while aspiring for a 3 per cent rate in the long term. This might sound a little 
unrealistic in the current scenario, but in order to both justify the aspiration itself as well as 
assess  its  realism  we  need  to  look  at  the  historical  record  of  inflation  management  in  the 
Indian economy.  
Slide 7 provides a very revealing picture of how the growth-inflation balance has shifted in 
the Indian economy. The first graph, relating decadal averages of growth and inflation over 
the past several decades clearly indicates that a steady upward movement in the growth rate 
has been accompanied by a steady downward movement in the inflation rate. The contrast is 
even  more  striking  when  we  remove  the  agricultural  sector,  which  is  the  slowest  growing 
among the three – Agriculture, Industry and Services – over long periods of time, from the 
growth  calculations.  These  patterns  clearly  suggest  that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off 
between  growth  and 
is  accompanied  by 
decelerating inflation. 
This may appear to be an obvious conclusion. The textbook treatment of the growth-inflation 
trade-off sees it as an essentially short-run phenomenon, with the quantum of resources and 
capacity in the economy being fixed. However, the reason I specifically mention this point is 
that  in  the  wake  of  recent  assessments  that  the  Indian  economy  is  poised  to  significantly 
increase its growth rate many people have asked me whether this will be accompanied by an 
inflationary surge. My answer to this is precisely with reference to the distinction between the 
short-run  and  the  long-run  relationship  between  growth  and  inflation.  In  the  short-run,  with 
capacities  fixed,  a  surge  in  growth  can  cause  the  economy  to  overheat,  thus  stoking 
inflationary pressures. This is the bread-and-butter issue of monetary policy, the effectiveness 
of  which  must  be  judged  by  its  ability  to  keep  the  economy  growing  at  a  rate  just  short  of 
overheating, thereby keeping inflation in check.  
In  the  long  run,  capacities  are  not  fixed.  Acceleration  in  growth  over  long  periods  of  time 
occurs  in  part  because  investment  activity,  which  itself  contributes  to  growth,  leads  to  an 
increase in capacity. This pushes up the potential growth rate of the economy, i.e., the rate at 
which it can grow without causing overheating. Looking back over the growth performance of 
the Indian economy, it is quite evident that the acceleration of growth from the 5–6 per cent 
range to the 8–9 per cent range was accomplished by a massive increase in investment. As 
if  anything,  accelerating  growth 
inflation; 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 Slide 8 indicates, the Investment-GDP ratio rose quite sharply over the decades. Even the 
relatively high number of 30.5 per cent during the last decade masks the sharp surge in this 
ratio towards the middle of the decade, which saw it rise above 35 per cent. At that rate of 
investment, the capacity of the economy to increase output is growing quite rapidly and its 
ability to meet the requirements of a growing and increasingly affluent population is clearly 
expanding. 
In short, the secret to accelerating growth while still being able to keep inflation in check over 
long periods of time is in the speed and efficiency of the supply response. As long as the 
growth in supply keeps pace or even exceeds the growth in demand, inflationary pressures 
do not sustain. Supply can be expanded by enhancing domestic capacity, which the Indian 
economy  has  clearly  done,  or  by  tapping  into  global  sources,  which  the  significant 
liberalization in trade policy, particularly since the early 1990s, also enabled.  
However,  while  this  combination  of  domestic  and  global  supply  responses  has  helped  to 
steadily  bring  the  inflation  rate  down,  the  Indian  economy  has  always  been  vulnerable  to 
inflation shocks, which have caused uncomfortable spurts in prices across the board. Slide 9 
identifies some major shocks to the system, all of which required strong policy responses. As 
is evident from the graph, the vulnerability of the Indian economy to supply shocks on the 
food  and  energy  fronts  is  persistent.  There  have  also  been  periods  in  which  a  significant 
fiscal  expansion  accompanied  by  an  accommodating  monetary  stance  –  i.e.,  demand-side 
pressures – raised the inflation rate significantly. Sharp depreciation of the rupee in the midst 
of an oil shock has also played a role on one occasion. While the demand driven inflation 
shocks can be avoided by prudent  monetary and fiscal policies, the vulnerability to supply 
shocks in the form of a failed monsoon or a surge in oil prices will obviously remain. 
Slides  10–12  display  some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  transformation  of  the  inflation 
scenario  in  India.  On  Slide  10,  we  see  how  the  relative  contributions  to  inflation  have 
changed over the decades. Food has been a steady source of inflation over the entire period. 
Energy became a significant factor during the 1970s, following the first oil shock of 1973. It 
has  persisted  in  its  contribution  since  then.  Adding  up  the  two  provides  the  overall 
contribution of supply-side factors, which, as the graph suggests, have persisted in one form 
or  another  through  the  entire  period.  Looking  ahead,  it  would  be  reasonable  to argue  that 
these  pressures  are  likely  to  persist,  as  a  result  of  both  global  and  domestic  imbalances 
between demand and supply. 
On the energy front, one of the fundamental drivers of high oil prices is increasing demand in 
Emerging  Market  Economies,  whose  rising  affluence  is  resulting  in  very  rapid  growth  of 
energy-intensive activities. As relatively low-cost reserves of fossil fuels are exhausted, rising 
global demand is being met by exploiting higher cost sources. The cost differential between 
petroleum  and  alternative  sources  makes  such  sources  viable  even  at  their  relatively  high 
costs. Steadily rising costs of production, in turn, exert inflationary pressures on the global 
economy,  which  hits  those  economies  hardest  whose  energy  intensity  is  increasing  most 
rapidly. In recent years, the prices of petroleum, as well as other commodities, are perceived 
to have been further impacted by their emergence as an attractive asset class. However, as 
significant as the contribution of this factor may have been to price increases, the underlying 
fundamentals are what will continue to drive prices in the coming years. 
As  regards  food,  the  pressures  in  the  Indian  economy  are  predominantly  domestic.  Our 
Green Revolution in the 1960s raised the production of cereals dramatically, which increased 
availability  and  stabilized  prices.  However,  what  we  are  seeing  today  is  the  impact  of 
increasing affluence on the demand for a variety of food items that go far beyond cereals. As 
people  become  more  affluent,  their  diets  diversify.  Just  as  the  growing  Indian  consuming 
class  has  stimulated  a  boom  in  the  demand  for  consumer  durables,  vehicles  and  mobile 
phones,  to  give  but  a  few  examples,  it  has  also  manifested  an  enormous  increase  in  the 
demand for various food items beyond cereals. Demand for protein sources – pulses, milk, 
meat, fish and eggs – has surged as has the appetite for sugar, fruits and vegetables.  
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 In  the  case of  consumer  durables, vehicles  and  mobile  phones,  the  expansion  in  capacity 
was  enormous  and  rapid,  resulting  in  the  demand  being  met  without  prices  increasing.  In 
fact, economies of scale and technological advancements actually helped to bring down the 
prices of many products even as volumes were increasing. The globalization of the supply 
chain also contributed significantly, as global capacities were brought into play to meet the 
rising demand. This combination of forces has certainly not been in play in meeting the rising 
domestic  demand  for  the  food  items  mentioned  above.  Supply  is  predominantly  domestic 
and,  for  the  most  part,  is  unable  to  respond  effectively  to  the  expansion  in  demand.  The 
inevitable consequence of this is an increase in prices. This is a significant structural driver of 
inflation in the Indian economy. A good monsoon may provide some relief, while a bad one 
will  aggravate  the  pressures,  but  the  enduring  solution  to  this  problem  lies  in  a  rapid  and 
sustained increase in the supply of these items. 
Slide 10 also displays the positive impacts of effective supply response. The contribution of 
manufactured  goods  to  inflationary  pressures  has  declined  significantly  over  the  decades. 
This  decline  can  be  attributed  to  increasing  effectiveness  of  policy  reforms  in  increasing 
domestic capacities and competition and integrating domestic markets with the global supply 
chain. 
In Slide 11, we look at inflation dynamics from the macroeconomic policy perspective, i.e., 
monetary and fiscal actions that may have contributed to the rise and fall of the inflation rate. 
During the 1970s and 1980s, the monetization of the fiscal deficit, as reflected in the height 
of the bar showing the growth in net RBI Credit to Government, was clearly a contributor to 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  Government  spending  boosts  demand  and  if  the 
government  faces  no  effective  financial  constraints,  it  can  increase  spending  without  limit 
and, certainly beyond the capacity of a relatively closed economy to meet the demand. 
The  emergence  of  an  effective  constraint  on  monetization  of  the  fiscal  deficit  during  the 
1990s helped to rein this source of inflationary pressure in. Now, if the Government wants to 
increase its spending, it has to raise resources  from the market, bringing in some realistic 
cost-benefit calculations,  including  the  fact  that  the  cost  of  funds  for  the  private  sector  will 
also increase. Against this backdrop, the Government’s commitment to fiscal prudence in the 
form  of  fiscal  responsibility  legislation  is  an  important  contribution  to  maintain  the  growth-
inflation balance. 
It  is  also  striking  in  Slide  11  that,  contrary  to  popular  notions  about  the  link  between  the 
growth in money and the inflation rate, the rate of growth of money remained constant even 
as inflation declined. The reason for this was that the expansion in money was absorbed by 
the growing volume of transactions that involved money exchange. This absorption mitigated 
the potentially inflationary impact of money growth. 
One  important  consideration  in  inflation  management  is  the  stability  of  the  inflation  rate. 
Forward-looking transactions build in some expectations about inflation rates over the tenure 
of  the  contract.  Significant  deviations  of  actual  outcomes  from  expected  ones  can  cause 
huge losses to one of the transacting parties, thereby acting as a deterrent to what may be 
growth-enhancing transactions. The more stable the inflation rate, the less these deviations 
will be. There appears to be an almost universal correlation between the level of the inflation 
rate  and  its  stability.  As  Slide  12  shows,  this  relationship  is  quite  evident  in  the  Indian 
context. The reduction in the average inflation rate over the years has been accompanied by 
a sharp reduction in the volatility of that rate. The aspiration of a “low and stable” inflation 
rate is a realistic one. 
Finally, let me make a few comments on the role of monetary policy in this transition from a 
relatively  high-inflation  economy  to  a  relatively  low-inflation  one.  Conventional  monetary 
policy began to apply only during the 1990s, with the freeing up of restrictions and mandatory 
allocations  of  credit  to  various  sectors.  Genuine  markets  for  both  products  and  credit 
emerged after the reforms of the early 1990s. As Slide 13 shows, the persistent inflationary 
conditions during the 1990s were responded to by significant monetary actions in terms of 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 5
 both rates and liquidity management. As the inflation rate trended lower, a process to which 
the monetary policy actions of the period contributed, the policy stance in turn changed to 
accommodate the new circumstances. In other words, monetary policy has been aimed at 
keeping inflation under control, which involves tightening when inflation exceeds the comfort 
level and loosening when it falls below. 
Concluding remarks 
The current inflation scenario is a cause of concern, as the inflation rate persists well above 
the  upper  bound  of  the  comfort  zone.  The  fact  that  these  inflationary  pressures  emerged 
rather  quickly  in  a  situation  in  which  the  economy  was  just  beginning  to  recover  from  the 
significant slowdown of 2008–09 made the policy challenge more complicated. The monetary 
policy response to these pressures has been a calibrated one, seeking a balance between 
sustaining  the  recovery  and  reining  in  inflation,  while  being  mindful  of  the  risks  that  still 
remain in the global environment. Recent data suggest that the approach is working, with the 
economy set to grow at a reasonably healthy rate during the current year and the inflation 
rate beginning to decline, including, significantly, in the manufacturing sector, where inflation 
is seen as being most responsive to monetary actions. 
This  approach  must  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  a  long-standing  policy  commitment  to 
maintain  a  balance  between  growth  and  inflation  in  the  short  run,  while  fostering  faster 
growth  with  lower  inflation  over  long  periods  of  time.  The  growth  pattern  of  the  Indian 
economy  over  the  past  six  decades  clearly  shows  that  accelerating  growth  has  been 
accompanied  by  declining  inflation.  This  is  primarily  because  growth  has  been  driven  by 
expanding  capacities  across  the  board  as  well  as,  in  recent  years,  by  increasing  global 
linkages.  Both  these  factors  have  helped  to  achieve  a  strong  supply  response  to  growing 
demand, thus keeping inflation in check. 
This is not to say that the Indian economy is now invulnerable to inflation shocks. Food and 
energy price shocks have been a regular part of the economic landscape and may continue 
to  be  so  in  the  future.  Food  prices,  in  particular,  are  now  being  driven  by  some  structural 
imbalances between demand and supply, as increasingly affluent consumers diversify their 
dietary  patterns  away  from  cereals  and  towards  protein  sources.  This calls  for  an effort  to 
quickly increase the availability of these items, on which is contingent the longer term outlook 
for food price inflation. 
However,  over  the  years,  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  approaches  have  clearly 
assimilated  the  lessons  of  the  past  and  have  moved  in  a  direction  which  helps  contain 
inflationary pressures even as growth remains robust. Making inflation low and stable was 
the outcome of a combination of long-term and short-term policies over the past decades. 
Keeping  it  there  remains  the  objective,  while  an  appropriate  combination  of  long-term  and 
short-term policies will provide the instrument to achieve it. 
I thank the organizers of this event once again for giving me this opportunity and thank you 
for listening.  
6 
 BIS Review 129/2010
    BIS Review 129/2010 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 129/2010
    BIS Review 129/2010 
 9
     10 
 BIS Review 129/2010
    BIS Review 129/2010 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 129/2010
  BIS Review 129/2010 
 13
