Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Role of central banks in emerging economies 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Svein 
Gjedrem Colloquium, Oslo, 18 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
Central banks continue to be challenged with changing demands as the environment before 
us  is  rapidly  being  transformed.  These  fundamental  and  pronounced  changes  have 
prompted  calls  for  a  review  of  the  role  of  central  banks  in  the  financial  system  and  in  the 
economy. Frequently, such calls have been precipitated during a financial crisis, as was the 
case during the Asian financial crisis and more recently during this current global financial 
crisis.  However,  such  institutional  reforms  undertaken  in  periods  of  exceptional  conditions 
risks influencing the nature and direction of the reforms. While the reforms following a crisis 
may  address  the  immediate  term  demands,  of  equal  importance  is  the  medium  and  the 
longer term implications of the reforms. Perhaps, an important lesson for central banks is that 
such reinvention and modernisation should be undertaken during the good times so that we 
will  not  be  subjected  to  such  changes  during  the  worst  of  times.  In  essence,  in  such  a 
dynamic environment, central banks need to continue to adjust and evolve to remain relevant 
and, thus, useful. 
It is my great honour to be invited to speak at the Norges Bank Colloquium held in honour of 
Governor Svein Gjedrem. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Governor Gjedrem for 
the achievements of the Bank under this leadership during his twelve year terms in office. My 
remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  role  of  central  banks  from  the  perspective  of  emerging 
economies and more specifically in the context of central banking in Asia as we confront the 
challenges in this rapidly changing global economic and financial environment. 
Central bank mandates 
While  there  is  no  unique  blueprint  for  the  design  of  the  institutional  arrangements  for  a 
central bank, of importance is that it needs to be relevant to our own circumstances. But of 
importance is that there is clarity on the mandate, the governance framework and the areas 
of  accountability  of  the  central  bank.  And  that  needs  to  be  supported  by  the  empowering 
legislation to ensure that the central bank has at its disposal the capabilities to deliver the 
mandate. 
Central  banks  in  emerging  economies  generally  have  a  broader  mandate  beyond  the 
traditional  mandates  of  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Even  within  these  traditional 
mandates, the role of central banks have varied considerably. In the mandate of monetary 
stability,  it  has  ranged  from  having  the  narrow  mandate  of  price  stability  to  the  mandate 
where price stability is the primary role of the central bank while due consideration is also 
given  to  economic  and  employment  objectives.  While  for  some  the  mandates  are  clearly 
hierarchical, for others, the multiple mandates involve assessments of the trade-offs. 
The  central  bank  mandate  of  financial  stability  is  less  clearly  defined  particularly  in 
circumstances  in  which  the  supervisory  function  does  not  reside  in  the  central  bank.  The 
majority of central banks in emerging economies in Asia, however, has the responsibility of 
the supervisory function although for three of the region’s major economies – Japan, China 
and Korea, this function resides in a separate agency. Even for central banks that has the 
responsibility  of  the  supervisory  function,  the  specific  outcomes  to  be  achieved  are  less 
clearly  defined  compared  to  the  mandate  for  price  stability.  In  Malaysia,  our  new  Central 
Bank Act of 2009 has defined this mandate in terms of the risks to financial stability – that is, 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 1
the  risk  of  the  disruption  to  financial  intermediation,  the  risk  of  disruption  to  the  orderly 
functioning of financial markets and the risk of loss of confidence in the financial system. 
Common  to  most  central  banks  in  emerging  economies  is  the  mandate  to  develop  the 
financial  system.  Given  the  stage  of  development  of  financial  systems  in  emerging 
economies,  this  is  an  important  mandate  not  only  to  enhance  the  financial  intermediation 
process in the economy but also for the purposes of facilitating the mandate of monetary and 
financial  stability.  This  mandate  has  involved  institutional  building,  financial  market 
development  and  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  infrastructure  including  that  of  the 
payment systems and the legislative framework. 
The  decade  of  financial  reforms  and  financial  sector  development  that  followed  the  Asia 
financial crisis have resulted in more developed and resilient financial systems that is now 
better able to intermediate the more volatile financial flows and to withstand shocks to the 
system. During the recent global financial crisis, most emerging economies in Asia did not 
experience any disruptions to the financial intermediation process and credit flows continued 
uninterrupted providing important support to economic activity. It also allowed the financial 
markets to facilitate the transmission of policies to support the economic recovery. 
This  developmental  role  is  also  significant  in  contributing  towards  preserving  financial 
stability. The development of the domestic financial markets and the development of a more 
diversified  financial  system  has  reduced  the  risk  of  over  concentration  on  the  banking 
system, a feature that was prevalent during the Asian financial crisis. The introduction of new 
institutional  arrangements  has  also  been  aimed  at  keeping  abreast  with  innovation,  the 
advancement in technology and the intensification of globalisation. It has also allowed for the 
adoption of a more balanced approach towards regulation in which it is complemented by the 
newly  developed  mechanisms  for  surveillance  including  across  borders,  strengthened 
supervisory oversight and institutional arrangements for resolution. 
Central banks and financial markets 
A  more  recently  much  discussed  mandate  is  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  ensuring  the 
orderly  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Orderly  functioning  financial  markets  are  vital  not 
only for the efficient allocation of financial resources in the economy but it is also essential for 
the  transmission  of  the  monetary  policy  and  for  preserving  financial  stability.  While 
competitive forces are expected to result in efficient and optimal outcomes, central banks in 
emerging  economies  have  had  the  important  role  of  balancing  between  the  market  forces 
and  intervention  with  the  objective  of  ensuring  the  orderly  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets. It needs to be recognised that several important preconditions need to be in place 
to  generate  equilibrium  prices  that  reflect  the  underlying  fundamentals.  This  includes  the 
institutional and market infrastructure, the incentive structure, the rules of the game and the 
level  of  financial  literacy  that  recognise  and  understand  the  market  signals.  When  these 
elements are still yet to be fully developed in many emerging economies, it increases the risk 
to instability. Thus, as a result of the stage of development of such markets, or its size or 
prevailing market imperfections, emerging economies have tended to be more vulnerable to 
greater  volatility  and  circumstances  in  which  markets  do  not  self-equilibrate.  The  recent 
global  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  such  dislocations  have  occurred  even  in  developed 
financial systems. Institutional structures and rules that become deficient and less relevant 
heighten the risk for such unstable market conditions. Experience has also shown that such 
market  dislocations  have  severe  and  far  reaching  adverse  implications  on  the  overall 
economy. 
For  the  effectiveness  of  such  interventions,  however,  there  needs  to  be  clarity  in  the 
objectives to be achieved by such central bank presence and the results that are expected to 
be  delivered.  Of  importance,  there  needs  to  be  the  recognition  of  the  temporary  nature  of 
such  interventions  and  the  challenge  of  efficiently  unwinding  such  presence  when  the 
objectives  are  achieved.  There  is  also  the  need  to  manage  the  risks  of  unintended 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2010
consequences  of  such  direct  central  bank  interventions.  Such  risks  could  include  the 
potential  for  circumvention,  or  the  gravitation  to  other  markets  not  protected  by  such 
intervention. There could also be potential costs associated with such interventions, not only 
the current costs, but also the cost to future generations. 
While  the  pace  of  deregulation  and  liberalisation  may  differ  across  emerging  economies, 
there is a discernable distinct shift to greater market orientation in this recent decade. These 
reform efforts have been reinforced by efforts to develop the financial markets and financial 
infrastructure. Within this framework, the nature of intervention has been in the form of direct 
presence in the financial markets, the setting of rules and regulation, and in the resolution of 
problem  financial  institutions.  Such  interventions  were  evident  during  the  Asian  financial 
crisis  in  the  late  1990s  to  restore  stability  in  the  financial  markets.  This  in  turn  created 
conditions  for  the  resumption  of  the  financial  intermediation  process.  While  the  efficient 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  was  vital  for  the  economic  recovery  in  Asia,  more 
important was the comprehensive set of policies that produced the recovery. Within a year of 
the  introduction  of  the  pro-growth  measures,  most  of  the  crisis  affected  economies 
experienced a strong recovery. 
More  recently,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  seen  several  rounds  of  wide  ranging  direct 
market  interventions  to  restore  the  smooth  functioning  of  these  markets.  Described  as 
actions taken in the most extraordinary and exceptional circumstances, it demonstrates that 
this phenomenon of severe market dislocations has the potential to occur even in the most 
developed of the financial systems. As these massive interventions continue, primarily in the 
public and private securities markets, the concern is on its potential consequences on other 
parts of the world, in particular, to the emerging world. In the now more interconnected and 
interdependent  world,  these  actions  are  already  creating  significant  shifts  in  capital  flows. 
Important  for  the  emerging  world  is  the  ability  to  intermediate  such  surges  in  capital  flows 
and to manage the risks associated with such liquidity inflows and its potential to undermine 
the current recovery. 
A further element that has frequently been underestimated is the role of behaviour which has 
had  a  major  influence  on  the  dynamics  of  the  financial  markets.  Extreme  forms  of  such 
behaviour are evident in asset and foreign exchange markets. While the former is prone to 
boom and bust, the latter is prone to overshooting. While several emerging economies have 
successfully  relied  on  macro  prudential  measures  to  contain  the  formation  of  such  asset 
bubbles, the foreign exchange market is not like any other market. With a daily transaction 
amounting to USD4 trillion, it is the most liquid and dynamic market in the world. The role of 
sentiment  and  expectations  has  resulted  in  a  market  that  is  frequently  prone  to  excessive 
movements and overshooting. As highly open economies, disruptions and disequilibrium in 
the  foreign  exchange  market  have  far  reaching  consequences  in  the  real  economy. 
Intervention  operations  to  maintain  orderly  market  conditions  reinforced  by  sterilisation 
operations  have  aimed  at  ensuring  liquidity  in  the  market  and  at  ensuring  that  the  market 
conditions  reflect  the  underlying  economic  fundamentals.  Similar  to  the  presence  in  other 
financial markets, this is to ensure the sustainability of the efficient functioning of the market. 
Central banks and crisis containment and management 
The  world  going  forward  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  affected  by  financial  crisis.  History  has 
shown that there have been more than a hundred distinct banking crises in this recent two 
decades. The prospect of surviving such a crisis is not only about building resilience but also 
having the capacity to manage it. Central banks have a critical role in crisis containment and 
management, in particular, to provide liquidity, to restore the efficient functioning of financial 
markets, to lead resolution programmes and to restore confidence to the financial system. 
Given that the central bank is the lender of the last resort, the central bank is in the front line 
of actions to restore stability. Regardless of the institutional arrangements for the supervision 
function, – of whether it is based on an integrated model or a model that is organised along 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 3
sectoral  lines,  effective  coordination  is  vital  to  effectively  safeguard  financial  stability. 
Established  arrangement  for  coordination  avoids  a  piecemeal  approach  by  any  individual 
agency  in  the  system  and  ensures  a  comprehensive  response  to  the  crisis.  Greater 
coordination across agencies also allows for prompt actions to be taken. 
Elements for crisis management have largely been put in place in several of the emerging 
economies  in  Asia.  This  has  included  a  framework  for  rigorous  surveillance  for  the  early 
detection of risks and vulnerabilities, the range of policy instruments to address the build-up 
of risks, the governance and accountability framework as well as the coordination framework. 
Regardless of whether the supervisory responsibility resides at the central bank, the role of 
the central bank in surveillance for macro-economic management, and its direct contact with 
the  financial  markets  in  its  money  market  and  reserve  management  operations  can  be 
leveraged  upon  to  support  the  financial  stability  mandate.  This  allows  for  a  more 
comprehensive response in containing and managing the crisis. 
In  Asia,  as  regional  financial  integration  intensifies,  there  has  been  greater  regional 
cooperation and collaboration. During the Asian financial crisis, the management of the crisis 
was  by  the  individual  economies.  As  the  challenges  become  more  complex,  standalone 
actions may not achieve the desired outcomes. Moreover, the perceived best solution for one 
country  may  have  unintended  consequences  for  collective  stability.  Asia  has,  thus,  come 
together collectively to conduct regional surveillance with concrete steps to establish financial 
support  networks,  to  develop  regional  financial  markets  and  payment  systems.  Such 
collaboration  also  provides  a  collective  voice  and  representation  and  the  potential  to  be 
heard in the sphere of global policy formulation. 
the 
legislation  and 
the  empowering 
Modernisation of the central bank 
As central banks advance forward into the future of great uncertainty, the challenge of the 
new  environment  demands  new  institutional  capability  for  the  central  banks  to  remain 
effective  in  delivering  our  mandates.  Central  banks  also  need  to  undertake  its  own 
transformation  and  modernization.  Such  institutional  capability  enhancement  may  involve 
changes  in  the  institutional  arrangements,  organizational  and  governance  structures  and 
practices, 
talent  required.  Such  organisational 
development  would  thus  require  continual  reinvention  to  adjust  to  the  new  realities  of  the 
changing environment. 
In most emerging economies, the largest concentration of talent resides in the central bank. 
In  this  new  environment,  this  talent  needs  to  have  new  capabilities  to  deal  with  complex 
issues from different perspectives that are no longer based on functional boundaries. While 
this involves horizontal collaboration across the organization, it also requires management of 
relationships  including  with  the  government  while  retaining  the  independence  of  the 
organization.  This  would  require  institutionalizing  the  channels  for  information  flows, 
governance structures and clarity of accountabilities as well as the mechanisms for dealing 
with  disputes.  Cumulatively,  this  would  provide  for  a  constructive  relationship  while 
preserving the independence of the central bank. 
An  essential  element  in  central  banking  that  is  paramount  in  an  environment  of  great 
uncertainty is having a well-developed communication strategy. Unlike the mature evolution 
of communication strategy in the conduct of monetary policy, central banks’ communication 
with respect to financial stability is still very much in its early stage of development. Indeed, 
the recent crisis has clearly surfaced the need for central banks and policy makers to design 
communication  strategy  that  balances  the  objective  of  providing  information  to  the  market 
and the public, while achieving an optimal outcome of enhanced financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2010
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. The rapidly changing global economic and financial environment will 
continue to exert much demands on the central banks. While extensive modernization and 
transformation  of  central  banks  can  be  implemented  at  the  national  level,  the  increasingly 
interconnected  and 
interdependent  world  demands  a  greater  emphasis  on  global 
perspectives and considerations. The greater interface at the international level has involved 
enhanced engagement to concrete collaborative actions. The common objective is surely for 
an inclusive participation in the international financial system that will facilitate the common 
agenda for a self-sustaining global growth and development. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 5
