 Choongsoo Kim: Challenges to the further advance of the Asian 
economy following the global financial crisis 
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of 
the 
12th International  Convention  of  the  East  Asian  Economic  Association  (EAEA),  Seoul, 
2 October 2010. 
the  Bank  of  Korea,  at 
 It is a great pleasure and privilege to stand before you all today, to deliver this dinner speech 
to  such  renowned  economists  gathered  for  this  12th  international  convention  held  by  the 
East Asian Economic Association, a leader in studies of the East Asian economy for the last 
20 years. I should like to express my deep thanks to all members of this eminent academic 
circle,  including  your  esteemed  chairman,  Jang-Hee  Yoo,  for  so  graciously  inviting  me  to 
share this occasion with you.  
As all of you here know well, a shift of wealth in the world economy is already underway. The 
shift is from Western to emerging economies, particularly in Asia, and it will accelerate in the 
future. According to a study by Professor Angus Maddison, in real PPP terms Chinese GDP 
is projected to surpass that of the US by 2015, and the sum of Chinese and Indian GDP will 
be double US GDP by 2030.1 From this observation, we can easily infer how fast the Asian 
economy should grow relative to the rest of the world economy in the future. This is not such 
a surprise if we recall that, for eighteen of the past twenty centuries, Asia has produced over 
half of world output.2 And given this, it is to be taken for granted that Asian, and particularly 
East Asian, economies, have contributed so greatly to the  world economy’s recovery from 
the global financial crisis. In this regard, I think discussion of the role that our dynamic East 
Asian economies have played in overcoming the crisis is both timely and useful.  
The impact of the global financial crisis on the Asian economy  
In retrospect, the global financial crisis aggravated by the collapse of Lehman Brothers came 
as an incredible shock to the world economy. This will be recorded as the worst crisis since 
the Great Depression of the 1930s. And we can gain a vivid picture of just how greatly world 
economic integration has progressed over the years from the speed at which this financial 
crisis,  sparked  in  the  US,  spread  around  the  world,  as  well  as  from  the  huge  scale  of  the 
consequent shock.  
In particular, even though Asian economies including that of Korea were not at the epicenter 
of  the  financial  crisis,  in  its  immediate  aftermath  they  still  suffered  shocks  very  similar  to 
those at the time of the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98. Basically, the factor behind this was 
their  vulnerability  to  external  shock  due  to  their  export-driven  growth  strategies,  rapid 
economic liberalization and market opening.  
As several researches by the Fed of the US and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) have 
pointed out, the financial crisis in advanced countries was transmitted to Asian economies 
through the trade channel even more than through the financial channel.3 In the initial phase 
                                                 
1   Angus  Maddison,  Chinese  Economic  Performance  in  the  Long  Run,  second  edition,  revised  and  updated  
960–2030 AD, The Development Centre, OECD 2007. 
“Asia accounted for over half of world output for 18 of the past 20 centuries.” The Economist, February 27, 
2010, p. 72. 
2  
3   For example, the  welcome address  by Ben Bernanke on  “Asia and the  Global Financial Crisis” at the Asia 
Economic  Policy  Conference  on  October  2009  and  the  ADB’s  Asian  Development  Outlook  Update  on 
September 2009. 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 1
 of  the  crisis,  the  foreign  exchange  and  financial  markets  in  every  country  in  Asia  suffered 
severe turmoil. However, they began to regain stability comparatively quickly. Although this 
recovery was in part ascribable to the bold and active policy response of countries around 
the world, and to their close international policy cooperation, as seen for example in the use 
of  bilateral  currency  swaps,  it  is  also  a  fact  that  the  Asian  financial  sector  was  in 
comparatively strong shape thanks to its structural adjustments following the Asian financial 
crisis, and this is considered to have played a considerable part as well. On the other hand, 
every country in Asia also suffered very large real sector shocks by way of the trade channel. 
From the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2008, most Asian countries shifted into states in 
which economic activity was extremely subdued, in line with the sharp drops in their exports 
as  import  demand  in  advanced  countries  shrank  sharply  due  to  the  rapid  slowdown  of 
economic activity.  
Subsequently,  however,  Asian  economies  staged  much  faster  recoveries  than  advanced 
countries  and  came  to  serve  as  the  locomotives  of  the  world  economic  recovery.  During 
2009,  economic  growth  in  major  advanced  countries,  namely  G7  countries,  averaged  a 
negative 3.4%, whereas that of the Asian economies reached a positive 3.6%. In this year of 
2010, growth rates in Asia are expected to climb to 7.5%, and the forecast is that they will 
account for 40% of world economic growth this year.4 
Strengths and weaknesses of the Asian economy revealed by the crisis  
The backdrop to this swift recovery staged by the Asian economies lies in a number of strong 
attributes that they possess.  
Firstly, Asian economies have great dynamism. Since the beginning of the 21st century, they 
have continued their dynamic economic growth, rising to become central forces in the world 
economy.  Basically,  this  comes  from  the  epoch-making  expansions  in  the  extent  of  their 
market opening and liberalization. These policies have spurred freer movement  and better 
allocation of resources, which is giving Asian economies improved opportunities for higher 
economic  growth  due  to  greater  competitiveness.  What  is  more,  the  Asian  economy 
including China possesses a vast market, that is not yet saturated. This means that, as Asian 
economies’  incomes  increase  in  the  future,  rapid  growth  of  their  domestic  consumption 
markets is possible. For example, the increase in exports to China caused by its policy of 
expanding domestic demand has also served as a source of regional growth momentum. In 
addition, the Asian economy holds abundant potential in terms of supply. There is plenty of 
capacity for a continual supply, on a large scale, of well-educated, disciplined and low cost 
human  resources,  in  addition  to  Asian  countries’  own  considerable  capital  resources 
accumulated in the course of rapid economic growth until now. The Asian economies, being 
still in their comparatively youthful stages of growth, generally differ much from the majority 
of  advanced  economies  that  have  already  matured.  Over  and  above  this,  taken  together 
Asian  economies  possess  mutually  complementary  economic  structures,  as  they  are  at 
various  different  stages  of  development.  East  Asian  intraregional  trade  has  grown  rapidly 
since  the  turn-of-the-century,  with  the  formation  of  a  vertically  integrated  division  of  labor 
centering on parts and components. The weight of intraregional trade among non-Japan East 
Asian countries has risen steeply, from 31.7% in 1990 to 42.0% in 2008.  
Meanwhile,  however,  this  recent  financial  crisis  has  also  served  to  throw  light  on  certain 
weaknesses of the Asian economies. 
                                                 
4   The Asian economies here are the same as the category used in Box 1 of the IMF’s World Economic Outlook 
(WEO) Update on July 2010. The growth rates and growth contributions are from the WEO (April 2010) and 
the WEO Update (July 2010). 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 The  external  dependency  of  Asian  economies  is  very  high,  first  of  all,  because  of  their 
pursuits of export-led growth strategies. This has meant that they have weak foundations for 
domestic driven growth, due to the relatively small sizes of their domestic markets. And, as 
we have seen during the global crisis, they are thus extremely vulnerable to the impacts of 
an external shock. Looking at the degrees of export dependency (exports/nominal GDP) of 
various  major  countries  in  2008,  we  see  those  of  the  USA  and  the  UK  standing  at  0.3  to 
0.7 times the worldwide average, whereas that of Korea was 1.7 times the world average, 
that of China 1.2 times, and that of the major five ASEAN members combined 2.0 times the 
world  average.  Domestic  economic  activities  in  countries  with  high  export  dependency  of 
course  react  very  strongly  to  external  demand  shocks.  Empirical  analysis  shows  the  USA, 
the  UK  and  the  euro  zone  exhibiting  GDP  elasticities  of  0.3–0.4%  to  a  1%  increase  in 
external  demand  (world  GDP  minus  its  own  GDP),  in  comparison  to  which  Korea’s  is  for 
example  about  1.0%.5  Asian  economies  consequently  tend  to  show  high  degrees  of 
economic volatility. Asian economies are in addition at risk of possible financial and foreign 
exchange  market  unrest  owing  to  large  in-  and  outflows  of  global  funds.  This  risk 
accompanies  their  pursuit  of  economic  development  on  the  principle  of  increased  market 
opening  and  liberalization  policies.  While  causing  domestic  liquidity  to  swell,  excessive 
inflows  of  global  funds  may  at  the  same  time  generate  steep  rises  in  the  prices  of  assets 
such as shares, bonds and real estate. In the event of what is termed a sudden stop, i.e. the 
halting  of  global  fund  inflows  and  their  abrupt  outflows  instead,  the  domestic  financial  and 
foreign  exchange  markets  will  be  thrown  into  turmoil.  During  the  global  financial  crisis, 
despite holding adequate levels of foreign exchange reserves, a number of Asian countries 
including Korea underwent severe crises, due to increased foreign currency liquidity risk and 
steeply rising exchange rates caused by these sudden fund outflows. Apart from this, it must 
be said that the structures of many Asian economies are characterized by fragility, as they 
are  still  stuck  in  the  early  stages  of  development.  Compared  to  the  advanced  countries, 
productivity  here  is  low  and  the  service  sector  lacking  in  competitiveness,  while  the 
environmental  problems  arising  from  our  long  period  of  rapid  growth  until  now  impose 
constraints on our abilities to continue growing at reasonable levels in the future.  
Challenges to the further advance of the Asian economy 
Transition to a sustainable growth framework 
The  Asian  economies  must  move  a  further  step  forward  if  they  are  to  remedy  these 
weaknesses.  And  as  a  first  step,  it  is  extremely  important  to  shift  to  a  well-balanced 
economic  structure  by  expanding  domestic  demand.  Toward  this  objective,  consumption 
capacity needs to be enlarged by reducing the incentive for precautionary savings, through 
financial  system  improvement  and  the  building  of  denser  social  safety  nets.  And  a  recent 
ADB report in fact appraises the foundation for such a shift toward a demand-led economy 
as  having  to  some  extent  already  been  formed  in  Asia,  through  the  growth  of  the  middle 
class.6  Provided  that  Asian  economies  can  make  the  transition  in  this  way  toward  an 
economic  structure  that  is  better  balanced,  it  will  give  them  greater  capacity  to  counter 
external  shocks,  while  lowering  the  volatility  of  their  economic  activities.  It  can  also  be 
anticipated to help in easing the problem of global imbalances.  
                                                 
5   The estimates of elasticity refer to Table B11 in Dees et al., “Exploring the International Linkages of the Euro 
Area: a Global VAR Analysis”, November 2004. 
“The rise of Asia’s middle class”, the chapter on Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2010, ADB, August 
2010. 
6  
BIS Review 129/2010 
 3
 Securing the qualitative improvement of growth potential 
We  are  now  reaching  the  limits  of  extensive  growth  relying  upon  increased  inputs  of 
production  factors,  and  should  instead  be  pursuing  intensive  growth,  that  seeks  to  boost 
productivity by heightening the efficiency with which these production factors are combined. 
To this purpose, in tandem with developing such aspects of the economic infrastructure as 
the financial system and the regulatory framework, it is essential to upgrade the caliber of our 
human  capital,  to  improve  the  quality  of  our  facilities  investment,  and  to  expand  our 
R&D investment.  In  conjunction  with  this,  it  is  also  desirable  to  develop  those  service 
industries having the greatest scope for enhancement of productivity and high growth.  
It is likewise very important to build up fresh growth momentum. The water and air pollution 
and destruction of the green environment as a result of rapid growth over a number of years 
are  now  among  the  principal  factors  holding  future  Asian  economic  growth  back.  Green 
growth, that sets in motion a virtuous circle of environmental protection and economic growth 
by showing that green and growth can go hand in hand, can now come to the fore as a new 
growth engine.  
foreign  currency  swap  agreements  under 
Strengthening of regional economic integration and policy cooperation 
Last but by  no means least, the recent global financial crisis has also underlined both the 
necessity and the effectiveness of strengthening our regional economic integration and policy 
cooperation.  
Looking ahead, to promote the consistent growth and structural intensification of Asian trade, 
I believe efforts must be stepped up for greater integration of the regional market. In the long-
term, it is desirable to replace the present patchwork of regional FTAs by a single region-
wide FTA similar to NAFTA.  
Meanwhile, in view of the recent global financial crisis, there is a growing need for regional 
financial cooperation if we are to avoid repeat crises in the future. As one link in this chain, 
the  drive  for  regional  financial  cooperation  was  furthered  in  March  of  this  year,  when  the 
bilateral 
Initiative  were 
re-organized  within  the  multilateral  cooperative  framework  of  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative 
Multilateralisation (CMIM). Korea, in a similar vein, has officially put forward construction of a 
“Global Financial Safety Net” as one item on the agenda of the G-20 Summit meetings. The 
various strands for construction of such a global financial safety net are already in place, in 
the form of the IMF lending system and regional financial safety nets such as the CMIM, and 
what  is  needed  now  is  to  link  these  strands  more  fully  to  form  a  coherent  and  systematic 
network.  And  provided  that  such  a  network  can  indeed  be  constructed,  it  is  anticipated  to 
contribute  greatly  to  nipping  putative  financial  crises  in  the  bud,  while  containing  the  post-
facto  spread  of  those  that  do  break  out,  as  the  arrangements  will  complement  individual 
countries’ self insurance efforts in the form of their foreign exchange reserve accumulations. 
In  order  to  make  active  use  of  individual  Asian  countries’  funds,  for  example  such  foreign 
exchange holdings, we are also pressing ahead under the Asian Bond Market Initiative led 
by the ASEAN +3 to nurture a regional bond market. This has already given rise to some 
tangible  results,  such  as  the  recent  agreement  to  set  up  a  regional  Credit  Guarantee 
Investment  Facility. Over and above all this, Asian countries also need to take very active 
part in the building of the new international financial order now underway in the wake of the 
global financial crisis.  
the  Chiang  Mai 
Closing words 
In  concluding  my  address,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  three  very  important  economic 
implications.  Firstly,  the  global  economic  crisis  cannot  be  easily  surmounted  without  the 
contribution  of  Asia,  especially  the  East  Asian  economy.  In  other  words,  the  East  Asian 
economy is becoming more responsible for world economic development, as the weight of 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2010
 the East Asian economy in the world economy increases. Meanwhile, even though it is not 
fair to totally attribute the global imbalances to the East Asian economy, it is a fact that the 
global  rebalancing  and  global  financial  stability  may  not  be  achieved  without  the  active 
cooperation of the East Asian Economies with the rest of the world. Secondly, the advanced 
countries  have  some  responsibility  for  collaborating  with  the  emerging  economies  in 
establishing the global financial safety net. This net is not for saving countries in particular 
regions,  but  for  protecting  countries  from  falling  victim  to  economic  crises  due  to 
interconnectedness of the economies, even despite their maintenance of sound economies. 
It is worthwhile protecting benign by-standers. If countries pursuing economic development 
based  on  the  principles  of  economic  liberalization  and  market  opening  remain  highly 
vulnerable to external shocks, the future effect will be harmful: in choosing their development 
strategies, many of the world’s developing countries will choose to not pursue free trade. We 
should therefore take notice of the very important forward-looking policy implications of this. 
Lastly,  the  most  important  lesson  of  this  global  crisis  is  perhaps  that  policy  effects  are 
maximized  in  the  case  of  close  policy  cooperation  among  all  countries.  Awareness  of  this 
comes from the facts both that policy cooperation can reduce the uncertainties surrounding 
markets, and that, in an environment of more open international economies, the effects of a 
single country’s policies on its own can be of only limited effect. 
I would like to underline one more time, in closing, what I believe have been the two most 
important determinants of our success in overcoming the current global economic crisis – the 
role of the East Asian economies, and the cooperation between advanced and developing 
countries. I look forward to both continuing to increase in the years ahead. I hope that the 
wide range of papers to be presented here over these two days, and the lively debates that 
ensue, will provide very fertile soil for a further strong advance of our Asian economies in the 
years ahead.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 129/2010 
 5
