Jean-Claude Trichet: Educational games “€conomia” and “Inflation 
Island” 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the launch 
event  for  the  educational  games  “€conomia”  and  “Inflation  Island”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
8 December 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I’d like to welcome you all to this launch event here today – in particular the students and 
teachers who accepted our invitation. I also extend a warm welcome to all the other visitors, 
notably the ECCO colleagues and media representatives – and to ECB staff members who 
have worked on this project.  
In recent years, central banks have become important communicators and since its founding 
in 1998 the ECB has engaged on several avenues to broaden its outreach. The ECB was the 
first  major  central  bank  in  the  world  to  hold  a  press  conference  immediately  after  the 
Governing Council meeting to explain its monetary policy decisions. We publish a monthly 
bulletin  for  specialised  audiences.  We  have  educational  videos  on  our  website  for  the 
general public, we have games for children and of course we have our general publications. 
In 2010, our website was visited approximately 25 million times. Every year, around 13,000 
people  visit  the  ECB  and  we  talk  to  them  about  the  economy  and  our  work.  But  there  is 
always room for further improvement. And this is no time for complacency.  
We want to reach out to you – young people who have grown up in a networked, multimedia 
world. So we decided to develop games like these because their interactivity and playfulness 
could  help  enhance  the  learning  experience.  Today  we  are  launching  “€conomia”  and 
“Inflation Island” on our website, and we will continue our work on such tools in the next few 
years. We expect the games to make this institution and its activities more accessible. The 
games are available in 22 European languages. 
You  have  just  been  playing  against  each  other  in  “€conomia”  and  I  hope  you  found  it 
interesting and fun. But perhaps it wasn’t so easy to keep inflation low and stable, in line with 
our definition of price stability: less than 2%, but close to 2%. If that was the case, then the 
games have already served a purpose, because in real life it is challenging to keep inflation 
low and stable. Developing, producing and translating both games was quite a challenge as 
well.  
I’d  like  to  thank  everyone  who  has  worked  on  the  two  games  over  the  past  year  –  the 
Directorate Communications, which is responsible for the project, ECCO members, experts 
from DG Economics and DG Market Operations, the language and software specialists.  
Let me now officially launch the games [by sending a tweet on Twitter and pushing a button 
to link of the game on the ECB’s Website].  
Now  it’s  my  pleasure  to  hand  over  the  certificates  and  prizes.  In  equal  4th  place  are  the 
European  School  of  Frankfurt  and  the  ISF  International  School  Frankfurt  [hands  over  the 
certificates] 
In third place is Lycée Français Victor Hugo [hands over the certificates and prizes] 
In second place is Friedrich-Dessauer Gymnasium [hands over the certificates and prizes] 
And the winner is Liebigschule [hands over the certificates and prizes] Congratulations! 
BIS Review 168/2010 
 1
