Mira Erić-Jović: Compulsory insurance, damage compensation and 
security over receivables 
Opening speech by Mrs Mira Erić-Jović, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the 
13th Annual Conference “Compulsory Insurance, Damage Compensation and Security over 
Receivables”, Belgrade, 16 September 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to greet you all on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia, sponsor 
of this 13th regular annual conference, as well as to point out the significance of this event 
and the importance of its agenda. Namely, all expertise acquired and activities taken in order 
to improve damage compensation procedures and upgrade fair and sound insurer practices 
will  lead  to  more  equitable  damage  compensation  according  to  principles  of  fairness  and 
justice.  This,  at  the  same  time,  represents  a  precondition  for  efficient  consumer  protection 
and building consumer confidence in the insurance business, which, in turn, is a prerequisite 
to insurance sector growth. 
That  is  why  this  conference  and  its  agenda  –  compulsory  automotive  insurance,  damage 
compensation  and  security  over  receivables  –  are  particularly  significant  at  this  point, 
i.e. after the enactment of the new Law which now has to be implemented fully in practice. 
The solutions laid down by this law, particularly those relating to damage compensation, aim 
primarily to protect the interests of damaged parties. This is all the more so as such persons, 
for  no  fault  on  their  part  or  even  active  participation  in  damage  events,  suffer  the 
consequences of someone else’s reckless or accidental conduct, often for as long as they 
live. 
Legal  solutions  therefore  seek  to  ensure  that  those  persons  can  exercise  their  right  to 
damage compensation in full and as effectively as possible. I believe that, regulatory-wise, 
we  have  made  significant  progress  in  this  segment  of  the  system.  Improvement  of  the 
regulatory framework should, of course, be accompanied with building good insurer practice, 
leading  ultimately  to  their  better  performance,  but  also  to  improved  court  practice  and 
practice of other parties in the process of damage evaluation and compensation. 
The  importance  of  adequate  implementation  of  the  Law  cannot  be  stressed  enough  –  this 
type of insurance holds a 30% share in the domestic insurance market, while as many as 
11 of  the  22  companies  engaging  in  insurance  business  are  involved  in  compulsory 
insurance.  True,  available  data  point  to  some  positive  trends  in  terms  of  timeliness  in  the 
claim resolution process, as well as in terms of reducing the number of overdue claims. 
Nevertheless,  it  should  be  said  that  though  improved,  timeliness  is  still  not  satisfactory  as 
suggested by the number of complaints against insurers’ operations received by the National 
Bank of Serbia through its Centre for Financial Services Consumer Protection. The analysis 
of those complaints has shown that the majority relate to none other than automobile liability 
insurance. Without going into further analysis, we may also say that this was rather expected 
as  this  type  of  insurance  is  by  far  the  most  common  in  the  market.  However,  different 
conclusions  may  be  drawn  when  one  compares  the  market  share  of  automobile  liability 
insurance  and  the  share  of  complaints  against  insurers’  operations  in  this  field  which 
currently stands at as much as 62%. Furthermore, majority of complaints in the first half of 
2010  related,  quite  unexpectedly, 
late  payment  of  damage  claims,  amount  of 
compensation offered and the refusal to pay the indisputable damage. Though not too high 
(58), the number of such complaints is rising, which points to inadequate practice contrary to 
the new Law. In the long run, this is certainly not in the interest of either the damaged parties 
or the insurers, and will surely hinder the development of the insurance market. 
to 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 1
In view of the objectives of the new Law, most notably those regarding efficient payment of 
compensation and adequate protection of damaged parties, we believe this to be the right 
moment to discuss the issues of damage compensation at professional gatherings such as 
this one. Such consultations should and can give a significant contribution to establishing fair 
practice in the insurance sector. 
I believe that this conference will provide an important contribution in this respect. And finally, 
I wish you all a lot of success in your work. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2010
