 Jean-Claude Trichet: Global economic governance and euro area economic 
governance 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the World 
Policy Conference, Marrakech, 16 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a real pleasure to be here in Marrakech – a city which, in its history, is a demonstration 
of the link between economic success and political events and choices. Morocco is also an 
important  partner  for  the  EU  in  the  context  of  the  Union  for  the  Mediterranean  and  the 
Barcelona process. Let me also mention that the ECB and the Bank Al Maghrib have well-
established  bilateral  relations,  as  well  as  close  contacts  in  a  multilateral  framework.  For 
example,  the  ECB  and  the  other  Eurosystem  central  banks  regularly  meet  with  Bank 
Al Maghrib and the other central banks of the Mediterranean region in the framework of high-
level seminars, in which they discuss economic and financial issues of common interest.  
 Let me start by saying a few words about the current economic outlook in the euro area.  
Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  grew  by  1%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  second  quarter  of  this 
year.  Growth  has  been  supported  mainly  by  domestic  demand,  but  also  reflects  some 
temporary  factors.  Recent  statistical  releases  and  survey  evidence  generally  confirm  our 
expectation of a moderation in the second half of this year in the euro area. Therefore, we do 
not declare victory and we have to remain cautious and prudent. That being said, the positive 
but modest underlying momentum of the recovery remains in place. Annual inflation in the 
euro  area  is  currently  1.8%,  and  we  expect  inflation  to  remain  moderate  in  2011.  Very 
importantly, we note that inflation expectations over the medium to longer term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with our definition of price stability. 
 In my remarks today, I will focus on global governance and in particular on the lessons that 
can be drawn from the extraordinary events of the past two years. I will first elaborate on why 
we  need  a  set  of  rules,  institutions  and  international  relations  that  we  call  “global 
governance”.  Second,  I  will  analyse  how,  in  hindsight,  the  existing  global  governance  has 
fared during the global financial crisis. Third, I will deal with the evolution of the system as a 
response to the crisis, and in particular I will discuss the rise of new key entities in the world 
economy  such  as  the  G20  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  with  a  view  to  the  upcoming 
G20 Leaders meeting in Seoul. Finally, I will touch upon the important institutional changes 
that  are  being  decided  on  or  implemented  in  Europe,  which  should  make  the  EU  better 
equipped to contribute to global stability and prosperity. 
Let me point out that economic freedom is not possible without an adequate set of rules and 
this  is  valid  both  within  countries  as  well  as  in  the  international  realm.  This  will  be  the 
overarching theme in my intervention today. 
Why do we need global economic governance? 
1. 
By  “global  economic  governance”  we  mean,  at  least  in  the  economic  sphere,  the  set  of 
supra-national institutions and laws as well as the international relations between countries 
that have an effect on cross-border economic and financial transactions.  
BIS Review 135/2010 
 1
 Indeed, no market can survive without an institutional infrastructure, i.e. a set of rules and 
this  is  particularly  true  at  the  international  level,  where  natural  barriers  to  transactions  are 
already formidable. Global governance’s primary aims should be that of reducing transaction 
costs,  and  that  the  process  of  doing  so  is  evolutionary  and  characterised  by  continuous 
change and learning by doing. One therefore needs to maintain a pragmatic approach with 
respect  to  what  arrangements  may  work  and  not  work  in  facilitating  trade  and  keeping 
transaction costs low, depending on the circumstances. 
Moreover, the more complex and durable the goods and services exchanged, the larger the 
need  for  a  sound  institutional  infrastructure.  In  this  respect,  finance  stands  out  as  a  field 
where global rules may be particular beneficial. More generally, the crisis has weakened the 
arguments  of  those  who  think  that  de-regulation  is  always  and  necessarily  conducive  to  a 
better functioning of markets. 
Of course, there are clear limits to what internationally agreed rules can and should achieve.  
First, the principle of subsidiarity remains valid, implying that no rule should be imposed at a 
global level that cannot be more or equally effectively set at the local level. Incidentally, this 
principle is enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty and is therefore part of primary EU law; the Lisbon 
Treaty,  in  particular,  has  explicitly  recognised  a  role  for  national  Parliaments  in  monitoring 
subsidiarity in the EU. This principle might also imply that the “burden of the proof” should 
rest on those who want to establish global, as opposed to local, rules and institutions.  
Second, there is a risk that common rules are not optimal and in particular they are too lax, 
since  they  have  to  be  the  “common  minimum  denominator”  across  many  different  local 
positions.  
Third, some argue that imposing a common rule also implies limiting the range of national 
experiences  and  therefore  the  potential  for  learning  about  the  best  institutional  setting.  It 
would therefore prevent the best rules from emerging from free competition among different 
systems.  Finally,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  it  is  not  easy  to  set  common  rules  in 
particular in complex and innovative fields like finance.  
The global financial crisis has, however, weakened some of these arguments and shattered 
the  previously  held  conviction  that  “putting  one’s  house  in  order”  is  the  only  principle  that 
matters  to  ensure  global  welfare,  and  that  international  spillovers  need  not  be  taken  into 
account.  We  have  certainly  become  more  aware  of  the  negative  externalities  that 
globalization,  in  particular  financial  globalization,  can  create.  This  is  epitomised  in  the 
sentence  “the  crisis  is  global,  the  solutions  need  to  be  global”.  In  my  view,  international 
interdependencies are too large for purely national or regional rules to be optimal and there 
is  a  clear  need  to  strengthen  global  governance,  in  particular  in  the  financial  field.  For 
example, the crisis has exposed the risk of regulatory arbitrage, shedding a more negative 
light on the competition among different systems and rules. In addition, the view that local 
governments  are  always  driven  by  the  welfare  of  their  citizens  needs  to  be  qualified,  as 
special  interests  often  matter  a  great  deal.  Those  special  interests  are  likely  to  exert  less 
influence if the rules are agreed on at the international level.1 
2. 
How has global economic governance fared during the global financial crisis? 
Let me now turn to analyse how our global institutions have fared during the global financial 
crisis. 
Global governance in the decades before the financial crisis was characterised by a number 
of multilateral institutions and relations, in particular three key supra-national institutions, the 
                                                 
1   Frieden (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 IMF, the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) were (and still are) in charge 
of  the  international  monetary  system,  long-term  development  and  trade  respectively,  while 
the G7 was the main informal forum for global strategic governance.  
Another distinctive feature of the decade before the financial crisis has been a progressive 
and  largely  beneficial  trade  liberalisation  and  integration,  driven  by  the  WTO.  Trade 
liberalisation  has  reshaped  the  world  economy,  leading  to  the  integration  of  key  emerging 
economies such as China and India in a market-based system, a trend which has benefited 
consumers the world over. At the peak of the crisis, there was a legitimate concern that such 
progresses would be stalled or reversed as countries focused on their own economic growth 
even at the expense of growth elsewhere. Protectionist and “beggar-thy-neighbour” policies 
would  have  certainly  aggravated  the  crisis,  as  they  notoriously  did  in  the  1930s,  and  yet 
somehow  it  could  have  been  expected  in  such  dire  circumstances  and  given  the  political 
difficulties associated to them. A good system is one where these self-defeating pressures 
could  be  resisted.  How  has  the  global  system  fared  in  this  regard?  I  will  look  into  five 
dimensions, namely protectionism, central bank cooperation, regulatory arbitrage, and global 
imbalances.  
Protectionism 
2.1 
A systematic look at recent trends in global protectionism indicates that there has so far been 
an only moderate increase in actual protectionist measures to restrict trade through tariff and 
non-tariff barriers. According to the WTO, a significant outbreak of trade protectionism has 
been avoided since the start of the crisis. Yet more protectionist pressures might be on the 
pipeline.  First,  evidence  from  surveys  shows  that  public  pressure  for  more  economic 
protection not only has been mounting since the mid-2000s, namely well ahead of the crisis, 
but has intensified since its start and particularly in the most recent months. 
This leads me to conclude that in the trade field, while a repetition of the experience of the 
1930s is very fortunately not on the cards, there is certainly no room for complacency and 
vigilance needs to remain high. 
Central bank cooperation 
2.2 
Another  dimension  of  international  cooperation  that  has  worked  well  during  the  financial 
crisis has been that among central banks, channelled through the various Basel and Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  committees.  This  institutionalised  cooperation  has  ensured 
an unprecedented degree of collaboration and coordination in the provision of cross border 
liquidity. 
Information  sharing  among  central  banks  has  also  worked  very  well,  for  example  on  the 
occasion of the Global Economy meeting of Governors of Central Banks that meets every 
two months in Basel and where central bank governors from systemic economies have the 
occasion to discuss issues the global economic outlook, international monetary and financial 
issues  and  other  issues  of  mutual  interest.  Clearly,  these  fora  have  turned  out  to  be  very 
useful in times of global financial distress and we should continue to invest on them in the 
future.  
I would also like to mention that the BIS as an institution has been “ahead of the curve” in 
terms  of  identifying  unsustainable  trends  in  the  financial  sector  and  more  generally  in  the 
global economy – such as the under-appreciation of risk and excessive credit growth – which 
eventually led to the global financial crisis. It could do so based on a high degree of analytical 
depth and information sharing at a global level that the BIS and the Basel committees have 
been able to develop over time. In my opinion, these analytical contributions have played a 
very significant contribution to form the strong and coordinated policy response that we have 
witnessed during the financial crisis.  
BIS Review 135/2010 
 3
 2.3 
Where the system has fared less well: regulatory arbitrage and global 
imbalances 
As much as global governance appears to have passed the severe test of the global financial 
crisis, we should not remain oblivious to the fact that there were significant shortcomings that 
have  contributed  to  create  the  conditions  for  the  crisis  to  happen  in  the  first  place.  I  will 
mention, in particular, two dimensions: the insufficiencies in terms of financial regulation and 
international coordination, on the one hand, as well as the constellation of global imbalances, 
on the other. Let me deal with both in turn. 
The  lack  of  integration  and  coordination  in  financial  regulation  was  pervasive  before  the 
crisis,  even  though  this  was  not  properly  appreciated  at  the  time,  and  has  encouraged 
financial  institutions  to  engage  in  a  large  degree  of  regulatory  arbitrage.2  This  was  the 
unavoidable result of the fact that, while finance was becoming more and more global, with 
some  financial  institutions  having  operations  in  dozens  of  jurisdictions,  financial  regulation 
has remained largely national, with only some form of mild and non-binding coordination at 
the European and international level. Later, I will discuss how the international community is 
addressing this problem, in particular, under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board 
and of the Basel Committee. 
As  regards  global  imbalances,  the  deficiencies  of  macroeconomic  policies  as  regards 
economic  and  financial  medium-term  stability  and  sustainability,  led  to  the  build-up  of 
unsustainable  external  imbalances  among  key  deficit  and  surplus  economies  prior  to  the 
crisis.  A  number  of  advanced  economies  have  engaged  in  macro-policies  that  are 
imbalanced  and  marked  by  a  structural  lack  of  savings.  On  the  other  hand,  excessive 
reserve accumulation by emerging countries have contributed to make global imbalances too 
easy to finance, resulting in compressed global interest rates and ultimately in too high risk 
taking  and  leverage  in  those  (advanced)  countries  that  were  receiving  a  large  degree  of 
capital  inflows,  ultimately  contributing  to  pave  the  way  for  the  financial  crisis  to  unfold. 
Moreover, there was a distinct perception of a lack of an effective mechanism to influence 
macroeconomic and structural policies in key countries where those appeared unsustainable 
from  the  standpoint  of  global  economic  and  financial  stability.  The  global  public  good  of 
international financial stability was, and remains, under-supplied. This is an area where bold 
and ambitious reform was and is needed.  
The evolution of the system 
3. 
Finally, let me now turn to the question of how the financial crisis has moved the direction or 
the speed at which global governance is moving. Some of these trends are not yet fully clear, 
nor free of challenges. 
From the G7 to the G20 
3.1 
One  distinctive  feature  of  this  crisis  has  been  its  originating  at  the  centre  of  the  system, 
differently from past major crises in the previous three decades. Although emerging countries 
have also been severely affected, they have overall been, at least taken as a group, a source 
of  strength  for  the  world  economy.  They  are  also  recovering  significantly  faster  than 
advanced countries at the current juncture. It is therefore not surprising that the crisis has led 
to  an  even  better  recognition  of  their  increased  economic  importance  and  to  a  better 
integration in global governance. It is notable that emerging markets now represent around 
half of the world GDP in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). To be sure, the acknowledgement 
                                                 
2   See, among others, V. Acharya and M. Richardson (eds) (2009): Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair 
a Failed System, Wiley, March. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 of  the  increased  role  of  emerging  countries  is  a  trend  which  precedes  the  global  financial 
crisis, but that has been made significantly faster, and perceived more pressing, by it.  
Global  governance  –  and  indeed  collective  decision  making  in  general  –always  faces  a 
trade-off  between  efficiency  and  legitimacy.  With  few,  homogeneous  players  around  the 
table, decisions are taken more quickly and perhaps implemented more easily; but they may 
not  be  seen  as  legitimate  from  those  excluded  from  the  same  table.  Therefore,  devising 
institutions for collective decision making is always a delicate balancing act, even more so at 
the global level. The international community has agreed that, from now on, the G20 is the 
main forum for the informal governance of international economic cooperation and it includes 
11 emerging economies.  
To be sure, the G20 has already been in existence for over a decade. The main innovation is 
to make it as the key informal forum for strategic global impulse at the level of the Leaders as 
well as at the level of Ministers and Governors, not only in crisis times but permanently. 
The G20 Framework 
3.2 
An  important  decision,  taken  at  the  G20  Pittsburgh  summit  in  March  2009,  has  been  the 
G20 Framework on cooperative mutual assessment of members’ policies. I consider this a 
decisive  step  forward  in  order  to  address  one  of  the  main  shortcomings  of  the  pre-crisis 
regime, namely the lack of a way to ensure that macroeconomic and structural policies of key 
countries take into consideration their external spillovers and in particular the risks that they 
entail  for  the  global  financial  system.  This  should  not  imply  that  the  G20  should  enter  in 
macroeconomic  decisions  on  a  short  term  basis  or  micro-manage  economic  policies,  but 
rather that a mechanism should be put in place in order to evaluate whether medium to long 
term policy objectives are mutually compatible, which is the optimal pace for the rebalancing 
of  the  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses,  as  well  as  the  domestic  demands  of  the 
systemic economies.  
However,  whether  this  initiative  will  eventually  lead  to  a  significant  change  in  national  and 
global economic decision making is still far from obvious, and only time will tell. Notably, the 
Framework’s  predecessor,  the  IMF’s  2007  multilateral  surveillance  initiative,  encountered 
significant  compliance  problems,  which  makes  the  G20  ownership  of  the  new  Framework 
particularly  promising  and  noteworthy.  At  the  same  time,  we  still  cannot  be  sure  that  the 
Framework  will  be  implemented  effectively.  It  is  therefore  paramount  that  the  international 
community  presses  ahead  now  and  fully  lives  up  to  the  commitments  taken  in  the 
G20 context; in particular, it is important that the rebalancing efforts are maintained over time 
even when the recovery will appear to be solidly consolidated at the global level. 
Further strengthening of central bank cooperation 
3.3 
In the area of central bank cooperation, discrete, but decisive steps have been made since 
the onset of the crisis. A core feature of this crisis has been not only the central importance 
of  domestic  liquidity  provision  by  central  banks,  but  also  its  complementary  cross-border 
dimension, that is, the network of temporary  currency swaps or repos set up bilaterally by 
major central banks such as the ECB and the Federal Reserve, which has involved many 
other  central  banks  in  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  progress  has  been  also  made  in 
deepening central bank cooperation and extending its geographical scope.  
The main forum of global central bank cooperation is the Global Economy Meeting (GEM) 
which  takes  place  in  Basel.  Over  the  past  few  years,  this  forum  has  been  including 
34 governors  as  permanent  members  plus  a  number  of  other  governors  attending  on  a 
revolving  basis.  The  GEM  is  a  very  important  forum  as  it  assesses  global  economic  and 
financial  conditions,  analyses  economic  and  financial  policy  issues  of  common  interest  to 
central  banks.  It  now  exerts  governance  over  the  central  bank  cooperative  activities 
conducted by various Basel-based central bank committees under the auspices of the BIS. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 5
 I  have  the  privilege  to  chair  the  GEM,  and  must  say  that  I  find  the  frank  and  very  rich 
discussions we hold at its bi-monthly meetings of invaluable importance for the central bank 
community at large.  
The rise of the FSB 
3.4 
Another  crucial  innovation  of  the  past  couple  of  years  has  been  the  expansion  of  both 
membership and range of competencies of Financial Stability Board (FSB) chaired by Mario 
Draghi,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  and  in  charge,  together  with  the  IMF,  of 
strengthening  the  international  financial  architecture  and  of  global  financial  stability.  The 
expanded membership – now largely overlapping with the G20 – and the stronger mandate 
significantly raises the profile of the FSB. The broad membership of the FSB – where both 
central banks and regulatory authorities are involved – ensures an unprecedented degree of 
international  cooperation  in  regulatory  matters.  The  FSB  has  been  working  actively  on 
drawing the lessons from the crisis from the standpoint of the global principles for prudential 
rules regulations and supervision of all financial activities. In any case progress in building a 
global financial regulation architecture that is broadly agreed and at the same time effective 
is  not  easy,  and  we  need  a  very  strong  consistent  and  determined  action  of  all  parties 
involved.  
Let  me  also  mention  that  the  ECB  is  actively  involved  in  the  G20  (at  the  Ministers  and 
Governors level) and the FSB, being a full member of both fora, and participates to their sub-
structures at the technical level.  
Summing up 
3.5 
Overall, the system is moving decisively towards an ownership of global governance that is 
really  inclusive  and  comprehends  systemic  emerging  economies  as  well  as  industrialised 
countries. This very significant transformation of global governance that we are engineering 
today can be illustrated strikingly by three examples: first, the G20 replaces the G7 as the 
prime  group  for  global  economic  and  financial  governance  at  the  level  of  Ministers  and 
Governors and at the level of Heads of State or Government. Second, the Global Economy 
Meeting of central bank governors replaces the G10 group of governors as the prime group 
for  the  governance  of  central  bank  cooperation.  And  third,  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
membership  is  extended  far  beyond  the  borders  of  the  G7.  Not  surprisingly  after  a  global 
financial crisis, the economic and financial sectors are areas where a new concept of global 
governance  has  been  decided,  and  we  can  expect  a  number  of  tests  of  this  new  bold 
concept in the years to come.  
Putting the EU house in order 
4. 
Let me mention now the institutional changes that are taking shape in Europe which I could 
label  as  “putting  the  EU  house  in  order”,  thereby  contributing  to  global  economic  and 
financial stability more generally. I mentioned earlier that putting one’s house in order is not 
sufficient, but it always remains necessary and now more than ever. 
The  first  is  the  EU’s  new  financial  supervisory  architecture,  which  has  recently  been 
approved  by  the  European  Parliament.  The  new  architecture  includes  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board, established under the aegis of the ECB, and the three EU supervisory 
authorities  (for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  markets).  There  are  two  noteworthy 
innovations in the new architecture which I would like to emphasise here. The first is that a 
high-level body is explicitly tasked with the monitoring and prevention of systemic risks to the 
financial sector, similar to what is happening in other important jurisdictions such as the US. 
Second, the macroprudential analysis will also be conducted at the EU level, in recognition of 
the increasing degree of financial integration within the EU. Clearly, many macroprudential 
issues are global, which implies that the ESRB will have to talk to, and collaborate and share 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 information with, similar bodies outside the EU as well as international institutions such as 
the IMF and the FSB.  
Second,  last  spring  the  EU  has  experienced  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  which  it  was  not  a 
bystander, but rather the epicentre. The crisis has had important reverberations at the global 
level. It is essential that the EU reforms its own institutional infrastructure so that this episode 
is not repeated – not only in the EU’s own interests but also in view of the external effects 
that instability within it can have on the global economy and finance. As you know, this is a 
matter that is being still debated in the context of the Task Force chaired by President Van 
Rompuy and the European Commission has recently published legislative proposals with its 
views on how to reform EU governance.  
The  Commission  has  published  on  29  September  its  proposals  to  strengthen  economic 
governance.  
A  number  of  the  Commission’s  proposals  are  going  in  the  right  direction,  but  for  the  euro 
area  more  ambitious  reforms  are  needed  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  monetary 
union.  
In  short,  it  is  essential  to  strengthen  further  the  euro  area  dimension  of  surveillance  and 
policy  adjustment.  The  euro  area  dimension  must  entail  even  greater  automaticity, 
accelerated timelines and reduced room for discretion in procedures. It must foresee country 
missions and the possibility of sanctions at earlier stages in the macroeconomic surveillance 
framework;  greater  independence  and  quality  controls  in  underlying  analysis;  and  stronger 
powers in case of questions over statistics.  
This is our assessment in a nutshell. Since the matter is so important for monetary union, I 
would like to give you also our more detailed assessment, which can be summarised in four 
points.  
First,  on  fiscal  surveillance,  more  is  needed  to  enhance  enforcement  procedures. 
Specifically,  all  deadlines  under  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  should  be  significantly 
reduced;  sanctions  should  be  applied  quasi-automatically  on  the  basis  of  clearly  defined 
criteria, without scope for discretion through “exceptional circumstances” or waivers; and the 
debt reduction should in some cases be more ambitious than proposed by the Commission.  
Second, on macroeconomic surveillance, the procedures need to be straightforward and use 
a maximum of analytical intelligence. Thus, on top of what the Commission has proposed, it 
is crucial that the framework focuses on countries with vulnerabilities, competitiveness losses 
and  high  debt  levels.  Vulnerabilities  can  be  detected  on  the  basis  of  a  limited  number  of 
indicators;  and  when  the  indicators  reveal  potential  problems,  they  should  automatically 
trigger an in-depth analysis of the country concerned, including missions of the Commission 
in  liaison  with  the  ECB  and  public  scrutiny.  Finally,  to  reinforce  compliance,  graduated 
sanctions should come into play at an earlier stage.  
Third, the quality and independence of economic analysis is essential. Therefore, it would be 
important  that  Commission  services  conducting  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  surveillance  for 
the  euro  area  have  some  independence,  for  example  the  same  independence  as  the 
Commission  competition  services.  A  body  of  “wise  persons”  should  be  created  to  provide 
external assessments; and the Code of Practice for European statistics should be enshrined 
in  a  Regulation,  ensuring  that  weak  spots  in  data  collection  and  reporting  are  addressed 
immediately.  
Fourth, and as the final point, member States should anchor the new surveillance framework 
in  national  legislation.  Beyond  the  minimum  requirements  for  budgetary  frameworks 
proposed  by  the  Commission,  it  is  essential  to  introduce  rules-based,  medium-term 
frameworks and establish independent national institutions assessing fiscal policy.  
Implementing the most ambitious reforms possible under the current Treaty is in the deepest 
interest of the euro area countries. 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 7
 Conclusions 
5. 
Let me conclude. If I were to summarise the key lessons of the global financial crisis that I 
have been talking about today, I would emphasise three main points:  
Firstly, a very profound transformation of economy and finance at the global level has taken 
place over the last thirty years. The combination of a technological revolution which is still 
ongoing, particularly, but not exclusively, in the field of information technology, with the fall of 
the  Soviet  Empire  and  the  generalisation  of  market  economies  at  a  global  level,  has 
contributed  to  create  a  new  entity,  which  is  the  globally  integrated  economy  with  its 
associated global financial system.  
We have attained a level of intertwining and interdependencies at the global level which was 
previously unseen in terms of intensity of the links and also the rapidity of global transmission 
of shocks. The fact that a sole event, namely Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy, was transmitted 
in all economies – whether industrialised or emerging – and in all sectors – whether financial 
or non-financial – in a few half days, was a “première” in the history of economy and finance.  
Secondly, the fact that the global financial system and the global economy are now deeply 
integrated  and  are  pertinent  entities  of  their  own,  this  calls  for  an  equivalent  appropriate 
concept of global governance. In this respect, the crisis has been revealing. Extremely bold 
changes that seemed unthinkable have been triggered by the intensification of the crisis in 
mid-September  2008.  It  is  imperative  that  all  institutions,  governments,  central  banks  and 
parties concerned do what they can to make the new constellation of global governance work 
exemplary.  
Thirdly,  the  central  issue  for  executive  branches  is  that,  even  if  the  pertinent  entity  is  the 
integrated  global  economic  and  financial  system,  major  decisions  have  to  be  taken  at  the 
level of individual countries. Only to speak of the industrialised world, it is necessary to make 
our  public  opinions  sufficiently  aware  of  the  externalities  of  national  decisions,  and 
consequently  on  the  necessity  to  internalize  complex  concepts  like  global  economic 
prosperity and global financial stability.  
In  our  democracies,  very  fortunately,  decisions  depend  on  the  sentiment  of  the  people.  I 
consider  that  one  of  the  most  formidable  challenges  of  today  is  to  engage  in  a  deep 
communication exercise at the level of each of our countries to permit our public opinions to 
be as enlightened as possible on the very nature of the new globalised world in which we are 
living.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Committee on the Global Financial System (2010): The functioning and resilience of cross 
border funding markets, March. 
Frieden,  J.  A.  (2009):  “Global  governance  of  global  monetary  relations:  rationale  and 
feasibility”, Economics, Policy Paper No. 2009–06. 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2010
