Yves Mersch: The euro – a credible currency? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, President of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the Luxembourg 
Financial Centre Conference, Shanghai, 28 September 2010. 
 Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure and honor to talk to such a distinguished audience this afternoon. I am very 
grateful to for this opportunity to exchange views on the credibility of the Euro and on the role 
of our respective currency areas for a more balanced global economy. 
Let me start with the credibility of the Euro. If you ask me, who has been a member of the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) since its establishment in 1998, if 
the Euro was a credible currency, you will not be surprised that my answer is “Yes”. 
The  statement  the  Euro  being  a  credible  currency  might  be  more  surprising  against  the 
backdrop  of  the  current  economic  and  financial  crisis.  Especially,  as  it  has  doubtlessly 
affected not only the (global) economy but also the major institutions of the Euro area. Some 
outside observers even have prematurely forecasted its demise. Let me explain why these 
predictions are wrong. 
Currently ongoing recovery in the Euro area 
In the short term, the economic situation is improving. The Euro area and its single currency 
are  recovering  from  the  most  severe  recession  since  World  War  II  at  a  pace  which  takes 
laymen  and  experts  by  surprise.  Since  mid-2009  economic  activity  has  been  expanding. 
Recently the recovery has gained momentum. Euro area real GDP increased, on a quarterly 
basis, by 1% in the second quarter of 2010. 
Clearly, the Euro zone was hit hard by the Great Recession. In 2009, i.e. in the aftermath of 
the near meltdown of financial markets in September 2008, real GDP fell by 4.1% in the Euro 
area.  As  a  consequence  unemployment  rates  soared  to  beyond  9%  the  same  year. 
Correspondingly, the free fall of energy prices and the decrease of economic activity slashed 
down inflation significantly in 2009, pushing the inflation rate even into negative territory for a 
couple of months. 
More recently, price developments have somewhat normalized, staying in line with the ECB’s 
aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Although, in line with the ECB’s projections recent data and surveys indicate a moderation of 
growth in the second half of this year in the Euro area as well as on the global level, I am 
confident that the positive underlying momentum is increasingly broader based and signals a 
self-sustaining  recovery  in  the  Euro  area.  In  my  view,  therefore  inside  the  Euro  area  the 
gradual pace of adjustment of the monetary policy stance, of the overall provision of liquidity 
and of its allotment modes can continue.  
The Euro: sound track record in the first decade 
In a longer perspective the performance of the currency union is far more flattering. Between 
1999 and 2009 real per capita output in the Euro zone grew on average by 1.5% per year. 
This is a comparable order of magnitude to that in the US, despite higher overall growth rates 
in the US. Consumer prices developed in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. In 
the eleven and a half years after the creation of the single currency the Harmonized Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) has risen on average by exactly 1.97% per year. The performance 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
of the ECB in delivering price stability has beaten that of the former benchmark currencies, 
the Deutsche Mark and the Dutch Guilder. 
High cost of fighting the crisis 
Still,  there  is  no  scope  for  complacency.  In  recent  months,  Europe  has  demonstrated 
unwavering commitment to the unity and integrity of the single currency area. However, the 
fight  against  the  financial  crisis  and  the  deep  recession  has  not  only  been  successful,  but 
also very costly. Moreover, it has uncovered institutional weaknesses as has been the case 
in the history of most currency unions. In particular, it poses challenges to the sustainability 
of public finances. In the Euro area the government deficit climbed to 6.3% of GDP in 2009. 
This year the Euro area government deficit will peak at 6.6%, before declining only to 6.1% in 
2011. The overall government debt is expected to amount to 88.5% of GDP next year. This is 
still below the level prior to the introduction of the Euro. But it is also an increase of more 
than 20% from the level before the crisis.  
Although,  it  is  not  too  comforting  that  other  major  currency  areas  are  facing  even  more 
severe deteriorations of public finances, it is a matter of fact: 
 
In  the  US  fiscal  stimuli  and  rescue  packages  have  resulted  in  the  federal  budget 
deficit widening to around 10% of GDP for the fiscal year 2009 – and it will probably 
stay at that level in 2010 and 2011. By consequence the government debt-to-GDP 
ratio in the US was about 84% in 2009. It is expected to rise to 102.5% by 2011. 
In the UK, the general government deficit widened to 11.5% of GDP in 2009, and it 
is expected to decline to only about 10% by 2011. Gross government debt-to-GDP 
ratio is expected to increase from 68.1% in 2009 to around 87% in 2011. 
In Japan, the general government fiscal deficit is projected to be between 6% and 
7% of GDP in 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. The government debt ratio was 
about 189% of GDP in 2009, and is expected to increase to about 195% of GDP by 
2011.  
  Restoring fiscal sustainability is key 
Given the deterioration of public finance in the industrialized world in general and in the Euro 
zone  in  particular,  it  is  of  the  essence  to  correct  fiscal  imbalances  in  many  Euro  area 
countries. Responsible fiscal management is the basis for balanced and sustainable growth. 
Stability-orientated  fiscal  policies  will  stimulate  confidence  of  households,  firms  and 
investors.  This  confidence  is  the  pre-condition  for  economic  growth  and  job  creation. 
Governments must therefore send a clear message to markets – a message of determination 
and commitment to sound macroeconomic policies and fiscal sustainability. Budget plans for 
2011 and beyond should reflect the urgent need for credible consolidation strategies. 
Remember  the  words  of  John  Maynard  Keynes  in  1937,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Great 
Depression: “Just as it was advisable for the government to incur debt during the slump, so 
for the same reasons it is now advisable that they should incline to the opposite policy”. 
Strengthening of the institutional framework 
What  is  economically  reasonable  needs  an  appropriate  institutional  framework.  Neither 
markets nor the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) succeeded in ensuring fiscal discipline in a 
sufficient manner.  
Therefore,  the  spirit  of  the  SGP  needs  to  be  strengthened.  Promising  steps  have  been 
undertaken so far. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
  The  task  force  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  President  of  the  European  Council, 
Herman  Van  Rompuy,  proposed,  first,  a  streamlining  of  national  budgetary 
calendars  in  order  to  improve  monitoring  and  correction  at  an  earlier  stage  of 
decision  making.  The  so  called  European  semester  will  stress  economic 
surveillance: the fiscal discipline of the SGP, the structural reforms in the long term 
vision program “Europe 2020”, and a new mechanism to prevent macro-imbalances 
which will be fully embedded in the surveillance cycle. The European semester aims 
at prior policy guidance and preventive budgetary surveillance, in time when these 
really matter and allow discussing common policy before the budgets are agreed at 
the  national  level.  The  European  Semester  cycle  will  start  in  January  with  an 
“Annual  Growth  Survey”  prepared  by  the  Commission,  reviewing  economic 
challenges. 
Second, the task force discusses a system of “smart sanctions” against countries in 
breach of the debt and deficit limits, in order to strengthen the SGP in a preventive 
phase.  The  commission  will  tackle  its  proposals  tomorrow.  These  plans  aim  at 
imposing more automatic sanctions in a gradual way. 
In order to prevent the built-up of imbalances leading to pressures on the fiscal stance and 
diverging  situations  weakening  the  effect  of  a  single  monetary  policy,  surveillance  at  the 
macro-economic  level  needs  to  be  strengthened,  especially  as  far  as  competitiveness  is 
concerned. Within a single currency union, the relative competitiveness of economies mirrors 
the  sustainability  of  national  price  and  cost  developments,  the  compatibility  of  national 
nominal trends with those that are appropriate for the monetary union as a whole. Proposals 
are due to October. 
This  institutional  deepening  in  crisis  prevention  is  completed  by  crisis  management 
decisions.  The  set  up  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF),  a  rescue  fund 
which  achieved  “AAA”  status  by  all  major  rating  agencies,  intended  to  this.  The  European 
System of Central Banks (ESCB) together with the Commission call for renewed efforts for 
more integrated financial and capital markets. The regulatory reform for banking should spur 
these efforts leading to a new European banking landscape. Luxembourg with its experience 
will assume its share and responsibility in this evolution. 
Another institutional deepening has been approved by the European parliament last week. In 
the  micro-prudential  area  three  European  risk  agencies  will  be  set  up  for  supervision  in 
banking, securities markets and insurance. They will be completed by a European Systemic 
Risk Board strongly supporting Central Banks in the area of macro-prudential surveillance, 
hitherto neglected. 
Rebalancing and global cooperation 
China  has  been  affected  by  the  global  crisis,  too,  though  in  a  more  subtle  way.  The 
challenges are manifold. 
First, China’s impressive growth story of the previous decade was mainly export driven. This 
approach led to the inflow of foreign capital, a huge current account surplus and a massive 
accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Different  from  what  could  be  observed  in  the 
past, China as a dynamic Newly Industrialized Country became the biggest net creditor to 
the rest of the world in general, and to the US in particular.  
The  economic  rise  of  China  and  other  Emerging  Market  countries  has  gone  along  with 
increased  political  presence  and  responsibility  at  the  global  level.  China  in  this  respect 
reassumes the role it had in the world economy throughout most of history. 
Second,  although  the  fiscal  position  of  China  was  sound,  other  vulnerabilities  have  been 
disclosed.  A  growth  model  that  is  highly  concentrated  on  exports  is  at  risk  when  external 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 3
demand  drops  sharply.  A  broadening  of  the  macro  economic  policies  would  reduce  this 
exposure. The growth model, thus, would become more sustainable.  
Tackling this issue would also be a contribution to deal with global imbalances. 
One  step  on  this  way  for  sustainable  growth  and  an  orderly  rebalanced  global  economy 
could  be  the  enhancement  of  social  safety  nets.  A  coherent  system  of  reforms  of  social 
security, health care and pension schemes would reduce the need for precautionary savings 
of private households and could thus stimulate private spending. This holds in particular for 
the  challenge  of  an  ageing  society.  A  shift  from  economic  activity  from  the  public  to  the 
private sector would be helpful in this respect, just like corporate governance and financial 
sector reforms, or a reflection on local government finance.  
There  are  some  encouraging  indications  that  measures  to  increase  household  income, 
notably  in  rural  areas,  expected  to  feature  prominently  the  new  five-year  plan  starting  in 
January  2010.  This  could  be  an  important  contribution  to  a  broadening  the  Chinese 
economic approach, and to move to a more quality oriented growth. 
Concluding remarks 
I am convinced that cooperation between the major players in the world economy is crucial. 
To tackle global imbalances, each continent has to do its homework. 
 
For China, continuing the rebalancing process from external to domestic demand, 
from  huge  public  enterprises  to  private  enterprises,  demographic  ageing  and 
dispersion are no less challenging. In such an environment the increased role of the 
Renminbi will be one part. 
The European Union must resume the path of institutional deepening. It needs less 
divergence and more structural reforms to enhance growth and employment. Also, 
enhanced  stability  in  the  financial  sector  is  of  the  essence.  We  must  furthermore 
strengthen the economic governance of the European Union with reforms designed 
to a stable Euro and strengthen the foundations for sustainable public finances. In 
such a surrounding the Euro can and will stay a credible currency. 
 To sum up, both economic areas have – to use the word of Premier Wen Jiabao who spoke 
recently in Tianjin – to undertake efforts to ensure, first, better balance, second, coordination 
and, third, sustainability of economic development. 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2010
