Nout Wellink: A new regulatory landscape 
Remarks by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  16th  International  Conference  of  Banking 
Supervisors, Singapore, 22 September 2010. 
 Introduction and background 
Good morning and welcome to the 2010 International Conference of Banking Supervisors. I 
will start by thanking our host – the Monetary Authority of Singapore. I would like to thank in 
particular MAS Managing Director Heng Swee Keat and his deputy, Teo Swee Lian, and the 
staff of MAS for doing a marvellous job of organising and hosting this ICBS.  
It has been two short years since we last met in Brussels at the 2008 ICBS. In my opening 
remarks  at  that  conference,  I  used  the  occurrence  of  storms  and  the  need  to  build  strong 
dikes as metaphors for the financial crisis and the need for a strong supervisory response. 
This morning I will reflect on our response to the recent financial storm, which is designed to 
protect against future crises.  
Consider  the  extraordinary  financial  landscape  around  the  time  of  the  last  ICBS.  In 
September 2008 alone:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy,  
the other large US investment banks converted to bank holding companies,  
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were nationalised,  
AIG was brought back from the brink of collapse,  
Fortis, the financial conglomerate, was broken up and sold,  
Iceland’s  largest  commercial  bank  –  and  subsequently  the  banking  system  – 
collapsed, and  
many countries had to step in to provide massive support to their banks.  
 
This was the height of the crisis. Since then, the financial and banking system have been 
stabilised  and  we  are  on  the  road  to  recovery.  But  this  has  come  at  a  high  cost:  many 
government budgets have been stretched due to massive amounts of official sector support. 
There was a fundamental spillover from the financial crisis to the real economy. This resulted 
in lost wealth and a loss of jobs. It is not yet over and risks remain.  
While painful and costly, the crisis has nonetheless presented an opportunity to put in place 
longer term reforms that are needed to make banks and the financial system more resilient to 
future periods of stress. The Basel Committee has been at the core of this reform agenda, 
which was crystallised at the G20 Leaders summit last year in Pittsburgh.  
Last year we also expanded our membership by doubling in size to 27 jurisdictions. We have 
benefited  immensely  from  this  broadened  membership,  both  in  terms  of  wisdom  and 
legitimacy.  
This morning I would like to describe ways in  which the Committee has responded to this 
financial  storm  and  to  prepare  for  the  next  storm.  I  will  start  first  by  talking  about  the 
Committee’s  bank-specific  reforms,  the  goal  of  which  is  to  make  banks  more  resilient  to 
shocks.  But  a  bank-specific  approach  is  not  enough.  The  Committee  is  also  addressing 
system wide risks and I will also say a few words about this.  
BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
Making the banking system more resilient  
The core of our bank-specific reforms is stronger capital and liquidity regulation. The Basel II 
framework  was  bolstered  significantly  in  July  2009  and  the  Committee’s  December  2009 
proposals, which  were  signed  off-on  in  September,  will  further  strengthen  existing  Basel  II 
capital  treatments.  In  other  respects,  the  December  2009  proposals  introduced  global 
standards  where  none  currently  exist  (eg  a  leverage  ratio  and  liquidity  requirements). 
Collectively, the revised Basel II capital framework and the new global standards have been 
commonly referred to as “Basel III”.  
With the benefit of hindsight, pre-crisis capital standards were too weak for the types of risks 
that  were  building  up  in  the  system.  Keep  in  mind  that  the  effects  of  the  crisis  became 
manifest  in  2007  and  built-up  prior  to  the  implementation  of  Basel  II.  Many  countries  that 
have adopted Basel II did so in 2008 or later. So this was not a Basel II crisis.  
The deficiencies leading to the crisis were numerous and attributable to many. This includes 
bankers,  investors,  rating  agencies  and  supervisors.  From  the  regulatory  perspective,  the 
main  inadequacy  related  to  the  level  and  quality  of  capital.  Instead  of  8%  of  hard  capital 
backing risks, many banks typically held 2%. And if you consider that regulatory adjustments, 
such as goodwill, are deducted from Tier 1 or Tier 2 capital, then it was possible for banks to 
have even lower levels of tangible common equity.  
The set of capital rules governing trading book exposures was another regulatory deficiency. 
Banks  had  built  up  massive  illiquid  credit  exposures  in  these  portfolios.  The  VAR-based 
capital regime, with its 10-day liquidity horizon was not designed for this. Banks abused this 
regime, and warehoused highly illiquid, structured credit assets in the trading book for which 
there  was  no  market,  which  were  impossible  to  value  when  liquidity  broke  down,  and  for 
which too little capital was held to protect against risks. This is where the first wave of losses 
hit.  
These were two important deficiencies but there were others, like liquidity. Many banks relied 
excessively  on  wholesale  funding  to  finance  securitised,  illiquid  assets.  In  addition,  there 
were  poor  incentives  and  governance  at  the  firm  level  along  with  a  lack  of  transparency, 
which  made  it  nearly  impossible  to  understand  a  bank’s  exposures  or  the  quality  of  the 
capital backing them.  
So what has the Committee done in response? First, we have strengthened the capital base. 
Raising the quality, consistency and transparency of the capital base has been one of the 
primary  objectives  of  the  Committee’s  reform  programme.  Overall,  these  rules  that  will 
govern the capital structure represent a substantial strengthening of the definition of capital. 
By  itself,  the  new  definition  of  capital  is  a  significant  improvement  to  the  global  capital 
regime,  which  will  be  enhanced  further  by  better  risk  coverage,  the  introduction  of  buffers 
and higher minimum capital requirements. On top of this comes the higher level of capital.  
In  addition  to  raising  the  quality  of  the  capital  base,  the  Committee  has  improved  risk 
coverage of the regulatory framework and more improvements are on the way. Our goal is to 
ensure that all material risks are captured. During the crisis, many risks were not reflected in 
the risk-based regime. The Committee has substantially strengthened the rules that govern 
capital requirements for trading book exposures as well as for complex securitisations and 
exposures to off-balance-sheet vehicles. The revised trading book framework, on average, 
requires banks to hold around three to four times the old capital requirements. We are now 
finalising rules that will strengthen the capital requirements and risk management standards 
for counterparty credit risk.  
An additional element to the regulatory capital framework is a leverage ratio, which will serve 
as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirement. In the lead-up to the crisis, many banks 
reported very strong Tier 1 risk-based ratios while, at the same time, managed to build up 
high levels of on- and off-balance sheet leverage. The use of a supplementary leverage ratio 
will  help  contain  the  build-up  of  excessive  leverage  in  the  system.  It  will  also  serve  as  an 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
additional  safeguard  against  attempts  to  “game”  the  risk-based  requirements  and  will  help 
address model risk.  
In July, the Committee’s oversight body of Governors and Heads of Supervision agreed on 
an indicative calibration of 3% as a minimum for the leverage ratio to be tested during the 
parallel run period, with a view to be implemented on January 1st, 2015. For global banks 
with significant capital markets activities, this 3% calibration is likely to be more conservative 
than  the  current  measures  of  leverage  in  place  in  some  countries.  The  new  definition  of 
capital and the inclusion of off-balance-sheet items in the calculation of the leverage ratio are 
the main factors.  
The reform measures described above radically transform the regulatory capital framework. 
The Committee’s proposed liquidity framework will have as profound an effect since a global 
liquidity standard does not currently exist.  
During the crisis, funding remained in short supply for an extended period. In response, the 
Committee has proposed global minimum liquidity standards to make banks more resilient to 
potential  short-term  disruptions  in  access  to  funding  and  to  address  longer-term  structural 
liquidity mismatches in their balance sheets. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) will require 
banks  to  have  sufficient  high-quality  liquid  assets  to  withstand  a  30-day  stressed  funding 
scenario that is specified by supervisors. This is complemented by the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio  (NSFR),  which  is  a  longer-term  structural  ratio  designed  to  address  liquidity 
mismatches.  
Introducing a new set of standards is a complex process. Unlike the capital framework, for 
which extensive experience and data help inform calibration, there is no similar track record 
for liquidity standards. The Committee is therefore taking a carefully considered approach to 
the design and calibration and will review the impact of these changes to ensure that they 
deliver a rigorous overall liquidity standard. It will introduce the LCR as a minimum standard 
in 2015 after thoroughly assessing its behaviour. In a similar way, the Committee will also 
carry out an “observation phase” to address any unintended consequences across business 
models  or  funding  structures  before  finalising  and  introducing  the  revised  NSFR  as  a 
minimum standard by 1 January 2018. The Committee will revise the NSFR by the end of 
this year and will test it during the observation phase.  
These initiatives – higher and better quality capital, improved risk coverage, introduction of a 
leverage  ratio  and  new  global  liquidity  standards  –  are  the  foundation  for  the  Basel 
Committee’s  response  to  the  crisis.  But  they  are  not  the  whole  story.  The  Committee  has 
also  developed  supervisory  guidance  on  other  important  bank-specific  initiatives.  These 
include stress testing, valuation, corporate governance, compensation, supervisory colleges, 
and high level principles for financial instruments accounting.  
Addressing systemwide risks  
While stronger individual banks typically lead to a stronger banking system, this firm-specific 
approach  by  itself  may  not  be  sufficient.  Broader  macroprudential  measures  to  address 
procyclicality  and  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  entire  banking  system  are  equally 
important.  A  systemwide  focus  addresses  problems  related  to  interconnectedness  and  the 
perception that some banks are too big to fail.  
An essential element in addressing systemwide risk is the build up of buffers in good times 
that  can  be  drawn  down  in  periods  of  stress.  To  help  achieve  this,  the  Committee  has 
introduced a capital conservation buffer. As a bank’s capital levels move closer to minimum 
requirements,  the  conservation  buffer  will  impose  a  constraint  on  its  discretionary 
distributions. These include dividend payments, share buybacks and bonuses. Retaining a 
bigger  proportion  of  earnings  during  a  downturn  will  help  ensure  that  capital  remains 
available to support the bank’s ongoing business operations and lending during the period of 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
stress. This buffer of 2.5% will be comprised of common equity and will be fully phased in by 
the end of 2018.  
In addition, the Committee in July 2010 issued a proposal for a countercyclical buffer which 
would be imposed when, in the view of national authorities, excess aggregate credit growth is 
judged to be associated with an excessive build-up of system-wide risk. The countercyclical 
buffer  would  increase  the  conservation  buffer  range  by  up  to  an  additional  2.5 percentage 
points during such periods of excess credit growth. Conversely, the buffer would be released 
when, in the judgment of the authorities, the released capital would help absorb losses in the 
banking  system  that  pose  a  risk  to  financial  stability.  This  would  help  reduce  the  risk  that 
available  credit  is  constrained  by  regulatory  capital  requirements.  Taken  together,  this 
framework  of  buffers  is  intended  to  increase  banking  sector  resilience  and  mitigate 
procyclicality.  
The use of “gone concern” contingent capital would increase the contribution of the private 
sector  to  resolve  future  banking  crises,  thereby  reducing  moral  hazard.  The  Committee 
recently published a proposal for consultation based on a requirement that the contractual 
terms of capital instruments will allow them – at the option of the relevant authority – to be 
written  off  or  converted  to  common  shares  if  the  bank  is  judged  to  be  non-viable  by  the 
relevant  authority.  The  potential  role  of  “going  concern”  contingent  capital  in  the  capital 
framework is also currently under review. The objective here is to decrease the probability of 
banks, or the banking system as a whole, reaching the point of non-viability.  
Several initiatives discussed above will help reduce procyclicality. These include the leverage 
ratio, capital conservation buffer and countercyclical capital buffer. In addition, the Committee 
is reviewing different approaches to address any excess cyclicality of the minimum capital 
requirements. It has also developed a concrete proposal to operationalise an expected loss 
approach to provisioning that was proposed by the IASB.  
While procyclicality amplified shocks over the time dimension, excessive interconnectedness 
and  the  too-big-to-fail  issue  also  transmitted  shocks  across  the  financial  system  and 
economy. Work on this topic is ongoing. The Committee and the Financial Stability Board are 
developing  a  well  integrated  approach  to  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  This 
could include combinations of a capital surcharge, bail-in debt and contingent capital.  
Many  of  the  Committee’s  reform  measures  also  help  address  risks  that  originate  or 
concentrate outside of the banking sector. For example, the Committee’s July 2009 Basel II 
enhancements  specifically  addressed  risks  related  to  securitisations,  resecuritisations  and 
off-balance-sheet  exposures  (eg  structured  investment  vehicles).  In  addition,  the  limitation 
established by the leverage ratio, which takes account of off-balance-sheet exposures, and 
the measures to improve both the risk management and capitalisation of counterparty credit 
risk, will also play important roles. Moreover, a heightened sensitivity to financial innovation 
and the regulatory perimeter, a renewed focus on consistent and timely implementation, as 
well  as  more  rigorous  supervision  will  help  safeguard  against  risks  arising  from  or 
concentrating in a non-banking sector.  
Conclusion and the road ahead  
In all, the Committee has taken major steps to move the banking system to a much higher 
level of resilience. If, prior to the crisis, banks had the levels of capital we are asking for, we 
likely would not have experienced such a deep crisis.  
Let me be clear, the current standards are extremely demanding. Before we even raise the 
level of capital, we have introduced a much stricter definition of capital. This is equivalent to a 
substantial  increase  in  the  minimum  requirement  by  itself.  In  addition,  we  have  raised  the 
capital  requirement  for  trading,  derivatives,  and  interbank  exposures  by  a  substantial 
amount. Finally, we have increased the amount of common equity that banks need to hold 
from  2%  to  7%.  To  help  illustrate  this  point,  for  many  global  banks,  a  7%  requirement  is 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2010
substantially higher than the same number under the old standard, as one must factor in both 
the  effect  of  regulatory  adjustments  to  common  equity  and  the  higher  risk-weighted  asset 
requirements for trading and counterparty exposures.  
This is a fundamental improvement in addition to the other improvements I have mentioned 
and  the  Committee  has  taken  full  account  of  the  potential  impact.  It  has  conducted  a 
comprehensive  quantitative  impact  study  and  other  analyses  to  assess  the  impact  of  its 
regulatory  reforms.  In  August,  the  Committee  and  the  FSB  published  a  report  on  the 
macroeconomic  implications  of  the  proposed  higher  regulatory  standards  during  the 
transition to these new standards. This report concluded that the transition to stronger capital 
and  liquidity  standards  is  likely  to  have  only  a  modest  impact  on  economic  growth.  This 
report  was  accompanied  by  an  additional  study  conducted  by  the  Committee  on  the  long-
term economic impact of the new standards, which concluded that there are clear economic 
benefits  from  increasing  the  minimum  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  from  their  current 
levels. These benefits accrue from reducing the probability of financial crises and the output 
losses associated with such crises.  
Indeed, in recognition of this more stringent regime and to support the ongoing recovery, the 
Committee  is  keen  to  provide  for  a  smooth  transition.  As  of  2013  the  standards  rise  each 
year to their final level at the end of 2018. Over the same period, the leverage ratio and the 
liquidity standards will also be phased in.  
These are minimum requirements. We have said that countries should move faster if their 
banking  systems  are  profitable  and  able  to  do  so  without  having  to  restrict  credit.  Banks 
should not be permitted to increase their distributions if they are still below the ultimate target 
but  feel  they  can  take  their  time  to  get  there. Banks  can meet  the  new  standards  through 
earnings retention, capital raising, or reducing their riskier exposures that are not necessarily 
associated with the granting of credit to ultimate borrowers.  
Will our response to the recent financial crisis be adequate? The answer to this is “yes” but a 
qualified “yes” as there is much more to be done and the crucial second step of the policy-
making  process  has  yet  to  take  place.  I  refer  here  to  implementation  and  rigorous 
supervisory follow up.  
We must remember that memories fade quickly. Regardless of how tough the new standards 
are and how we expect them to increase the resilience of bank and banking systems, they 
must be effectively implemented and enforced. Moreover, our standards need to keep pace 
with financial innovation.  
We  have  provided  a  road  to  a  much  safer  banking  system.  When  we  meet  again  in  two 
years, it is my hope that the banking sector and broader economy will be well along towards 
greater resilience.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 5
