Javier Aríztegui: Savings bank restructuring and institutional protection 
schemes 
Speech  by  Mr  Javier  Aríztegui,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  conference 
organised by Caja Granada, Granada, 17 December 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  able  to  share  with  savings  banks  professionals  and  Spanish 
financial system specialists some reflections on what are known as “Institutional Protection 
Schemes” (IPSs). And it is all the more satisfying to do so in a city as magnificent as that 
hosting the event today. My thanks, then, to Caja Granada for kindly inviting me to participate 
in the closing of this conference.  
The  year  2010  now  drawing  to  a  close  has  been  a  difficult  one  for  the  Spanish  banking 
system,  whose  activity  has  continued  to  unfold  in  a  sluggish  economic  setting  marked  by 
financial markets that have not yet managed to attain the degree of stability and confidence 
needed. It has thus been a year replete with management challenges, intellectual debates 
and legislative initiatives. But if we must choose one specific milestone marking it above all 
others, 2010 has been the year of merger agreements between savings banks, in possibly 
the most extensive banking concentration process ever undertaken in our country. 
A  sizeable  portion  of  these  agreements  has  taken  the  form  of  Institutional  Protection 
Schemes  or  –  to  make  a  further  addition  to  the  plethora  of  acronyms  and  initials 
characterising  today’s  financial  jargon  –  IPSs.  While  as  a  general  rule  I  am  against  this 
invasion  of  jargon,  perhaps  in  this  specific  case  the  initials  are  preferable  to  the  longer 
version, because IPSs, the focus of this conference, are not merely “institutional protection 
schemes”,  or  legal  instruments  suitable  for  securing  the  benefits  of  consolidation  under 
capital regulations. They are and should be much more than that.  
IPSs have arisen as an innovative structure in the banking system and, like all new products, 
they are best evaluated by organising their assessment in steps, or successive degrees of 
scrutiny, so that at the end of the process their structure can be fully appreciated.  
The first step in the process of evaluation will be to judge whether they are timely. The second 
will focus on their design and construction. The third will be a “use test”. And the fourth and 
final  level  of  assessment  will  look  at  how  readily  they  lend  themselves  to  progressive 
development so as to cover potential future needs. 
Allow me to cover these successive steps or facets one by one. Let us start with the first, 
their timeliness. 
IPSs  are  a  response  to  an  unquestionable  substantive  need:  the  downsizing  of  the 
Spanish  banking  sector,  following  the  excesses  of  the  growth  period  prior  to  2007.  These 
factors left many institutions facing the challenge of a future far removed from the comforts 
that  had  characterised  the  previous  period,  namely:  strong  economic  growth,  abundant 
liquidity  on  international  markets,  extensive  business  margins  and  healthy  assets.  Such 
comforts were viewed by many as a shield against underlying risks, and in some cases they 
prompted banks to lower their guard against the problems that were gathering. 
Given  the  new  playing  field  in  place  as  from  2007,  the  responsibility  of  savings  banks  is 
clear: to act resolutely to change those structures that can be improved, in full awareness 
that other parts of the new situation are exogenous and therefore elude their management 
capabilities. Hence the importance of taking decisions aimed at improving efficiency, through 
merger – or concentration – processes that position savings banks at a new set of size and 
rationality-based coordinates.  
BIS Review 173/2010 
 1
Faced with this need, the structuring of the new IPS instrument (new, at least, in terms of its 
current contours) responds to the need to pave the way so that concentration agreements 
may  be  reached  between  a  type  of  institution  –savings  banks  –  which,  given  its  business 
form and complex governance arrangements, does not have the same flexibility as banks to 
conclude  merger  agreements.  To  smooth  these  concentration  processes,  the  Fund  for  the 
Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector was also created, a Fund to which the initiators 
of  the  various  projects  can  resort  to  strengthen  their  capital.  This  assistance  adds  further 
discipline in respect of compliance with the plans, since the condition imposed by the use of 
public funds is that the capacity of the banking system should be reduced and its efficiency 
increased.  
Mergers and IPSs are thus two alternatives available to savings banks to concentrate their 
business and restructure. The two options differ in terms of their legal form, but they coincide 
fully in their objectives and should be equivalent in terms of their results.  
Let us turn to the second step of the evaluation process. The guiding principle of the design 
and  legal  construction  of  IPSs  has  been  the  search  for  a  concentration  mechanism 
analogous  to  mergers  in  terms  of  practical  results.  In  this  connection,  the  IPS  has  been 
structured on three basic pillars. 
The  first  entails  the  relinquishing  by  all  participants  to  the  central  body  of  the  IPS  of  the 
capacity  to  determine  and  implement  business  strategies  and  internal  risk  control  and 
management tools, in such a way that this central body becomes the nerve centre of the IPS. 
The second pillar comprises the mutual liquidity and solvency pacts between the participating 
savings banks and the pooling of results, to extents that should exceed 40%. And the third 
pillar is a commitment to stability of the agreements, which must run for a minimum term of 
10  years,  and  which  cannot  be  broken  without  the  Banco  de  España  first  analysing  the 
viability of the various institutions resulting from the fragmentation process. 
It should be stressed that, in all cases, the agreements so far reached go further than these 
minimum legal requirements, in the extent of pooling of solvency, liquidity and results. This is 
because,  if  so  approved  by  the  general  meetings  convened  for  next  week,  the  extent  of 
pooling will reach 100%. This solidarity arrangement contributes to providing firm foundations 
for  a  common  project  and  giving  it  substance,  since  objectives  are  unified,  more  efficient 
management arrangements are set in place and the markets and all intervening agents can 
more readily perceive the project’s cohesiveness and viability. 
From the standpoint of banking regulation, by using this design IPSs become consolidatable 
groups of credit institutions dominated by a central body. Actually, however, they are more 
than a group; they are de facto mergers (“cold mergers” as they have been called) since, for 
economic – not legal – purposes, each participant has forgone the individuality proper to a 
separate legal person. 
Full mutual liability between the parties to the agreement has been achieved, going beyond 
what  the  law  governing  corporate  groups  provides  for  in  Spain.  Hence,  in  practice,  the 
participating  savings  banks  become,  from  a  merely  economic  and  managerial  standpoint, 
what  are  veritable  retail  banking  “regional  heads”  of  the  IPS  regarding  their  operational 
capacity and the way in which they contribute solvency, liquidity and results to the group; yet, 
from  the  legal  standpoint,  they  retain  their  personality  and  their  sovereignty  in  the  agreed 
distribution of welfare fund assets.  
I also pointed out how, like any new product, IPSs must pass muster in respect of the third 
and most important step of the evaluation process, namely the “use test”, i.e. proof of their 
adaptation to reality. 
IPSs have to obtain the same improvements in organisation, efficiency, economies of scope, 
diversification and quality and unity of management as traditional mergers. They must do so 
in  the  same  length  of  time  as  a  normal  merger,  and  they  must  strive  to  ensure  that  their 
results are clearly perceived by the markets as lasting. 
2 
 BIS Review 173/2010
In this connection, it is vital that the initiators should be particularly diligent in countering the 
danger that the “raw novelty” of this legal formula – whose features have had to be rapidly 
devised – may be used as an excuse for rigidities, procrastination or half-measures.  
Compared with traditional mergers, where the combining of objectives and efforts to advance 
in  a  single direction  is more  natural,  all  the  participants in  IPSs  must  be  on  their  guard  to 
prevent the essential goal of unity from becoming distorted. They must strive to ensure that 
the mind-set of directors, managers and staff alike is geared towards a single goal; individual 
visions are no longer appropriate here, and nor are decisions not aimed at achieving a better 
future for the single corporate project that has replaced its predecessors. 
All  the  participants  in  institutional  protection  schemes  are  assuming  a  very  specific 
responsibility  here,  an  institutional  responsibility  and  a  personal  responsibility.  The  single 
economic  entity  resulting  from  the  IPS  –  the  aggregate  –  must  be  profitable  and  efficient, 
well-managed  and  display  dynamism  befitting  the  financial  sector  so  as  to  provide  the 
services demanded by the real economy with quality and at competitive prices. 
Evidently, in a setting of clear risk-aversion, the road to attain these goals and to convince 
savingsbank creditors of them, so that they renew the funding they have provided, is not an 
easy one. This task requires three basic conditions. 
First condition: resolve in adopting the measures needed using exclusively corporate criteria, 
in full knowledge that some of them may not be agreeable owing to the personal sacrifice 
entailed. To achieve this, it is essential that all the interest groups behind the governance of 
the merged savings banks should identify with the goals of the single project. 
Second condition: flexibility and speed in adopting these measures. As the saying goes, time 
is  precious.  The  need  to  access  wholesale  funding  markets  as  from  the  first  fortnight  in 
January  in  2011  and  the  greater  capital  requirements  imposed  by  the  regulations  in  the 
pipeline and by the widespread increase in the perception of risk should be a spur to all, and 
they impose a clear-cut reduction in all the timeframes envisaged for the conclusion of the 
projects. In practice, the timetables for the concentration plans suggested some six months 
back must be significantly shortened. Implementation of the various steps must be brought 
forward, with every extra effort and sacrifice needed being made. 
Third  condition:  determination  in  transmitting  to  the  market  the  idea  of  a  single  and 
consolidated  project,  of  a  concentration  arrangement  equivalent  to  a  merger,  of  an  entity 
prepared  to  harness  in  practice  all  the  synergies  and  all  the  management  improvements 
made  possible  by  an  IPS  structure.  To  do  this  a  proactive  strategy  should  be  adopted, 
geared  to  securing  the  economies  of  scale  characteristic  of  a  merger  and  to  reducing 
overheads,  including  unit  wage  costs,  which  is  imperative  in  the  current  economic 
circumstances.  Any  sign  of  wavering  should  be  avoided,  since  this  would  be  seen  as  an 
excuse to question the group’s cohesiveness, which is an unacceptable risk at present. 
I stated in the introduction that any new product has to be prepared to overcome a fourth and 
final trial and evaluation step: it must prove its capacity for future development. This is a 
particularly pertinent demand for the financial system, since what is involved is a nimble and 
dynamic sector.  
IPSs are a structure that must prove to be of use in providing lasting banking services. But it 
is  also  true  that  legislation,  specifically  Royal  Decree-Law  11/2010  of  9  July  2010,  has 
opened  up  new  means  for  savings  banks  to  pursue  their  activity,  offering  a  range  of 
possibilities.  In  particular,  it  is  provided  for  that  savings  banks  participating  in  an  IPS  can 
convert in the future, de facto or de jure, into savings banks with “indirect activity”, or into 
foundations,  which  focus  on  attending  to  and  developing  their  welfare  fund  assets.  In  this 
connection they will transfer in full the assets assigned to their banking activity to the central 
credit  institution,  in  exchange  for  shares,  and  they  will  collaborate  efficiently  in  the 
management and control of the activity pursued by this bank.  
BIS Review 173/2010 
 3
Making use of this possibility is a decision incumbent upon the managers of IPSs, and one 
which should be considered without delay, if funding markets so demand. Or if this should be 
so required by the even more demanding capital market, to which access will prove vital. In 
adopting  investment  decisions,  this  will  call  for  a  high  level  of  certainty  in  projects  and  in 
business structures.  
To access bond markets and cover maturities, it may suffice, along with the full sharing of 
profits and losses and the cross solvency guarantee, to transfer to the central entity a portion 
of the group’s assets and liabilities (normally that associated with wholesale businesses and 
branches located in territories in which it does not operate exclusively). We shall find out if 
this is sufficient from January 2011, when significant volumes of external financing will have 
to be renewed.  
However,  probably,  when  it  is  necessary  to  raise  capital,  by  issuing  shares  of  the  bank 
located at the heart of the IPS, a larger contribution of strategic assets and liabilities to this 
bank  will  be  needed,  if  it  is  desired  to  give  expectant  new  members  complete  certainty 
regarding  the  specific  assets  and  liabilities  they  are  going  to  share  and  promote  as  a 
shareholder.  And  I  insist  that,  in  the  current  circumstances,  this  decision  must  be  taken 
promptly, if the necessary capital is to be raised for the projects that need to be developed. 
Firms  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  savings  bank  workers,  the  public  in  general  and 
welfare  projects  will  ultimately  be  the  true  beneficiaries  of  concentration  processes 
conducted in accordance with the criteria of rationality I have referred to. 
The  Banco  de  España,  in  its  capacity  as  the  supervisory  authority,  has  adapted  the 
organisational structure of its supervisory services to the new savings bank map, in order to 
monitor meticulously the progress of each project. 
Before concluding, I must draw attention to an urgent outstanding task. Over the past year, 
savings banks have performed an excellent job of self-criticism, reform and adaptation which, 
in my opinion, has only been partly publicised and explained to all parties interested in their 
welfare: the financial markets – on which they depend for the lifeblood of funds to conduct 
their activity – and the public, who are the ultimate beneficiaries of the banking services the 
savings banks provide. 
Businesses,  balance  sheets  and  income  statements  have  been  integrated,  market  values, 
capital gains and capital losses have been recognised, and assets have been written off in 
the concentration processes, which will be recorded in the accounts at year-end 2010. This 
overhaul and the key future milestones in the concentration processes (relating to resources, 
systems, human resources, etc.) have not been sufficiently communicated to all interested 
parties.  
Consequently, a major communication drive is needed to explain the changes agreed, the 
assets  and  liabilities  of  the  new  financial  statements  (which  are  still  pro-forma)  and  the 
pending concentration programme. This is because suspicions arise in the markets from time 
to time that these changes, rather than amounting to wholesale reform of the organisations 
concerned,  are  merely  window-dressing.  And  this  task  of  educating  people  must  be 
performed before the wholesale markets re-open in about three weeks’ time. 
When that happens, the new treasury teams resulting from the concentration and merger of 
savings banks will have to use that detailed information as the basis for their demands for 
financial  resources  from  euro  area  creditors.  Without  fluid  communication,  matters  will  be 
very complicated indeed. 
It is now that the true extent of the value added by good management comes into its own. 
You  must  take  decisions,  at  times  disagreeable  ones,  to  protect  profit  margins,  to  reduce 
operating  costs  and  overheads,  to  promote  business  activity,  to  control  risks  and  liquidity, 
and to complete the integration of operations. In short, you will have  to convince the euro 
financial markets to commit money to your projects, in the form of loans and capital, and all 
this must be done very rapidly and in an adverse environment. 
4 
 BIS Review 173/2010
The new decade dawning in a few days will be as the old one, full of challenges but also full 
of  hope  that  we  will  be  able  to  pool  the  best  of  our  abilities  to  contribute  to  a  future  the 
Spanish banking system merits. 
Allow me to wrap up by making a small correction so as to infuse some consistency in all I 
have  said.  At  the  beginning  I  thanked  Caja  Granada  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  this 
conference. I should like to clarify by saying that my thanks should really go to IPS “Mare 
Nostrum”. 
Thank you very much and Happy Christmas to you all. 
BIS Review 173/2010 
 5
