 José De Gregorio: Exchange rate and export development 
Speech  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  Special 
Session  on Exchange  Rate  at  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  and  the  23rd National  Meeting  of 
Fruit and Vegetable Producers, Santiago de Chile, 6 October 2010. 
 Chile  has  prospered  during  recent  decades  thanks  to  globalization.  Having  tried  various 
strategies, we can say we have reached consensus on this matter. For an economy of our 
size  and  characteristics,  opening  up  to  the  rest  of  the  world  is  essential  for  creating  the 
competition and efficiency that will stimulate development. Four decades ago, this idea was a 
voice in the desert in developing economies, but today it is the accepted norm. 
There  is  also  consensus  that  monetary  and  exchange  policy  should  be  conducted  by  an 
autonomous  central  bank,  and  that  fiscal  policy  should  be  governed  by  transparent, 
predictable  and  sustainable  rules.  After  much  trial  and  error,  our  country  adopted  an 
institutionality  that  has  allowed  us  to  walk  through  complex  international  situations  with 
relative stability. 
Today I would like to discuss how we at the Central Bank of Chile view the challenges facing 
export development, in particular with regard to monetary and exchange-rate policy. 
Let  me  open  by  explaining  the  four  principles guiding  our decisions,  so  I  can  clarify  some 
misconceptions with respect to the Central Bank and the exchange rate. 
To begin with, the Central bank is not indifferent to the movements of the exchange rate, in 
the same way as we are not indifferent to the evolution of unemployment, credit or any other 
variables  relevant  to  the  country’s  economic  performance.  The  Bank’s  constitutional  act 
mandates that we safeguard price stability and the normal functioning of internal and external 
payments, but fulfilling this mandate requires us to adopt those measures which will drive the 
economy  to  making  full  use  of  its  resources  and  maintaining  a  sustainable  balance  of 
payments.  Price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  cornerstones  of  our  economy’s 
performance, growth potential and human well being. 
I could make a lengthy discourse about how the Central Bank reconciles its mandate with 
welfare objectives but I think it is enough to observe our track record over the past two years 
to  recognize  that  if  output  and  employment  are  recovering  so  strongly  today,  it  is  largely 
thanks to the flexibility of our monetary policy in facing the worst global economic downturn in 
almost a century. 
Our second principle is that we have to evaluate the effectiveness, costs and benefits, of our 
actions.  We  must  also  explain  with  maximum  rigor  and  transparency  our  decisions  and 
opinions  regarding  the  main  trends  of  our  economy.  Our  reputation  and  credibility  would 
suffer  if  we  took  any  actions  without  being  soundly  convinced  that  they  would  be  both 
convenient  and  effective  towards  achieving  our  objectives  and  at  the  same  time  inflict  the 
smallest possible social cost. 
The third principle is that the Central Bank does not use the exchange rate to target inflation. 
There  are  many  examples  of  financial  crises  and  economic  disasters  when  the  exchange 
rate has been used as an anti-inflationary tool, generating serious exchange setbacks that 
only  brought  on  substantial,  costly  adjustments  to  the  real  sector  and  caused  long-lasting 
harm to GDP potential. 
However – and I must say this not to fail on the second principle I mentioned earlier – the 
exchange  rate  does  affect  inflation  and,  yes,  it  is  affected  by  monetary  policy  in  the  short 
term. This is a channel for transmitting monetary policy in open economies that mitigates the 
cost  in  terms  of  increased  unemployment  of  meeting  the  inflation  target.  Let  me  rephrase 
this.  Inflation  is  controlled  via  the  interest  rate:  if  the  outlook  is  inflation  rising,  then  the 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 1
 interest rate is raised. In a closed economy, interest rate hikes slow down demand, which 
means  that  they  also  slow  down  economic  activity  and  employment,  thereby  controlling 
inflationary pressures. This allows medium- and long-term policy to be upheld but obviously 
inflicts short-term costs. That is what stability is all about. In an open economy, on the other 
hand,  there  is  an  additional  channel  and  that  is  the  temporary  exchange  rate  appreciation 
that results from raising the interest rate and this diminishes the need to slow down economic 
activity. The effects of exchange rate fluctuations on activity are an important factor in our 
evaluation of the inflation outlook and in our monetary policy decisions. At the present time, 
interest rate differentials with developed economies are well below historic averages and the 
interest rate is still below normal levels. 
The  fourth  principle  I  want  to  discuss  is  that  stronger  countries  generally  have  stronger 
currencies.  In  other  words,  the  purchasing  power  of  their  wage  packets  is  comparatively 
greater  as  these  economies  outpace  the  rest  of  the  world.  We  could  discuss  many  more 
factors, such as ways to mitigate appreciation, what circumstantial factors spur it, etc. At the 
end  of  the  day,  what  we  need  is  to  transform  the  cyclical  strength  of  our  economy  into 
greater productivity which will increase our potential for growth. But it is important to note that 
this  principle  does  not  work  the  other  way  around.  In  the  past  we  have  been  obnubilated 
equating  a  strong  currency  with  a  strong  economy,  but  we  soon  had  to  realize  that  the 
strength  of  the  currency  was  not  due  to  a  fundamentally  sound  economy  but  rather  the 
outcome of policies inducing currency misalignment. 
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that I have not included a flexible exchange rate 
as  one  of  the  principles,  in  order  to  avoid  dogmatism.  But  in  our  country,  experience 
overwhelmingly  shows  that  exchange  rate  flexibility,  managed  pragmatically,  is  the  most 
adequate  system  for  us.  This  regime  some  times  involves  drastic  exchange  rate 
adjustments,  which  can  be  costly  to  many  firms.  The  alternative  is  a  more  rigid  exchange 
rate, where fluctuations in foreign currency supply are mirrored by fluctuations in domestic 
credit cost and availability, which can be very detrimental to the financial system’s soundness 
and to firms. More rigid systems simply put off real-sector adjustments, but in the meantime 
capital flows, credit availability for firms and inflation are all affected and eventually the value 
of the currency is eroded and the higher nominal exchange rate does not lead to a higher 
real exchange rate. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  floating  exchange  rate  allows  more  rapid  adjustments  and  the  next 
movements of the exchange rate are uncertain, preventing the market from betting on one 
direction. Thus we avoid repeating past mistakes and returning to the days where prospects 
of gradual appreciation artificially cheapened foreign borrowing and induced massive capital 
inflows. 
Another important factor in determining the exchange rate are pressures from fiscal policy. 
For  more  than  twenty  years,  Chile  has  benefited  from  a  responsible  fiscal  policy,  using  it 
counter-  cyclically  when 
the  situation  warranted.  Questions  of  budget  go  beyond 
macroeconomic considerations but the fact is that in the present circumstances our economy 
has  started  to  take  off  and  does  not  require  an  additional  boost  from  fiscal  policy.  The 
Finance Minister’s recent statement on the budget aims towards reducing the structural fiscal 
deficit and is fully coherent with assumptions in our latest Monetary Policy Report. 
Now,  from  the  standpoint  of  export  development,  several  aspects  are  worth  highlighting. 
Firstly, since the mid-1970s, Chile adopted an ambitious agenda of insertion into the world 
economy.  This  drive  has  accelerated  and  deepened  over  the  years.  Some  sectors  of  the 
economy  that  were  protected  by  international  trade  barriers  had  to  adjust.  Eliminating 
protection  meant  that  each  productive  activity  had  to  focus  on  its  own  comparative 
advantages and the export sector benefited from this structural change, as confirmed by the 
sustained  growth  of  exports  as  a  percentage  of  GDP.  In  the  1970s,  goods  and  services 
exports accounted for about 10% of GDP (measured in pesos of 2003) while in the past five 
years they averaged 38%. Moreover, this increase has been based mainly on the growth of 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2010
 non-copper shippings which went up from only 30% of total exports in the 1970s to 70% in 
the past five years. That is, more than 80% of Chile’s exporting boom since the 1970s is due 
to non-copper exports. 
Of  course,  this  growth  has  not  been  free  of  reversals  or  accelerations  due  to  external 
conditions and domestic circumstances. Among external factors we can point to the sharp 
global  downturn  caused  by  the  debt  crisis  and  the  2009  recession  and,  of  course,  the 
devastating earthquake and tsunami in February this year. Among domestic factors, we had 
the necessary sharp cutback to address high levels of foreign borrowing in the second half of 
the  1980s.  Nevertheless,  as  I  said,  the  long-term  performance  bears  witness  to  Chile’s 
vocation as an exporting economy. 
What has been the role of the exchange rate in this process? This question can be looked at 
from  two  different  angles.  First,  it  is  worth  noting  that  Chile’s  export  development  has 
continued  through  good  times  and  bad  times  in  foreign  accounts  and  with  whatever 
exchange regime was in force and, over the past four decades, almost all possible regimes 
have been tried. However, on average, the real exchange rate has been significantly higher 
than it was in the period of economic development based on substitution of imports. This is 
no accident; practical evidence and economic theory both strongly indicate that more open 
economies tend to have weaker currencies in real terms. 
Second,  irrespective  of  the  exchange  rate  regime,  foreign  currency  supply  and  demand 
conditions fluctuate over time so, as in many other areas, relative currency prices must also 
fluctuate.  Sometimes  changes  in  supply  and  demand  reflect  speculation  and  thus  are  not 
associated with long-term fundamentals. At other times, they may reflect confusion as to the 
future  evolution  of  monetary  policy.  In  these  situations,  the  Central  Bank  can  intervene  to 
affect the value of the currency and bring it back in line with fundamentals. The Central Bank 
does not consider exchange rate flotation as a dogma and constantly evaluates any possible 
over-reactions that could be harmful to the economy and call for an intervention. 
In any case, we must mention some costs of interventions. Apart from the cost in net worth, 
intervention requires withdrawing money used to purchase foreign exchange by placing debt. 
This debt has an impact on market interest rates, affecting firms’ financial costs and arbitrage 
conditions,  which  could  end  up  undoing  the  direct  effects.  At  the  same  time,  repeated  or 
frequent interventions lose effectiveness: it is essential for intervention to be an exceptional 
occurrence in order to transmit the relevant information to financial markets. Nevertheless, it 
is  a  valid  tool,  effective  in  changing  the  exchange  rate  and  strengthening  the  international 
liquidity position. The board of the Central Bank of Chile constantly evaluates the timing and 
the size of any intervention and in the past few weeks it has certainly been present in our 
discussions, based on weighing the benefits, costs and the present context. 
In the Central Bank of Chile we use a variety of methods for assessing the real exchange 
rate  level  with  regard  to  its  long-term  fundamentals  and  thus  we  have  an  ample  range  of 
estimates.  Our  aim  is  not  to  determine  which  is  the  equilibrium  –  that  is  the  task  of  the  
market  –,  but  rather  to  detect  any  anomalous  deviation.  These  discussions  led  us  to  the 
conclusion  in  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  that  the  real  exchange  rate  is  within  the 
adequate  range  of  levels,  albeit  in  the  lower  part  of  it,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  most 
recent appreciation. 
The real exchange rate is currently slightly below its average over the past twenty years but, 
with respect to said period, terms of trade, even excluding copper, are today much better. 
Similarly, our economy is enjoying a much easier net external position – that is, how much 
we owe and how much is owed to us by the rest of the world – than in the 1980s and 1990s 
and the real exchange rate has only appreciated slightly over what it was then. 
Since the floating exchange rate was adopted, there have been three occasions on which the 
board  considered  that  intervention  was  warranted.  In  general,  these  interventions  affected 
the  exchange  rate.  Other  episodes,  that  showed  how  difficult  it  is  to  apply  an  effective 
intervention, were experienced in the 1990s, when the real exchange rate was significantly 
BIS Review 135/2010 
 3
 more  appreciated  that  it  is  today,  despite  worse  terms  of  trade,  a  weaker  net  external 
position, massive purchases of foreign currency reserves and restrictions on capital inflows. 
In emerging and industrialized economies that have successfully weathered the crisis, export 
activity  today  faces  considerable  challenges.  The  financial  crisis  and  the  Great  Recession 
have  had  profound  consequences  on  the  developed  world  because  of  their  financial 
excesses. In this sense, they are facing a situation similar to what we lived through in the 
mid-1980s,  only  now  the  adjustments  they  make  locally  have  global  implications.  Current 
account deficits in the advanced world will no longer be what they were five years ago, and 
this implies also adjustments in the economies that had strong current account surpluses. All 
this is resulting in a global reorganization of world currencies. However, not all countries are 
contributing  to  this  exchange  reorganization  and  this  generates  tension  in  the  workings  of 
international currency markets. I do not wish to enlarge on this point but what is happening in 
Chile  is  happening  in  many  regions  of  the  world  irrespective  of  the  macroeconomic  policy 
measures they have adopted. 
Four factors allow us to be optimistic about how Chile, as an exporting country, will be able to 
face these challenges successfully. In the first place, we have learned from our past and we 
have  substantially  reduced  the  harmful  effects  of  copper  price  swings  on  the  rest  of 
productive activities. The danger of exacerbating commodity cycles is widely recognized so 
stabilizing macroeconomic policies are brought to bear. Secondly, a floating exchange rate 
discourages  speculation  and  massive  capital  inflows;  in  fact,  in  Chile  today  there  is  no 
evidence  of  short-term  capital  inflows  for  this  motive.  Thirdly,  exchange  rate  flexibility 
promotes  the  development  of  a  hedging  market  (a  mechanism  practically  unknown  when 
there was a band-based exchange rate regime) and this is now a developing market. Access 
to this market is to be encouraged, especially for small firms, and any steps in this direction 
on  the  part  of  authorities  are  welcome.  Fourthly,  our  financial  system  is  solvent  and  well 
regulated, which limits the possibility of appreciation bubbles being created by the prospect 
of inexpensive financing from abroad and abundant credit. 
We will continue to face important adjustments in the global economy, with exchange rate 
tensions  in  all  the  economies  of  the  world  because  rigidity  among  the  most  important 
currencies persists. Recovery of the global economy will be gradual and will vary greatly from 
country to country. This situation presents a national task, which we must each take on board 
from  our  own  perspective.  In  the  Central  Bank  we  are  paying  particular  attention  to  the 
evolution  of  the  exchange  rate  because  we  recognize  that  there  has  been  rapid  and 
substantial  appreciation  and  we  must  be  watchful  that  this  does  not  hinder  the  vigorous 
growth of our economy. That growth will be long-lasting provided that we ensure stability. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2010
