Stanley Fischer: Israel’s economy 
Summary of the address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the 
Israel Business Conference, Tel Aviv, 13 December 2010. 
 Israel’s economy is doing well, but there are still many long-term goals that need to be dealt 
with.  Each  one  of  them  needs  to  be  approached  differently,  and  requires  hard  work  and 
difficult decisions. I will outline what I consider to be the major challenges confronting us in 
the next decade. 
First, we must ask ourselves about the strategy that will lead us towards long-term growth. It 
is  clear  that  Israel’s  economy,  like  every  open  economy,  must  continue  to  be  based  on 
exports as the engine of growth and to be open to competition from other economies. 
The results of international tests showing a persistent decline in the relative achievements of 
Israeli students indicate that we must continue to promote the education system and to solve 
the problems it faces in all segments and across the entire age structure. 
The problem of education is directly connected with the problem of poverty, which in Israel is 
concentrated in two sectors in the population – the ultra-orthodox, and the Arab sector. Only 
30 percent of ultra-orthodox men participate in the work force, with the inevitable result that a 
large part of that population is below the poverty line. In the Arab sector the main problem is 
the low level of employment of women, as well as discrimination, and the need to improve 
the education system. If we do not deal with these problems we will be unable to maintain 
our standard of living – that of the advanced economies. 
Israel also suffers from a lack of infrastructures, and related to that, from bureaucracy, slow 
decision  making,  and  a  low  level  of  public-sector  efficiency.  Our  geopolitical  situation  is 
clearly  another  factor;  if  that  problem  would  be  solved,  the  standard  of  living  in  the  whole 
region, and in Israel too, would improve significantly. 
The problems I have enumerated till now are long-term ones. I will turn now to some short-
term  macroeconomic  issues  that  come  within  the  scope  of  the  responsibility  of  the  central 
bank.  The  main  goal  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  under  the  Bank  of  Israel  Law  passed  by  the 
Knesset this year, is the preservation of price stability, i.e., to keep inflation down to between 
1 percent and 3 percent a year. In addition, the Bank’s objectives are to work towards the 
achievement  of  the  other  goals  of  the  government’s  economic  policy,  in  particular  growth, 
employment and the narrowing of social gaps, and to maintain the stability of the financial 
system and its proper functioning.  
Recently inflation has been within the target range, and will probably remain within it until the 
end  of  this  year.  Inflation  expectations  for  next  year,  however,  are  relatively  high.  As  the 
expectations are around the upper limit of the target inflation range, this does not present a 
serious problem at this stage, but it is our task to ensure that inflation should not exceed the 
upper limit of the target. To achieve that requires a slightly tighter monetary policy. 
Let  us  turn  now  to  the  second  goal,  employment.  The  rate  of  unemployment,  which 
increased during the crisis and declined during the recovery almost to its pre-crisis level, has 
recently risen slightly. This, in effect, is good news, as the unemployment rate has increased 
because of an increase in the rate of participation in the labor force, and not because of a 
drop in the number of employed persons. If the rate of participation had not risen, the rate of 
unemployment would today be about 5.5 percent. 
Our  function  is  also  to  promote  economic  growth,  and  we  therefore  also  keep  an  eye  on 
developments  in  the  exchange  rate.  The  latest  figures  show  that  exports  remained  steady 
while imports declined, so that we expect the current account surplus to increase despite the 
relatively strong shekel exchange rate. Nonetheless, we must continue to support exports, 
BIS Review 172/2010 
 1
and  we  will  therefore  continue  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  currency  market,  and  like  every 
other country, we must be prepared for every possible economic scenario. 
With regard to financial stability, we are currently mainly concerned over developments in the 
housing market. The Ministry of Finance reports that prices of new houses have fallen, while 
the  Central  Bureau  of  Statistics  (CBS)  reports  that  overall  housing  prices  continue  to 
increase. Until the trends in the real estate market become clearer, the Bank of Israel must 
ensure that no bubble in housing prices develops that would harm financial stability. The best 
solution is to boost the supply of houses and thus lower their prices, and together with the 
Ministry  of  Finance  we  are  examining  ways  of  doing  that.  Meanwhile,  as  I  said,  we  must 
ensure that financial stability is maintained. 
Another  issue  I  would  like  to  address  is  that  of  the  medium  term.  The  question  is  asked 
whether the recent discoveries of natural gas will have a major impact on Israel’s economy. It 
is  too  soon  to  answer.  We  have  to  continue  encouraging  the  various  investors  to  keep 
searching  for  gas,  and  must  await  results.  The  immediate  issue  here  is  that  of  royalties, 
reviewed  by  the  Sheshinski  Committee.  I  support  the  Committee’s  approach,  the  aim  of 
which is to find a way of dividing the gas profits between the entrepreneurs who search for 
and  find  the  gas  and  Israel’s  citizens.  In  this  context  I  refer  you  to  what  I  said  when  the 
Committee’s  recommendations  were  published  and  I  stand  behind  the  views  I  expressed 
then. 
The gas discoveries raise a related issue, known as the Dutch disease. I have stated in the 
past  that  in my  opinion  the  right  way  to  deal  with  the  problem  is  the  Norwegian  model,  in 
which the royalties and the relevant government’s tax revenues are invested in a sovereign 
fund. The fund invests its income abroad, and the government’s income from this investment 
is more stable over time, and the fund moderates the short-term effect of the gas income on 
the exchange rate, an effect that could prove disastrous for the tradable goods industries, as 
happened in the Netherlands and other countries. 
I would now like to introduce the next speaker. Dr Jihad Al-Wazir, Governor and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  the  Palestine  Monetary  Authority  (PMA),  was  born  in  1963.  Dr  Al-Wazir 
obtained  his  Ph.D.  in  Business  Administration from  Loughborough  University  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  and  in  the  past  served  as  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance  and  Acting  Minister  of 
Finance  in  the  Palestinian  Authority.  Relations  between  the  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  PMA 
under  Dr  Al-Wazir’s  leadership  are  marked  by  effective  and  productive  cooperation,  and  I 
hope that they will continue to be so. 
2 
 BIS Review 172/2010
