Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula: Stakeholder’s workshop on the draft Bank of 
Zambia Act 
Opening remarks by Dr Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at 
the Stakeholder’s Workshop on the Draft Bank of Zambia Act, Lusaka, 21 September 2010.  
 Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of Stakeholder Institutions;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Directors and Staff of the Bank of Zambia;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  and  indeed  on  my  own  behalf,  I  welcome  you  to  this 
workshop which is entitled “the Stakeholder’s Workshop on the Draft Bank of Zambia Act”.  
As  the  name  rightly  suggests,  it  is  a  workshop  facilitating  the  meeting  of  minds  of  key 
stakeholders  affected  by  the  Bank  of  Zambia  Act.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  those 
administering  the  Act,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  representatives  and  on  the  other  hand  those 
whose operations stand to be affected by the administration of the Act, the Financial Service 
Providers.  We  have  also  cast  the  net  wide  to  include  other  key  stakeholders  such  as 
Government  ministries,  other  regulatory  entities  and  professional  bodies  representing 
lawyers, accountants and economists.  
The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  formulating  and  implementing 
monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability  and  promote 
financial system stability in the Republic of Zambia. To give you a brief background on the 
central bank legislation, since its inception in 1964 the Bank has operated under 3 different 
Bank of Zambia Acts; the BoZ Act of 1965, the BoZ Act of 1985 and the current BoZ Act 
of 1996. Each of these Acts has responded to the era of its time.  
For  example,  the  Acts  of  1965  and  1985  were  characterised  by  high  Government 
involvement  in  the  operations  of  the  Bank.  The  Bank  administered  exchange  control 
regulations. It also determined and regulated the frequency and rates of fees, commissions 
and interest rates etc charged by financial institutions.  
The economic reforms that swept the country in the 1990’s saw the ushering in of the current 
BoZ  Act  of  1996  which  supported  the  Government’s  free  market  policies.  The  Bank’s 
mandate was made clearer, exchange control regulations were suspended and the Bank’s 
regulation  of  interest  rates  etc  was  removed.  There  was  also  improved  transparency  and 
accountability.  
Since the enactment of the BoZ Act of 1996 two issues have precipitated the need to have 
the Act reviewed again;  
1. 
In  2002,  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  conducted  a  joint  assessment  of  Zambia’s 
financial  sector  under  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP).  The 
result of this assessment raised awareness of various weaknesses in our financial 
system  which  needed  to  be  addressed.  For  this  purposes,  the  Government 
approved  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  in 
2004  to  address  these  weaknesses  and  implement  recommendations.  One  of  the 
recommendations  adopted  was  the  need  to  modernise  and  harmonise  financial 
sector legislation. This included the current Bank of Zambia Act.  
Secondly  under  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC),  the  SADC 
Committee for Central Bank Governors (CCBG) was tasked to develop harmonised 
2. 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 1
   Encouraged by these two events, the Bank of Zambia embarked on a process of reforming 
and modernising its legislation. In doing so we relied heavily on the provisions of the Model 
Law but were mindful that these had to relate to our local circumstances.  
This exercise has resulted in a “home grown” draft Bank of Zambia Act which is the subject 
of  this  workshop.  We  are  pleased  to  report  that  the  draft  has  incorporated  principles  of 
international  best  practice.  Some  of  the  salient  features  of  the  Act,  as  can  be  read  in  the 
Consultative Paper prepared for this workshop are: 
 
provisions to strengthen the legal basis, ownership and structure of Bank of Zambia 
as a modern central bank, as well as its primary objective;  
provisions relating to adequate power and independence;  
provisions  relating  to  all  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  the  Bank  and 
Government structures;  
institutional  arrangements  of  the  Bank  including  the  appointment  of  governors, 
directors  and  auditors,  internal  budgets,  reporting  requirements,  preservation  of 
confidentiality and handling of possible offences;  
adequate mechanisms for good governance and security of tenure for Governors;  
measures to better manage and application of monetary policies, including the role 
of  lender-of-last-resort,  interest  rate  policies,  exchange  rate  policies  and  Bank  of 
Zambia’s involvement in money and foreign exchange markets;  
creation of a Monetary Policy Committee; and  
accountability to Government, Parliament and the Public.  
 
 
By tabling this draft Act before you the Stakeholders, the Bank of Zambia wants to maximise 
its  consultative  process  by  taking  into  account  your  views  on  this  layman’s  draft.  We 
encourage  constructive  debate  and  assure  you  that  your  views  will  be  taken  into  account 
before  the  draft  is  transmitted  to  our  parent  ministry,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  National 
Planning. The Ministry is responsible for initiating the legislative process that shall see this 
layman’s draft transformed into a Bill and tabled before Parliament for debate.  
Therefore, I call upon all participants to openly debate this draft Act and share opinions which 
the Bank can benefit from in its effort to develop a comprehensive law.  
With these words, I declare this Stakeholders Workshop open and wish you a fruitful debate.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2010
