Elizabeth A Duke: Foreclosure documentation issues 
Testimony  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Financial Services Subcommittee on Housing and Community 
Opportunity, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 18 November 2010. 
 Chairwoman  Waters,  Ranking  Member  Capito  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  I  am 
pleased  to  appear  today  to  discuss  issues  related  to  mortgage  loan  servicing  and  the 
mishandling of documentation in foreclosure proceedings. The Federal Reserve is focused 
on a range of issues related to mortgage lending, such as loan underwriting and origination 
practices, loan servicing, loan modification, neighborhood stabilization and foreclosure. We 
take  all  of these  matters  seriously  and  are  quite  concerned  about  reported  irregularities  in 
foreclosure practices.  
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Federal Reserve are conducting 
an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations. The interagency 
examination and review focuses on foreclosure practices generally, but with an emphasis on 
the  breakdowns  that  led  to  inaccurate  affidavits  and  other  questionable  legal  documents 
being used in the foreclosure process. The regulators expect the initial on-site portion of our 
work to be completed this year and currently plan to publish a summary overview of industry-
wide practices in early 2011. At that time we will have more information about the extent and 
significance of these very troubling practices, as well as what must be done to prevent them 
from occurring in the future.  
Losing  a  home  is  a  tragic  event  for  families  and  the  communities  in  which  they  live.  It  is 
imperative  that  mortgage  lenders  and  servicers  provide  borrowers  every  opportunity  to 
modify the loan and retain their homes or, if that is not possible and foreclosure becomes 
necessary, that they give borrowers all the protection afforded by following due process as 
required by law. The issues raised as foreclosure improprieties came to light have cast a pall 
of uncertainty across the entire housing market. The Federal Reserve is actively working to 
accurately  understand  and  size  the  threat  to  determine  the  appropriate  response.  Any 
response must ensure that actions taken with respect to borrowers and their homes are valid 
and  in  accordance  with  the  law;  at  the  same  time,  those  actions  should  help  remove 
uncertainty and restore smooth functioning to housing and financial markets. Although it is 
difficult  to  determine  the  incremental  effect  of  further  procedural  delays  in  foreclosures, 
delays and uncertainty resulting from flaws in the foreclosure process have the potential to 
delay  recovery  in  housing  markets  and  to  undermine  confidence  in  our  financial  and  legal 
systems.  
In my testimony I will discuss the potential risks to consumers, financial institutions, housing 
markets, and the broader economy regarding failures to follow proper procedures. I will cover 
in  more  detail  our  interagency  reviews  of  servicer  performance  and  potential  remedies  if 
procedures are not being followed. And I will return to the important role of loan modifications 
in reducing the number of foreclosures to be processed.  
Risks to consumers 
Consumers  and  consumer  counselors  have  been  quite  vocal  in  their  frustration  over 
unreturned phone calls, lost documents and changing decision criteria that have plagued the 
loan modification process. In light of such experiences, evidence of improper procedures in 
foreclosure  cases  causes  consumers,  at  a  minimum,  to  further  mistrust  the  loan  servicing 
process. At worst, it can result in improper loss of a home or premature eviction from that 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 1
home.  For  individual  borrowers,  uncertainty  about  the  prospect  or  timing  of  foreclosure 
makes everyday decisions difficult. Borrowers who are uncertain about their ability to keep 
their homes have little incentive to invest in or maintain those homes, resulting in damage to 
neighborhoods and lowering the value of surrounding properties.  
And, with wide-spread stories of foreclosure improprieties, families in the process of buying a 
home or considering the purchase of a home have become concerned about the validity of 
their titles. Others who have purchased homes in foreclosure have had their closings delayed 
while documents are reviewed. Consumers have already fallen victim to foreclosure rescue 
scams as charlatans posing as mortgage counselors claimed to be able to obtain mortgage 
modifications for a fee. In light of new stories of mortgage abuse, new incarnations of those 
scams are sure to proliferate.  
including 
foreclosure  documentation  problems, 
Risks to financial institutions and the financial system 
Financial institutions face a number of risks if inadequate controls result in faulty foreclosure 
documents  or  failure  to  follow  legal  procedures.  Recent  events  have  shown  that  even  the 
possibility  of  problems  can  lead  to  costly  delays  and  reviews.  In  cases  where  actual 
problems are found, regulators will require lenders and servicers to correct not only the faulty 
documents  themselves  but  the  faulty  systems  that  allowed  them  to  occur.  Institutions  with 
widespread problems may be subject to fines and fees in addition to the costs associated 
with correcting the errors.  
Cost  associated  with 
“robo-signing” 
(discussed  in  more  detail  later),  are  not  the  only  potential  liabilities  facing  financial 
institutions. Investors in mortgage-backed securities and purchasers of unsecuritized “whole 
loans” have begun to explore and in some cases assert contractual and securities law claims 
against the parties that originated the loans, sold the loans, underwrote securities offerings, 
or had other roles in the process. The essence of these claims is that the mortgages in the 
securitization pools or that had been sold as unsecuritized whole loans did not conform to the 
representations made about their quality – specifically, that the loan applications contained 
misrepresentations  or  the  underwriting  was  not  in  conformance  with  stated  underwriting 
guidelines.  
With  respect  to  the  contract  claims,  this  potential  liability  is  usually  called  “put  back”  risk, 
because many of the relevant agreements permit the buyer of the loans to put the loans back 
to the seller (or other party that makes representations). That is, the buyers can demand that 
the seller repurchase the loans at par if defects are found in the loan underwriting contrary to 
representations  and  warranties  in  the  pooling  and  servicing  agreement  that  created  the 
securitization trust or the whole loan mortgage purchasing agreement. At the time of the put-
back, the loan has usually gone into default, sparking a review of the original loan application 
file. The defaulted loan, given current market conditions, is typically worth substantially less 
than  par,  thus  the  put-back  transfers  any  potential  loss  from  the  buyer  back  to  the  seller. 
Although  the  representations  and  warranties  in  the  various  agreements  vary  considerably, 
they frequently require that the defect materially and adversely affect the value of the loan 
before put-back rights can be exercised.  
There  are  also  pending  claims  by  some  that  underwriters  and  sponsors  of  securitizations 
failed to comply with the Federal securities laws covering offering documents and registration 
statements.  These  suits  specifically  reference  descriptions  of  the  risks  to  investors,  the 
quality  of  assets  in  the  securitization,  the  order  in  which  investors  would  be  paid  or  other 
factors.  Most  of  these  lawsuits  are  in  the  early  stages,  and  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the 
probability that investors will be able to shift a substantial portion of the losses on defaulted 
mortgages, specifically, or mortgage-backed securities back to the parties that sold the loans 
or underwrote the offerings.  
2 
 BIS Review 154/2010
Nevertheless,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  conducting  a  detailed  evaluation  of  put-back 
risk to financial institutions. Losses due to put-backs are not new; buyers, insurers of loans 
(private mortgage insurers), and guarantors of securitizations (GSEs) of defaulted mortgages 
have been seeking to put back defective loans since well before the mortgage crisis began. 
This practice has accelerated during the current mortgage crisis. Financial institutions have 
been resolving these claims throughout the crisis. However, just as holders and guarantors 
of mortgages and mortgage-backed securities are pressing their claims, financial institutions 
are vigorously defending against many of the claims that seek to impose substantial liability 
on  them.  We  are  gathering  information  to  ensure  that  the  institutions  we  supervise  have 
adequately assessed these risks and have accounted for them properly.  
that  may 
Risk to mortgage market and housing 
In addition to the potential harm to consumers, financial institutions and the financial system, 
the  Federal  Reserve  is  evaluating  the  potential  macroeconomic  effects  of  foreclosure 
documentation problems to the mortgage and housing markets. The number of foreclosures 
initiated  on  residential  properties  has  soared  from  about  1  million  in  2006,  the  year  that 
house prices peaked, to 2.8 million last year. Over the first half of this year, we have seen a 
further 1.2 million foreclosure filings, and an additional 2.4 million homes were somewhere in 
the foreclosure pipeline at the end of June. All told, we expect about 2.25 million foreclosure 
filings this year and again next year, and about 2 million more in 2012. While our outlook is 
for filings to decline in coming years, they will remain extremely high by historical standards. 
Currently, almost 5 million mortgage loans are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure.  
The  Federal  Reserve  believes  that  the  best  way  to  assist  struggling  borrowers  is  with  a 
mortgage  modification  that  allows  borrowers  to  retain  their  homes  with  an  affordable 
mortgage payment. Foreclosures are costly to all parties and, more broadly, to our economy. 
Lenders and investors incur financial losses arising from the litigation expenses associated 
with  the  foreclosure  process  and  the  loss  on  the  defaulted  mortgage  when  the  foreclosed 
property  sells  at  a  “fire  sale”  price  for  substantially  less  than  the  loan  balance.  Local 
governments  must  contend  with  lower  property  tax  revenue  and  the  ramifications  of 
neglected  properties 
threaten  public  safety.  Additionally,  neighbors  and 
neighborhoods suffer potential spillover effects from foreclosure sales because foreclosures 
may  reduce  the  attractiveness  of  the  neighborhood  or  may  signal  to  potential  buyers  a 
forthcoming decline in neighborhood quality.  
Problems  with  foreclosure  documentation  procedure  could  lead  to  further  delays  in  an 
already  lengthy  foreclosure  process.  Recent  estimates  suggest  that  the  average  time  to 
foreclosure  in  the  United  States  has  already  increased  from  251  days  in  January  2008  to 
more  than  440  days  in  2010.  While  a  mortgage  modification  is  always  preferable  to 
foreclosure, when a sustainable loan modification is not possible, long and uncertain delays 
in the foreclosure process can be harmful to neighborhoods and the housing market more 
generally. Vacant properties may fall into disrepair or be vandalized. Even when borrowers 
continue to live in their homes, those unable to make their mortgage payments may not have 
the  resources  or  the  incentive  to  adequately  maintain  their  properties.  In  the  end,  an 
overhang of homes awaiting foreclosure is unhealthy for the housing market and can delay 
its recovery as well as that of the broader economy.  
In addition, the lack of certainty and price discovery created by the glut of foreclosures has 
further  weakened  property  values  and  has  contributed  to  a  slowing  in  the  recovery  of  the 
housing market more generally. The most important action policymakers can take to address 
the  rising  foreclosures and  the  lack  of  mortgage  activity  is  to  craft  policies  that  encourage 
market  participants  to  act  in  a  particular  manner  that  will  allow  the  economy  to  achieve  a 
sustainable recovery. Over the course of the past two years, the Federal Reserve has taken 
forceful action in response to the financial crisis to help improve financial market conditions 
and  to  promote  the  flow  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  More  specifically,  our 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 3
purchases of long-term mortgage-backed securities, government agency debt, and Treasury 
securities  served  to  reduce  mortgage  rates  which  in  turn  allowed  mortgage  holders  to 
refinance into lower payments and made home loans more affordable for new purchasers.  
Foreclosure process 
Before I turn to specific examination procedures underway, it might be helpful to review the 
foreclosure  process  and  the  role  of  investors  and  loan  servicers.  Foreclosure  is  a  legal 
process initiated to terminate a borrower’s interest in a property and is permitted only when 
the borrower has defaulted on the debt obligation for a specified period. To the extent a loan 
is secured by the property, the process allows the lender to sell the property and apply the 
proceeds  in  full  or  partial  satisfaction  of  the  borrower’s  unpaid  debt.  Foreclosure 
requirements  are  generally  established  by  state  law,  and  each  state  has  its  own  statutes, 
rules, and court decisions pertaining to foreclosures. For this reason, a financial institution 
needs to understand the foreclosure procedures and documentation practices for each state 
in which it operates.  
Some  23  states,  known  as  judicial  foreclosure  states,  require  foreclosures  to  be  reviewed 
and  approved  by  a  court  in  advance.  Nonjudicial  foreclosure  states  have  varying  waiting 
periods  and  documentation,  filing,  and  notice  requirements  after  a  default  occurs  before  a 
foreclosure  sale  may  take  place.  In  judicial  foreclosure  states,  homeowners  can  challenge 
the foreclosure either by appearing in and defending the action already brought by the lender 
or by filing for bankruptcy. In nonjudicial foreclosure states, to challenge the foreclosure, the 
homeowner must take the initiative to file suit in state court to enjoin the foreclosure or file for 
bankruptcy. Almost half of all of the states have statutes that allow the borrower to cure a 
default by paying any amount already due, plus any allowable costs and fees, prior to the 
foreclosure sale without having to pay off the entire principal amount of the mortgage loan.  
Mortgage  servicers  are  a  critical  link  between  borrowers  and  mortgage  holders  as  they 
maintain  the  official  accounting  of  all  amounts  paid  and  owed  by  borrowers.  In  addition, 
servicers  handle  loan  default  management,  including  negotiating  repayment  of  loss 
mitigation plans with borrowers. In the event that loan modification efforts are not successful, 
the  servicer  would  initiate  foreclosure,  often  as  the  agent  for  third  parties,  such  as 
securitization  trusts.  In  this  regard,  servicers  have  responsibilities  to  investors  holding 
residential  mortgage-backed  securities.  These  securities  are  held  by  a  broad  range  of 
investors  including  state  pension  funds  and  retirement  systems.  Servicers  also  have 
responsibilities  to  borrowers  to  maintain  accurate  and  complete  records  of  payments 
received,  amounts  advanced,  notifications  made 
to  borrowers,  and  any  mortgage 
modification discussions.  
Foreclosure  documentation  typically  requires  an  assertion  that  the  agent  bringing  forth  the 
action  has  the  legal  right  to  foreclose  and  that  the  loan  is  in  default.  The  document  filing 
would contain details of the transaction and the amounts owed. Problems associated with so-
called robo-signing of documents include documents signed by individuals who do not have 
personal knowledge of the facts being asserted, documents signed by individuals who are 
not  properly  authorized  to  make  such  claims  or  assertions,  notarized  signatures  on 
documents that were not executed in the presence of a notary or that have other violations of 
proper notary procedures, and documents that contain inaccurate amounts, dates, or other 
facts.  Lenders  and  servicers  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  person  who  signs  a 
document is duly authorized and has appropriate knowledge obtained from a review of the 
case. In addition, servicers and lenders are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of records 
and the facts recited in the documents.  
State law and local real estate recording requirements govern recordation of real estate and 
mortgage title transfers. Given the multiple transfers of mortgage loans over time, concerns 
have  been  raised  about  investors’  or  servicers’  right  to  foreclose.  Although  state-by-state 
practices vary considerably, generally the note holder has the right to initiate foreclosure if an 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2010
original  note  can  be  produced  and  the  current  holder’s  ownership  is  able  to  be  verified  in 
some  fashion.  If  there  is  no  controversy  concerning  ownership  of  the  note,  but  rather  an 
inability to locate original documents, processes usually exist that allow for a foreclosure to 
proceed, albeit at some cost and delay. If there is some question of ownership, the investor 
or  servicer  may  be  required  to  produce  evidence  of  ownership  before  a  foreclosure  can 
proceed.  
Matters regarding real estate titles and foreclosures are generally governed by state law, and 
the 50 state attorneys general have undertaken a joint review of lenders and servicers and 
the reported problems in foreclosures. In addition, numerous federal agencies have launched 
investigations, including examinations in process by the federal financial regulators.  
Interagency examinations 
The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies, 
approximately 800 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System 
(state  member  banks),  and  certain  other  financial  institutions  and  activities.  We  work  with 
other  federal  and  state  supervisory  authorities  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
banking industry, foster the stability of the financial system, and provide for fair and equitable 
treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. As the consolidated supervisor of bank 
holding  companies,  including  financial  holding  companies,  the  Federal  Reserve  conducts 
inspections of those institutions. The Federal Reserve is involved in both regulation, which 
involves  establishing  the  rules  within  which  banking  organizations  must  operate,  and 
supervision,  which  entails  ensuring  that  banking  organizations  abide  by  those  rules  and 
remain, overall, in safe and sound condition.  
As  I  indicated  at  the  beginning  of  my  statement,  the  OCC,  the  OTS,  the  FDIC,  and  the 
Federal Reserve are in the process of conducting interagency targeted examinations of the 
foreclosure  policies  and  practices  of  the  financial  institutions  that  control  a  majority  of 
outstanding  mortgage  loans.  The  agencies  expect  to  conclude  the  on-site  portion  of  our 
examination  process  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  plan  to  review  the  findings  immediately 
thereafter. We want to ensure that our analysis is comprehensive and provides a basis for 
development of remedial actions. Currently, the banking agencies plan to publicly release a 
summary report highlighting the industry-wide findings in early 2011.  
In  our  examinations,  the  agencies  are  reviewing  firms’  policies,  procedures,  and  internal 
controls related to foreclosure practices and are sampling loan files to test the effectiveness 
of  those  policies,  procedures  and  internal  controls.  We  are  prepared  to  take  supervisory 
action where necessary and appropriate to hold institutions accountable for poor practices.  
Specifically,  we  are  examining  the  firms’  internal  governance  processes  related  to: 
(1) foreclosure policies and procedures; (2) organizational structure, approval process, and 
staffing levels; (3) vendor management of outside law firms; (4) quality control processes and 
internal audit; and (5) foreclosure workflow process and loan documentation procedures. We 
have  also  solicited  information  from  consumer  organizations  to  help  us  better  direct  our 
actions  to  detect  problems  at  specific  servicers  and  to  determine  whether  systematic 
weaknesses are leading to improper foreclosures.  
For  additional  insights  into  foreclosure  processes,  we  have  sent  a  self-assessment 
questionnaire  to  other  Federal  Reserve-regulated  institutions  that  have  mortgage  servicing 
activity  but  were  not  part  of  the  interagency  horizontal  examination  effort.  The  staff  will 
analyze  the  responses  from  the  firms  and  determine  what  follow-up  work  is  required  to 
validate the information they provide.  
The Federal Reserve requires supervised institutions to have sufficient corporate governance 
and  maintain  adequate  risk-management  programs  to  ensure  the  institution’s  safety  and 
soundness, as well to comply with consumer protection laws and regulations. Institutions with 
identified  weaknesses  will  be  directed  to  take  remedial  actions.  Any  remedial  action 
BIS Review 154/2010 
 5
mandated  by  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  consistent  with  the  goals  and  objectives  of  the 
Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  2010  to  promote  best 
practices and financial stability.  
Supporting loan modifications 
Notwithstanding the right of lenders to pursue foreclosure, the Federal Reserve encourages 
mortgage servicers to first pursue a sustainable loan modification for the borrower. To ensure 
that modification requests are handled appropriately, we have leveraged the information from 
our  consumer  complaint  investigation  process.  As  a  result  of  complaints  received  from 
consumers and members of the Congress on behalf of their constituents, in October 2009 
the Federal Reserve began a review of the loan modification practices of loan servicers for 
which  we  have  supervisory  responsibility.  These  reviews  include  on-site  examinations  that 
began in the second quarter of this year and are still underway.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  emphasized  the  importance  of  using  loan  modifications  as  a 
means  to  avoid  unnecessary  foreclosures  and  continues  to  encourage  effective  loan 
modifications.  Prudent  modifications  that  are  consistent  with  safe  and  sound  lending 
practices  are  generally  in  the  long-term  best  interest  of  both  financial  institutions  and 
borrowers. We have sponsored numerous modification fairs and events to bring lenders and 
borrowers  face-to-face  to  explore  alternatives  to  foreclosure.  In  addition  to  promoting  loan 
modifications, the Federal Reserve has actively supported efforts to help communities that 
have  been  hard  hit  by  vacancies  and  foreclosures.  Federal  Reserve  staff  members  in  our 
regulation  divisions  are 
research,  community  development,  and  supervision  and 
collaborating 
the 
local 
level  and  promote 
neighborhood stabilization initiatives. Further, Federal Reserve staff members are conducting 
empirical research on mortgage- and foreclosure-related topics, and they are reaching out to 
industry and consumer experts as well.  
A key initiative developed under the leadership of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago has 
been the Mortgage Outreach and Research Effort (MORE). MORE involves all 12 Federal 
Reserve  Banks  and  the  Board  of  Governors  in  a  collaboration  that  pools  resources  and 
combines expertise to inform and engage policymakers, community organizations, financial 
institutions,  and  the  public  at  large.  In  September  2010,  MORE  sponsored  a  discussion 
among  experts  and  policymakers  on  effective  strategies  for  stabilizing  neighborhoods 
weakened by real estate owned by financial institutions and vacant properties. This meeting 
also included a publication developed by the Board and the Boston and Cleveland Federal 
Reserve banks that featured analysis and promising practices from leading practitioners and 
applied researchers.1 Another important resource published this year by MORE summarizes 
key actions that the Federal Reserve has taken to address the foreclosure crisis.2  
In addition to encouraging loan modifications by other holders of mortgage loans, the Federal 
Reserve has worked with servicers of mortgages it acquired in actions taken to stabilize the 
financial system. On January 30, 2009, the Board of Governors adopted a policy requiring 
the  pursuit  of  mortgage  modifications  prior  to  initiating  foreclosure  on  loans  held  in  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
foreclosure  prevention  at 
to  encourage 
                                                 
1   Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, and others (2010), REO Vacant Properties: Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization. 
2   Federal Reserve System, Mortgage Outreach and Research Efforts (MORE) Initiative (2010), Addressing the 
Impact  of  the  Foreclosure  Crisis:  Federal  Reserve  Mortgage  Outreach  and  Research  Efforts  (Chicago: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago). 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2010
Conclusion 
In  summary,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  actively  working  to  mitigate  the  harm  to 
consumers and markets caused by problems in mortgage loan origination, securitization, and 
loan  foreclosures.  We  are  participating  in  interagency  examinations  of  the  foreclosure 
processes  and  controls  in  the  financial  institutions  that  control  the  majority  of  the  nation’s 
mortgages.  We  are  conducting  examinations  of  lenders’  and  servicers’  loan  modification 
efforts. In response to the fallout from the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has helped 
stabilize the mortgage market and improve financial conditions more broadly, thus promoting 
economic  recovery.  As  the  foreclosure  crisis  has  intensified,  Federal  Reserve  staff  in  our 
research,  community  development,  and  supervision  and  regulation  divisions  have  actively 
collaborated to support foreclosure prevention at the local level and promote neighborhood 
stabilization  initiatives.  These  efforts  reflect  a  continuation  of  actions  undertaken  by  the 
Federal Reserve System since the start of the financial crisis. We remain committed to the 
goal of stabilized financial markets that promote economic recovery.  
Thank  you  for  holding  this  important  hearing  today,  and  I  would  be  happy  to  answer  any 
questions that you may have.  
BIS Review 154/2010 
 7
