Bank of Japan’s June report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 14 June 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
The  improvement  in  Japan’s  economy  is  becoming  distinct.  Recovery  has  been  observed  in  some
areas of private demand, with business fixed investment continuing to increase.
With regard to exogenous demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to follow an
upward trend due to steady developments in overseas economies, and public investment is picking up
reflecting the progress in the implementation of the supplementary budget for fiscal 1999. As regards
domestic private demand, housing investment is on a moderate declining trend,  and the  recovery  in
private consumption continues to be weak through lack of notable improvements in employment and
income conditions. Meanwhile, business fixed investment is increasing.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand,  industrial  production  is  increasing,  and  corporate
profits and sentiment continue to improve. Firms as a whole still strongly feel that they have excess
capacity  and  employees,  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.
Nevertheless,  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as  increasing  the  amount  of  fixed
investment, has been increasing, especially in high-growth sectors. Regarding employment conditions,
although the decrease in the number of employees and in wages is slowing, efforts by firms to reduce
personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  likely  to  increase  for  some  time.  This,  along  with  the
favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s monetary easing, is expected to continue
underpinning the economy. Moreover, net exports are likely to follow an upward trend reflecting the
recovery  of  overseas  economies,  and  it  is  also  highly  probable  that  business  fixed  investment  will
increase  gradually  with  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  sentiment.  However,  housing
investment is expected to decline for the time being. While there seems to be no substantial change in
firms’ stance to reduce personnel expenses, an improvement in households’ income conditions, which
should  support  private  consumption,  is  likely  to  be  moderate  at  the  most.  In  addition,  since  firms’
prospects  for  sales  remain  modest,  careful  monitoring  is  still  required  to  determine  whether  the
recovery in business fixed investment is sustainable and whether it is likely to spread to a wider range
of industries.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  decreasing  slightly,  reflecting  a  temporary  decline  in
international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding
the fall in prices of electric machinery, are unchanged mainly due to the rise in prices of petroleum and
chemical  products  reflecting  the  increase  in  crude  oil  prices  to  date.  Meanwhile,  consumer  prices
continue to be somewhat weak owing to the slight decrease in the prices of private-sector services and
the decline in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of the yen. Corporate service
prices are still falling slowly.
As  for  the  outlook,  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  likely  to  arise  from  the  gradual  improvement  in
domestic supply-demand balance and from the rise in crude oil prices. On the other hand, downward
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 12 June 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 12 June 2000 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 49/2000
pressure  is  expected  from  the  long-term  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  due  to  technological
innovations and from the fall in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of the yen.
On balance, overall prices are likely to remain unchanged. However, attention should still be paid to
the downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand, although the pressure has weakened
given some recovery in private demand.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has generally stayed near zero, and financial institutions
have been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount of funds outstanding in the
call money market is declining gradually.
Interest rates on term instruments basically continue to be stable but have increased somewhat from
the start of June. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds have been moving in the range of 1.6-1.8 percent. The yield
spread between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds remains
mostly unchanged.
Stock prices fell sharply until the end of May triggered by the drop in U.S. stocks but have recovered
thereafter.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  temporarily  rose  to  around  110  yen  in  mid-May  but  then
strengthened against the U.S. dollar. The yen is currently being traded in the range of 105-107 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased considerably. Given this, major banks are becoming  more active in extending  loans,
while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is increasing in parallel with a recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result, credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Issuance of corporate
bonds and CP has been steady.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) grew slower in May compared with the previous month on a year-on-year
basis.
In  this  financial  environment,  corporate  financing  conditions  are  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial institutions is perceived by firms as less severe. It continues to warrant careful monitoring
how these favorable developments in corporate financing environment will affect economic activities.
BIS Review 49/2000
2
