Mr George takes a look at recent developments in the UK economy against
the background of global influences in the international financial environment
Speech given by The Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the  City  Council
Dinner hosted by the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce on 18 January 2000.
 Mr Chairman, my Lord Provost, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I always enjoy my visits to Scotland. And I’ve been particularly looking forward to this visit since I
read  a  Business  Comment  headline,  in  one  of  your  newspapers  on  Friday,  referring  to  the  warm
welcome  I  could  expect  on  this  occasion  -  following  last  week’s  decision  by  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee to put up interest rates!
It has to be said that some of the rest of the article, and some other press comment on Friday was less
welcoming! We - the MPC - were variously accused of “ignoring the pain suffered by firms north of
the  Border”,  of  “being  willing  to  sacrifice  Scotland’s  economy  just  to  cool  the  overheated  London
property  market”;  and  of  causing  the  Scottish  economy  once  again  to  suffer  because  South-East
England is overheating.
Well I’m a great believer in free speech, but let me give you some relevant facts.
The  MPC  sets  interest  rates  to  achieve  the  Government’s  target  for  retail  price  inflation  in  the  UK
economy as a whole consistently over time. Those are our marching orders.
In fact for the past seven years - starting well before the MPC came into existence - the UK economy
as  a  whole  has  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of  sustained  low  inflation  that  we’ve  known  in  over  a
generation.  Retail  price  inflation  on  the  Government’s  target  measure  has  averaged  2.7%  over  that
time (or only 2.1% on Europe’s HICP measure).
Alongside  low  inflation  we’ve  also  had  the  lowest  nominal  interest  rates  that  most  of  us  can
remember.  Short-term  rates  have  averaged  some  6¼%  (fluctuating  between  5  and  7½%  over  the
period), compared with some 11¼% (fluctuating between 7 and 15%) over the previous decade. And
ten-year government bond yields have fallen from nearly 9% on average in 1992 to around 5½% at the
present time.
But  more  than  all  that,  we  have  also  over  the  past  seven  years  or  so  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of
uninterrupted,  quarter-by-quarter,  economic  growth  in  the  UK  as  a  whole  since  quarterly  records
began in 1955. Annual growth since 1992 has in fact  averaged  2.8%,  which  is  between ¼  and ½%
above most estimates of our long-term underlying trend rate.
Equally  important,  we  have  also  enjoyed  an  almost  continuous  month-by-month  fall  in  the  rate  of
unemployment,  on  a  claimant  count  basis,  from  a  peak  of  some  10½%  at  the  end  of  1992  to  the
present  rate  of  just  over  4%.  That  is  the  lowest  rate  of  unemployment  on  this  measure  since  early
1980. And, finally, the number of people in employment - and let’s never forget we are talking about
people here - is currently around the highest number on record.
Now we don’t have fully comparable data for Scotland within this overall picture. Interest rates are of
course identical, and as far as we can tell, the inflation story over the past seven years is pretty much
the same as in the rest of the UK. So, too, is the story of sustained economic growth. On the basis of
annual data Scotland’s economy, too, has grown year by year over the period - at an average rate of
2.6%. And on the basis of the new quarterly GDP data series for Scotland, produced by the Scottish
Executive,  Strathclyde  University’s  Fraser  of  Allander  Institute  concluded  that,  while  the  Scottish
economy  is  somewhat  more  volatile  than  that  of  the  UK  as  a  whole  on  a  quarterly  basis,  it  moves
broadly in line with the UK over longer periods.
1
BIS Review 5/2000
We do have consistent data for the labour market. And this shows that Scotland too, like the UK as a
whole, has enjoyed a steady fall in the rate of unemployment, from a peak of some 10% at the end of
1992 to just over 5% now. In the case of Scotland, this is the lowest rate since the middle of 1976. (It
compares with the truly grotesque Scottish rate of unemployment of close to 14% in the mid-1980s.)
And, at just over 2.3 million, the number of people in employment in Scotland is, as in the UK as a
whole, currently around its all-time high.
Of course it is for you to decide what interpretation to put on these facts. But I don’t find a shred of
evidence in them to suggest that low inflation - monetary stability - need be at the expense of growth
and employment in the UK economy as a whole. Indeed they are more obviously consistent with the
view that monetary stability is good for sustained growth and employment. And there is nothing in the
facts about the Scottish economy to suggest that the pursuit of monetary stability in the UK as a whole
is in any sense at the expense of growth and employment north of the Border. Indeed it seems clear on
the facts that over time the Scottish economy prospers very much in line with the economy of the UK
as a whole. So let’s keep the national conflict where it belongs - on the rugby field!
Now, Mr Chairman, what certainly is true is that recent upheavals in the world economy have had a
damaging  impact  on  particular  businesses  and  particular  sectors  of  the  UK  economy  -  including
particular businesses and sectors of the Scottish economy, which has greatly complicated our conduct
of monetary policy.
You are all of course familiar with the global financial shock which hit Asia in 1997 and spread to
other emerging market countries and transition economies through 1998 and the early part of last year.
This shock impacted the UK economy in two main ways.
First, the withdrawal of external finance from the immediately affected countries meant that they had
no option but to rein back their domestic economies, resulting in a sudden, sharp, slowdown in world
demand - including demand for industrial countries’ exports. That in turn had the effect of dampening
aggregate demand in the industrial countries. Had the industrial countries - led by the United States
and the United Kingdom and closely followed by the Eurozone and subsequently also by Japan - not
acted to stimulate their own domestic demand, we could indeed have seen the serious world downturn
which many were anticipating only a year or so ago. In the event, the global slowdown was contained,
but at the expense of the build-up of substantial external imbalances within the world economy, and at
the expense, too, of substantial imbalance between strong domestic and weak net external demand in a
number of industrial countries - most notably in the US and here in the UK.
Second, these developments in the world economy had a major impact on the international pattern of
exchange rates. In the first place, many of the countries most adversely affected by the interruption of
international financial flows saw their currencies fall dramatically in foreign exchange markets.  But
there  were  also  important  secondary  effects  on  the  relationships  between  the  major  industrial
countries’ currencies. The dollar and sterling - which have in fact been reasonably stable against each
other since we came out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism - strengthened, notably against the euro,
notwithstanding reductions in our relative interest rates, perhaps on the expectation that an earlier or
stronger pick-up in domestic demand would keep our economies operating closer to capacity than in
the  Eurozone.  And  the  yen,  which  had  been  notably  weak  on  the  back  of  Japanese  recession,  has
subsequently  picked  up  as  the  prospect  of  economic  recovery  there  improved.  It  is  the  strength  of
sterling’s exchange rate which gives rise to the most vociferous complaints.
I am only too well aware that for many of the internationally-exposed sectors of the UK economy -
most of agriculture, much of manufacturing industry, and some services sectors - these developments
came  as  a  series  of  hammer  blows  -  of  varying  intensity  depending  on  the  particular  international
orientation of the business. Companies trading with, or competing against, much of East Asia, but also
other  emerging  and  transition  economy  markets,  saw  their  markets  collapse  and  prices  fall
dramatically given the massive falls in many partner-country exchange rates. Trade with the Eurozone
- by far our largest trading partner - was also adversely affected, until recently, by sluggish domestic
demand in the major Continental countries and by the weakness of the euro. And even those who look
mainly  to  the  United  States  -  where  both  the  market  and  the  currency  relationship  have  been  more
stable - faced intensified competition from the rest of the world.
BIS Review 5/2000
2
These effects were not, of course, peculiar to Scottish businesses. They applied equally to all similarly
internationally-exposed  businesses  throughout  the  UK.  Each  region  has  its  own  particular  business
characteristics so that some were affected more than others - with some English regions worse affected
than the overall economy here in Scotland. But the effects were just as damaging to similar businesses
wherever they were located, so that the differential impact was felt within regions throughout the UK
not just between them. These cries of pain from the most severely affected businesses and sectors right
across the UK I really do understand.
The question is what can we do about it through the operation of monetary policy?
The problems - as  I have explained - derive essentially from developments abroad, and there  is  not
much  that  we  can  do  directly  about  them,  although  both  the  Bank  and  the  Government  are  very
actively involved in the wider international debate on how to bring about greater stability and better
balance in the global economy.
Of course we take full account, in our forecasts and in our policy judgements, of the implications of
the  international  environment  for  our  own  economy.  That  is  why  we  moved  aggressively  to  cut
interest  rates  from  the  autumn  of  1998  and  early  last  year.  Even  though  we  could  not  change  the
international environment (and as I say the exchange rate actually rose despite our interest rate cuts),
we could cushion its negative effect on the economy as a whole by providing an offsetting stimulus to
the domestic economy. Had we not done so, we might well have suffered recession in the UK. But the
hard  question  for  us  is  could  we  -  and  should  we  -  attempt  to  shelter  internationally-exposed
businesses even if that were to mean putting our objective of sustained low inflation at risk. In fact
I’ve not heard anyone argue openly for that - and I would be surprised if they did. The reality is that if
we  were  to  put  the  economy  as  a  whole  at  any  significant  risk  of  accelerating  inflation  -
notwithstanding  our  mandate  -  we  would  not  succeed  in  providing  the  intended  protection  to  the
internationally-exposed sectors other than possibly in the very short term; and in the medium to long
term our overall economic performance would almost certainly be worse.
The more hopeful news is that we have more recently seen strong signs of recovery - of both economic
activity and exchange rates - in a number of emerging markets and transition economies. And we are
seeing  a  strengthening  of  domestic  demand  and  of  output  in  the  Eurozone,  where  the  currency  is
commonly  acknowledged  to  have  considerable  potential  for  appreciation.  These  trends,  and  the
extraordinary efforts of UK businesses themselves to cope with the hostile international environment,
are already resulting in a stronger net external trade performance. That in turn is contributing to the
recovery,  particularly  in  manufacturing  output  growth  and  to  the  more  encouraging  news  in  some
recent surveys. To the extent that this improvement in external demand persists, it will help to ease the
exceptional pressures on the most internationally-exposed sectors, and contribute to a better balance
within the UK economy. But it needs, of course, to be accompanied by corresponding moderation of
the growth of domestic demand - after the offsetting stimulus of a year  ago  -  if  we  are to  maintain
overall stability. That essentially is why interest rates have had to rise since last autumn.
Mr Chairman, most people, as I say, accept in principle that sustained monetary stability is good for
the economy as a whole in the longer term - though it is accepted with varying degrees of enthusiasm
by  adversely  affected  sectors  at  any  particular  time.  But  there  is,  nevertheless  plenty  of  room  for
debate  about the operation  of  monetary  policy  in  practice.  Specifically  at  present  the  MPC  is  often
accused of being overzealous - and it is suggested that we don’t in fact need to raise interest rates at
this point in order to achieve the inflation target. That is a more technical question.
Changes  in  interest  rates  take  time  to  have  their  full  effect,  so  our  decisions  have  to  be  forward
looking.
We start from a position in which inflation is in fact running - and has been running for some months -
slightly below the Government’s 2½% target. The November figure was 2.2% and within this goods
price  inflation  was  running  at  around  only  ½%,  while  retail  services  price  inflation  was  running  at
nearly 4%. On Europe’s HICP measure, inflation in November was running at 1.3%.
In  part  this  out-turn  reflects the  abnormal  international  developments  I  have  already  discussed.  The
slowdown  in  the  world  economy  reduced  external  demand  in  the  UK.  Weak  world  demand  was
3
BIS Review 5/2000
accompanied  initially,  too,  by  falling  commodity  and  manufacturing  input  prices.  And  sterling’s
strong exchange rate had a direct, dampening, impact on our domestic price level. It is clear that world
demand has now started to strengthen and commodity prices generally have stopped falling. And the
oil price has already recovered strongly  - which may benefit the Scottish economy but puts upward
pressure on inflation. But sterling’s exchange rate remains uncomfortably strong.
Looking  ahead,  there  are  a  number  of  unusual  factors  that  might  help  to  hold  the  rate  of  inflation
down, at least in the short term. Some of these are one-off administrative measures rather than broader
economic influences: they include the unusually large price reductions imposed by utilities regulators
to come into effect in the spring as well as the Chancellor’s decision to end automatic over-indexation
of excise duties on fuel and tobacco. But there is also evidence, which is harder to evaluate, of more
intensive retail price competition, squeezing retail margins, and that could hold down prices at least
for  a  time.  And  this  last  effect  could  intensify  and  extend  further  into  the  future  as  a  result  of  the
spread of e-commerce.
Meanwhile we are faced with familiar uncertainties about the prospective strength of domestic demand
and about overall demand pressure. Final domestic demand growth, including the growth of consumer
spending, did apparently moderate in the middle of last year - as it needed and still needs to do. But
there is plenty of evidence to suggest that consumption growth will in fact remain quite buoyant: the
strength of the  equity  market;  rising  house  prices  -  certainly  led  by  London  and the  South-East  but
followed, not all that far behind, by Edinburgh, and spreading out across the UK; strong borrowing,
including mortgage equity withdrawal, by the household sector; and rising incomes from employment.
Meanwhile,  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  there  is  little  evidence  as  yet  in  the  overall
productivity data that would suggest an imminent, abnormal, pick-up in the underlying rate of capacity
output growth such as they have seen in the US, however fervently we might hope to become infected
by what is happening there!
Now none of this means that we have closed our minds to the possibility of a more benign relationship
between  the  demand  and supply  sides  of  the  economy,  which  would  allow  us  to  sustain  for  a  time
stronger growth consistently with meeting our inflation target. But we can’t afford to bet the Bank on
that  happy  state  of  affairs  either.  When  people  approach  me  with  the  sound-bite  “give  growth  a
chance” what I hear them saying is “take a risk with inflation”. But equally when they say “you must
take  no  risks  with  inflation”  I  hear  them  saying  “the  world  will  never  change”.  The  truth  is  that
nobody knows with any great confidence. The important thing is to keep an open mind and to monitor
intensively all of the data as it becomes available to us, and draw what inferences we can as to how
those data affect the balance of risks around the inflation target looking ahead.
What  is  encouraging,  Mr  Chairman,  is  that  for  all  these  uncertainties  and  complications  the  broad
prospect for the UK economy - including the Scottish economy - over the next couple of years is for
continuing  relatively  strong  growth,  with  continuing  relatively  high  employment,  and  continuing
relatively low inflation. The monetary policy debate is a narrow one, it is about just how strong the
growth, just how high the employment and just how  low  the rate  of  inflation.  It’s a  very  long  time
since any of us could describe the debate in that way with any degree of confidence.
BIS Review 5/2000
4
