Y V Reddy: Issues in managing capital account liberalisation
Presentation by Dr Y V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  Commonwealth
Secretariat  -  World  Bank  Conference  on  Developing  Countries  and  Global  Financial  Architecture,
held in London, on 23 June 2000.
 The objectives of this presentation are:
(i) 
to  suggest  the  need  of  some  of  the  developing  countries  for  managing  capital  account,
implying elements of control, regulation and liberalisation as appropriate;
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
to emphasise the importance of both international and national context in the management of
capital account;
to outline the contours of control and regulatory framework and the possible use of these in
prioritising  capital  flows  while  suggesting  the  dynamic  elements  needed  to  enable
liberalisation;
to  elaborate  the  linkages  with  other  external  sector  policies,  while  considering  the
appropriate control and regulatory framework or liberalisation;
to highlight the complementary policies that are necessary while considering liberalisation of
capital account.
This  presentation  is  from  the  perspective  of  policy  making  in  developing  countries,  and  is  drawn
mainly from the Indian experience.
Need
It  is  currently  well  recognised  that  although  global  capital  flows  have  a  potential  for  improving
efficiency  and  growth  prospects,  they  can  also  trigger  instability,  due  to  a  variety  of  reasons.  The
objective of current deliberations on the international financial architecture is to enhance efficiency of
such flows while avoiding, to the extent possible, instability, and managing instability if and when it
occurs. These issues are assessed essentially from the view point of developing countries, which, as a
group has tended to be more vulnerable to instability arising out of capital flows.
Though  there  are  some  differences  of  opinion  as  to  whether  liberalisation  of  capital  account  would
necessarily add to growth prospects of developing countries, there are several developments in regard
to international trade in goods and services, international business, technology, cross-border flows of
capital,  etc.  that  would  necessitate  a  more  active  management  of  capital  account,  with  a  view  to
continuously assessing the costs and benefits of liberalisation vis-à-vis control or regulation.
In the current debate on international financial architecture, there is no settled position on several of
the actions being considered. In respect of liberalisation of capital account, however, there appears to
be  a  broad consensus,  viz.  such  a liberalisation  is  desirable,  should  be  gradual,  well-sequenced  and
undertaken in conjunction with several other measures at micro and macro level. In most cases, the
desirability of limiting total external debt, especially short-term is generally advocated.
In  other  words,  there  is  need  for  developing  countries  to  choose  or  prioritise  alternative  forms  of
capital flow on the basis of costs and benefits. In choosing the alternative forms, the costs and benefits
of  a  variety  of  instruments  by  which  each  of  the  forms  of  flows  can  be  influenced  should  also  be
assessed. The need for prudent limits on short-term debt is universally acknowledged in the  current
debate. The treatment of individual components of the capital account and the pace of liberalisation
need to  vary.  Briefly  restated,  the  components  of  the  capital  account  needs  to  be  managed  by  each
country taking into account country specific characteristics.
1
BIS Review 64/2000
It is also clear that while several initiatives are proposed at the global level, the task of preventing a
crisis is essentially a national responsibility though an enabling international environment is sought to
be  put  in  place  to  facilitate  action  by  individual  countries.  No  doubt,  in  today’s  globalised  world,
prevention  of  crises  as  well  as  mitigating  the  effects  require  multilateral  efforts,  but  the  social
consequences of such crises are to be met by the national governments concerned. In this sense, the
ultimate  responsibility  in  regard  to  crisis  prevention  and  management  rests  primarily  on  the  policy
makers of the countries concerned.
The policy makers in developing countries, therefore, have to manage their capital accounts to ensure
an  orderly  process  of  liberalisation.  In  this  context,  management  of  the  capital  account  involves
management of control, regulation and liberalisation. Gradualism in liberalisation implies that the mix
between controlled, regulated and liberalised capital transactions keeps changing gradually in favour
of the latter. In fact, if the option of re-imposing controls to meet an emergency is contemplated, the
management of capital account should always contain control, regulatory and liberalisation options.
In India, capital account liberalisation is treated as a process. The medium-term objective is orderly
liberalisation,  while  the  short-run  challenges  are  met  by  flexible  use  of  the  control  and  regulatory
framework  In  other  words,  there  may  be  occasions  when  the  pace  of  liberalisation  needs  to  be
temporarily slowed down or halted, though in some rare cases the process has to be reversed, albeit for
a short period.
Context
Industrial and developing countries do have a common interest in encouraging larger but less volatile
global flows. Since the policy-making in developing countries involves gradual liberalisation, the pace
and sequencing would also depend on the international context as appropriate to the country. Among
the relevant international factors are the following.
Firstly, the state of global arrangements for prevention of crises.
Secondly, the extent, nature, anticipated promptness, and apolitical element in liquidity support from
international financial institutions.
Thirdly, the arrangements in international financial architecture for burden-sharing between domestic
and global as also between private and public sectors.
Fourthly,  the  perception  of  a  developing  country  on  the  potential  for  magnification  of  possible
inadequacies in domestic policies by the international financial community.
Similarly, the country-context is important in managing capital account.
Among the relevant aspects are:
First, size and structure of economy, especially the share of external sector.
Second, socio-political orientation to risk-taking or risk-aversion or the societal weights to efficiency
vis-à-vis stability.
Third, the potential benefits of liberalisation. For example, in some low-income developing countries,
the capital flow may be restricted to official flows, Foreign Direct Investment and trade related flows.
The immediate benefits of liberalisation in terms of private flows are, therefore, not evident.
Fourth,  the  level  of  development  of  financial  markets  and  consequently  the  possible  responses  of
domestic financial institutions to the liberalisation may be such as to indicate relatively more or less
efficiency gains, compared to the costs of instability.
Briefly stated, in the absence of effective lender of last resort at the international level, and perceived
benefits  and  cost  of  liberalisation  vis-à-vis  regulatory  framework  and  controls  on  capital  flows,  a
developing  country  may  have  to  keep  choosing  from  time  to  time  a  capital  account  management
regime appropriate to itself.
BIS Review 64/2000
2
In India there is a significant opinion in favour of cautious liberalisation, but at the same time there are
understandable fears of destabilisation. In India there is perhaps a greater weight attached to stability.
This  may  be  in  view  of  the  size  and  structure  of  the  economy  and  the  uncertain  comfort  level  on
international official, and private sector response to a crises on an apolitical basis. Thus, the policy in
India  is  to  approach  liberalisation  on  capital  account  cautiously,  gradually,  in  a  well-sequenced
manner,  treating  it  as  a  process  and  responding  to  domestic  monetary  and  financial  sector
developments as also the evolving international financial architecture.
Control and regulatory framework and liberalisation
The mainstream thinking till the Asian crisis was averse to capital-controls, but in the recent past, such
aversion  has  yielded  to  a  lively  debate  on  the  efficacy  of  such  controls,  and  consequently  the
framework  and  operation  of  such  controls.  The  control-framework  can  be  viewed  from  different
angles. Basically, the control instruments are quantitative  or  price-based,  including  price ceilings  or
floors and possibly a combination of the two. Controls or lack of controls may be based on size of a
transaction, purpose, or category of participant. Asymmetrical treatments in regard to applicability and
nature  of  controls  are  common  between  inflows  and  outflows;  between  outflows  associated  with
inflows (i.e. principal, interest, dividend, profits and sale proceeds) and other outflows; resident and
non-residents;  and  between  individuals,  corporates,  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries.  The
instruments of control do vary from non-applicability, to total prohibition with intermediate regimes,
say  of  approval  on  an  automatic  basis,  case-by-case  or  simply  price-based.  The  control  may  also
differentiate financial instruments by their nature or ratings.
In managing the capital account through control framework, there could be a prioritisation of capital
flows - in terms of their desirability or otherwise. Thus, for example, a higher preference could be to
Foreign Direct investment and long-term debt compared to portfolio flows and short-term debt.
It must be recognised that the efficacy of control depends, among many other things, on the category
of flows or participant. For example, it is less complex to control the inflows from non-residents, since
non-residents are keen to have a legal title to their asset. Empirical evidence indicates that the control
over outflows from residents is facilitated more by the appropriate tax regime and acceptable exchange
rates, than through the control framework.
It  is  necessary  to  make  a  distinction  between  control  framework  and  regulatory  framework.  An
important component of regulatory framework relates to prudential regulation on banks vis-à-vis the
external sector. They may include provisioning requirements for net external positions; limits on open
positions,  and  limits  on  investments  in  foreign  currency  denominated  assets.  There  could  also  be
differentiated  tax  regimes  affecting  the  maturity  pattern.  Monetary  measures  such  as  reserve
requirements have both an external sector and monetary angle. These regulatory instruments are part
of  the  package  available  for  influencing  the  size  and  composition  of  capital  flows.  Similarly,
regulatory  restrictions  on  portfolio  investments  by  a  securities  regulator  would  also  provide  for
different degrees of openness from time to time.
While  controls  may  have  a  potential  to  be  inefficient,  there  is  considerable  merit  in  using  the
regulatory mechanisms for moderating the ebb and flow in capital movements. The gradual movement
towards  liberalisation can  be  operationalised  through  a  change  in  the  mix  and  rigour  of  controls  or
regulatory framework, especially taking into account the tendency towards perceived excess in inflows
or outflows.
In  regard  to  the  dynamic  of  control  or  regulation  vis-à-vis  liberalisation,  it  is  clear  that  a  workable
framework  appropriate  to  each  country  is  necessary.  The  more  important  aspect  of  management  of
capital  account  is  the  flexibility  available  in  the  framework  to  progressively  liberalise  the
capital-account transactions, depending on the domestic and international developments. At the same
time,  such  a  flexibility  could  permit  quick  responses  to  changes  in  magnitudes,  direction  and
composition  of  flows  that  may  appear  to  be  inappropriate  to  the  circumstances.  This  flexibility  in
operations may, for success, warrant complementarity with other policies. Finally, there may be a case
for retaining the freedom to re-impose controls or tighten regulations as long as the vulnerability to
3
BIS Review 64/2000
highly speculative or motivated attack on the currency exists, since market corrections may be more
destabilising  to  the  economy.  Thus,  it  may  be  wise,  even  in  the  liberalised  framework  in  capital
account to retain an option to impose controls or tighten regulations.
In  India,  regulatory  framework  has  been  used  in  several  combinations  to  address  problems  of
excessive  inflows  and  pressures  towards  outflows,  during  the  reform-period,  implying  short-term
movements bi-directionally, i.e. tightening or loosening controls as also regulations, while maintaining
medium-term progress in liberalisation. Controls, however, continue to apply mostly to residents.
A  qualitative  change,  however,  has  been  brought  about  in  the  legal  framework  for  management  of
foreign exchange in June 2000 by which the objectives of regulation are redefined as facilitating trade
and  payments  as  well  as  orderly  development  and  maintenance  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  in
India.  The  legal  framework  envisages  both  a  developmental  dimension  and  orderliness  or  stability.
The legislation provides power to the government to reimpose controls if public interest warrants it.
Linkages
It  appears  that  the  porous  nature  of  capital  controls  is  minimised  if  the  dangers  of  capital  flows
occurring  in  the  guise  of  current account  transactions  are  avoided.  Among  the  measures  adopted  in
India  are  the  twin  requirements,  viz.  repatriation  and  surrender  of  current  receipts  of  the  residents
(which includes entities) and restricting foreign currency payments only to genuine transactions, and
in reasonable amounts. Furthermore, serious distortions in trade policy could make the management of
capital account difficult. Thus, liberalisation of the import of gold to officialising inevitable import of
gold to satisfy the domestic demand was considered essential to enable liberalisation of capital account
in  India.  Moreover,  if  there  is  a  commodity-concentration  in  exports  or  imports  (oil  in  the  case  of
India), careful monitoring is required to  assess  the impact  and respond, if need be,  with  changes in
management of capital account.
Experience  indicates  that  foreign  currency  denominated  assets  within  the  country  and  trading  of
domestic  currency  outside  the  country  could  have  destabilising  effects  on  the  balance  sheets  and
currencies for reasons essentially external to the domestic economic factors.
The adequacy of forex reserves is yet another important consideration in the management of capital
account. First, adequacy has to be viewed not only in terms of trade needs but also other short-term
liabilities. Secondly, it is not merely the long-term or short-term debt in terms of original maturity that
is relevant for reserves, but the residual maturity. Thus, in managing the capital account, the maturity
profile of debt, including short-term debt becomes important. Thirdly, a trade-related debt which is in
the nature of collateralised debt may be less severe on reserve-requirements. Fourthly, any addition to
portfolio-flows may warrant comfort through some additions to reserves, which implies  that the  net
contribution  to  investment  in  the  country  through  portfolio  flows  is,  in  effect,  less  than  what  the
magnitudes indicate. This is not to deny the indirect effects  on competition  of enhancing  efficiency
through portfolio flows. Fifthly, there is usually a cost of maintaining forex reserves and the net cost
would depend on the difference between the marginal cost at which the reserves have been built and
the marginal return from deployment of reserves. The liquidity management including level of forward
liabilities  is  also  relevant.  Disclosures  of  such  liabilities,  as  in  India,  have  proven  to  be  effective.
Finally, while the optimal level of reserves is difficult to quantify, attention to level of reserves and
their  management  are  critical  to  overall  capital  account  management,  especially  to  the  sentiments
prevailing in forex markets. Often, the incremental changes in level of reserves rather than the level
seem to be of significance to market perceptions. Further, the market perceptions appear to be more
sensitive to downward movement in reserves than upward movements. To the extent that management
of capital account tries to influence the size and composition of capital flows impacting on meeting the
current  account  deficit  as  well  as  movements  in  reserves,  the  adequacy  of  level  of  reserves  is  a
relevant factor.
In  India  the  level  of  forex  reserves  is  so  maintained  and  increased  from  year  to  year  as  to  cover
adequately not only imports but also the short-term liabilities, especially short-term debt and portfolio
investment.  Further, the level  of  reserves  also takes  into account the operational  need to  enable  the
BIS Review 64/2000
4
Reserve  Bank  to  even  out  the  mismatches  between  supply  and  demand  in  forex  markets  and  thus
ensure orderly conditions in a less developed market characterised by lumpy demands.
On  exchange  rate,  the  possibility  of  persistent  misalignments  due  to  reasons  other  than  domestic
factors  cannot  be  ruled  out  and  correction  cannot  be  left  entirely  to  the  market.  The  developing
countries do need some armoury to address such issues. It appears almost certain that capital controls
would  be  ineffective  if,  in  popular  perception,  the  exchange  rate  does  not  appear  to  be  realistic.  In
other words, there is considerable merit in the argument that capital controls are not substitutes for an
appropriate exchange rate regime even though capital controls facilitate avoidance of excess volatility
in the exchange rate that may be caused by destabilising capital flows.
Finally,  an  integrated  view  of  the  state  of  development  of  and  activities  in  financial  markets  is
appropriate.  The  activities  in  forex  markets  and  its  linkages  with  other  markets,  especially
money-market, debt market, especially government securities market, and equity markets, have to be
identified  and  monitored  while  managing  capital  flows.  Recognition  of  linkages,  monitoring  the
developments, and willingness to intervene credibly in any or all of these markets as appropriate may
be essential. Perhaps markets should be aware of the broad objectives of such intervention. As each of
the  financial  markets  develop  and  get  integrated  with  others,  measures  to  increasingly  liberalised
capital account could be considered. Indeed, it is possible to argue that liberalisation of capital account
would aid the process of development of financial markets, but this is valid only when some informed
judgements are made in respect of each country on the interactions between the management of capital
account  and  the  financial  markets.  In  any  case,  capital  control  or  regulatory  framework  or
liberalisation would be ineffective or unstable in the absence of proper appreciation of such linkages
among financial markets.
Above  all,  irrespective  of  the  extent  of  liberalisation,  official  monitoring  and  surveillance  of  large
international transactions and players would be helpful in effective and credible management of capital
account.
In India, during periods of surges in capital inflows or pressures on outflows, operations in the external
sector  were  coordinated  with  actions  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  money  and  government  securities
market to ensure stability.
Complementary policies
There  are  several  policy  areas  that  have  been  identified  as  being  critical  to  the  health  of  global
monetary and financial systems in future. Many of them fall within the jurisdiction of the countries
concerned. There is certainly an implicit recognition that the net benefits from liberalisation of capital
account in respect of any developing  country  would be  enhanced  if the  complementary  policies  are
followed. Among the more important of these are: first, strengthening the banking system, diversifying
financial  intermediation  through  both  banks  and  non-banks,  and  developing  as  well  as  regulating
financial markets in a sound manner.
Secondly, the regulatory practices and the coordination between regulators as the national level and
among the national level regulators at the international level are also attracting attention.
Thirdly, monitoring the balance sheets of large banks, large corporates and even governments in terms
of their growth, quality and vulnerability to shocks is considered important. This monitoring may have
to  cover  stocks  and  flows,  as  also  foreign  currency  exposures  hedged  or  otherwise  and  direct  or
indirect.
Fourthly, there is a fiscal burden in case there are systemic problems, especially in the banking sector,
irrespective of whether banking is in the public or private sector. The health of the banking sector is
critical for many reasons, one of them being stability in the external sector.
In  India,  the  complementary  policies considered essential  have  been  identified  by  the  Committee  of
Capital Account Convertibility (1997). The  Committee  observed  that  while  there  were  benefits  of a
more  open  capital  account,  it  could  also  impose  pressures  on  the  financial  system.  Hence  the
5
BIS Review 64/2000
Committee indicated certain sign posts or preconditions for a more open capital account and these are:
fiscal consolidation, inflation-mandate and strengthening the financial system.
Of  particular  significance  in  regard  to  complementary  policies  that  are  relevant  to  management  of
capital account are standards and codes being evolved and monitored by several agencies, including in
particular  IMF,  World  Bank,  BIS,  Financial  Stability  Forum  etc.  (Dr. S.N. Acharya  has  made  an
excellent presentation on this at this Conference).
Each  country  will  no  doubt  benchmark  their  existing  practices  against  the  international  codes  and
standards,  and  consider  their  appropriateness,  extent  of  application,  nature  of  adaptation  needed,
relative priorities, etc. Several of the actions suggested require tremendous  effort in  regard  to  many
developing countries and if full compliance is desirable for further liberalisation of capital account, the
pace of such liberalisation may not be rapid.
In India, several Advisory Groups have commenced a review of the international standards and codes
and an assessment insofar as India is concerned; some of these reports are expected to be released for
public debate during the next 6 to 9 months.
Outlook
It is clear that avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The impact of instability in times
of  crisis  appears  at  this  stage  of  global  environment  to  be  borne  largely  by  the  home  or  domestic
public  sector  rather  than  the  global  private  sector.  Moreover,  the  burden  of  such  an  asymmetrical
impact is more painful on developing countries, especially the poorer ones. Hence, in this context, the
distinct preference for stability, on the part of some developing countries needs to be appreciated. Such
a  preference  towards  stability  also  argues  for  managing  their  capital  account  regime.  Such  regimes
could have a mix of control, regulatory and liberal elements as appear most appropriate from time to
time, to the national authorities who are accountable to the people for possible crises. In such a mix,
there  is  merit  in  avoiding  controls,  but  taking  recourse  to  regulatory  measures,  while  pursuing  the
liberalisation objectives.
Within this overall framework, the progress in capital account liberalisation would perhaps depend on
several international and domestic factors. Some of them are: first, the progress in global cooperation
and understanding on relevant codes and practices to assure financial stability. Secondly, the quality of
assurances  and  support  from  the  international  financial  community  in  general  and  International
Financial  Institutions  in  particular,  if  crises  were  to  occur.  Thirdly,  the  nature  of  burden-sharing
arrangements with private sector in case of crises. Fourth, the progress of institutional and financial
market developments in the country concerned.
In India, it is recognised that the pace of liberalisation of the capital account would depend on both
domestic  factors,  especially  progress  in  the  financial  sector  reform  and  the  evolving  international
financial architecture.
BIS Review 64/2000
6
