Willem F Duisenberg: Are different price developments in the
euro area a cause for concern?
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the Financial Services
Industry Association, Dublin, on 6 September 2000.
 Introduction
1.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure for me to speak here in Dublin on the occasion of the annual
dinner of the Financial Services Industry Association (FSIA). Public support for the euro in  Ireland
has  been  particularly  strong,  and  this  may  be  due  to  the  prevailing  expectation,  stronger  than
elsewhere,  of  economic  benefits  resulting  from  the  single  currency.  The  introduction  of  the  euro,
however,  also  poses  some  new  questions  and  challenges  for  the  ECB  and  national  economic
policymakers. Today I should like to take the opportunity to elaborate on one particular issue, that is
the challenge posed by different inflation rates across countries or regions within the euro area. There
is a general consensus that the euro area economies have experienced a great deal of convergence both
in  terms  of  economic  growth  and  inflation  during  the  past  decade.  In  fact,  the  move  to  a  single
currency  and the introduction  of  the  euro are based  on  a  successful  convergence  process  towards  a
high  degree  of  price stability  in  participating  countries.  However, this  does  not  mean  that  countries
have always had the same rates of inflation during the past decade. And, indeed, there is no reason to
believe that they will - at all times - have the same rates of inflation within Monetary Union. I am well
aware that  divergences  in  inflation  have  increased  lately  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  For  example,
inflation in Ireland deviates significantly from area-wide inflation.
Different price developments will not generally disappear
2.
There are a number of reasons why differences in economic conditions have occurred in the past, and
there  is  ample  reason  to  expect  that  some  degree  of  economic  divergence  will  continue  to  emerge
within the euro area. First, there may be  reasons  why  some  differences in  inflation  may  occur  over
relatively  short  periods  of  time.  Second,  national  or  even  regional rates of inflation  may  also  differ
within a single currency area over longer periods of time. Let me elaborate on each of these factors in
turn.
Short-term differences in inflation may generally occur due to country-specific, statistical and “erratic”
factors.  First,  government  policies  may  lead  to  different  price  developments  via  tax  changes,
liberalisation  measures  and  administrative  price  changes,  as  they  are  generally  not  of  the  same
magnitude and timing across all euro area countries. The deregulation of national electricity and gas
markets or measures such as the eco tax in Germany or the tobacco excise duty in Ireland may serve as
examples  of  such  policy  measures.  Secondly,  since patterns  of  consumption are  not the  same  in  all
participating  countries,  the  weights  used  in  the  construction  of  the  national  components  of  the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) differ. For example, processed food constitutes around
13.5% of the HICP in the euro area as a whole, but 21% of the HICP in Ireland. This could, purely
mechanically,  generate  measured  inflation  differentials  across  countries  even  if  price  changes  for
individual goods were equal  in  all these  countries.  Finally,  different  weather  conditions  or  different
numbers and timing of national holidays can create “noise” in measured inflation rates, which would
be of only limited economic significance. Looking ahead, there is no reason to expect that such factors
would disappear within the euro area.
In  addition,  a  number  of  deeper  economic  factors  may  also  contribute  to  short-term  divergences  of
price  developments.  Trade  patterns,  production  structures,  tax  systems,  financial  markets,  and
institutional  structures  differ  significantly  across  euro  area  countries.  Hence,  common  shocks  may
1
BIS Review 70/2000
affect countries in a diverse way. The 1998/1999 emerging market crisis, the depreciation of the euro
against the US dollar, and the recent surge in oil prices may all serve as examples of common shocks
which have contributed to diverging developments  within  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  second-round
effects  of  common  shocks  may  differ  because  of  different  institutional  structures,  such  as  the
wage-bargaining  system.  Of  course,  the  transmission  of  single  monetary  policy  reactions  to  such
shocks  may  also  still  differ  because  of  financial  structures.  Likewise,  differences  in  inflation  may
occur on account of the impact of asymmetric shocks, or differences in the response to such shocks.
German unification was a clear example of such an asymmetric shock.
Looking ahead, some of these deeper economic factors may become less important as differences in
trade patterns, tax systems, financial markets and institutional structures are likely to diminish. Others
may  become  more  important.  In  the  face  of  increased  openness  and  trade  integration,  a  tendency
towards country-specific and regional specialisation might emerge. This could lead to some inflation
divergences between countries when shocks occur. However, to the extent that the linkages between
industries increase across national boundaries as part of the process of growing integration in the euro
area,  the  degree  of  synchronisation  across  national  short-term  economic  developments  may  well
increase.
Let me now turn to the factors which could lead to long-term differences in inflation. I should like first
to address briefly the issue of price level convergence. Price level convergence could be expected to
take place in the euro area for at least two reasons. First, the completion of the internal market and
increased  cross-border  price  transparency  contribute  to  eroding  the  scope  for  the  existence  of
substantial price differentials for products which are easily tradable across borders. To a large extent,
this  may  have  taken  place  already  before  the  start  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  but
differences remain. One example of such a price convergence that has attracted public attention relates
to car prices. Secondly, with regard to goods and services which are less easily tradable across national
borders  (such  as  housing  and  hairdressing),  the  long-term  convergence  of  productivity  and  living
standards  across  the  euro  area  would  create  a  tendency  towards  price  level  convergence.  Countries
with higher levels of economic development tend to have higher price levels for non-traded goods and
services. While higher wages in the traded goods sector largely reflect higher levels of productivity,
spillovers of wage increases to the non-traded goods and services sector often imply that wage levels
in the economy as a whole will typically be higher in more developed economies. As the scope for
increasing  productivity  growth  is  usually  more  limited  in  the  non-traded  goods  sector,  a  general
increase  in  wages  as  a  result  of  productivity  gains  in  the  traded  goods  sector  will  raise  the  cost  of
producing non-traded goods and services. This leads to higher relative price increases for non-traded
goods  and  services.  In  a  dynamic  context,  as  a  less  developed  country  is  catching  up  with  its
neighbours,  inflation  in  its  non-traded  goods  sector  could  be  rising  more  rapidly  than  in  other
countries,  and  as  a  result,  inflation  will  be  higher.  This  type  of  convergence  normally  takes  place
gradually and within certain limits among relatively homogeneous industrial countries, but could, of
course, reach a much larger scale if differences in price levels among participating countries are more
marked.
Are divergent price developments a cause for concern?
3.
Are differences in inflation among euro area countries a cause for concern? The short answer is, “it
depends”. On the one hand,  as  I  have  just  explained,  differences  in inflation  rates  among  euro  area
countries  had  to  be  expected.  They  are  in  effect  partly  the  result  of  the  completion  of  the  internal
market and the creation of the single currency itself. On the other hand, if differences in inflation rates
are  quite  large,  they  need  a  thorough  examination  of  the  underlying  reasons  as  well  as  appropriate
economic policy action at the national level.
The single monetary policy and the establishment of a more stable price environment in the euro area
as a whole have been accompanied by a  considerable degree  of  narrowing  in inflation differentials.
However, current inflation differentials for some  euro area  countries  are  quite  large.  An  analysis  of
data for  price  developments  in  various  US  cities  in  the  past  suggests  that  inflation  differences  may
occur within a monetary union, which can be at least as great as those currently prevailing between
BIS Review 70/2000
2
most euro area countries. A further feature of the US data is that the observed divergences in inflation
rates  among  these  cities,  although  persistent,  are  not  permanent.  There  seems  to  be  a  tendency  for
price levels in individual cities to return to their initial levels relative to the national average. It can be
assumed that similar adjustment processes would generally also operate in the euro area.
The  cyclical  component  of  consumer  price  developments  may  be  affected  by  the  orientation  of
monetary policy and changes therein, and could thereby exhibit more common patterns in the future.
Typically,  all  kinds  of  specific  shocks,  such  as  oil  price  changes,  seasonal  patterns  and  weather
conditions  may  then  dominate  the  dispersion  of  price  developments.  To  give  you  an  example,  the
difference  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest  annual  national  HICP  inflation  rate  increased  to
3.8 percentage points in July 2000, from an average of less than 2 percentage points recorded during
1998 and 1999. The biggest differentials have emerged  in  product  groups such as  food  and  energy.
These  have  traditionally  been  most  exposed  to  such  oil  price  shocks  and  weather  conditions.  Non-
energy industrial goods not only show the lowest, but also the least volatile differentials.
I have so far mentioned a number of reasons why divergences in price developments as such need not
be particularly worrisome. There are, however, also circumstances under which inflation differentials
are a cause for concern within a monetary union. Let us consider the case of a country where domestic
demand has long been growing strongly, pushing real GDP at or above its potential. A further stimulus
to domestic demand may then tend to generate upward pressure on domestic costs and prices. It will
also  lead  to  a  higher  demand  for  import  goods.  The  external  position  deteriorates.  The  increase  in
inflationary pressures in such a case is not offset by a rise in productivity. Therefore the rise in prices
relative to the external sector implies a loss of competitiveness for the economy. This in itself could
exacerbate  external  disequilibria.  Moreover,  if  the  losses  in  competitiveness  are  not  corrected,
domestic  and  foreign  markets  for  some  products  may  be  permanently  lost,  damaging  longer-term
growth prospects. Within a monetary union, the potential correction mechanism through the exchange
rate is no longer available. Hence, the adjustment has to occur through domestic costs and prices. If
rigidities in product, labour and capital markets hamper such adjustment, the correction may only take
place in the form of weaker growth and a loss in employment growth.
The role of the single monetary policy and national economic policies
4.
Differences in price, and more generally, economic developments between euro area countries do not
automatically warrant concern. Some differences in economic developments across euro area countries
may  even  be  seen  as  an  advantage  as  they  would  average  out  and  help  to  smooth  cyclical
developments at the area-wide level. Perfectly synchronous movements would increase the amplitude
of  cyclical  movements  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  However,  a  national  policy  response  would  be
clearly warranted to deal with sizeable, growing and unsustainable divergences. The single monetary
policy can only be geared towards the objective of price stability for the euro area as a whole. It is
therefore not in a position to influence the dispersion of inflation rates across euro area countries. If
action  is  required,  it  must  be  taken  through  national  economic  policies.  They  need  to  ensure  the
capability  of  individual  economies  to  absorb  and  respond  to  shocks.  The  flexibility  of  national
economic policies to deal with country-specific issues is required in all Member States of a currency
union, but perhaps in particular in the smaller countries. Because of sheer size and weight, economic
developments in the large Member States have less potential to deviate from area-wide averages than
those in a small country. Moreover, national developments in large Member States may have greater
spillover effects on other, smaller Member States’ developments. Furthermore, small economies, such
as Ireland, tend to have a higher degree of national openness, which implies that specific responses to
divergent economic developments may be less effective and thus should be further-reaching than in
the larger economies.
As regards structural policy, it is important to implement reforms in the product, labour and capital
markets,  which  are  aimed  at  increasing  overall  economic  flexibility  and  which  would  increase  the
degree of flexibility of national economic policies in reacting to country-specific events and common
shocks. This is important for all countries, independent of their cyclical position. Policies that support
greater  wage  flexibility,  wage  dispersion  in  line  with  labour  productivity,  and  greater  mobility  of
3
BIS Review 70/2000
labour  across  sectors  and  regions  are  likely  to  smooth  the  adjustment  process,  both  in  a  booming
economy  and  during  a  downturn.  Also,  measures  to  increase  competition  in  the  non-traded  sector,
particularly services, would help to smooth the adjustment process. All such policies are desirable in
their own right, irrespective of membership of the euro area. However, the use of structural reforms to
address excessive aggregate demand growth in the short term suffers from the substantial amount of
time  needed  to  prepare  and  implement  such  reforms.  This  should  make  it  clear  that  national
governments  have  no  time  to  lose  in  taking  measures  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  their  national
product,  labour  and  capital  markets.  The  current  favourable  economic  environment  provides  an
excellent opportunity to undertake the necessary structural reforms in euro area countries with vigour.
It  is  also  necessary  for  fiscal  policy  to  play  its  part.  In  general,  unbalanced  fiscal  policies  have  a
negative effect on economic efficiency and on price developments. They also increase strains on the
single monetary policy, and may have negative spillover effects on other countries. The Stability and
Growth  Pact  helps  to  guarantee  sound  public  finances  over  the  long  term,  which  is  an  important
contribution  to  macroeconomic  stability  and  is  also  conducive  to  sustained  economic  growth  and
employment. If the public debt is reduced to a sustainable level and fiscal deficits are close to balance
or in surplus, this creates room for manoeuvre to let automatic stabilisers play their role in the event of
the economy slowing down. However, in addition, particular attention also needs to be given to fiscal
policy  in  an  environment  of  strong  growth,  budget  surpluses  and  decreasing  debt  ratios.  In  such
circumstances,  fiscal  policy  should  by  all  means  refrain  from  giving  a  pro-cyclical  impulse  to  the
economy.
Concluding remarks
5.
To summarise, the euro area has experienced a considerable degree of convergence in inflation rates
during  the  past  decade.  National  differences  in  output  growth  or  inflation  observed  at  the  current
juncture do not in general appear to be unusual either from a historical perspective or compared with
developments in the United States. The more pronounced divergences in some countries strengthen the
case for policy action at the national level.  Looking  ahead, there is  reason  to  believe that  divergent
price developments may continue to emerge. Some sources of divergence may become less significant,
while others may become more important. The ECB will continue to monitor divergent developments,
but as our monetary policy can only be geared towards maintaining price stability in the euro area as a
whole, it cannot play a role in tackling growth and inflation differentials between euro area countries.
Therefore,  national  economic  policies  need  to  take  action  if  divergences  threaten  to  cause  undue
imbalances.  In  this  context,  structural  policy,  strongly  backed  by  fiscal  policy,  which  is  not  pro-
cyclical  and  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  as  well  as  appropriate  wage  developments
taking account of labour productivity growth and the level of unemployment, have to play a crucial
role.  Fortunately,  professional  forecasters  not  only  expect  continued  and  strong  output  growth  to
prevail in the euro area over the next few years, but the outlook also suggests increasing convergence
both in terms of economic growth and consumer price inflation within the euro area.
BIS Review 70/2000
4
