Koh Yong Guan: The economic outlook and monetary policy
in Singapore
Statement  by  Mr  Koh  Yong  Guan,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,
delivered at the MAS Annual Report 1999/2000 Media Conference in Singapore on 27 July 2000.
 Introduction
We  have  had  an  eventful  year  as  we  supported  Singapore’s  recovery  from  the  Asian  crisis  and
persisted  in  our  efforts  to  liberalise  the  financial  sector.  The  economy  turned  in  an  impressive
performance in 1999 compared with the year before, showing clear signals that we have emerged from
the  crisis.  Having  weathered  the  crisis,  the  economy  is  now  more  resilient  and  better  prepared  for
external shocks.
Let me first highlight some pertinent points on our outlook for the domestic economy as well as our
monetary policy stance.
The economic outlook and monetary policy
In July last year, MAS had noted that the Singapore economy was picking  up  faster than  expected,
although recovery had not extended to all sectors. Manufacturing had posted strong growth in the first
half of 1999, but construction, commerce, and most financial services remained weak. The economy
was still operating below potential, and the inflation outlook was benign. MAS therefore took a neutral
exchange  rate  policy  stance,  to  reinforce  the  government’s  cost  reduction  measures  and  facilitate
economic recovery.
The  trade-weighted  S$  remained  roughly  unchanged  over  the  past  year,  fluctuating  within  its  usual
band, although the S$ bilateral exchange rates varied significantly against individual major currencies
on account of volatility in the global currency markets. Reflecting the strength of the US dollar, the
Sing dollar, along with most other major currencies, depreciated against the US dollar in the first half
of  this  year.  However,  the  Sing  dollar  appreciated  against  the  euro,  the  Australian  dollar,  pound
sterling and some of the regional currencies over the same period.
The external environment has since strengthened. The industrial countries except Japan are enjoying
strong  economic  growth.  The  regional  economies  have  shown  more  vigour  and  resilience  than  was
expected. Against these positive developments, Singapore’s GDP rose by 5.4% in 1999. The economy
grew  further  by  a  robust  8.4%  in  H1  2000.  Both  external  and  domestic  demand  have  expanded
strongly. Real non-oil domestic exports grew by about 12% in the first six months of 2000, boosted by
the continued strength of global electronics demand.
The  turnaround  in  the  regional  economies  has  underpinned  strong  service  exports  and  boosted  the
commerce  and  transport  and  communications  sectors.  Domestic  consumption  has  grown  steadily  in
tandem with labour market conditions and overall sentiment, while investment spending has recovered
strongly on the back of a surge in investment in machinery and equipment.
Despite the robust economic recovery, inflationary pressures remain subdued. CPI inflation was 0% in
1999,  rising  moderately  to  average  just  1%  in  the  first  six  months  of  2000.  (Based  on  the  old  CPI
basket before the revision introduced early this year, measured CPI inflation in 1999 would have been
slightly higher at 0.4%.) Inflationary pressures have been held down by greater competition in several
segments of the economy, particularly in the supermarkets and telecommunications industry. Strong
productivity growth has also helped neutralise the inflationary effects of increases in nominal earnings
and the partial restoration of the employers’ CPF contribution rate.
1
BIS Review 62/2000
Looking ahead, we expect the growth momentum to be sustained for the rest of 2000 and to moderate
only  slightly  next  year.  This  is  underpinned  by  the  favourable  outlook  for  the  external  economic
environment. Economic activity will be led by steady growth in the manufacturing sector and a strong
pick-up in the services sectors. Domestic spending is also expected to remain strong. We expect the
remaining slack in the economy to be taken up within the next 12 months.
As the labour market tightens further, wage pressures will begin  to  emerge.  Imported  CPI  will  also
rise,  as  higher  commodity  prices  filter  through  to  higher  import  prices  of  consumption  goods.  We
expect CPI inflation to edge up slightly, to about 1-2% in 2000 and 2001.
MAS is, therefore, prepared to allow a gradual and modest appreciation of the Sing dollar on a trade
weighted  basis  in  the  coming  year,  in  line  with  the  strengthening  of  economic  fundamentals.  This
would  contain  any  incipient  inflationary  tendencies  without  exerting  undue  pressure  on  our
competitiveness,  bearing  in  mind  the  tightening  labour  market  and  the  progressive  restoration  of
employer CPF contributions. This stance will however be subject to continual review, depending on
developments in the domestic economy and external environment.
Financial services sector
Performance of financial services sector
The  financial  services  sector  saw  an  improved  performance  last  year,  rebounding  from  a  negative
8.1% growth rate in 1998 to register flat growth in 1999. The recovery was largely fuelled by the surge
in  the  stock  market  and  fund  management  activities  over  the  year,  reflecting  buoyant  market
sentiments and a brighter regional economic outlook. The upturn is likely to be sustained for the rest
of the year. For the first quarter of 2000, the sector has already turned in an encouraging 6.9% growth.
Review of financial reforms and key priorities
MAS has continued apace with our financial sector reforms over the last year, introducing a series of
strategic  policy  changes  to  foster  a  more  transparent,  innovative  and  dynamic  financial  sector.  We
have  taken  measures  to  fine-tune  and  update  our  legislation  and  guidelines  to  keep  pace  with  the
changing market environment.
To further strengthen the domestic banking sector, we recently announced regulations to separate the
financial and non-financial activities of our local banking groups, and to require the rationalisation and
unwinding  of  cross-shareholdings.  Last  week,  MAS  also  unveiled  our  policy  on  internet  banking,
whereby we affirmed that the existing prudential regulation and supervision framework will apply to
such new business models.
On the insurance front, we have liberalised the entry into the direct insurance industry and adopted an
open policy for admission of insurance brokers. We have also abolished the foreign shareholding limit
on local insurers to make way for strategic mergers and alliances with reputable international players.
Earlier this month, MAS announced plans to introduce a new modular licensing framework for market
intermediaries in the securities and futures industries. In addition, MAS will streamline the regulation
of financial advisers and require them to comply with standards of market conduct and practices. MAS
is  also  stepping  up  its  review  of  the  policy  issues  of  the  securities  and  futures  legislation,  to
consolidate and streamline the requirements into a proposed Omnibus Securities and Futures Act.
In  the  coming  year,  the  key  priority  for  the  MAS  is  to  follow  through  the  reforms  that  have  been
introduced over the past year, and ensure that the implementation is carried out effectively. MAS will
continue  to  review  and  refine  our  legislation  and  regulatory  framework  to  keep  pace  with  global
developments. The challenge for us is to sustain the momentum and persevere in our efforts to build
Singapore into a world-class financial centre.
BIS Review 62/2000
2
International relations
Let  me  now  turn  to  MAS’  efforts  in  the  international  fora.  With  the  recovery  in  crisis-affected
economies, the focus has shifted from crisis management to ensuring the sustainability of the recovery
and reform of the international financial architecture.
Singapore has  participated  actively  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  established  over  a  year  ago  to
monitor  international  financial  market  developments  for  potential  vulnerabilities.  As  one  of  four
non-G7  financial  centres represented  on the  Forum,  we  play  a  useful role  in providing  insights  and
perspectives from the region on financial market developments. We participated in the FSF’s work on
Offshore Financial Centres. We also hosted a meeting of the FSF earlier this year during which the
three FSF reports were adopted.
Singapore  also  participates  actively  in  IMF  initiatives  to  enhance  transparency  as  a  means  to
minimising risks to the global financial system. In particular, we are in general compliance with SDDS
(Special Data Dissemination Standards), including the new requirements for more detailed breakdown
of  data  on  official  foreign  reserves  of  member  countries.  We  also  release  regularly  the  IMF’s
assessment  of  our  Singapore  economy  and  policies;  the  latest  report  was  based  on  the  annual
consultation that ended in June of this year.
MAS annual accounts
Assets & liabilities
On  MAS’  annual  accounts,  total  assets  increased  by  S$6.2  billion  to  S$114  billion  as  at  31  March
2000, of which S$3.9 billion was in the form of foreign assets and S$2.2 billion in our holdings  of
Singapore Government Securities (SGS). The increase in SGS holdings reflects a conscious effort to
build up our portfolio of SGS to engage in more repo transactions for our money market operations,
thereby broadening the range of money market instruments that we use. On the liabilities side, there
was  a  reduction  in  deposits  of  banks  by  about  S$3.3  billion,  reflecting  the  repayment  of  deposits
previously placed by POSB with MAS prior to its merger with DBS. However, this  was  more than
offset by increases in Government deposits with MAS and our borrowings from the  money  market,
again due to the diversification of our money market instruments from mainly swaps to include money
market borrowings and repos.
Income & expenditure statement
For the financial year ended 31 March 2000, MAS made profits of S$3.6 billion (net of provisions), a
decrease of 38% or S$2.2 billion compared with the previous year. The lower return was due mainly
to translation losses, as the Singapore dollar strengthened against major foreign currencies such as the
US dollar and euro during the financial year.
The organisation
To  support  MAS’  expanded  roles  and  functions  in  building  a  central  bank  of  excellence,  we  have
taken  steps  to  strengthen  our  human  resources.  Over  the  last  two  years,  we  have  increased  our
headcount by 30%. Of these, a substantial number were early-  and  mid-career  officers  from  a  wide
range  of  professional  and  academic  backgrounds.  The  increase  in  mid-career  employees  has
encouraged  greater  diversity  in  perspectives  and  views  within  the  organisation  as  we  address  the
increasingly  complex  issues  in  monetary  policy  and  financial  sector  supervision  and  development.
MAS will continue to build up our internal capabilities and human resources, and actively consult the
industry participants in our efforts to meet the challenges in the coming year.
3
BIS Review 62/2000
