Marko Škreb: The transition process - it’s all about people, isn’t it?
Text of the Jacques de Larosière Lecture given by Mr Marko Škreb, Governor of the Croatian National
Bank, at the EBRD Ninth Annual Meeting, held in Riga, Latvia, on 21 May 2000.
 Mr President, ladies and gentlemen,
Let  me  first  of  all  say  how  deeply  honored  and  humbled  I  am  to  be  chosen  to  deliver  this  year’s
Jacques de Larosière lecture1 on the occasion of the Ninth Annual Meeting of the EBRD. It is a special
honor  not  only  for  me,  but  for  my  country,  Croatia,  as  well.  Let  me  thank  you  all  for  this.  It  is  a
privilege  to  deliver  this  lecture  after  only  two  distinguished  central  bank  governors:  Hanna
Gronkiewicz-Waltz two years ago and Jacob A Frenkel last year. Which reminds me that right now I
am breaking one of the main BIS rules: “Never speak after Jacob Frenkel”. My only hope is that the
time lag of one year is long enough for your memories to fade.
Making  a  speech  to  honor  Mr  de  Larosière  is  an  enormous  challenge.  I  have  always  been  very
impressed  by  his  work  and  his  distinguished  domestic  and  especially  international  career.  I  met
Mr de Larosière for the first time in 1996 (after I became the governor of the central bank) and have
managed to stay in touch regularly since then. Even in the very difficult moments in Croatia’s history
during periods of international political isolation, we managed to have a very honest and professional
relationship, which today I respect even more than I did then. For me the highlight in our relationship
happened  last  year  when  Mr  de  Larosière  accepted  the  invitation  to  give  the  keynote  speech  at  the
traditional Vth  Dubrovnik  Conference on Transition  Economies  organised  by  the  Croatian  National
Bank. Definitely, his knowledge, experience and insight into the transition process were invaluable to
the  Conference.    The  title  of  his  lecture  was  non-pretentious  (like  the  man  himself):  “Transition
Economies”, but his messages were very strong and deep (again, like Mr de Larosière himself). In his
concluding remarks Mr de Larosière, among other things, had the courage to point  out  some  of  the
negative human facets of transition, for example: “… in some countries the human costs of transition
have been high, for instance in terms of male life expectancy ..., growing inequalities of income and
increased poverty.” (de Larosière, 1999, p.10).
Of course, there are many positive human sides to transition. What I would like to do today is neither
present to you a comprehensive survey of transition as there are numerous articles entitled: “Ten years
of transition …”, nor give some new empirical evidence about causalities between the main variables
in the transition process. I would simply like to share with you some of the experiences I have had as a
policymaker in transition, experience of course gained in my own country - Croatia. Beside this I will
try, by asking questions, to make you reflect for a moment on some simple ideas. For example, one of
the questions to which I am looking for an answer is whether we have in the past consistently checked
our progress in transition not only against other countries or international standards, but against what
must be the ultimate goal of the transition process - increasing the wellbeing of the people.
My lecture is divided into three parts. First, I will try to answer a simple question: What is transition
all about? The second part will discuss what the main “ingredients” are  in  the  process  of  achieving
rapid and sustained growth and will focus on human and social capital. In the third part I will discuss
some  obstacles  to  transition  the  way  I  see  them,  which  means  as  a  central  banker.  I  will  end  by
summing up my remarks.
1
I would like to thank Mr. Boris Vujcic and Mr. Gary O’Callaghan for their suggestions while preparing this lecture. The
usual disclaimer applies.
1
BIS Review 43/2000
What is the transition process all about?
1.
Numerous researchers have analysed in depth the transition process in terms of speed of reforms, their
sequencing, results and possible outcomes, but rarely do we ask ourselves the simple questions like:
Why has transition started and why are we involved in it? Without elaborating the answer in detail, let
me offer just one possible answer. Socialism (as defined in Kornai, 2000), the predominant system in
countries where EBRD operates today, has imploded, has collapsed. This system was not able to meet
the growing demands of the population for a better life, that is to say: raising living standards, and the
development  of  a  civil  society  and  political  freedoms.  In  a  globalized  world,  information  on  living
standards and developments of civil society and political freedoms from the neighbouring West could
not be hidden any more from most transition economies, and discontent grew. The political conditions
for change are symbolized in the fall of the Berlin Wall. This created huge expectations among people
in the countries of formerly socialist economies. The expectations of the population at that time were
that there would be a rapid catch-up with the western standard of living (including political freedoms
as well). With regard to the speed of catching up in terms of economic wellbeing, this turned out to be
a naïve view.
The  main  goal  of  any  economic  policy  should  be  to  increase  the  welfare  of  the  population,  which
includes a sustained and high growth of GDP and a desirable distribution of income. In other words,
we want welfare to increase; we want people to be better off. Not many people should have trouble
agreeing  with  that  statement.  Today,  indeed,  there  is  evidence  that  the  dual  goals  of  growth  and
equality of income distribution are mutually compatible (Wolf, 2000).
Whether policymakers are always fully aware of the ultimate goal to promote the welfare of the people
is  another  question.  Policymakers  in  transition  face  many  challenges  and  bold  decisions.  Let  me
mention just a few. Whether to privatize rapidly or not? Whether to open up the economy at once or
retain external controls for some time? Whether to aim at zero inflation or not? The main point is that
those (and other similar) questions should not be answered only from the viewpoint of either ideology
or academic debate, but should be answered in the light of the fact that they are only means to achieve
the ultimate goal of increasing the welfare of a people in each country in transition. I would argue that
policymakers tend to forget this and think of measures in transition as the goal in itself. For example,
sometimes they are proud of rapid privatization regardless of its effects.
The  second  danger  is  that  policymakers  do  not  care  about  the  ultimate  objective  at  all.  Sometimes,
politicians  do  things  in  order  to  enrich  themselves,  their  family  or  friends,  instead  of  increasing
society’s welfare. Such behaviour is called a “bad” political culture (Hillman and Swank, 2000). It has
to be stressed that those societies perform badly. Corruption is endemic, tax evasion high, resources
are misallocated, growth lower, and inequalities higher.
In the transition process people are sometimes forgotten. And here I do not refer only to the poor or
deprived,  but people in  general. Therefore  we, the policymakers,  have  to  ask  ourselves  whether  we
have  consistently  checked  our  progress  against  what  must  be  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  transition
process.
My message here is not only that transition policies should ultimately benefit the people, but that the
people have to understand why reforms are necessary and what kind of reforms we should pursue. In
short  they  have  to  understand  what  the  policymakers  are  doing.  Let  me  stress  that  because  of  the
legacy of socialism this goal is even more challenging in transition. Usually people are both averse to
risk and have a high discount rate about the future. In socialism those two behavioral patterns seem to
be even stronger. People who have spent part of their lives in a socialist system and came out of it only
ten years ago, on average tend to be even: a) more risk averse and b) have stronger preferences for the
present.
a) 
In socialism the notion of risk and its consequences were almost unknown. One can think of
socialism  as  a  big  insurance  company.  No  bankruptcies,  no  unemployment,  no  financial
markets, no volatility whatsoever, very little choice (both for households and companies) as
almost everything was laid down by the central plan. Most risks (which always exist) were
taken  by  society  as  a  whole  (socialized)  and  were  not  individualized.  Or,  vice  versa,
individual decisions rarely affected individual wellbeing. In a market environment there are
BIS Review 43/2000
2
b) 
so many more decisions to be taken and almost each of them is associated with risk and its
consequences.
In  socialism  there  was  no  reason  to  worry  too  much  about  the  future.  Free  schools,  free
education,  free  health  insurance,  no  unemployment,  secured  pensions,  in  short  very  few
incentives to take a long-term perspective on life. Questions like: How am I going to finance
my children’s education? Should I save for my old age? Will I be able to afford a mortgage
if I’m unemployed? were very rarely asked under socialism. So, it was comfortable to think
only  about  the  present,  as  someone  else  -  “the  socialist  system”  -  would  take  care  of  the
future. The same reasoning could be applied to companies. Why worry about the long-term
market developments, when the almighty central planner would take care of that?
For those reasons it is even more challenging for policymakers in transition to explain their goals and
actions clearly to the population than it would otherwise be.
In  reality  we  do  not seem  to  have  acted  consistently  in  pursuit  of  these  goals  of  whether  transition
benefits the people and whether they understand the process. Sometimes the people get left behind and
we embark on a reform without asking whether it fulfils the ultimate goal of raising people’s living
standards. Moreover, we can fall into the trap of measuring our success in piecemeal reforms without
asking whether the whole spectrum of economic relations have moved forward together. Therefore, we
must bring the people forward with the reforms and ensure that they are politically accepted. If this is
not the case, it may become a big obstacle to rapid transition (as I will explain further in due course).
Which reminds me of an old joke that we used to tell during socialism, and it goes something like this.
During  a  preparatory  seminar  for  future  members  of  the  then  almighty  Communist  Party  the  local
Party  Secretary  explained  to  the  group  of  candidates  that  the  future  belongs  to  socialism  and  that
socialism is the most advanced system in the world. A young candidate asks a question referring to
permanent meat shortages under socialism: Mr Secretary, if we are so advanced how come there is no
meat in our shops? The swift answer was: “My dear comrade, we are advancing so quickly into the
future that the cattle can’t keep up with us”.
I am not I arguing for slower reforms in transition, on the contrary, but let us not forget in our rush to
market economies that transition is done for the benefit of the people.
What “ingredients” do we need to achieve sustained, rapid growth?
2.
Economists  agree  that  for  transition  to  be  successful  we  need  sustained  growth.  Therefore,  the
question of what needs to be done in transition ultimately leads to the question of what causes growth?
The  literature  on  growth  has  been  expanding  lately,  but  most  work  on  transition  agrees  that
macroeconomic stability linked with structural reforms is essential to growth (Wyplosz, 1999; Fischer
and Sahay, 2000). And it is equally true that most transition economies have responded positively to
the combination of the two and after a sharp decline in GDP today have positive growth.
We have learned as well that the growth process is much more complex than was anticipated at one
time.  We  know  that  the  future  success  of  reforms  depends  very  much  on  elements  like:  institution
building, contract enforcement, rule of law, etc. To explain the complexity of growth in transition a
little bit I will use two concepts: a) human capital and b) social capital.
Human capital
a)
Let  me  immediately  start  by  quoting  Lucas  (1993)  on  what  causes  growth:  “The  main  engine  of
growth is the accumulation of human capital - of knowledge  - and the main source of difference in
living  standards  among  nations  is  difference  in  human  capital”  (p.270).  So,  if  we  want  sustained
growth we must promote the accumulation of human capital in transition economies.
The next question is: How does the accumulation of human capital happen? Obviously, there are many
ways in which human capital is accumulated but, to mention just a few: it happens in schools, in other
forms of training, particularly on-the-job, in research institutes, etc. Therefore it seems reasonable to
3
BIS Review 43/2000
argue that transition economies should pay special attention to formal education, and other forms of
training and research. As the empirical evidence suggests (Flanagan, 1998), return to schooling began
to  rise  rapidly  during  the  transition.  Relatively  soon,  they  approximated  those  in  many  market
economies.  Under  central  planning,  the  main  distortions  in  human  capital  formation  were  the
overvaluation  of  vocational  training  and  the  undervaluing  of  university  education.  However,  the
transition process has quickly started to correct this shortcoming of socialism.
Formal schooling need not be the main factor in developing human capital. Let me just mention that
according  to  Lucas  (1993),  the  most  central  feature  of  human  capital  accumulation  for  growth  is
learning on the job (learning by doing). For this to happen, we need both managers and workers to be
constantly exposed to new challenges, to move up on the “quality ladder”. In the globalized world of
today it seems that one of the best ways to be exposed to new challenges is by exporting. An old Latin
saying could be paraphrased into: “Exportare necesse est, vivere non necesse est”.2 By opening up the
economy, we are promoting human capital, which in turn is essential to growth.
A  similar  approach  can  be  used  to  argue  for  more  foreign  direct  investments  (FDI)  in  transition
economies.  FDIs  bring  not  only  physical  capital,  but:  new  organization,  know-how,  etc  which  then
increase  “domestic”  human  capital.  That  is  why  strategic  investors  with  new  knowledge  are  so
important for overall growth.
Let  me  be  a  little  provocative  and  state  that  unfortunately  multilateral  institutions  rarely  talk  about
human  capital  explicitly.  For  example,  the  EBRD  Charter  (quoted  after  Bronstone,  1999)  does  not
mention developing human capital as EBRD’s role. A bureaucratic answer might be that that is not its
mandate. But, according to the EBRD’s Transition Report: “The EBRD seeks to foster the transition to
an open market-oriented economy and to promote private and entrepreneurial initiative in all 26 of its
countries  of  operation”.  (EBRD,  1999,  p.  vi.)  If  we  agree  that  human  capital  is  so  important  in
transition, I ask myself how we can achieve this ambitious goal without knowing more about the level
and  development  of  human  capital  in  its  countries  of  operation?  Does  the  EBRD  have  a  set  of
measures of human capital in transition countries (both cross-country and time series), maybe invent a
new index on human capital (like the broadly quoted one for privatization), a separate chapter in the
Transition report? Please, let me assure all EBRD governors, management and staff that these remarks
are made only in good faith in the hope that we will all reflect upon them a little bit.
In a more general framework let us ask ourselves the following question: Have we done enough in the
past to achieve this goal? I doubt whether a lot of people in this room (and policymakers in transition
economies in general) will say yes without hesitation. Based on the experience in my  own  country,
Croatia,  I  would  say  that  we  have  unfortunately  somewhat  neglected  the  development  of  human
capital in the last ten years of transition.
Social capital
b)
New literature is trying to explain the complexities of various phenomena by social capital (Collier,
1998, Fukuyama, 2000). It is clear that for growth we need not only physical and human capital, but
quality social capital as well. Social capital can be described as features of social organisation, such as
norms,  trust,  networks,  etc.,  that  facilitate  coordination  and  cooperation  among  the  group  for  the
mutual benefit of the group. A group can be anything from a household to the nation. In the production
process  it  is  an  addition  to  physical  capital  (machines,  tools)  and  human  capital  (accumulated
knowledge).  Social  capital  can  enhance  the  benefits  of  both  investments  in  physical  and  human
capital.
One  may  distinguish  between  government  social  capital  and  civil  social  capital.  Government  social
capital  encompasses  government  institutions  that  influence  people’s  ability  to  cooperate  and  get
mutual benefit out of it. Examples are: the rule of law, enforceability of contracts, civil liberties. Civil
2  The original Latin saying is: Navigare necesse est, vivere non necesse est.
BIS Review 43/2000
4
social capital includes: common norms, values, informal groups or networks that influence the ability
of people to work together.
Both of them resolve, i.e. overcome the collective action problem (the prisoner’s dilemma). Trust, as
promoted by social capital, reduces uncertainty and thus reduces transaction costs. This is all clearly
beneficial for growth, so we may conclude: the more quality social capital there is the higher growth
will be.
In this lecture I will not elaborate the concept of social capital any further. My intentions are to focus
narrowly on the issue where I think my comparative advantage may be, namely central banking, and
its  role  in  promoting  social  capital.  It  is  not  very  common  to  associate  central  banks  with  the
development of social capital, but I would argue that by forcefully pursuing its functions the central
bank is increasing social capital especially in transition economies.
Central  banks  are  usually  associated  with  two  main  functions:  macroeconomic  stability  or  more
precisely  price  stability  which  today  is  considered  the  principal  mandate  of  a  central  bank  and
financial  stability,  which  is  usually  narrowed  down  to  banking  system  stability.  Not  all  transition
central banks are responsible for banking supervision, but most are.
First  let  me  explore  the  idea  of  increasing  social  capital  by  pursuing  price  stability.  Today,  most
transition  economies  have  managed  to  have  relatively  modest  inflation  after  the  initial  outburst  of
inflation  and  even  hyperinflation.  But  it  is  worth  remembering  that  inflation  is  always  a  constant
threat,  it  is  never  dead,  only  tamed.  Central  banks  must  continuously  send  a  credible  message  that
complacency  will  not  set  in  and  that  price  stability  is  their  main  long-term  objective.  People  must
always be reminded that inflation is a tax. And this tax is: undemocratic (rarely approved or discussed
in  the  Parliament),  regressive  (a  heavier  burden  is  put  on  the  poor;  those  that  cannot  protect
themselves  from  it),  and  economically  inefficient  (high  inflation  inhibits  economic  growth  and
ultimately reduces budgetary revenues). And an inflationary environment creates the wrong incentives.
In  a  highly  inflationary  environment incentives  to  produce  are  reduced.  For  entrepreneurs  to  take  a
decision to produce (the “make it” approach) and not redistribute (the “take it” approach) one needs a
long-term stable environment. Therefore by maintaining price stability the central bank gives a clear
incentive  to  gain  experience  in  production,  not  in  redistribution.  Per  contra,  by  not  carrying  out  its
main function, but letting inflation rise in the economy, the central bank gives incentives to engage in
redistribution and in higher than necessary transaction costs to avoid the inflation tax.
Let  me  illustrate  this  with  some  Croatian  experience.  In  the  twenty  years  preceding  independence
(from 1971 to 1991 - Croatia at that time being part of former Yugoslavia), average inflation was 69%
per  annum.  In  1992  and  1993  the  average  yearly  inflation  was  more  than  1000%.  Similar  trends
remained  until  October  1993,  when  the  Stabilisation  program  was  launched.  From  my  personal
experience  I  can  assure  you  that  in  a  highly  inflationary  environment  a  household’s  objective  is  to
avoid the inflation tax. Currency substitution and “shopping around to find old prices” are the main
behavioral patterns, not long-term planning. The same can be said for production. What is the purpose
of getting a monthly 2% efficiency gain in some production process if monthly prices change more
than 20%? The same principle applies if monthly inflation is more than 4% as it was in Croatia (on
average) in the two decades preceding independence. Throughout that period GDP was either stagnant
or falling.3 GDP started to increase only in 1994, after prices were successfully stabilized.
The costs of inflation are relatively well analysed in the literature, so there is no need to analyse them
any further, but let me reiterate that it is important that the incentives in a country help people produce
new wealth and not put their efforts into redistributing it. Inflation favors predation over production.
The  second  important  function  of  the  central  bank  is  a  stable  financial  or,  more  narrowly,  banking
system. But, banking crises have affected a large number of countries and almost none of the transition
economies  escaped  them  (Frydl,  1999).  A  lot  of  transition  economies  passed  through  two  banking
3 The dramatic fall in GDP in Croatia in the early nineties cannot be attributed to inflation alone. It was not even the main
contributor. The disintegration of former Yugoslavia, war and transition were taking place at the same time.
5
BIS Review 43/2000
crises:  the  first  was  the  crisis  of the old  banks  with  their  legacy  (dubious  assets) from  the  previous
economic system. The second crisis occurred in banks founded after changes in the economic system
that were not able to remain viable, because of either weak management and/or increased competition
in the market as the transition period progressed.
Croatia followed that pattern. The first banking crisis, the crisis of the old banks, as they were called,
started with the beginning of the transition process (and even before it), and is even now ending with
the sale of the rehabilitated state banks to foreign strategic investors. The costs of this crisis, brought
about by the legacy of the past and as is too often forgotten, by the enormous consequences of the war,
can be estimated at about 23% of GDP. These high costs are typical of countries caught up in a war,
like Kuwait and Israel in parts of their histories.
During the first half of 1998 the second banking crisis became visible in Croatia. The then government
made  a  decision  to  rehabilitate  two  banks  which  represented  about  7%  of  the  total  banks’  balance
sheet.  Bank  rehabilitations  are  payed  out  of  the  budget.  The  Croatian  National  Bank  required  that
bankruptcy  proceedings  be  started  in  nine  banks  and  four  savings  banks,  while  it  withdrew  the
operating permit from one branch of a foreign bank, one bank and six savings banks. This has imposed
high  budgetary  costs  for  the  payment  of  insured  savings  deposits  in  banks  in  which  bankruptcy
proceedings have been started. The total costs of the second banking crisis could be estimated at about
4% of GDP.
The  costs  of  the  first  and  the  second  crisis  represent  about  27%  of  Croatia’s  GDP  in  1999.  It  is
obviously a very heavy burden on the economy.  The  costs  mentioned  are  fiscal costs,  borne  by  the
taxpayers. Economic costs are certainly higher.
 If  regulation  and  supervision  are  inadequate,  bad  banks  will  emerge  or  proliferate  more  than
otherwise would be the case.4 This will not only impose  costs  on  the  budget, but the  economy  will
suffer as such banks will not  be efficient  financial intermediaries.  For  example,  banks  may  allocate
resources  (loans)  not  according  to  market  principles  and  good  banking  practices,  but  in  the  aim  to
“favor” themselves (management), their relatives, friends, connected businesses, with other people’s
money. Asset stripping, simple theft and similar activities can easily develop within and around banks.
All  those  features  will  benefit  only  the  few.  As  long  as  management  of  banks  “can  get  away  with
murder” they will continue to behave in such a way.
By  creating  a  stable  environment  (both  macroeconomic  and  financial)  the  central  bank  favours  the
long-term  perspective.  People  should  expect  stability  in  prices  and  in  the  financial  system,  take  a
long-term view and get involved in long-term wealth creation and not only short-term redistribution
gains.
Obstacles to transition - a personal account
3.
Certainly, there is a long list of obstacles to rapid transition. Besides, I am sure that each one of you
present  here  would  have  a  different  list  of  obstacles.  Today  I  will  elaborate  only  on  two  of  them,
which I consider important from my own experience. They are: a) rent-seeking behavior, and b) lack
of broad political support for reforms (which I partly discussed before).
Rent-seeking
a)
If  private  returns  on  predation are  larger  than  private  returns  on  production,  this  will  send  “wrong”
incentives to people and society will not develop in the desired direction. Therefore we have to make
every effort to “get the incentives right”. This is not an easy exercise. Socialism and, sometimes even
more, early transition, have created vested interests and it is understandable that every socio-economic
4
In no way am I trying to imply that the main cause of the banking crisis is inadequate supervision and regulation. But,
they can certainly deepen banking problems.
BIS Review 43/2000
6
group  will  fight  either  to  preserve  their  status  quo  or  try  to  “grab”  even  more.  The  problem  is
especially exacerbated if the prevailing mentality in a society as a whole is the “take it” and not “make
it” philosophy.
Every change is a redistribution, redistribution of power and relative wealth. Transition by definition is
a  change.  People  on  average  resist  change.  I  have  called  this  the  Newtonian  Law  of  Transition,
namely:  “Every  action  creates  a  reaction.”  (Škreb,  1998).  This  resistance  to  reform  (changes)  is
probably  “time-dependent”  and  positively  correlated  with  the  time  spent  in  transition.  In  the  early
stages  reforms  are  more  general  (macroeconomic  stabilization)  and  there  is  much  more  support  for
them. In the later stages “transition fatigue” starts to develop, and disappointment with slowness (or
even a decline or stagnation) in the rise of living standards is more and more present. On top of this,
structural reforms imply microeconomic changes (usually labor-shedding). This is a challenge to the
status  quo.  These  are  some  of  the  reasons  why  structural  reforms  are  so  much  more  difficult  to
implement  and  slower  than  glamorous  macroeconomic  stabilization  programs  or  measures  like  the
announcement of a new currency, a new exchange-rate regime or a new central bank governor.
Based on Croatia’s experience I would like to say that some important large-scale privatizations and
foreign direct investments were either postponed or abandoned because of resistance from workers and
local  communities.  They  both  preferred  the  imaginary  safety  of  the  status  quo.  The  conventional
wisdom is that government ownership (the status quo) should ensure at least minimal wages and job
security. By contrast, private ownership of a company means job uncertainty for employees, as they
have observed in many cases of privatized companies that labor-shedding took place. We should be
aware that workers will not automatically embrace privatization and restructuring of their companies
in spite of the fact that they are very often carried out in their interest or are the only option for the
company to stay alive.
The  same  can  be  said  for  the  case  of  banking  crisis  resolution  in  Croatia.  Based  on  my  own
experience, any  resolution is  bound to  be  faced  with  strong  resistance  and  delays.  First,  the  budget
(i.e. the Ministry of Finance) will not willingly accept that it has to pay for the costs of banking crisis
resolution. Second, the management of the banks will try to change the banking problem resolution
and not shoulder the costs of their actions. They have clear vested interests in the bank as it is (their
high salaries, their influence through credit allocation, the wish to hide previous decisions, etc). Third,
depositors  (households  and  companies)  will  make  every  effort  to  minimize  their  losses  and  get
someone else to bear the costs of the problem. Fourth,  the  owners  of  banks  will  try  to  put political
pressure on the government to bail them out. Fifth, there is the personnel of the bank, because they
know  that  either  all  or  part  of  them  will  lose  their  jobs.  Sixth,  politicians  will  try  to  minimize  the
problem in the hope that it will not hurt their “image”.
Every decision on the bank resolution problem is a redistribution problem. There are always welfare
losses  for  some  interest  groups,  so  we  should  be  aware  that  such  decisions  will  create  very  strong
lobbying, corruption, ruthless behaviour, a fight to preserve vested interests, etc. Needless to say, all
such behavioral patterns mean using scarce resources to influence the outcome in a redistributive way,
and not use them to produce new wealth. To overcome this problem policymakers must make sure that
they have the “incentives right” and have a clear set of rules to diminish the scope  of discretionary
decision-making which always gives room for rent-seeking.
Support for policies
b)
Ultimately sound economics is sound politics as well. But the problem is that economic measures may
take  time  to  bear  fruit.  In  other  words  reforms  usually  have  immediate  costs  and  the  benefits  are
(sometimes) distant. Let me stress again that policymakers must educate the public at large to get their
support. If this is not the case, it may be a serious obstacle to rapid transition.
With the benefit of hindsight and from the perspective of a central banker I would say that in the past
we lacked not so much sound economic decisions but good public relations for our policies. This is
especially true in the case where the central bank initiated bankruptcy procedures or withdrew licences
for 25 banks which was something unheard of in Croatia in the last fifty years. Let us not blame only
people  or  politicians  for  their  resistance  to  those  measures.  New  economic  policy  is  like  a  new
7
BIS Review 43/2000
product.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  producer  -  the  policymakers  -  to  overcome  the  information
assymetry  and  inform  the  consumers  -  the  population  and  the  politicians  -  of  the  benefits  of  this
product  (bankruptcies  in  the  banking  system)  and  sell  it  successfully.  If  central  banks  in  transition
economies  want  to  be  successful  they  should  be  much  more  “customer-oriented”  and  educate  the
public and politicians about the benefits of their main products: price stability and financial stability.
Otherwise, they risk a weak demand for their services.
Without clearly explaining the goals of reforms to the people, policymakers put at risk the necessary
support for changes. This is a very challenging and long-term task as it is easier to get people out of
communism than communism out of people. This problem is nothing new in history. It is not without
good reason that it took Moses forty years to bring his people from slavery in Egypt to the promised
land (simply to replace the entire generation), a trip that could be completed in weeks (Hillman, 1999).
It is therefore our duty to make the journey in the transition desert as short as possible.
Summing up
4.
Transition has been a tremendous and exciting project in the last ten years, as well as an invaluable
experience for all of us who took part in it in one way or another. Out of it we have learned a lot, not
only about how economic systems function or how to initiate economic changes, but we have learned
about human nature as well. So, let us keep in mind that the transition process is done for the people
and by the people. They happen at the same time: the main objective of transition (we have to increase
their welfare), the main engine of transition (through human and social capital) and the main constraint
to more rapid transition (rent-seeking behaviour and lack of political support).
Therefore, in my view, policymakers have to ask themselves constantly the following three questions:
a) 
whether  they  have  consistently  checked  progress  in  transition  against  what  must  be  the
ultimate goal of the transition process;
b) 
c) 
whether  they  have  done  enough  to  nurture  human  and  social  capital,  as  without  those
ingredients economies will grow slower than they might; and
whether  they  have  anticipated  and  tried  to  overcome  the  obstacles  to  transition,  since  one
should expect resistance to change and one should not expect broad understanding for every
measure taken.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, in honour of Monsieur Jacques de Larosière, I have chosen to conclude
this lecture with a French saying: “Le bonheur, disait M… n’est pas chose aisée. Il est très difficile de
le trouver en nous, et impossible de le trouver ailleurs.” (Sebastien Roch Nicolas dit Chamfort - 18th
century French Philosopher.)
Applied to transition economies Chamfort’s words can mean that we of the transition economies must
realize  that  our  happiness  lies  within  us.  We  must  look  inside  our  respective  countries  and  find
specific answers to our problems for the better future.
Naturally, we should not neglect looking outside as well. There is not a single doubt in my mind that
for transition to be successful countries need to open up, promote foreign direct investment as much as
possible, extensively use foreign technical assistance, embrace transfers of knowledge, participate and
benefit  from  globalization,  and,  last  but  not  least,  exploit  to  the  maximum  the  beneficial  role  of
international  financial  organizations  in  general  and  the  EBRD  in  particular  as  this  institution  was
created for us. All those elements are necessary. But, it is my strong belief that the ultimate test of a
successful transition lies within us. Why? Simply because, it’s the people’s transition, isn’t it?
Thank you very much for your attention.
BIS Review 43/2000
8
Literature:
Bronstone,  A  (1999):  The  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development.  Manchester
University Press, Manchester.
Collier, P (1998): Social capital and poverty, The World Bank, Social Capital Initiative, WP No. 4
EBRD (1999): Transition Report, London.
Fischer,  S  and  R  Sahay  (2000):  The  Transition  Economies  After  Ten  Years  of  Transition.  IMF
Working Paper, February.
Flanagan,  R  J  (1998):  Were  communists  good  human  capitalists?  The  case  of  the  Czech  Republic,
Labour Economics, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 295-312.
Frydl, E J (1999): The Length and Cost of Banking Crises: IMF Working Paper (WP/99/30).
Fukuyama, F (2000): Social Capital and Civil Society. IMF Working Paper 00/74.
Hillman, A L (1999): In Transit to the Promised Land: Ten Years in the Wilderness Without Moses.
Fifth Dubrovnik Conference on Transition Economies, June 1999.
Hillman  A  L  and  O  Swank:  (2000):  Why  political  culture  should  be  in  lexicon  of  economics,
European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 16, No.1, pp. 1-4.
Kornai,  J  (2000):  What  the  Change  of  System  From  Socialism  to  Capitalism  Does  and  Does  Not
Mean. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 1. pp. 27-42.
Larosière, J de (1999): Transition Economies. Fifth Dubrovnik Conference on Transition Economies,
June 1999.
Lucas, R E (1993): Making a Miracle. Econometrica, Vol. 61. No. 2, pp. 251-272.
Škreb, M (1998): Economic Transition in Croatia: An Insider’s View. SAIS Review. Vol. XVIII, No.
2., pp. 71-88.
Wolf, M (2000): Kicking down growth’s ladder. Financial Times, April 12, p. 15.
Wyplosz, C (2000): Ten Years of Transformation: Macroeconomic Lessons. The World Bank. Policy
Research Working Paper 2288, February.
9
BIS Review 43/2000
