Masaru Hayami: Revitalization of Japan’s economy
Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japanese Economic Research
Center, Tokyo, on 29 May 2000.
 I had opportunities to speak  on the structural  problems  facing  Japan’s  economy  and  the  medium  to
long-term issues which needed to be addressed. And, on each occasion, I emphasized that for Japan to
achieve a full-fledged recovery, not only support from policy measures but also private sector vitality
in the form of “creative destruction”, were of critical importance.  As Japan’s economy  has  recently
been  showing  clearer  signs  of  improvement,  we  have  witnessed  earnest  efforts  toward  structural
reform  being  set  in  motion  in  various  areas  of  the  economy.  Bearing  in  mind  such  a  development,
today I would like to talk about the issues which are considered important to Japan’s economy at the
moment.
1.
Recent economic developments and structural adjustment
Current state of the economy
Let  me  start  by  giving  our  view  on  the  current  state  of  the  economy.  The  improvement  in  Japan’s
economy is becoming distinct. And, recovery has been observed in some areas of private demand as
witnessed by business fixed investment continuing to increase gradually. Looking back to around this
time last year, it is true that some economic indicators had already begun to show signs of recovery.
Such a recovery was brought about by an increase in public investment and favorable developments in
overseas economies, and was far from being a self-sustained recovery led by domestic private demand.
To  the  contrary,  the  recent  improvement  has  been  accompanied  by  a  recovery  in  private  demand
centering  on  a  moderate  increase  in  business  fixed  investment,  and  deflationary  concerns  have
gradually  subsided,  although  private  consumption,  which  is  a  major  component  of  private  demand,
still remains short of what one would call a recovery. Granted that private consumption is unlikely to
return to the high growth of the 1980s because of the declining growth potential of Japan’s economy
over the long run, and given that consumer  sentiment  has  been  gradually  improving,  the  key  to  the
outlook  for  private  consumption  will  be  the  impact  of  increased  production  and  higher  corporate
profits  on  household  income.  With  this  in  mind,  we  continue  to  carefully  monitor  the  economic
situation.
Business cycle and structural adjustment
While  the  economy  is  on  a  recovery  path,  we  observe  that  structural  problems  have  not  yet  been
solved. Since such an observation leads to controversy over the relation between the business  cycle
and structural adjustment, allow me to elaborate a little.
It  is  not  correct  to  say  that  the  economy  will  never  recover  unless  structural  problems  are  solved.
Needless to say, some kind of structural problems always exist at any point in time in any economy,
and  I  do  not  deny  that  Japan  currently  faces  extremely  big  problems.  Moreover,  it  should  be
remembered  that  at  the  same  time  we  also  experience  business  cycles.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not
correct to claim that an economic recovery  has  nothing  to  do  with structural  problems.  If  structural
reform does not proceed smoothly, economic recovery will lack strength, or big problems will remain
unsolved even after the economy recovers substantially as evidenced by the situation in Japan after the
bursting of the bubble. I think it true to say that economic recovery would be all the more robust if
accompanied by the progress of structural reform.
1
BIS Review 46/2000
The nature of structural problems may differ from time to time and from country to country, and it is
not easy to come up with a clear-cut definition. Having said this, the  current structural problems  in
Japan could be characterized as arising from the process of the economic system adapting to a new
environment,  in  other  words,  it  is  a  problem  that  has  contained  the  dynamism  of  the  Japanese
economy.  Indeed,  changes  in  the  economic  environment  in  the  1990s  such  as  the  progress  of
information  and  telecommunications  technology  and  the  globalization  of  market  economies  had  a
substantial impact on Japanese firms in persuading them to change. The aftereffects of the bursting of
the bubble can also be recognized as a structural problem in that they prevented firms and financial
institutions from adapting to the change in the environment by eroding their financial strength.
Significant changes in the environment can  make  an  existing  economic  system  obsolete  and reduce
profitability of the corporate sector. Particularly when the magnitude of change is large and firms are
uncertain  as  to  how  to  adapt,  many  initially  tend  to  be  defensive  in  their  response  by  reducing
investment and employment, which only leads to further downward pressure on the economy. In the
process of cost reduction, however, firms that recover profitability and discover ways to adapt to the
new  environment  will  gradually  increase  in  number.  Then,  the  way  a  firm  overcomes  structural
problems itself will become a source of new growth. This is the stage where firms take the offensive in
that  they  implement  comprehensive  reform  of  their  management  system  geared  toward  the  new
environment and invest in strategically important areas or new businesses. Though even at this stage
there will exist not a few firms which are still defensive, the overall picture is that the economy will
recover as structural reform progresses. And, as the number of firms taking the offensive increases, the
economy will eventually shift to a full-fledged recovery path.
Characteristics of economic recovery under structural adjustment
Currently, it is our judgment that Japan’s economy is at the stage where the number of firms taking the
offensive has started increasing, that is, the economy is moderately recovering parallel with structural
adjustment. Let me point out some of the major characteristics of this recovery.
First, the recovery has been led by the corporate sector. In the 1990s, the prolonged recession and slow
adjustment  of  employment  and  wages  under  the  prevailing  management  system  led  to  a  substantial
rise  in  the  proportion  of  labor  income  to  national  income,  which  was  one  factor  behind  the
deteriorating  profitability  of  Japanese  firms.  Putting  aside  the  effects  of  active  monetary  and  fiscal
policy as well as steady developments in overseas economies, the current recovery is, to a large extent,
triggered by the earnest restructuring of Japanese firms with the aim of restoring profitability. Thus,
with respect to the recovery of private demand, it seems natural that the corporate sector, which has
regained  profitability  as  a  result  of  restructuring,  should  take  the  lead  by  increasing  investment
followed by the household sector as income conditions gradually improve. This is the development we
are now witnessing.
Second, we observe polarization in various areas of the economy. For example, a moderate recovery
of  business  fixed  investment  does  not  mean  a  uniform  increase  across  the  board.  While  those
industries which produce basic materials are burdened with excess capacity and continue to restrain
investment,  those  related  to  information  technology,  such  as  electric  machinery,  have  increased
investment  substantially.  Another  example.  In  the  labor  market,  we  have  recently  witnessed  the
situation where new job offers have been growing at a double-digit rate on a year-on-year basis while
the  unemployment  rate  has  remained  high  or  even  slightly  increased.  This  signifies  a  widening
mismatching of supply and demand in the labor market. Under the globalization of market economies
and  the  progress  of  information  and  telecommunications  technology,  while  workers  with  skills  that
firms need are in short supply, workers who have accumulated firm-specific skills under the traditional
lifetime employment system are no longer in demand.
When  economic  recovery  and  structural  adjustment  proceed  simultaneously,  we  often  observe
conflicting developments. Thus, to accurately grasp economic developments, it is extremely important
not only to examine macroeconomic indicators but also to thoroughly understand the microeconomic
movements behind such macroeconomic indicators.
BIS Review 46/2000
2
2.
Movements toward structural reform
Response to the aftereffects of the bursting of the bubble - declining financial intermediary function
Now let me turn to the earnest structural reform efforts being seen in various areas of the economy.
First, the problem of the declining financial intermediary function after the bursting of the bubble has
begun to be resolved. It goes without saying that the aftereffects of the bursting of the bubble were one
of the major factors responsible for making the 1990s a “lost decade” in Japan. The bursting of the
bubble  created  the  balance  sheet  problem.  Indeed,  the  non-performing  asset  problem  of  financial
institutions has reduced their risk-taking capacity and impaired the smooth  circulation of  money.  In
particular,  behind  the  extremely  severe  recession  from  the  end  of  1997  to  1998  was  a  decline  in
confidence on the part of both the corporate sector and the household sector stemming from financial
system  instability  and  the  deterioration  of  the  financial  intermediary  function  which  has  often  been
termed a credit crunch.
Since spring last year when the Bank of Japan effected the zero interest rate policy and public funds
were  injected  into  major  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  base,  public  confidence  in  the  financial
system  has  been  gradually  restored,  and  we  are  observing  a  favorable  impact  on  the  economy.
Furthermore, an important development which has not been observed for nearly half a century since
the end of World War II, is that the financial industry is moving toward large-scale consolidation.
Last year, private consumption supported the economy in the midst of a decline in household income,
which means a decline in the savings rate. This can perhaps be interpreted as households, which were
concerned with financial system instability and increased their savings from the end of 1997 to early
1998,  turning  to  loosen  their  purse  strings.  In  this  regard,  the  Survey  on  Lifestyle  and  Financial
Behavior conducted by the Bank of Japan indicates that since spring last year not only has concern
over  the  collapse  of  financial  institutions  subsided  but  also  the  number  of  respondents  expressing
worries about job security and earnings or refraining from spending has also gradually decreased. On
the part of the corporate sector, responses to the Bank’s Tankan survey indicate that the improvements
in the lending attitude of financial institutions and also their funding conditions have been gathering
momentum.  Moreover,  the  willingness  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms  to  invest,  which  is  mostly
financed  by  bank  borrowing,  seems  to  have  gradually  strengthened,  though  up  until  now  such
investment has been contained within cash flow and has not yet led to an increase in bank borrowing.
Considering that the non-performing asset problem of financial institutions has not been completely
resolved, and taking into account the excess debt of the corporate sector, we have not yet reached a
point where we can say that the problem of the aftereffects stemming from the bursting of the bubble
has been resolved. In addition, the continuous decline in property prices is another matter of concern.
Furthermore,  the  consolidation  of  financial  institutions  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  size.  The  key  to
successful consolidation is to become more efficiently managed through a strategy of “selection and
concentration”,  and it  will  take  more time  for such consolidation  to  bear  fruit.  Nevertheless,  at  this
moment, it should be noted, and welcomed, that amid the irreversible trend of financial globalization
and  the  advance  of  information  technology  it  is  the  initiative  of  the  private  sector,  not  that  of  the
public sector, which will pave the way to the new economy.
Parallel with such moves on the part of major financial institutions, progress has been made in direct
financing such as the establishment of MOTHERS on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in November 1999,
followed  by  NASDAQ  JAPAN  established  in  early  May  at  the  initiative  of  the  private  sector  and
which  will  start  operation  in  June.  I  have  repeatedly  emphasized  that  at  the  present  time  when
structural  adjustment  is  much  needed,  abundant  domestic  savings  should  be  utilized  to  finance
investment in the form of “risk capital”. And, I thus welcome that such markets have been inaugurated
to fulfill an intermediary function for risk capital.
New phase of corporate restructuring
Second, efforts toward structural reform have also been made in terms of corporate restructuring, and I
think we have begun to observe the result of such efforts. When talking about restructuring and the
3
BIS Review 46/2000
results in the recent period, those in the business world say that they have been pursuing restructuring
for a long time. I fully commend past efforts toward corporate restructuring, but what I would like to
emphasize here is that the restructuring witnessed since last year is of a different nature compared with
the past and such a tendency has recently become more distinct. In my view, past restructuring focused
mostly on cost reductions, in other words, downsizing. To the contrary, current restructuring, though
initially  having  a  tendency  toward  downsizing,  has  shifted  to  focus  on  business  content  or
reengineering, which means the restructuring of production and management systems which have been
rendered inefficient. I believe that the restructuring of Japanese firms has truly entered a new phase.
Behind  such  a  change  in  the  focus  of  restructuring,  those  in  the  business  world,  as  in  the  case  of
financial institutions, experienced a protracted recession and were faced with a very severe financial
environment, particularly from 1997 to 1998. During this period, many small and medium-sized firms
faced  funding  difficulties,  and  from  the  summer  to  the  autumn  of  1998  when  financial  and  capital
markets both at home and abroad were under stress due to such factors as the Russian crisis, not a few
representative  big  Japanese  firms  also  faced  similar  difficulties.  Such  an  experience  linked  with
changes  in  the  accounting  system,  namely  the  consolidated  and  mark-to-market  methods,  brought
about  the  recognition  or  a  sense  of  crisis  on  the  part  of  firms  that  Japan’s  traditional  corporate
governance including the main bank system and cross-shareholdings would not be viable for long and
that  for  their  own  survival  they  should  enhance  their  evaluation  in  the  capital  market  through  such
measures  as  improved  capital  efficiency.  All  this  seems  to  have  triggered  current  full-fledged
restructuring.
Current restructuring is different from past downsizing in its nature because firms are required more
than  ever  to  efficiently  allocate  resources  and  improve  profitability.  For  example,  since  big  firms
engaged in the production of electric machinery and chemicals could not enjoy economies of scope
any more, they concentrated on areas where they had the most edge, recently termed “areas of core
competence”  in  Japan,  and  at  the  same  time  withdrew  from  or  scaled  down  unprofitable  business
areas.  And,  among  basic  materials  industries  burdened  with  excess  capacity,  there  have  been
movements  toward  consolidation  including  mergers  and  acquisitions  and  obsolete  equipment
beginning  to  be  scrapped.  Recent  restructuring  and  consolidation  in  the  corporate  sector,  including
financial  institutions,  extends  beyond  the  existing  keiretsu  and  corporate  group  frameworks,  and  in
some cases has proceeded globally with the involvement of foreign capital. Also, good use is being
made of such new methods as mergers and acquisitions and the holding company format. Last year,
mergers  and  acquisitions  increased  substantially  and  direct  investment  into  Japan,  which  indicates
foreign capital inflows, reached a record high 1.5 trillion yen on a balance of payment statistics basis,
three  times  the  prior-year  level.  Of  course,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  recovery  of  corporate
profitability  has  been  largely  attributable  to  past  restructuring,  that  is,  downsizing  centering  on  a
reduction in labor costs. However, current restructuring can be expected to exert pressure on firms to
withdraw  from  low  profitability  areas  and  concentrate  resources  on  highly  profitable  and  strategic
areas such as investment in information technology-related areas. We continue to pay close attention
to how the recent development will lead to the recovery of corporate profitability and competitiveness,
and eventually the restoration of corporate vitality.
Possibility of an information technology (IT) revolution
Third,  the  IT  revolution  seems  to  have  reached  Japan.  In  the  1990s,  with  the  improvement  in
productivity induced by the expansion of IT-related investment, the United States enjoyed prolonged
expansion and price stability, although we observed such distortions as excessive consumption due to
higher stock prices and a rising current account deficit. In Japan, we have recently witnessed a rapid
increase in IT-related investment  by  semiconductor  manufacturers.  And,  I  feel that  expectations  are
gradually emerging in Japanese business circles that a mega change which occurs only once or twice
in  a  hundred  years  might  have  started  in  Japan.  However,  there  still  remains  a  deeply-embedded
pessimism that Japan is more than ten years behind the United States in IT-related business areas and
it is not easy even to catch up. To understand the coexistence of expectations and pessimism, let us
examine discussions regarding how the IT-related revolution has been affecting Japan’s economy.
BIS Review 46/2000
4
One topic for discussion is the spread of IT-related investment in the corporate sector. In this regard, it
is  necessary  to distinguish  between  investment  by  IT  producers and  that  by  IT  users.  It  is  true  that
IT-related  investment  in  the  United  States  has  centered  on  the  computer  and  telecommunications
industries which have recorded the largest improvement in productivity. But it is also true that IT users
in a wide variety of industries such as other manufacturing, financial, and distribution industries have
improved  productivity  by  way  of  IT-related  investment,  which  has  laid  the  foundation  for  the
prolonged  expansion  of  investment.  In  contrast,  the  current  surge  in  IT-related  investment  in  Japan
seems to be at the stage where IT producers such as semiconductor-related manufacturers expand their
investment  in  response  to  the  worldwide  expansion  of  IT  demand.  While  they  are  important
investments,  the  experience  in  1995  and  1996  shows  us  that  an  investment  boom  is  bound  to  be
cyclical, which sometimes takes the form of large-scale stock adjustment. Therefore, it is important
whether investment by IT users is sustainable. It is encouraging news that many firms are considering
strengthening  their  production  and  sales  systems  by  introducing  supply  chain  management  with  the
aim of information sharing among client firms as well as procuring materials through the Internet. In
the Economic Planning Agency’s Survey on Corporate Behavior published this April, many surveyed
listed firms reported excess production capacity on the one hand, and a shortage of information-related
equipment on the other. The future outlook for investment by IT users needs to be judged in relation to
Japanese-style management. Here, I would like to point  out  that  the  spread of  such  investment to  a
wide area, including small and medium-sized firms, will be the  key  to  the  sustainable expansion  of
investment, and eventually to an improvement in productivity.
IT can be utilized by the corporate sector which is called B-to-B, that is, business to business, and also
by  the  household  sector  which  is  called  B-to-C,  that  is,  business  to  consumer.  Another  topic  for
discussion is how Japanese firms will respond to the situation when IT is introduced to the household
sector. The IT revolution in the United States in the 1990s substantially enhanced productivity through
the  enhancement  of  operational  processes  as  personal  computer  networks  were  introduced  to  the
corporate sector. Japan was behind the US in this regard, which is perhaps one of the reasons behind
the “lost decade of the 1990s”. Some features of Japan’s corporate system were said to be related to
this delay. As you may remember, up until the 1980s, Japanese-style management, as represented by
keiretsu transactions, the main bank system, and lifetime employment, had been regarded as superior
in  terms  of  information  sharing  among  related  parties  through  long-term  relationships.  In  contrast,
since the US-style big business model was vertically integrated and susceptible to sectionalism, it had
been considered inferior to the Japanese system in processing information. However, any management
system should be evaluated in relation to the technology available at the time. The Japanese system is
no  exception  and  it  has  been  found to  be not necessarily  superior  on  all  accounts  when  the  cost  of
transmitting  and  processing  information  is  dramatically  declining  due  to  the  rapid  progress  of
information and telecommunications  technology.  Rather, the  merits of the Japanese system  led  to  a
lack of incentive to actively introduce IT for cost reduction purposes. In addition, while  firms  must
review existing transaction styles and reduce workers to take full advantage of the benefits of IT, the
Japanese system tends to make it difficult for firms to implement such changes. Furthermore, it should
be noted that the 1990s was a period during which Japan had to face the aftermath of the bursting of
the bubble and also that it has been difficult to create “venture businesses” in the cultural and social
climate of Japan. Considering that all this has constituted constraints for Japanese firms to introduce
IT, the IT revolution has widened the gap in competitiveness between the United States and Japan.
The recent move toward full-fledged restructuring and increase in investment by IT users can be seen
as  evidence  that  Japanese  firms  have  begun  to  be  aware  of  various  problems  related  to  IT.  The
foundation for venture businesses to be created and flourish is finally being laid as symbolized by the
“bit valley”, and partly due to such development the number of newly established firms as a whole has
been gradually increasing since last summer. The use of IT in the corporate sector has just started in
Japan. Even though the corporate sector in Japan lags behind that in the United States in the use of IT,
there is a piece of good news for Japan. The next ten years are regarded as a period during which IT
will  be  actively  used  by  consumers,  and  not  only  personal  computers  but  also  IT-related  electrical
appliances and  mobile phones  will  be  used  as  IT  terminals. Japanese firms  have  traditionally  had  a
competitive  edge  in  such  areas  as  electrical  appliances  and  mobile  phones,  and  indeed  they  are  the
front runner in such areas as the utilization of mobile phones as information terminals. Regarding the
5
BIS Review 46/2000
business-to-consumer area, the United States is yet to construct a plausible business model, and there
is still a lot of uncertainty about the future. Notwithstanding this, it is important that even though the
relative position of the United States and Japan may not be reversed, the possibility has emerged that
Japan can fully compete with the United States in the IT field. These developments also seem to have
had a positive impact on firms in enabling them to regain vitality.
3.
Escape from the lost decade
Remaining tasks
Compared with my July 1999 speech in which I said that the dynamism of the Japanese economy had
been  contained,  the  developments  that  I  have  described  today  indicate  that  such  dynamism  has
eventually begun to be re-ignited. However, this is far from saying that all structural problems inherent
in Japan’s economy have been solved.
For example, regarding the balance sheet problem of financial institutions, while the financial system
has indeed escaped from instability, the problem is not  yet  fully  resolved  as  I  previously  remarked.
The excess debt problem on the part of firms has yet to be completely solved. Furthermore, as a result
of firms putting more emphasis on capital efficiency, for a while they will continue to reduce assets
with low profitability.  In this regard, the  Bank  of Japan’s  March Tankan  survey  showed  that  major
manufacturing industries expected the ratio of ordinary profits to sales for the current financial year to
be around 4 percent, which is about the past average. We may be able to say that profitability indices
on a flow basis have recovered to the average level of the  past.  However,  profitability  indices  on  a
stock basis such as ROE and ROA have remained substantially below the level in the 1980s, which is
a different aspect of what I referred to as a “decline in capital productivity” in my speech last summer.
Under such circumstances, while investment will be made in highly profitable new areas such as the
IT-related field, asset reduction will continue in existing low profit areas in order to raise ROE and
ROA.  According  to  the  Economic  Planning  Agency’s  Survey  on  Corporate  Behavior,  about  half  of
listed  firms  responded  that  it  would  take  more  than  two  years  for  their  real  estate,  buildings,  and
production facilities to return to appropriate levels.
With respect to corporate restructuring and the IT revolution, there is no knowing how they will lead
to an improvement in corporate profitability and increase in investment.  Even  if  higher profitability
and larger investment were realized,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  polarization  seen  in the  economy
might  become,  albeit  temporarily,  more  apparent.  For  example,  while  there  are  industries  regaining
profitability  supported  by  restructuring  and  IT  demand,  not  a  few  firms  will  be  left  behind  in
traditional  and  domestic  demand-oriented  industries.  In  this  regard,  public  utilities,  which  have
experienced  a  series  of  deregulatory  measures,  continue  to  suppress  investment,  and  small  and
medium-sized wholesalers and retailers who are susceptible to the effects of the distribution revolution
have been slow to exhibit a business recovery. Regarding employment, there is a possibility that while
demand for workers who have skills compatible with the new era increases, demand for workers who
lack such skills declines. In this context, the unemployment problem might become an issue. These
negatives can be termed the “shadow of structural reform”.
Since it is difficult to forecast the impact of IT on corporate profitability and growth, we should bear
in mind that there may be large swings in the stock market which tends to strongly respond to a variety
of  forecasts.  In  fact,  strong  expectations  last  year  for  the  growth  of  IT-related  industry  led  to  a
substantial increase in the prices of IT-related stocks. On the other hand, while the improvements in
Japan’s economy is becoming distinct, IT-related stocks in Japan have recently been bearish reflecting
the worldwide correction of IT-related stocks. These swings are unavoidable to some extent when the
market is trying to identify growth industries and the key firms which lead such industries. The swings
in stock prices will reveal promising new technologies and firms which incorporate these technologies,
and nurture them. The Bank of Japan continues to pay due attention to stock price developments, and,
in  so  doing,  we  think  it  important  to  calmly  identify  the  meaning  and  background  of  stock  price
fluctuations.
BIS Review 46/2000
6
Furthermore,  a  declining  birth  rate  and  aging  society  present  a  long-term  challenge  to  Japan’s
economy. For example, with respect to the high savings rate of the private sector in Japan, I have often
remarked  that  the  lack  of  consensus  among  the  public  as  to  how  future  pensions  and  medical  fees
should  be  funded  has  restrained  consumption  through  anxiety  about  the  future.  In  this  regard,  the
introduction of a nursing care system from this year is certainly a step forward, and I hope this system
will take hold.
“Creative destruction” revisited
When the economy recovers, as is now happening, it might well be the case that efforts for structural
reform  might  be  neglected  due  to  a  sense  of  security.  In  addition,  when  the  shadow  of  structural
reform becomes conspicuous, for example in employment, calls to reverse such reform and pressure
for additional macroeconomic policy measures such as the expansion of aggregate demand are very
likely  to  intensify.  However,  there  is  no  doubt  that  structural  reform  has  contributed  to  the  current
economic  recovery,  and  we  should  not  forget  that  remaining  structural  problems  must  be  solved  to
achieve sustained economic expansion in the future. Structural problems cannot be solved solely by
macroeconomic policy measures such as  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  Now  that  financial and  capital
markets  are  highly  globalized,  any  attempt  to  wipe  out  past  problems  by  generating  inflation  will
never be successful. Let me emphasize again that it is private sector vitality in the form of “creative
destruction” that can solve these structural problems. And, as the US experience shows, private sector
vitality will gradually absorb the adverse effects of structural reform.
In this “era of metamorphosis” as represented by the current IT revolution, there exists considerable
uncertainty about the future. From another angle, we can say that it is an era where innovation can lead
to business opportunities. Under such circumstances, the role which the public sector should play is to
prepare a market environment which is conducive to nurturing innovation. One thing is the stability of
the  macroeconomic  environment.  In  this  regard,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  to
maintain  stable  macroeconomic  conditions  through  price  stability.  Other  important  roles  that  the
public sector should play are to promote deregulation and improve the taxation and legal systems so
that firms and households can take appropriate risks more easily and operate more flexibly.
As such, it is my view that the role of the public sector in this era of metamorphosis should be to focus
on  preparing  an  appropriate  market  environment.  In  this  regard,  we  should  learn  from  the  US
experience where the early Clinton administration advocated the “information  super highway”  plan,
but which was later dropped in favor of preparing an environment conducive to encouraging the IT
revolution led by the private sector. In Japan, triggered by  severe economic  conditions in  1997  and
1998, we have seen efforts toward preparing an environment suitable for economic rebirth, including
enactment of the Economic Revitalization Law. As we move toward a full-fledged economic recovery,
the  role  of  the  public  sector  and  economic  policy  should  be  flexible  so  as  to  be  able  to  remain
consistent with an era of metamorphosis. In this regard, it is necessary to examine the role of public
investment, the level of which is said to be very high among industrial countries, from the viewpoint
of fiscal deficits as well as whether such investment is in line with the current era of metamorphosis.
In July 1999 when I spoke on structural problems in Japan’s economy, there were more pessimistic
views about Japan’s economy than today. On that occasion, I said I was proud of Japan’s high quality
labor  force,  technology,  and  management  skills  which  had  created  a  big  economic  power  from  the
ruins after the war, and emphasized the need of ‘creative destruction”. And now, after almost a year, I
am quite encouraged to find that signs of a recovery have been increasing. I hope the current favorable
developments will gather momentum and that the day will soon come when Japan’s economy returns
to a full-fledged recovery path led by the private sector. Let me conclude my remarks by saying I hope
that the 1990s will be revaluated as the ten years which laid the foundation for the prosperity of the
next generation.
7
BIS Review 46/2000
