Mr Thiessen discusses accountability and transparency
in Canada’s monetary policy and assesses recent economic developments
Remarks  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Metropolitan  Halifax
Chamber of Commerce, Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 27 January 2000.
 Accountability and transparency in Canada’s monetary policy
Public sector institutions have been undergoing significant changes over the past decade. One of the
most  important  changes  has  been  the  move  to  greater  accountability.  Public  institutions  are  now
required to be more open and to provide more information about their operations. Or, to use the word
currently in vogue, to be more “transparent.”
Nowhere has this move towards greater transparency been more dramatic than among central banks in
the major industrial countries. Traditionally, central banks had been rather closed, almost mysterious,
institutions. This reflected the view that financial markets needed to be “surprised” if monetary policy
was to have a significant effect. In recent years, the philosophy behind monetary policy in Canada, and
in most major countries, has been moving in the other direction. Not only does this reflect the need for
accountability,  but  also  the  fact  that  central  banks  have  come  to  appreciate  that  transparency  can
actually lead to better policy outcomes.
Today, I would like to tell you about some of the steps we have taken to increase transparency in the
conduct of Canadian monetary policy. In keeping with this theme, I will also take this opportunity to
bring you up to date with the Bank’s view of recent economic developments at home and abroad and
tell  you  how  the  outlook  shapes  up.  I  will  also  discuss  what  monetary  policy  is  doing  to  keep  the
current economic expansion in Canada on a sustainable course.
Accountability and transparency in monetary policy
I  would  suggest  that  what  is  absolutely  crucial  for  the  accountability  and  transparency  of  public
institutions is clear objectives. This is certainly true for monetary policy.
In  Canada,  a  major  step  towards  greater  openness  was  the  adoption  in  1991  of  specific  targets  for
inflation  reduction.  Inflation  was  quickly  brought  down  and,  since  1994,  the  objective  has  been  to
keep  it low  and  stable  -  within  a  range  of  1%  to  3%.  This  explicit  target  is  a  precise  yardstick  for
measuring  the  Bank’s  success  or  failure  and,  thus,  provides  the  basis  for  our  accountability  to  the
public.
But  as  I  have  said  many  times  in  the  past,  low  inflation  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  We  focus  on  low
inflation because it contributes to a more productive, stable, and prosperous economy. So ultimately,
our  accountability  must  be  seen in terms  of inflation  control  as  a  means  to  better  overall  economic
performance.
Interestingly, once a central bank has adopted an explicit inflation target, as we have, and is held to
account for it, the move towards greater transparency is speeded up. For it quickly becomes apparent
that  monetary  policy  will  be  more  successful  in  meeting  the  target  if  both  the  public  and  financial
markets  understand  the  factors  affecting  inflation  as  well  as  the  central  bank’s  assessment  of  those
factors and its likely response.
Here in Canada, we found that, as we consistently met our targets, public expectations about future
inflation  changed  -  the  more  credible  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  the  targets  became,  the  more
Canadians formed their plans on the assumption that the future trend of inflation would stay inside the
target range.
1
BIS Review 8/2000
Over time, a credible commitment to inflation control also sets other positive developments in motion.
As  credibility  rises,  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  diminishes.  Interest  rates  are  lower  than
otherwise  and  investment  in  machinery,  equipment,  and  technology  increases,  leading  to  stronger
economic growth in the longer run.
But that is not all. As Canadians become more confident that inflation will be controlled, they are less
quick  to  react  to  unexpected  disturbances  that  could  affect  inflation.  This  contributes  to  greater
economic stability and gives the Bank of Canada a bit more time to assess the extent and persistence
of such disturbances. Greater public confidence thus gives the Bank more latitude to explore the limits
of  the  economy’s  capacity  to  produce  and  to  create  jobs  without  setting  off  inflation  pressures  that
undermine the sustainability of the economic expansion.
Transparency and accountability in monetary policy require effective communication. At the Bank, we
have undertaken a series of initiatives to improve our communications with the public.
Five years ago, we redesigned our Annual Report to make it a more reader-friendly yearly account of
how we have managed the Bank and how effectively we have carried out our main responsibilities.
At that time, we also introduced a Monetary Policy Report, which is published every six months - in
May and November. This Report describes our management of monetary policy and gives the Bank’s
assessment of recent economic information as well as our outlook for the economy and inflation.
After  the  release  of  each  Monetary  Policy  Report,  we  meet  with  media  as  well  as  with  business
economists and financial analysts. In addition, I appear before a parliamentary committee to discuss
the Report’s contents. Both of these initiatives are important parts of the accountability process.
Six  months,  however,  has  been  proven  to  be  rather  a  long  time  between  Monetary  Policy  Reports,
especially for market participants and economists  who  follow  monetary  policy  closely.  That is  why
next  month  we  will  issue  an  Update  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  from  the  Bank’s  Governing
Council. It will appear in the Winter 1999-2000 issue of the Bank of Canada Review. These Updates
will  be  published  regularly,  every  February  and  August,  between  issues  of  the  Monetary  Policy
Report.
Because Canada is such a large country with so many diverse economic regions, it is important that
the  Bank  maintain  contacts  with  the  public  that  are  country-wide  and  that  involve  two-way
communication.  We  need  to  hear  first-hand  what  is  happening  to  the  economy  in  every  corner  of
Canada. That is why, in 1997, we set up five regional offices, including one here in Halifax for the
Atlantic region. Our representatives are in frequent contact with various local associations, businesses,
community  groups,  government  officials,  colleges,  and  universities  to  give  and  receive  information
and to exchange views on the economy and monetary policy.
To supplement these contacts, my senior colleagues and I frequently travel across the country to talk
to groups, like this, to respond to questions, and to listen to comments and concerns. That way, we
ensure that we are heard and also that we hear what is going on from one end of this country to the
other.
For those of you who surf the Internet, I should mention that  there  is  also  a  tremendous  amount  of
information  on  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  Web  site.  All  of  our  recent  publications,  speeches,  and  press
releases  are  there.  You  will  also  find  short,  straightforward  notes  explaining  various  aspects  of
monetary  policy  as  well  as  information  on  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates.  In  addition,  our  site
features a rather neat inflation calculator, which allows you to find out what inflation has done to the
value of your money over any period during the past 85 years. This can really bring home just how
inflation eats into the buying power of money over time.
These  are  just  some  of  the  things  we  have  done  to  become  more  open,  understandable,  and
accountable to the Canadian public.
I would now like to give you my reading of where the Canadian economy is, where we are headed,
and what it all means in terms of the outlook for inflation and monetary policy.
BIS Review 8/2000
2
The Canadian economy - recent record and outlook
1999 turned out to be a very good year for Canada. Our economy rebounded strongly from the global
financial crisis of 1997-98 and its negative effects on the prices of the key primary commodities we
export. When the numbers for the final quarter of 1999 are out, I expect that they will show that the
Canadian economy has expanded by close to 4% since the fourth quarter of 1998. And employment
has  been  growing  strongly,  taking  the  national  unemployment  rate  down  to  an  18-year  low  of  just
under  7%.  Nova  Scotia’s  economy  has  also  done  well  this  past  year,  both  in  terms  of  output  and
employment growth. Indeed, when it comes to job creation through the year (that is, December 1999
over December 1998), Nova Scotia has done better than the national average.
A number of factors have supported the economic upswing in Canada. On the external side, we have
greatly benefited from an amazingly strong US market. A pickup in growth in Europe and a recovery
in some of the Asian economies that were most hurt by the financial crisis have also helped. Another
important factor has been  the turnaround  in  primary  commodity  prices, in  response  to firmer  world
economic  activity.  Stronger  domestic  spending  in  Canada,  reflecting  growing  confidence,  rising
employment,  and  relatively  low  interest  rates,  has  also  been  instrumental  in  boosting  the  rate  of
economic expansion.
When I talked about our economic prospects in Charlottetown in early November and again when our
Monetary Policy Report was released shortly after that, I indicated that the Bank expected a positive
picture  for  2000.  This  meant  continued  healthy  growth  and  an  underlying  rate  of  inflation  (as
measured by the Consumer Price Index, excluding food, energy, and the effects of changes in indirect
taxes) near the middle of our 1% to 3% target range.
Information received since then suggests that in the future there may be more upward momentum of
demand in Canada than we thought because of greater strength both in the world economy, especially
in the United States, and in global commodity markets. So we may be looking at a somewhat faster
pace  of  economic  expansion  for  this  year  -  in  the  upper  half  of  the  2¾%  to  3¾%  range  that  we
suggested in the autumn.
I also pointed out last November that there were inflation risks in the outlook for Canada that the Bank
was sensitive to, and should be ready to face, given that monetary policy must be forward-looking. I
highlighted two risks in particular: a potential buildup of inflation pressures in the United States that
could  spill  over  to  Canada;  and  the  possibility  of  a  much  stronger  momentum  of  demand  in  this
country from both domestic and foreign sources.
Economic developments since November continue to point to these risks. And they underline the need
for the Bank to be vigilant and ready to act in a timely fashion to safeguard Canada’s low  trend of
inflation.  For  let  us  make  no  mistake:  a  resurgence  of  inflation  would  undermine  our  chances  of  a
durable economic expansion.
Of course, the challenge for monetary policy is to assess carefully just when action is needed. Ideally,
we  would  want  our  economy  to  operate  at  a  level  that  is  as  close  to  full  production  capacity  as
possible. At this level, inflation will stay low and stable, and the economy can expand at as rapid a
pace as is sustainable over time. It is when persistently strong demand pushes the economy to operate
well  above  capacity  over  a  period  of  time  that  inflation  pressures  develop.  This  is  what  monetary
policy must seek to avoid.
Unfortunately, in practice, it is very difficult to estimate exactly where that sustainable operating level
for  the  economy  is.  And  this  is  even  harder  after  a  period  of  major  restructuring,  such  as  we  have
experienced in Canada in the 1990s. While conventional measures suggest that the economy may now
be operating at capacity, it is quite likely that structural changes have raised the output potential of our
economy. But we are not sure by how much.
That is why the Bank closely monitors a wide range of indicators that can help it assess the extent of
current and future pressures on capacity and inflation. Some of the elements going into this assessment
are:  unexpected  movements  in  actual  inflation;  changes  in  expectations  of  future  inflation;  other
measures of pressures in product and labour markets; the growth of money and credit; and information
gathered by our regional representatives from business contacts across Canada.
3
BIS Review 8/2000
Because of the current strong momentum of demand and high levels of economic activity, and because
of the uncertainty about Canada’s production potential, the Bank must continue to be on guard. It must
continue  to  watch  for  leading  signs  of  future  price  and  cost  pressures  and  stand  ready  to  respond
promptly if such signs emerge.
To conclude, the Bank of Canada has taken a number of steps to become more open, transparent, and
accountable about the conduct of monetary policy. Through a regular flow of reports and speeches like
this, we intend to continue telling you where the economy is and where we think it is going, what risks
we see out there, and what monetary policy can do to reduce them.
These days, the Bank is sensitive to the increased risks of inflation coming from a more synchronized
expansion of the world’s major economies. Not only does a buoyant US economy continue to bolster
the demand for Canadian products, but firmer commodity prices are boosting our national income and
adding to the impetus of domestic spending in Canada.
The Bank remains committed to delivering a trend of inflation that is inside the target range of 1% to
3%. Because the long and the short of it is that low and stable inflation is a crucial ingredient for a
durable, healthy economic expansion.
BIS Review 8/2000
4
