Arnold Schilder: The boundaries of the Civil Society?
The example offered by financial supervision
Speech given by Professor A Schilder, Executive Director of the Nederlandsche Bank, in the context
of the Second European Social Week held in Bad Honnef, Germany, on 7 April 2000.
 Introduction
The  main  theme  of  this  Second  European  Social  Week  is  the  establishment  of  a  Civil  Society  in
Europe. This Week is intended to generate initiatives which could contribute towards this goal. At the
same time, we need to ask ourselves where the boundaries of a Civil Society lie. Put differently, does
the model for the Civil Society meet the requirements of the European Society that we envisage? I am
sure that you have no need of an explanation  of the concept of a  Civil  Society.  Put  briefly,  a  Civil
Society is a society built on a large measure of self-control. If you favour a Civil Society you expect
individuals to engage in responsible behaviour. In our societies, freedom is a great good. But freedom
goes hand in hand with responsibility. One man’s freedom may be another’s lack of it. That is why
freedom is curtailed by standards and values. At the end of the day, it is these standards and values
that protect our freedom. These days we are increasingly asking ourselves to what extent individuals
are capable of taking responsibility for their actions. This question arises from our growing interest in
moral  values. There  is an  increasing  call  for  control  and  supervision  of  compliance  with  standards.
Why? Well, we are living in highly democratized times, where the need for transparency and openness
is growing daily. This is not least because of the development of a wide variety of new media, such as
the Internet. Whether this call for more supervision and control spells the end of the Civil Society is
something  I  will  be  going  into  later.  Let  me  first  say  something  about  the  boundaries  of  the  Civil
Society. Why do we need to see to it that individuals shoulder their responsibilities? I shall illustrate
my point by taking a look at supervision as it is exercised on the financial sector.
Financial supervision in summary
Before  discussing  the  boundaries  of  the  Civil  Society,  I  would  like  to  provide  you  with  a  brief
overview of financial supervision. The emphasis will be on how that supervision is organised in the
Netherlands.  However,  keep  in  mind  that  the  issues  confronting  the  Dutch  financial  system  are  no
different from those in other European countries or other parts of the world. In this context, the fact
that supervision is organised differently from one country to the next is irrelevant. Supervision on the
Dutch  financial  sector  is  segmented.  The  supervision  on  banks  (credit  institutions),  investment
institutions  and  exchange  offices  has  been  delegated  to  the  Nederlandsche  Bank.  The  Bank  is  also
responsible for the stability of the financial system as a whole. Insurance companies are supervised by
the  Dutch  Insurance  Supervision  Board,  while  the  Dutch  Securities  Board  supervises  the  stock
exchange, securities firms and securities business in general. Regulatory issues which involve all three
supervisory authorities are dealt with by the Council of Financial Regulators, without detracting from
their individual responsibilities. This model is receiving increasing attention internationally. It forms a
good alternative to the supervisory model whereby all regulators are united in a  single  agency. The
supervision  of  the  Dutch  financial  sector  is  laid  down  in  a  number  of  statutory  instruments.  The
statutory objectives of banking supervision in particular may be summarised as follows: safeguarding
a stable financial system, protecting creditors and, within the near future, maintaining the integrity of
the financial sector, objectives which I will be looking at extensively later on. Let us now return to the
Civil Society: what are key issues here? There are three,  which  I  will  be  discussing  in  detail.  First,
externalities,  i.e.  the  benefit  for  and  cost  to  society  of  individual  action.  Second,  reprehensible
behaviour  on  the  part  of  individuals.  Third,  the  need  to  protect  the  interests  of  weaker  groups  in
society. In each case, I will be drawing parallels with supervision of the financial sector and pointing
out what lessons could be drawn from this for the Civil Society.
1
BIS Review 32/2000
Key issues of Civil Society: externalities
A Civil Society is no free-for-all; it is a society of individuals engaging in responsible behaviour. As
the  Chairman  of  the  Van  Ede  Foundation,  Mr  Leeuwens,  put  it  very  aptly  not  long  ago:  acting
responsibly is acting appropriately on the common ground between self-interest and the greater good.
This is not a novel idea, and has always held its place in economic science, as Mr Leeuwens so rightly
pointed out. Adam Smith was a fervent advocate of free enterprise. He argued that when individuals
are free to choose how to use scarce goods and capital, the resources available to an economy are put
to their best use. Adam Smith was not thinking in terms of mere self-interest. He spoke of an invisible
hand, providing guidance to the market mechanism. He too assumed that, individuals are guided by
the  common  good  consciously  or  unconsciously.  The  question  arises  whether  this  invisible  hand
always works properly. Most individuals base their behaviour on a cost/benefit analysis of their own.
Even an individual who tries to take the general interest into account has no inkling of the true costs
and benefits of his decisions for society as a whole. In addition, individuals often base their decisions
on less rational considerations as well. Take, for instance, investor behaviour, such as the herd instinct
on the stock exchanges. This can be explained by the theory of cognitive dissonance: investors filter
information  to  justify  earlier  investment  decisions.  Economic  textbooks  often  cite  environmental
pollution as an example of an area where the invisible hand does not work as it should. Industrialists
undoubtedly  take  the  consequences  of  their  production  process  for  the  environment  into  account.
Nevertheless,  they  are  incapable  of  making  an  optimum  assessment  of  the  costs  of  pollution  for
society. In cases such as this, we need to seek ways of internalising the externalities into the market
mechanism. One way of dealing with this problem is to impose statutory requirements on the release
of  pollutants  and  to  set  up  an  agency  which  checks  compliance  with  these  requirements.  A  Civil
Society  will  also  have  externalities  to  deal  with.  Even  if  the  participants  in  a  Civil  Society  behave
responsibly,  the  outcome  of  their  actions  may  not  be  optimal  to  society.  To  what  extent  do
externalities figure in the functioning of the financial sector? A good example is the Nederlandsche
Bank’s  responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Through  their  behaviour,  financial
institutions  may  jeopardize  their  own  continuity.  Take,  for  instance,  a  bank  which  exposes  itself  to
considerable risk by granting vast, high-risk loans. If the borrower defaults on these loans, the bank
could founder. That in itself would be a disaster, but the ultimate outcome could be worse still. If the
bank in question has borrowed heavily from another bank, the latter may also  find  itself  in  trouble.
This is known as the domino effect. In order to prevent such situations from arising, the legislator has
set up a banking supervisory authority. The first task entrusted to this supervisor was to watch over the
continuity of banks. This is where prudential supervision came in. It made it possible for regulators to
issue  rules  and  guidelines  for  the  way  banks  manage  their  balance  sheets.  The  best  known  -
internationally-agreed - rule is the Basel Capital Accord. It compels banks to maintain a buffer of own
funds, of  at least  8%  of  all loans  outstanding.  Should a  bank  fail,  something  that  cannot  be  wholly
precluded by  supervision,  the  supervisory  authorities  can  resort to  other  ways  and  means to  keep  it
going.  In  the  early-1990s,  the  Swedish  government  made  vast  amounts  of  funds  available  to  the
Swedish banking system when a major financial crisis threatened to paralyse the entire financial sector
there. If and when a central bank will actually act as lender of last resort is known only to that central
bank. This is to prevent banks from engaging in “moral hazard” behaviour. If banks knew under what
conditions liquidity support is given to the banking system, they might anticipate such action, rather
than shoulder their own responsibility for the continuity of their business. This brings us back to the
Civil Society. Even though there may be an authority which supervises the functioning of the financial
sector, at the end of the day it is up to banks themselves to bear responsibility at the very least for their
own  continuity.  Supervisors  do  not  act  for  bankers.  In  other  words,  rules  and  standards  -  and  the
establishment  of  an  agency  which  ensures  compliance  -  may  help  to  internalise  externalities  in  the
Civil Society; ultimately, the participants of the Civil Society must shoulder their own responsibilities.
Key elements of the Civil Society: reprehensible behaviour
The  second  constraint  on  the  Civil  Society  is  reprehensible  behaviour  on  the  part  of  individual
participants in respect of certain standards and values. Those who advocate a Civil Society assume that
everyone is more or less concerned with the common good. Everyone operates on the common ground
BIS Review 32/2000
2
between  self-interest  and  the  greater  good.  There  are,  however,  always  people  who  have  only  their
own best interests at heart, and who have no qualms about sacrificing others in the process. This is
considered reprehensible behaviour. In this sphere, too, there is a need for an agency to demarcate the
boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable behaviour, as well as to ensure that these boundaries
are not transgressed. Reprehensible behaviour is completely out of the question in the financial sector.
Individuals entrust their money to financial institutions. Abuse of that trust will damage the reputation
of  the  bank  in  question,  and  with  it  possibly  its  continuity.  That  is  why  financial  supervisors  are
paying increasing attention to the integrity of financial institutions. This brings us to an area of great
activity. In the past, supervisors focussed notably on the prudential aspects of banks’ operations. Over
the years, however, their attention has shifted to the integrity aspects of banking. First of all, it turned
out  that  reprehensible  behaviour  can also  threaten  the  continued  existence  of  a  financial  institution.
Secondly, the requirements to be met by the integrity of the financial sector have been sharpened over
the  years.  Insider  trading,  never  questioned  several  decades  ago,  is  now  considered  totally
unacceptable in most countries. The Nederlandsche Bank has also come to pay increasing attention to
financial  integrity.  In  July  1997,  the  Bank  decided  to  set  up  an  integrity  unit.  The  unit  offers
specialised support in the sphere of regular integrity supervision. It also takes part in policymaking in
this field. Financial integrity has since come to figure prominently on the Dutch political agenda. As
things  now  stand,  integrity  supervision  is  becoming  a  separate,  statutory  aim  of  Dutch  banking
supervision.  In  anticipation  of  this  development,  an  integrity  audit  has  been  drawn  up  under  the
auspices of the integrity unit. This is in fact a computerised methodology that allows supervisors to
assess  banks  systematically  in  terms  of  integrity.  Back  to  the  Civil  Society  again.  Tackling
reprehensible behaviour does not mean distrusting every participant in the Civil Society in advance.
That is in any case not how financial supervisors see their task. Financial institutions, and certainly the
overwhelming majority of banks, are not out to engage in reprehensible behaviour. After all, if they
did, they could be jeopardising their continuity. However, there is always the chance that an individual
employed at an institution cannot resist the temptation to put his own interests above those of others.
Supervisors must therefore be on the lookout at all times. However, if distrust were to get the upper
hand,  the  open  relationship  between  the  supervisor  and  the  bank  would  be  undermined.  The  Civil
Society, too, cannot function on the basis of distrust. The measure of trust among people determines
the measure of cohesion within society.
Key elements of the Civil Society: protecting the weak
Let us take a look at the third element of the Civil Society. The participants of the Civil Society are
basically  assumed  to  be  equal.  They  allegedly  have  the  same  information  at  their  disposal  and  are
considered  capable  of  looking  after their  own interests.  In  practice,  however, that  is  not  always  the
case. Society also encompasses weaker groups, which are insufficiently able to defend their interests
in  a  Civil  Society.  There  are  several  solutions  to  this  problem.  Notably  in  a  well-functioning  Civil
Society,  the  obvious thing  would  be for  vulnerable  groups  of  individuals to  organise  themselves.  If
this  option  proves  ineffective,  they  should  be  able  to  resort  to  an  agency  which  looks  after  their
interests  for  them.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  financial  system,  the  weaker  party  is  clearly
discernible,  viz.  consumers,  the  individual  customers  of  a  financial  institution.  Their  interests  are
protected by supervision in several ways, in the Netherlands, too. To begin with, the Dutch Act on the
Supervision  of  the  Credit  System  explicitly  seeks  to  protect  banks’  creditors.  Not  only  do  the
supervisory  authorities  watch  over  the  continuity  of  financial  institutions  with  a  view  to  overall
financial  stability,  they  also  seek  to  protect  those  who  have  entrusted  their  money  to  banks.  In  the
event of a bank failure, its creditors can resort to a deposit guarantee scheme, which ensures that their
deposits  are  guaranteed  -  subject  to  certain  conditions  -  to  an  amount  of  EUR  20,000.  Supervisors
furthermore seek to ensure that financial institutions provide their customers with proper information.
The supervisory authorities do not intermediate between banks and their customers, on the contrary.
They - increasingly - require banks to provide consumers with adequate information. Consumers must
have  sufficient  information  at  their  disposal  to  make  a  well-founded  choice.  In  the  Netherlands,  a
package  of  minimum  information  requirements  is  currently  being  drawn  up.  Last  year,  the
Nederlandsche Bank set up a consumer affairs unit. The unit’s staff contribute to the rules being drawn
3
BIS Review 32/2000
up  with  regard  to  the  information  being  supplied  to  consumers.  They  also  answer  questions  put  by
consumers  about  financial  services,  and  inform  consumers  on  what  to  do  when  they  have  concrete
complaints  about  a  financial  institution.  In  this  respect,  the  Netherlands  is  in  the  vanguard  in
Continental  Europe.  In  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  consumer  interests  figure  even
more prominently in supervision. The conclusion is therefore that even in a Civil Society, it may be
necessary to protect the interests of vulnerable groups by formulating standards and values.
Is the Civil Society infeasible?
So much for key elements of the Civil Society. Does this mean that the Civil Society is infeasible? Far
from it. As I noted earlier, the proponents of the Civil Society are well aware of the bounds of societal
responsibility.  The  Civil  Society  has  nothing  to  do  with  unbridled  liberalism.  On  the  contrary,  the
protagonists of the Civil Society are continuously seeking to improve and supplement its model. This
serves to internalise the constraints which I outlined earlier. In the Netherlands, supervision is, on the
one  hand,  enforced  by  a  statutory  framework,  providing  for  rules  and  obligations  for  financial
institutions and sanctions for non-compliance. On the other, it was set up in a “partnership” with the
financial sector. The financial system helped to shape supervision as we know it. In other words, the
currently much-acclaimed Dutch polder model concerns not just the cooperation between government
and social partners, but in a sense also the supervision exercised on the financial sector, with all parties
involved  acknowledging  that  proper  supervision  serves  a  common  purpose.  Obviously  institutions
have commercial goals, but they are also aware that the public’s confidence in the financial system is
conditional  upon  sound  supervision.  An  open  relationship  has  consequently  grown  up  between  the
Bank and the institutions subject to its supervision. Yet the Bank maintains a sufficient distance vis-à-
vis the institutions, to safeguard objectivity and the authority to act when and where necessary. It is
this  mix  of  cooperation,  efficacy  and  forceful  action  which  makes  the  supervision  exercised  by  the
Bank so potent. I would like to point out that a partnership does not equal self-regulation where the
supervision of the financial  sector  is  concerned. The  experience  gained  by  the  financial  sector  with
self-regulation  has  not  always  been  positive.  Though  widely  sustained  by  the  sector,  financial
supervision  also  clearly  stands  above  it.  As  the  Civil  Society  will  not  be  able  to  function  properly
without  impartial  supervisory  bodies,  it  will  need  to  delegate  part  of  its  competencies  and
responsibilities to them.
Conclusion
I  am  nearing  the  end  of  my  address.  I  am  all  for  striving  for  a  Civil  Society  in  Europe.  It  means,
however, that we need to analyse the obstacles that we find on our way to that goal. The model of the
Civil Society is up against several constraints. First, the externalities of the behaviour evinced by those
taking  part  in  the  Civil  Society.  Second,  possible  reprehensible  behaviour  by  individuals  -  to  the
detriment of others. Third, the tendency to lose  sight of  the interests  of  weaker  groups in society.  I
have  attempted  to  show  that  the  limitations  that  the  Civil  Society  is  up  against  also  constrain  the
financial sector; there the remedy has been found in the establishment of a supervisory authority which
sets  standards  and  ensures  compliance.  Ideally,  financial  supervision  is  a  partnership  between  the
supervisory authority and the financial sector. At the same time, the supervisor should stand above the
sector, and be capable of intervening forcefully and effectively. What does all this mean for the Civil
Society? Though the constraints on the Civil Society can be remedied in part by society itself, some
form of supervision is ultimately indispensable. The best illustration I can think of is street violence.
Violence cannot be curbed by simply putting more police on the street. Maintaining standards within
society calls for the active participation of all. A good example is the neighbourhood watch. On the
other hand, it would be unacceptable if people were to take the law into their own hands, or if safety
on the street were to become only their own responsibility. An impartial supervisory authority - in this
case the police and other instruments of the constitutional state - may not be the ultimate remedy. It
certainly is an indispensable tool in ensuring a well-functioning society. Finally, how does the Civil
society achieve a state of supervision which is effective? This should develop through public debate as
well  as  initiatives  from  participants.  Recently  in  the  Netherlands  we  noted  some  cases  of  so-called
BIS Review 32/2000
4
meaningless  violence:  youngsters  killed  by  mindless  people  for  no  reason.  This  raised  storms  of
protest, demonstrations, silent procession. Now we see this developing into a mix of officially backed
arrangements  and  joint  private  efforts  to  fight  violence  and  the  lack  of  solidarity.  That  is  the  right
balance between organized supervision and self-regulation. So, there is no excuse for awaiting others’
actions. That is why this conference may prove meaningful.
5
BIS Review 32/2000
