Mr Greenspan gives a testimony on over-the-counter derivatives
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Agriculture,  Nutrition  and  Forestry,  United  States  Senate,  on
10 February 2000.
 I am pleased to be here today to underscore the importance of this committee’s efforts to modernize
the  Commodity  Exchange  Act  (CEA)  and  to  express  my  support  for  the  recommendations  for
amending  the  act  that  were  contained  in  the  report  by  the  President’s  Working  Group  on  Financial
Markets entitled Over-the-Counter Derivatives Markets and the Commodity Exchange Act.
The need for legislation
Over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives have come to play an exceptionally important role in our financial
system and in our economy. These instruments allow users to unbundle risks and allocate them to the
investors  most  willing  and  able  to  assume  them.  A  growing  number  of  financial  and  non-financial
institutions  have  embraced  derivatives  as  an  integral  part  of  their  risk  capital  allocation  and  profit
maximization.  In  particular,  the  profitability  of  derivative  products  has  been  a  major  factor  in  the
significant gain in the finance industry’s share of American corporate output during the past decade - a
reflection  of  their  value  to  non-financial  industry.  Indeed,  this  value  added  from  derivatives  itself
derives from their ability to enhance the process of wealth creation throughout our economy.
In  light  of  the  importance  of  OTC  derivatives,  it  is  essential that  we  address the legal  uncertainties
created by the possibility that courts could construe OTC derivatives to be futures contracts subject to
the CEA. The legal uncertainties create risks to counterparties in OTC contracts and, indeed, to our
financial  system  that  simply  are  unacceptable.  They  have  also  impeded  initiatives  to  centralize  the
trading and clearing of OTC contracts, developments that have the potential to increase efficiency and
reduce risks in OTC transactions. As I shall discuss more fully later in my remarks, rapid changes in
communications  technology  portend  that  time  is  running  out  for  us  to  modernize  our  regulation  of
financial  markets  before  we  lose  them  and  the  associated  profits  and  employment  opportunities  to
foreign jurisdictions that impose no such impediments.
To be sure, the Congress and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) have taken steps
to address these concerns about the CEA. The Futures Trading Practices Act of 1992 gave the CFTC
authority to exempt OTC derivatives from most provisions of the act. In early-1993 the CFTC used
that  authority  to create  an exemption for  OTC derivatives that  reduced  legal  uncertainty  for  a  wide
range of transactions and counterparties. Unfortunately, some subsequent actions by the Commission
called  into  question  market  participants’  understanding  of  the  terms  of  the  1993  exemption.  Now,
under the leadership of Chairman Rainer, the Commission is considering reaffirming and expanding
the terms of the 1993 exemption. Nonetheless, even with such an important and constructive step by
the Commission, legislation amending the CEA would remain critically important. The greatest legal
uncertainty affecting existing OTC transactions is in the area of securities-based contracts, where the
CFTC’s  exemptive  authority  is  constrained.  Furthermore,  as  events  during  the  past  few  years  have
clearly demonstrated, regulatory exemptions, unlike statutory exclusions, carry the risk of amendment
by future Commissions.
Principles of regulation
Imposing government regulation on a market can impair its efficiency. Thus, when evaluating the need
for government regulation, one must clearly identify the public policy objectives of the regulation. As
1
BIS Review 12/2000
the  working  group’s  report  discusses,  the  primary  public  policy  purposes  of  the  CEA  are  to  deter
market manipulation and to protect investors against fraud and other unfair practices.
We must of course assess whether government regulation is necessary to achieve those objectives. The
regulatory framework of the CEA was designed for the trading of grain futures by the general public,
including  retail  investors.  Because  quantities  of  grain  following  a  harvest  are  generally  known  and
limited,  it  is  possible,  at  least  in  principle,  to  manipulate  the  price  of  grain  by  cornering  a  market.
Furthermore,  grain  futures  prices  are  widely  disseminated  and  widely  used  as  the  basis  for  pricing
grain transactions off the futures exchanges. The fact that grain futures serve such a price-discovery
function means that if attempts to corner a market result in price fluctuations, the effects would be felt
widely by producers and consumers of grain.
OTC derivatives
The President’s working group has considered whether regulation of OTC derivatives is necessary to
achieve  these  public  policy  objectives  of  the  CEA.  In  the  case  of  financial  OTC  derivatives
transactions between professional counterparties, the working group has agreed that such regulation is
unnecessary and that such transactions should be excluded from coverage of the act. Importantly, the
recommended exclusion would extend to those securities-based derivatives that currently are subject
to the greatest legal risk from potential application of the CEA.
The  rationale  for  this  position  is  straightforward.  OTC  transactions  in  financial  derivatives  are  not
susceptible to - that is, easily influenced by - manipulation. The vast majority of contracts are settled
in cash, based on a rate or price determined in a separate highly liquid market  with  a  very  large  or
virtually  unlimited  deliverable  supply.  Furthermore,  prices  established  in  OTC  transactions  do  not
serve  a  price-discovery  function.  Thus,  even  if  the  price  of  an  OTC  contract  were  somehow
manipulated, the adverse effects  on the  economy  would  be  quite  limited. With respect  to fraud  and
other unfair practices, the professional counterparties that use OTC derivatives simply do not require
the  protections  that  CEA  provides  for  retail  investors.  If  professional  counterparties  are  victimized,
they can obtain redress under the laws applicable to contracts generally.
The working group also considered whether the introduction of centralized mechanisms for the trading
and settling of what heretofore have been purely bilaterally negotiated and settled transactions would
give  rise  to  a  need  for  additional  regulation.  In  the  case  of  electronic  trading  systems,  the  working
group  concluded  that  regulation  under  the  CEA  was  unnecessary  and  that  such  systems  should  be
excluded from the act, provided that the contracts are  not  based  on non-financial  commodities  with
finite  supplies and  that  the  participants  are  limited  to  sophisticated  counterparties  trading  solely  for
their own accounts. Electronic trading of such contracts by such counterparties, it was reasoned, would
be no more susceptible to problems of manipulation and fraud than purely bilateral transactions. It was
suggested that some limited regulation of such systems might become necessary in the future if such
trading  systems  came  to  serve  a  price-discovery  function.  But  it  was  agreed  that  creation  of  a
regulatory system for such systems in anticipation of problems was inappropriate. As I have already
noted, the vast majority of OTC derivatives simply are not susceptible to manipulation. Thus, even if
those contracts come to play a role in price discovery, regulation of the trading mechanism might still
be unnecessary.
In the case  of  clearing  systems  for  OTC derivatives, the  working  group  concluded  that  government
oversight is appropriate. Clearing tends to concentrate risks and responsibilities for risk management
in  a  central  party  or  clearinghouse.  Consequently,  the  effectiveness  of  the  clearinghouse’s  risk
management  is  critical  for  the  stability  of  the  markets  that  it  serves.  Depending  on  the  types  of
transactions cleared, such oversight might appropriately be conducted by the CFTC under the CEA.
Alternatively,  it  might  be  conducted  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  the  Federal
Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, or a foreign financial regulator that one of the
US regulators has determined satisfies appropriate standards. Provided such government oversight is
in place, OTC transactions that would otherwise be excluded from the CEA should not fall within the
ambit of the act because they are cleared. If market participants conclude that clearing would reduce
BIS Review 12/2000
2
counterparty  risks  in  OTC  transactions,  concerns  about  legal  risks  associated  with  the  potential
application of the CEA should not stand in their way.
Traditional exchanges
The  working  group’s  report  does  not  make  specific  recommendations  about  the  regulation  of
traditional exchange-traded futures markets that use open outcry trading or that allow trading by retail
investors.  Nevertheless,  it  calls  for  a  review  of  the  existing  regulatory  structures,  particularly  those
applicable to financial futures, to ensure that they are appropriate in light of the objectives of the act.
Consistent  with  the  principles  of  regulation  that  I  identified  earlier,  the  report  notes  that
exchange-traded futures should not be subject to regulations that are unnecessary to achieve the CEA’s
objectives.  The  report  also  concludes  that  the  current  prohibition  on  single-stock  futures  can  be
repealed if issues about the integrity of the underlying securities market and regulatory arbitrage are
resolved.
I  want  to  underscore  how important it is for  us  to  address  these  issues  promptly.  I  cannot  claim  to
speak with certainty as to how our complex and rapidly moving markets will evolve. But I see a real
risk  that,  if  we  fail  to  rationalize  our  regulation  of  centralized  trading  mechanisms  for  financial
instruments, these markets and the related profits and employment opportunities will be lost to foreign
jurisdictions  that  maintain  the  confidence  of  global  investors  without  imposing  so  many  regulatory
constraints.
My concerns on this score stem from the dramatic advances in information technology that we see all
around  us.  In  markets  with  significant  economies  of  scale  and  scope,  like  those  for  standardized
financial instruments, there is a tendency toward consolidation or even natural monopoly. Throughout
much  of  our  history  this  tendency  has  been  restrained  by  an  inability  to  communicate  information
sufficiently  quickly,  cheaply,  and  accurately.  In  recent  years,  however,  this  constraint  is  being
essentially eliminated by advances in telecommunications. We have not yet seen clear evidence of a
trend toward natural monopoly. But the diffusion of technology often traces an S-shaped curve, first
diffusing slowly, but then rapidly picking up speed. Once we reach the steep segment of that S-curve,
it may be too late to rationalize our regulatory structure.
Already the largest futures exchange in the world is no longer in the American heartland; instead, it is
now in the heart of Europe. To be sure, no US exchange has yet to lose a major contract to a foreign
competitor. But it would be a serious mistake for us to wait for such unmistakable evidence of a loss
of  international  competitiveness  before  acting.  As  our  experience  with  the  vast  eurodollar  markets
demonstrates,  once  markets  with  scale  and  scope  economies  are  lost,  they  are  very  difficult,  if  not
impossible, to recapture.
3
BIS Review 12/2000
