Ernst Welteke: Europe and the euro - an insider’s view
Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture at the
American Council on Germany in New York on 18 April 2000.
 Preface
It is a privilege and an honour for me to hold this Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture. I am very happy to
be  able  to  add  my  name  to  the  list  of  such  distinguished  speakers  as  Karl  Otto  Pöhl,  Alfred
Herrhausen,  Alan  Greenspan, Kurt  Biedenkopf,  Hans  Tietmeyer  and  Rolf  E  Breuer.  It  gives  me  an
opportunity to pay tribute not only to a high-grade economist but also to an elder statesman who did a
great deal to foster US-German relations.
When  Arthur  Burns  was  appointed  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System  in  1970,  he  already  had  an  impressive  academic  career  behind  him,  and  the  status  of  a
first-class  international  expert  on  economics.  Richard  Nixon,  one  of  five  US  presidents  for  whom
Arthur  Burns  acted as  advisor, expressed  his  high  opinion  of  him  in  these  words:  “Shortly  after  he
joined my cabinet in 1969, he demonstrated why I was right in selecting him as my first White House
Counselor. At our first meeting in the Oval Office, he explained his role. He said: “Mr President, most
advisors tell a president what he wants to hear. I believe it is the responsibility of an advisor to tell you
what you need to hear.” He never failed to meet this standard.”
The ability always to say and do what he thought essential likewise characterised his term of office as
Central Bank Governor.
The  incidental  conditions for that  office could  hardly  have  been  more  difficult.  The  collapse  of  the
Bretton  Woods  exchange  rate  system,  the  global  oil  crisis  and  recession,  accompanied  by  strong
inflationary pressures. But Arthur Burns set to work resolutely and persuasively; he made it clear that
central  banks  could  not  be  expected  to  bear  the  entire  burden  of  fighting  inflation  on  their  own.
Without the support of other policy areas, after all, a monetary policy geared to price stability soon
encounters its limits. Incidentally, this perception is just as true today as it was then.
Finally, Arthur Burns made an invaluable contribution to US-German relations during the four years
when he served as US ambassador to Germany. In 1985 he expressed his love affair with Germany in
these words: “I’ve fallen in love with Germany; that’s not difficult.” But notwithstanding that love - it
was he who analysed and pinpointed the structural weaknesses of the German economy back in the
early 1980s.
Arthur Burns, who always regarded his assignment in Germany as a “mission among friends”, knew
that friendship can also tolerate  criticism,  provided that  it  is  constructive  -  indeed, it actually  needs
such criticism. Against this background, I should like to pay tribute today to a great friend of - and
authority on - Germany.
I
In  his  famous  textbook  “Economics”,  Paul  Samuelson,  winner  of  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Economics,
quotes  the  American  actor  Will  Rogers,  who  allegedly  said  that  “There  have  been  three  great
inventions since the beginning of time: fire, the wheel and central banking.”
As a central banker, I do not wish to make any further comment on my profession being mentioned in
the same breath as fire and the wheel.
I only want to remark that we can now add a further creation - the euro - to those great inventions.
1
BIS Review 35/2000
There are some of you who will doubtless feel that adding the euro to that list is a slightly provocative
statement to make - especially in the United States with its strong dollar at present.
In point of fact, the adoption of the euro has introduced a currency for which monetary policy has been
communitised  but  not  the  other  areas  of  economic  policy.  That  has  no  parallel  in  history  and  has
created a situation to which many still have to become accustomed.
• 
How  will  the  participating  countries  manage  to  cope  without  their  own  monetary  and
exchange rate policies on a permanent basis?
 And conversely: how will a single monetary policy cope with the fact that it is now faced not
with just one but with 11 different national economic policies?
How is a currency of that kind assessed on the international currency and financial markets?
• 
Those questions are far from easy to answer.
The financial markets are apparently having particular difficulties in recognising the new currency’s
potential.
I am aware that there are no prizes for originality to be won at the moment by insisting that the euro
has  the  potential  to  appreciate.  But  that  statement  nevertheless  remains  correct,  as  I  would  like  to
explain in detail shortly.
In  passing,  I  should  like  to  call  to  mind  the  situation  a  few  years  ago  when  the  dollar  was  hitting
all-time lows. When our American colleagues made assurances at that time that they were interested in
a strong dollar - assurances which they, too, often repeated - scarcely anyone in the markets seemed to
notice at first either. Many of them probably came to regret that later.
II
It  is  nevertheless  interesting  that  it  is  certainly  not  doubts  about  the  anti-inflationary  resolve  of
European  monetary  policymakers  that  is  currently  perceived  by  the  public  to  be  the  reason  for  the
euro’s weakness.
At present, many market players are probably focusing more on the long-term outlook for growth and
the expected differences in that respect between the United States and Europe.
Barry  Eichengreen,  professor  of  economics  at  Berkeley,  said  recently  that  the  explanation  for  the
weakness of the euro lies in a changed perception of the revolution in information technology and its
implications for productivity and competitiveness in Europe and the USA.
Such assessments ignore two things:
• 
First, the strong growth in America undoubtedly also has its risks. These lie in the high level
of the stock market, the large current account deficit and the low saving ratio.
 Second, the positive stimuli to growth that exist in Europe are frequently underestimated. It
is not just that all the forecasts predict that Europe will emerge from the shadow cast by the
US economy. Even the longer-term stimuli are not noticed sometimes.
III
That applies, not least, to those stimuli that are being generated by the euro itself.
That is because monetary union is a classic example of the proposition that a merger produces greater
value than the sum of its individual parts.
With  regard  to  Europe  and  the  euro,  this  means  that  the  countries  participating  in  the  European
monetary union have greater opportunities for growth now that they have a single currency than they
did before on their own.
BIS Review 35/2000
2
The  euro  has,  in  fact,  created  a  large  monetary  and  economic  area  with  a  considerable  purchasing
power which is exceeded only by that of the United States.
Altogether, the 11 countries of the euro area account for around 15½% of global GDP. This share is
roughly  double  that  of  Japan  and  6%  below  that  of  the  USA,  which  has  around  21%.  By  contrast,
Germany, as the largest country in the euro area, on its own has only a share of about 4½% of global
GDP.
The  euro  area  also  has  the  largest  share  in  global  trade.  Its  share  of  total  global  exports  is  around
19½%, compared with a figure of 15% for the USA and 8½% for Japan.
It is scarcely possible to overstate the impetus to competition and growth that can be given by a single
large market - a phenomenon which has existed in the USA for a very long time: on the one hand,
enterprises in the euro area can grow to a size that makes them globally competitive, the key words in
this context being mergers, acquisitions, strategic alliances, joint ventures.
Secondly, internal competition - within the euro area - will also increase, as it is still the case that the
bulk of the individual euro area countries’ trade is with other participating countries. This trade is now
domestic trade for the euro area as a whole, in which exchange rates no longer enter into the equation.
Both factors - a single large market and the intensification of internal trade - will tend to enhance what
economists  call  the  growth  of  potential  output  in  the  euro  area.  At  least  on  the  supply  side,  these
factors are likely to boost productivity and growth in the euro area over the longer term as well.
Admittedly,  fiercer  competition  will  mean  that  the  challenges  become  greater.  Competition  exerts
pressure:
• 
• 
on both sides of industry, to stay within the available scope for productivity and to dismantle
rigidities on the labour market;
on enterprises, to restructure if profit margins are shrinking;
 and  on  national  policymakers,  to  create  underlying  conditions  that  are  conducive  to
investment, to consolidate budgets, to put the social security systems on a sound basis, and to
provide the right incentives on the labour market.
If the countries sidestep this pressure to reform, a strain will be placed on the euro.
Alternatively,  this  pressure  may  mean  the  euro  becomes  a  catalyst  for  devoting  more  energy  to
pressing  ahead  with  necessary  reform  projects  that  have  either  been  neglected  or  tackled  only
half-heartedly up to now.
To that extent a stimulus exists for the euro area to develop into - shall I say - a “new economy”.
I hesitate to use that term in this context as I know how difficult it is to identify - let alone, forecast -
such shifts in the trend-growth of economies.
But there is also another reason why I hesitate to use that term: it is often used as a synonym for the
proposition that all the laws of economics have now supposedly been suspended. That is nonsense, of
course. Technology changes, markets change, but economic laws do not. And, even in this brave new
world, the rate of inflation will go up if monetary policy is overly expansionary.
Whatever one may make of the “new economy” - one thing is certain: the euro has enhanced Europe’s
potential for growth.
And this was lent additional support by the declaration of intent of the Heads of State and Government
of the European Union at their summit in Lisbon, where they set the new strategic objective of making
the Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economic area in the world.
Admittedly, general declarations of intent alone have never made anyone more competitive.
In  a  comparative  study,  the  OECD  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  share  of  knowledge-based
industries in Germany is similar to that in the United States at over 50%. Germany’s highest growth in
investment is in software.
3
BIS Review 35/2000
And, for creating a knowledge-based economy, it is undoubtedly a significant factor that the labour
force in Germany is generally highly qualified. That makes it easier to adopt new technologies.
IV
That takes me on to the question of whether the opportunities on offer are also actually being used.
I do indeed have  the  impression  that the  necessary  restructuring  of the  European economy  is  under
way.
The changes are perhaps most clearly visible in the financial markets, where Europe is currently being
confronted with a massive surge of initial public offerings on the stock market. More than 200 new
innovative  enterprises  are  now  listed  on  the  Neuer  Markt  and  investment  in  venture  capital  in
Germany rose by DM 5 billion in 1999.
A lot is happening at the moment on the mergers and acquisitions front.
The process of concentration is going beyond national frontiers and traditional market segments, and
is helping to open up the global market.
Operational  efficiency  is  being  enhanced.  Costs  are  falling.  And  resources  can  be  saved  at  the
macroeconomic level as well.
Since the mid-1990s, when German industry ran into competitive difficulties due to the exchange rate,
internal  reforms  have  been  taking  place  in  German  enterprises  -  in  some  cases,  accompanied  by  a
considerable number of redundancies. I firmly believe that German industry is now highly productive
and competitive.
What  is  sometimes  also  underestimated  abroad  is  the  extent  of  reforms  in  the  public  sector,  for
example, in Germany. Certainly, there is still a lot that can be done in that area.
But  what  is  occasionally  overlooked  is  that  large-scale  privatisations  of  telecommunications,  postal
services, the electricity industry and the railways have taken place or are planned, and that industry is
using the opportunities which this presents.
V
Things are also moving in the field of fiscal policy - including in Germany. The deficit ratio has been
falling since 1997 - not least owing to the convergence criteria stipulated by the Maastricht Treaty.
Even though the public finance situation is less than ideal when measured against the objectives of the
Stability and Growth Pact, notable progress has still been made.
The  Federal  German  government  has  resolved  to  pursue  a  strict  course  of  consolidation,  making
savings of DM 30 billion in 2000, and is aiming for a deficit ratio of 0.5% in 2003.
At first glance, that may not seem particularly impressive. However, tax cuts are accompanying the
consolidation process.
This dual strategy - fiscal consolidation on the one hand and tax reductions on the other - will give
back financial scope to the private sector. The reform of corporate taxation will make Germany more
attractive as a location for investment. A lowering of corporation tax to 25% is envisaged.
Capital  gains  from  the  disposal  of  participating  interests  are  to  be  tax-free.  This  will  make
restructuring  of  the  corporate  landscape  easier  in  future.  As  a  result,  Germany  might  also  become
interesting as a location for holding companies.
There are some aspects of the planned reform to which objections could perhaps be raised from the
point of view of the overall tax structure, but, all in all, the proposals point in the right direction.
So you see, there are a lot of encouraging signs.
BIS Review 35/2000
4
There  is  thus  no  reason  to  fear  that  the  euro  will  be  persistently  weak  on  account  of  Europe’s
enterprises lagging behind in productivity and competitiveness.
The available opportunities for growth will have to be seized, however. Enterprises must press on with
reorganising the economy. Policymakers will have to go ahead with the necessary structural reforms in
public finance, the social security systems and on the labour markets.
What part can European monetary policymakers play in this?
VI
Trying to set targets for growth is certainly not the answer. That would surely be counterproductive.
The  best  way  that  monetary  policymakers  can  contribute  to  sustained  growth  is  by  pursuing  a
monetary policy that is consistently geared to the objective of stability.
With  a  stable  currency  prices  provide  an  undistorted  reflection  of  the  conditions  of  supply  and
demand. Efficiency is increased. Valuable resources are saved. With a stable currency investors do not
have to pay risk premia on the interest rate. Investment is stimulated. All of that fosters growth.
What is the situation in terms of price stability in Europe?
The euro has a very positive record in that respect.
Despite the recent stronger upside risks to price stability, the internal value of the new currency in its
first year was impressively stable.
In the first 12 months the rate of price increase was in some cases well below the 2% mark, which is
the  definition  of  price  stability  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank
(ECB).  The  rate  of  price  increase  in  the  euro  area  was  1.1%  -  a  dream  result  even  by  German
standards.
In January of this year, the inflation rate hit the 2% mark. But it is expected that it will be below 2%
for the year 2000 on an annual average. By its policy, the Governing Council of the ECB is making it
absolutely clear that it will go on conducting a monetary policy oriented to internal stability in future.
That monetary policy strategy is based on two pillars.
Monetary growth - on which the first pillar of the ECB’s strategy rests - has been above the reference
value  of  4½% for  some  time.  Lending  to  the  private  sector,  too,  has  been  persistently  strong.  Both
indicated that liquidity in the euro area was more than adequate.
The second pillar of the strategy is a broad assessment of the outlook for future price developments.
Latterly,  most  of  the  relevant  indicators  having  been  pointing  upward  over  the  medium  term  -
undoubtedly due in part to the rise in oil prices and, of course, also to the downward movement of the
euro exchange rate
This exerts pressure on import and producer prices. And, because of second-round effects, they can in
turn affect consumer prices. Happily, the pay agreements recently concluded in Germany have been
quite within the scope for national income distribution. To that extent, the risk of second-round effects
has been reduced. The same applies to OPEC’s decision to step up production of crude oil.
In line with its monetary policy strategy, the ECB Governing Council has now raised its key interest
rates three times. Those decisions to raise interest rates  took  account  of the existing  upside  risks  to
prices. They were taken to ensure continuing tension-free economic growth in the euro area, which is
the basis for a sustained development of economic growth.
There is thus no doubt about the ECB Governing Council’s resolve to safeguard price stability. That is
significant  because  the  future  outlook  for  internal  price  stability  -  in  other  words,  inflation
expectations - are of major importance for a currency’s potential - perhaps even more important, in
fact, than the current stability situation. That is because it is primarily the future that is traded in the
foreign exchange markets. On the monetary side, the future for the euro looks decidedly good.
5
BIS Review 35/2000
Experience has shown that, ultimately, the internal stability of a currency is invariably also reflected in
its external value. Naturally, the adjustment must not be in the sense that internal stability follows a
weak  external  value.  Rather,  the  external  value  will  follow  a  strong  internal  value.  The  current
scepticism  in  the  financial  markets  concerning  the  euro  is  undoubtedly  exaggerated.  From  a
medium-term perspective, certainly, there are no grounds at all for a weak euro.
Europe has all the opportunities and conditions needed. And I am confident that Europe will also make
use of those opportunities.
BIS Review 35/2000
6
