Villy Bergström: Should the Riksbank be concerned about asset prices?
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a Breakfast Meeting
arranged by Round Table in Sundsvall, on 11 April 2000.
 The Swedish economy is growing more quickly than for a very long time. In 1999, GDP increased by
3.8% and during the coming three years, growth is expected to average almost 3.5%. At the same time,
the prerequisites for a long-term favourable development appear better than for many decades. Almost
all  economic  indicators  are  pointing  in  the  right  direction.  Despite  a  very  strong  upswing,  the
long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  and  close  to  the  target  for  monetary  policy.  Central
government finances are in surplus for the second year running and despite a planned tax reduction of
over SEK10 billion this year, the surplus in the central government budget is expected to total at least
2% of GDP. From having had the next poorest budget balance in the entire EU in the early 1990s, the
budget  balance  in  our  public  finances  is  now  among  the  strongest  in  the  whole  union.  Since  the
mid-1990s, central government debt has decreased from 80 to 70% of GDP. Our country’s financial
balance, ie the current account, has at the same time shown a surplus for a number of years and the
foreign debt has fallen from 40 to 20% of GDP during this period.
However, unemployment is still too high - the increase in production of almost 15% since the end of
the 1980s has not been sufficient to bring the labour market into balance. The employment ratio has
increased,  however,  from  72  to  74%  during  the  past  year  and  employment  is  expected  to  increase
greatly during the coming years. It is expected that open employment will fall to 3.7% in 2002.
However, the beginning of this decade looks very promising. Almost the entire 1990s were marked by
the problems in the wake of the high inflation economy of the 1980s and the overheating that ended
that decade. Loan-financed consumption, excess investment, among other things, in properties, which
took place in tandem with the increasing asset and property prices, had led to large financial and real
imbalances being built up. When the bubble burst and the krona fell, there was a great need among
households, businesses and banks to review their balance sheets and reduce their debt. As we know,
this  led  to  a  great  reduction  in  demand  and  increasing  unemployment,  which  in  turn  caused  major
problems in public  finances. The  costs  of the bank  crisis  aggravated  the  central  government  budget
problem at the same time.
Monetary  policy,  focused  on  stable  prices,  has  played  an  important  role  for  creating  balance  in  the
Swedish economy.  This  favourable  development  would  not  have  been  possible,  however,  without a
responsible fiscal policy. The serious consequences of overheating at the end of the 1980s also seem to
have created a general insight that sacrifices were necessary for a time to bring the Swedish economy
into  a  state  where  the  conditions  for  sustainable  growth  and  high  and  stable  employment  could  be
created. The problems after the high inflation years have probably also contributed to creating a broad
support for the inflation targets of monetary policy.
Laboriously won improvements must be safeguarded
It is important now both for macroeconomic policymakers and otherwise in Sweden to avoid as far as
possible the reappearance of the problems that were overcome with great effort in the 1990s and to
avoid new imbalances being built up. The role of the Riksbank here is to ensure that price stability is
maintained and to ensure the stability of the payment systems. After the financial crises that affected
the world economy during the 1990s, a number of proposed measures aiming at preventing new crises
have  been  discussed  in  various  international  contexts.  Many  measures have  aimed  at increasing  the
so-called transparency of the financial systems so that the agents in the markets were able to base their
decisions  on  realistic  assessments.  My  intention  here  is  primarily  to  discuss  the  role  that  monetary
1
BIS Review 33/2000
policy  can  have  to  counteract  financial  imbalances  being  created  as  a  consequence  of  rising  asset
prices.
Let me first briefly describe the role of monetary policy in an economy that is in balance.
When the economy is in balance and the long-term inflationary expectations are in line with the target,
there are good prerequisites for monetary policy aimed at an inflation target also leading to cyclical
swings  being  evened  out  and  that  production  will  increase  apace  with  the  supply  of  labour  and
productivity growth. This is due to  fluctuations in inflation in an  economy  in  balance  largely  being
related to fluctuations in real demand and the use of resources in the economy. Stable inflation and
stable inflationary expectations also favour long-term growth, which is the reason for monetary policy
being given the task of maintaining an inflation target.
Since the means of monetary policy - the short interest rate - affects inflation with a time lag of one to
two  years,  the  design  of  monetary  policy  must  rest  on  forward-looking  assessments  of  inflation.
Demand  for  goods  and  services  and  the  supply  of  labour  and  productivity  growth  are  important
determining factors for inflation. At the same time, it is primarily through the effect of the interest rate
on the demand for goods and services that monetary policy has an effect on inflation. When the use of
resources is low, inflationary pressure is normally also low. The interest rate is then determined so that
demand is stimulated and inflation reaches the target and vice versa when the use of resources is too
high.
However, consumer prices are also affected by other factors than purely cyclical. Examples of such
factors are, internationally determined raw material prices, changes in taxes and subsidies and interest
expenses  for  housing.  An  increase  in  value-added  tax  would,  for  instance,  temporarily  lead  to
increases in CPI. To counteract such price increases, monetary policy would be forced to dampen the
real demand in the economy regardless of the  level  of resource  use  in  the  economy.  To  avoid  such
unnecessary fluctuations in production, we disregard from factors which we assess only temporarily
affect consumer prices, for example interest expenses, taxes and subsidies.
The inflation target regime tested in a strong upswing!
Before the economy had adapted to the new inflation target regime and inflationary expectations still
remained  at  too  high  a  level,  it  was  not  as  evident  that  monetary  policy  in  the  short  term  could
contribute  to  maintaining  the  growth  of  its  long-term  growth  track.  In  order  to  bring  inflation
expectations  down,  higher  interest  rates  were  required  and  thus  lower  demand  than  if  inflation
expectations had immediately been adapted to the new regime.
Although the economy is now approaching balance, all parts of the low inflation regime have still not
been tested. During the entire 1990s, the use of resources has been under its long-term growth track. It
is  first during  the few  years to come  that  we  will  have  a  real test  of  how  well  the  new  regime  has
penetrated in Sweden. In earlier speeches, I have developed my ideas around the mode of functioning
of the labour market. I would like here to content myself with pointing out the importance that wage
formation also functions well in such a strong cyclical upswing as the present. Higher pay increases
than  there  is  room  for  in  the  space  created  by  productivity  growth  and  the  inflation  target  lead  to
monetary  policy  having  to  be  made  more  stringent  and  demand  being  dampened.  If  the  monetary
policy is made more stringent altogether too late, there is a risk that inflation expectations will again
arise and persist. The consequences would then be a longer period with a stringent monetary policy. In
order  to avoid  this,  it  is  important that  monetary  policy  reacts in  time  when,  for  instance,  high  pay
increases  are  considered  to  threaten  the  inflation  target.  However,  above  all  it  is  important  that  the
social partners act so that we do not end up in such a position.
Why should monetary policy be concerned about asset prices?
Another  challenge  for  monetary  policy  just  now  is  to  assess  the  consequences  that  the  greatly
increasing share prices will have for the Swedish economy and inflation. In the big city areas, property
prices  have  also  increased  markedly.  There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  the  Riksbank  to  take  into
BIS Review 33/20009
2
account the development of asset prices. In the first place, asset prices affect the factors that determine
inflation during the forecast period. In the second place, the development of asset prices can lead to
financial  imbalances  accumulating  so  as  to  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector  and  the
Riksbank has a special responsibility here.
Asset  prices  stimulate  household  consumption  and  business  investment  and  it  is  probably  here  that
asset prices are most significant for inflation target policy. Rising share prices, for instance, increase
household  wealth  inter  alia  and  are  an  indication  that  the  economy  is  expected  to  grow  strongly.
Household consumption decisions are to a great extent based on expected incomes and wealth. At the
same time, investment decisions by businesses are based on expectations of increased production. If
households  and  businesses  base  their  consumption  and  investment  decisions  on  the  expectations
reflected  in  asset  prices,  demand  will  probably  increase  more  rapidly  than  the  actual  growth  of  the
economy. This creates an inflationary pressure in the domestic market. If the international investors
also  expect  that  productivity  and  the  return  will  increase  more  quickly  in  Sweden  than  in  the
surrounding world, the exchange rate can, however, strengthen and also dampen inflation.
Asset prices are also important for the assessment of stability in the financial system. It is important
for instance to assess the risk for debt among businesses and households, which can be the result of
rising asset prices, creating risks for suspensions of payments and ultimately for bank crises.
What characterises a financial imbalance?
Rising  asset  prices  can  thus  contribute  to  financial  imbalances  being  created  in  the  economy.  It  is
difficult to say in advance what characterises a financial imbalance. A simplified way of describing a
financial imbalance is that households, businesses and for that matter also the state base their decisions
on  increased  indebtedness  on  expectations  of  the  development  of  wealth  and  coming  real  incomes
which are then not realised. When this becomes evident, major sacrifices must be made to be able to
pay  debts.  The  macroeconomic  costs  can  be  high  when  households  are  forced  to  reduce  their
consumption  and  businesses  their  investments  to  be  able  to  adapt  their  balance  sheets  to  new
expectations. If the problems are so extensive that certain groups quite simply cannot pay their loans,
the crisis can spread to the bank system and the macroeconomic costs in the form of unemployment
and low growth rise further.
These are questions that are discussed frequently and at length with regard to the US economy. There,
demand  by  households  and  businesses  for  consumption  and  investment  goods  are  to  a  great  extent
financed on the capital market. Strong growth in wealth and expectations of continued high production
growth have driven forward development and this has also been reflected in share prices. A large part
of demand has leaked out in imports and there have been continual large American current account
deficits. This has been able to happen without inflation speeding up which has to some extent been due
to the strong development of the  US  dollar.  This is explained  by  foreign  investors  also expecting  a
high  return  from  investing  in  American  shares  and  a  large  capital  flow  has  strengthened  the  dollar
price.  Low  import  prices  and  high  productivity  are  some  of  the  explanations  to  inflation  not
accelerating. The low inflation has led to the American monetary policy being relatively expansive in
the light of the long, strong cyclical upswing.
It is only in retrospect that it can be established with certainty that a financial imbalance has been built
up.  This  applies  for  instance  to  the  assessment  of  the  durability  of  the  debt  ratio  for  a  country  or
households.  This  means,  for  instance,  that  a  balance  of  payments  deficit  cannot  necessarily  be
automatically  interpreted  as  an  imbalance.  It  is  only  later  if  it  is  shown  the  burden  of  interest  and
amortisation payments is too high in relation to the growth of incomes and production that problems
arise.
Effects of Swedish asset prices in Sweden today?
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  debt  ratio  among  the  households  is  too  high  today.  However,
during  the  past  year,  we  have  seen  a  development  that  resembles  the  American  in  some  respects,
3
BIS Review 33/2000
although we have still not seen as high productivity improvements as in the American economy. Asset
prices have risen strongly, household indebtedness has increased and interest in foreign investors in
purchasing  Swedish  shares  also  seems  to  be  very  great.  Household  indebtedness  is,  however,
considerably  lower  than  at  the  end  of  the  1980s.  While  consumption  certainly  provides  a  large
contribution to the strong growth in GDP in coming years, strong increases in real income also make a
contribution.  Strong  increases  in  the  property  and  share  prices  area  are  also  assessed,  however,  to
contribute to the high growth figures for consumption.
An  important  issue  is  whether  the  current  monetary  policy  regime  per  se  prevents  the  major
imbalances that we saw during the 1980s being built up? During the years monetary policy could not
counteract an altogether too high loan-financed increase in demand as the overheating did not seem to
threaten  the  exchange  rate  target  despite  the  large  deficit  in  the  current  account  and  a  continued
deterioration in competitiveness. In retrospect, it can be noted that too much confidence was placed in
the fixed exchange rate policy. It is difficult to conceive that such a high increase in demand and such
a  high  use  of  resources  today  would  not  be  considered  to  threaten  the  inflation  target  and  thus  be
counteracted  by  a  more  stringent  monetary  policy.  Accordingly,  the  debt  ratio  of  businesses  and
households would not either increase in such an unrestricted way as at the end of the 1980s. The banks
have  also  become  considerably  better  at  handling  risks  in  their  balance  sheets  at  the  same  time  as
supervision and monitoring has been improved and adapted to the deregulated financial markets that
we now have.
Conclusion
I have discussed the effects that rising asset prices can have on the real economy. The Riksbank must
take asset prices into consideration to the extent that they affect price stability or financial stability.
These are the areas that the Riksbank is responsible for.
The inflation target can be threatened if asset prices lead to households and businesses increasing their
demand so much that the use of resources in the economy exceeds potential growth. At present, the
use  of  resources  in  the  Swedish  economy  is  still  low  which  creates  space  for  a  time  for  a  higher
increase  in  demand  than  would  be  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  There  is  accordingly  space  for  the
stimulation  that  increasing  share  and  property  prices  create  and  which  is  inter  alia  reflected  in
increased indebtedness in the household sector. In a somewhat longer perspective, however, household
debts  probably  cannot  increase  at  the  rate  we  see  today  without  this  indicating  a  growth  in
consumption that is higher than permitted by the inflation target. The effect of asset prices on demand
and inflationary pressure is, however, only one of many factors that affect the assessment of inflation
and the conduct of monetary policy. This also applies for the assessment of financial stability.
In general, it is moreover probably hardly possible or advisable to attempt to dampen an increase in
share  and  property  prices  by  monetary  policy,  even  though  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  situations
where  the  Riksbank  would  want  to  be  able  to  do  so  on  some  future  occasion,  eg  with  a  view  to
avoiding  the  risk  of  recession  and  falling  prices.  The  Riksbank  hardly  has  better  prerequisites  than
investors  in  the  market  to  determine  whether  a  so-called  speculative  bubble  is  developing.  If  a
speculative bubble is involved, it will sooner or later burst. However, it is then the Riksbank’s duty to
counteract a fall in inflation by an energetic interest rate policy at the same time as it limits the damage
of the fall in demand that could ensue.
BIS Review 33/20009
4
Bank of Japan’s April report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 12 April 2000.
 The Bank’s view2
The  improvement  in  Japan’s  economy  is  becoming  distinct.  Recovery  has  started  in  some  areas  of
private demand, as seen in a gradual upturn in business fixed investment.
With regard to exogenous demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to follow an
upward trend due to an upturn in overseas economies, and  public  investment  has started to  pick  up
reflecting the progress in the implementation of the supplementary budget for fiscal 1999. As regards
domestic  private  demand,  housing  investment  is  decreasing  moderately,  and  recovery  in  private
consumption continues to be weak through lack of notable improvements in employment and income
conditions. Meanwhile, business fixed investment is starting to pick up albeit moderately.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand,  industrial  production  is  increasing,  and  corporate
profits and sentiment continue to improve. Firms as a whole still strongly feel that they have excess
capacity  and  employees,  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.
Nevertheless,  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as  increasing  the  amount  of  fixed
investment,  is  increasing  gradually,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Regarding  employment
conditions,  although  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  employees  and  in  wages  is  slowing,  efforts  by
firms to reduce personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  likely  to  increase  for  some  time.  This,  along  with  the
favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s monetary easing, is expected to continue
underpinning the economy. Moreover, net exports are likely to follow an upward trend reflecting the
recovery  of  overseas  economies,  and  it  is  also  highly  probable  that  business  fixed  investment  will
increase  gradually  with  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  sentiment.  However,  housing
investment is expected to continue declining moderately, and there seems to be no substantial change
in firms’ stance to reduce personnel expenses. Hence, it may take some time for households’ income
conditions  to  improve  and,  in  turn,  for  private  consumption  to  recover.  In  addition,  since  firms’
prospects  for  sales  remain  modest,  careful  monitoring  is  still  required  to  determine  whether  the
recovery in business fixed investment is sustainable and whether it is likely to spread to a wider range
of industries.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  basically  on  a  rising  trend  reflecting  the  increase  in
international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding
the  fall  in  prices  of  electric  machinery,  are  flat  mainly  due  to  the  rise  in  prices  of  petroleum  and
chemical products reflecting an increase in crude oil prices. Meanwhile, consumer prices continue to
be somewhat weak due to the decline in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of
the yen, despite the slight increase in the prices of private-sector services. Corporate service prices are
still falling slowly.
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 10 April 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 10 April as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
5
BIS Review 33/2000
As  for  the  outlook,  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  likely  to  arise  from  the  gradual  improvement  in
domestic supply-demand balance and from the rise in crude oil prices. On the other hand, downward
pressure  is  expected  from  the  long-term  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  due  to  technological
innovations and from the fall in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of the yen.
On balance, overall prices are likely to remain unchanged. However, attention should still be paid to
the downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand, although the pressure has weakened
given some recovery in private demand.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has generally stayed near zero, and financial institutions
have been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount outstanding of funds in the
call money market increased slightly in late March, and decreased thereafter.
Interest rates on term instruments rose slightly toward end-March, the end of the fiscal year, but have
weakened somewhat since the beginning of April. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  rose  marginally  in  mid-March  and  stayed  above  1.8%,  but
declined somewhat from late March and are recently back in the range of 1.7-1.8%. The yield spread
between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  continues
narrowing,  primarily  that  between  private  bonds  with  relatively  low  credit  ratings  and  government
bonds.
Stock  prices  weakened  almost  to  19,000  yen  in  mid-March,  but  then  rebounded  and  are  currently
moving between 20,000 and 21,000 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen strengthened against the US dollar toward the end of March.
However, it weakened at the beginning of April and has been traded at around 105 yen since then.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base  has  eased  considerably.  Under  these  circumstances,  major  banks  are  becoming  more  active  in
extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition,  firms  continue  to  reduce  debts  as  part  of  their  balance-sheet  restructuring  measures.  As  a
result,  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  be  basically  stagnant,  and  thus  private
banks’ lending has remained sluggish. Issuance of corporate bonds and CP has been steady.
The growth in money stock (M2+CDs) continues to slow reflecting the above-mentioned situation.
In  this  financial  environment,  corporate  financing  conditions  are  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial institutions is perceived by firms as less severe. It continues to warrant careful monitoring
how these favorable developments in corporate financing environment will affect economic activities.
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org.
BIS Review 33/20009
6
