Mr Noyer gives a review of the economic situation in the euro area
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the conference of the
International Finance Futures snc (IFF), Paris, on 8 March 2000.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure for me to speak here at this conference. The topic of my speech
is  “la  conjoncture  dans  la  zone  euro”  and  this  may  warrant  some  explanation,  given  that  this
conference traditionally focuses on the cyclical outlook for the French economy. Some, but hopefully
not  too  many  of  you  may  simply  see  this  as  confirming  their  suspicion  that  central  bankers  like  to
surprise financial market participants. Let me assure you that this is not our intention, and there are
good  reasons  indeed  why,  as  a  European  central  banker,  my  focus  should  naturally  be  on
developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  rather  than  on  those  in  individual  Member  States.  And,
while I will also briefly go into the cyclical outlook for France, this will be largely with the outlook for
the euro area as a whole in mind. Before I turn to this discussion and the policy challenges associated
with it, please allow me to review the case for this area-wide perspective.
The primary objective of the Eurosystem is to maintain price stability in the euro area. This implies
that the single monetary policy can only be based on developments in the euro area as a whole. Given
this view, decisions are made with due consideration of all information that is available and relevant
with  a  view  to  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  This  requirement  is  reflected  in  the
two-pillar  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  comprises  an  assessment  of  monetary  developments
against a reference value for growth of M3 and a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price
developments.
Economic analysis for the euro area as a whole critically hinges on the availability of appropriate data.
In addition to requirements in terms of sufficiency, quality and timeliness, area-wide data also need to
be harmonised to the highest degree possible. The latter requirement is clearly met regarding the data
on, for instance, monetary aggregates and consumer prices, as measured by the HICP. Moreover, the
changeover  to  the  new  European  System  of  Accounts  (ESA  95),  which  began  in  the  course  of  last
year, meant a further improvement in this respect and should be seen as representative of the ongoing
efforts  to  develop a  wholly  satisfactory  basis  for  the  single  monetary  policy.  It  is  true  that  in  some
areas further progress is still needed and, overall, it still holds that there is relative dearth of area-wide
data compared with the availability of data in individual Member States. In addition, when assessing
developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  the  possibility  has  to  be  considered  that  economic
relationships which are taken to prevail at the level of the individual countries may look different at
the area-wide level. But this cannot be taken as implying that a single monetary policy is not feasible
or  that  there  is  an  alternative  to  its  focus  on  developments  in  the  area  as  a  whole.  Rather,  these
intricacies should be seen as re-emphasising the case for the strategy which has been chosen by the
Eurosystem and which reflects these particular circumstances.
Cyclical outlook for the euro area ...
With  this  in  mind,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area.  There  is  by  now
sufficient evidence to say that the euro area is enjoying a strong upturn in growth, as had indeed also
been predicted by the vast majority of international organisations and private institutions in the autumn
of last year. The headline figure for this upturn is clearly the rate of growth of real GDP in the third
quarter of 1999, which was well up from what had been recorded for the first two quarters of the year.
1
BIS Review 22/2000
No estimate for real GDP is yet available for the final quarter of last year, but on the basis of available
indicators growth should have continued to be strong.
Taken together, the year 1999 has been characterised by a rather swift and strong rebound from the
slowdown in growth in the  course  of  1998 and  early  1999  following  the crises  in  Asia  and  Russia.
Indeed,  when  reviewing  the  magnitude  of  the  disturbances  in  the  external  environment  as  they
appeared at the time, the likely outcome of 2% for euro area growth in 1999 as a whole is not bad at
all.  Judging  from  the  currently  available  evidence,  there  seems  to  be  a  broad  consensus  in  the
forecasting community that the prospects for a strengthening of growth in the years 2000 and 2001 are
favourable. On average, the latest forecasts point to real GDP growth of about 3% in the euro area in
each of these years. It should be noted, however, that most of the currently available forecasts were
made in the autumn of last year and that some of their underlying assumptions and initial conditions
may  thus  no  longer  fully  reflect  current  perceptions.  For  example,  the  IMF  has  since  revised  its
projections  for  world  growth  upwards  and  such  a  scenario  could  well  provide  for  somewhat  larger
impulses on euro area export growth than have been incorporated so far. Similarly, the quasi-technical
assumptions for variables such as exchange rates, interest rates and certain commodity prices, which
forecasts tend to be built on, might need to be revised in order to bring them into line with the latest
developments. Rather than precisely forecasting numbers, my explanations should therefore be seen as
relating to the general picture of the outlook which is likely to be much more stable.
The  favourable  outlook  for  euro  area  growth  is  essentially  based  on  the  prospect  that  the  initial
impulses from external demand and the sustained domestic demand within the euro area reinforce each
other in a beneficial way in the current upturn. This is exemplified by the fact that, together with the
brightening picture on the external side of the economy, there has been a strong rebound in industrial
confidence. Following steady increases up to the first months of this year, most of the previous decline
in industrial confidence has now largely been reversed. The cyclical pattern of consumer confidence
was  fairly  subdued  and  confidence  remained  at  a  level  close  to  its  all-time  high  throughout  1999.
Continued  employment  growth  and  further  reductions  in  unemployment  should  help  to  sustain  it  at
this high level. Taken together, the prospects for a strengthening of domestic demand growth appear to
be good. In this context, it is worth pointing to a key feature of the euro area economy, namely that its
degree of openness, and thus its dependency on foreign demand, is much lower than that of individual
Member States. Developments in the world economy will nevertheless remain important, in particular
through their repercussions via financial markets, and need to be monitored carefully. But if conditions
for  growth  are  right  from  the  domestic  side,  the  euro  area  economy  should,  in  principle,  be  fairly
resistant to potential shocks to foreign demand.
Let me now turn to developments in prices. Looking back, the average rate of increase in consumer
prices in 1999 was just over 1%, the same as it had been in 1998. And most of the forecasts currently
available from private and international institutions, while projecting a somewhat faster rise in 2000
and 2001, expect inflation to remain below 2% on average. So, is there any reason to worry? The bulk
of these forecasts was made in the autumn of last year and is subject to the caveat of the potentially
outdated forecasting assumptions already mentioned earlier. In a number of cases, these forecasts also
incorporate the assumption of rising short-term interest rates in 2000. Prices are now rising faster and
further than was expected earlier. In the course of the second half of last year, inflation moved up by
almost one percentage point to reach 1.7% in December. And expectations of higher inflation rates in
the first months of this year have just been confirmed by a rise to 2.0%  in January.  This  continued
upward movement essentially reflects the increase in oil prices, but - increasingly - also the impact that
the  lower  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  has  on  import  prices  in  general.  While  these  effects  can  be
expected to unwind sooner or later, they have been more protracted and more fervent than expected
earlier and, through their very duration and magnitude, they clearly heighten the risk for second round
effects.
At this point, let me say something about interest rates. About one month ago, the Governing Council
of the ECB decided to raise the interest rate on the main refinancing operations by 25 basis points. I
would like to stress that this was not a direct consequence of the favourable prospects for euro area
activity growth which I just described. As has been emphasised repeatedly, the ECB is not concerned
about  higher  growth  as  such,  but  that  this  higher  growth  be  non-inflationary.  In  this  respect,  the
BIS Review 22/2000
2
interest  rate  decision  of  3  February  should  have  been  a  reassuring  one.  On  the  one  hand,  the  rate
increase did not mean that the ECB had put the brakes on. Rather, when looking at the high rates of
monetary and credit growth and the fact that the levels of both nominal and real interest rates remained
relatively low in a longer-term perspective, the appropriate picture would have been that of throttling
back. The economic upturn in the euro area is now well under way and its momentum should not be
hurt  by  an  adjustment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  interest  rate  move
provided  a  clear  signal  to  market  participants,  social  partners  and  policymakers  that  the  ECB  was
determined to counter inflationary dangers in a timely fashion and that the prospects for price stability
in the euro area remained good.
In the run-up to this interest rate decision, a number of risks to price stability in the medium term came
more clearly to the fore,  indicated  by  both of the two  pillars  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy.  First,
monetary growth has remained consistently above the reference value and the uneven growth pattern
at  the  turn  of  the  year  1999/2000,  with  lower  growth  in  January,  should  be  seen  against  the
background  of  a  base  effect.  It  is  worth  re-emphasising  that  there  are  no  mechanistic  reactions  to
deviations  of  monetary  growth  from  its  reference  value,  but,  together  with  the  continuing  strong
expansion of credit to the private sector, liquidity conditions in the euro area remained generous. As
regards the second  pillar,  the outlook  for  future  price  developments  has  become  less  favourable.  In
particular, the danger has increased that the temporary upward pressures on consumer prices from the
external side of the economy, from higher oil prices and a lower exchange rate, may feed into more
lasting price pressures from the  domestic  side.  In  this respect,  the interest rate increase  has  not,  for
instance, eliminated the need in the upcoming wage bargaining rounds to ensure that wage settlements
do  not  give  rise to  second  round  effects.  It  should instead  have  given  additional  assurance  to  wage
negotiators to keep wage increases in line with price stability.
... and the policy challenges lying ahead
What  we  currently  observe  in  the  euro  area  is  a  noticeable  upturn  in  growth  accompanied  by  price
stability,  and  the  challenge  is  to  set  the  scene  for  this  to  turn  into  a  prolonged  period  of
non-inflationary  growth.  Monetary  policy  can  best  contribute  to  long-term  growth  of  output  and
employment  by  pursuing  its  primary  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability  and  by  counteracting
risks in a forward-looking manner. This has been confirmed by several studies - within and outside the
ECB.  However,  it  would  mean  an  overburdening  of  monetary  policy  if  the  responsibility  for
non-inflationary growth and for the single currency were left to that policy field alone.
So  what  can  other  policy  areas  do  in  support  of  these  joint  responsibilities?  Ongoing  efforts  are
required from macroeconomic and general economic policies as well as from wage negotiators to raise
the productive potential of the euro area. In particular, further progress in structural reforms of labour
and product markets is needed to eliminate or at least significantly reduce existing rigidities. There is
now a broad consensus that the larger part of the still very high unemployment is of a structural nature.
It  is  true  that  estimates  of  structural  unemployment  are  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty,  but  the
dimension of the problem is certainly large enough to warrant decisive action. And there is no time to
lose.  The  change  to  a  post-industrial  economy  with  different  work  profiles  and  job  requirements  is
already  under  way.  There  is  also  the  prospect  of  rising  participation  rates  as  demand  for  part-time
employment increases. In order to ensure employability of the work force at all levels of productivity,
structural reforms of labour markets are urgently needed. However, the full benefits of such reforms
can only be reaped if supported by appropriate wage policies. The participants in the wage negotiation
process thus have the dual responsibility of keeping wage increases consistent with both price stability
and continued employment growth.
Some deregulation and liberalisation of previously sheltered sectors has already taken place in recent
years, but there remains significant scope for further action along these lines. The favourable impact of
such  measures  in  terms  of  lower  price  increases  have,  for  instance,  become  clear  in  the
telecommunications  and  energy  sectors  and  should  be  encouragement  enough  to  step  up  efforts  in
other sectors as well.
3
BIS Review 22/2000
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  current  cyclical  upturn  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  intensify  the
necessary consolidation of public finances. It has to be acknowledged that public deficits have come
down in recent years and that budgetary objectives for 1999 seem to have been met by all euro area
countries.  However,  it  has  also  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  recent  reduction  of  deficits  has  been
greatly helped by the relatively low levels of interest rates achieved in the run-up to Monetary Union.
And  in  a  number  of  Member  States  the  budgetary  situation  is  still  far  from  reaching  the  targets
specified in the Stability and Growth Pact, which are for budgets close to balance or in surplus. The
additional room  for  manoeuvre  offered  by  such  positions  is  urgently  needed.  First,  sufficient  safety
margins are necessary to cope with the adverse shocks which will not cease to occur in a Monetary
Union. Second, they are necessary to increase the scope for reforms of tax and expenditure systems
which  are  conducive  to  long-term  growth,  and  to  start  on  the  necessary  reforms  of  social  security
systems. It appears that a number of updated stability programs, which have recently been sent to the
European Commission for examination, do not yet sufficiently incorporate such objectives.
With all the appropriate policies in place, the momentum of non-inflationary growth could eventually
be stronger than is currently expected. Such a prospect would have made a nice ending to a discussion
on the outlook for the euro area. However, the question which currently appears to occupy European
policymakers is whether Europe is about to convert into a so-called “New Economy” and whether it
could be expected to mirror the strong performance of the US economy in terms of high growth and
subdued  inflation.  At  this  juncture,  the  concept  of  the  New  Economy  is  still  somewhat  unclear,
essentially  combining  a  range  of  rather  diverse factors  which  have  in  common  that  they  potentially
raise the  speed at  which the economy  can  grow  before inflation  starts to  accelerate.  In  this respect,
while  certainly  not  “new”  as  a  prescription,  decisive  action  on  the  part  of  policymakers  to  pursue
structural reforms and sound economic policies would certainly be part of this concept. The extent to
which the potential gains of factors such as information technology can be reaped, is likely to depend
on whether appropriate market structures and sound economic policies are in place.
To date, there has been a difference between the US economy and the euro area. This is most apparent
with respect to the different growth performance, which is also reflected in recent developments of the
euro. To  the  extent  that exchange  rates are a  reflection  of  cyclical  divergence  between  countries  or
economic regions, it is worth pointing out that the current external value of the euro vis-à-vis the US
dollar is not so much an expression of bad performance or unfavourable prospects of the euro area.
Rather,  it  reflects  the  exceptionally  good  performance  achieved  by  the  US  economy.  However,  the
growth differential vis-à-vis the United States is likely to narrow rapidly as the upturn in the euro area
continues [and some re-balancing of the exchange rate can hence be expected. At the same time, in the
longer-term, the exchange rate reflects more than just cyclical differences. Of greater importance for
the upward potential of the euro will therefore be that monetary policy is committed to securing price
stability. In addition, and this also ties up with the requirements for something like a New Economy to
emerge,  it  is  necessary  that  convincing  further  progress  be  made  in  the  individual  Member  States
regarding the structural reform of labour and product markets.]
Differences in economic performance across Member States ...
The single currency reflects a large number of factors, both at the area-wide and at the national level,
and  is  therefore  a  joint  responsibility  of  all  Member  States  and  of  all  policy  areas.  In  this  respect,
differences in growth and inflation between Member States will continue to occur also with a single
monetary policy, just as they have been normal between regions in the individual countries. Monetary
Union is no universal shield against shocks and does not prevent these shocks from affecting countries
differently, depending on their economic structures and policy responses. At the same time, monetary
policy can no longer be geared towards the divergent developments in individual countries and it is
clear that, if this divergence is considered to reflect unwarranted cyclical or structural conditions, this
is primarily a question of the country in question and of national economic policies. But we should not
forget  that  some  divergence  is  quite  normal.  For  instance,  with  countries  still  in  a  process  of
catching-up  in  terms  of  productivity  and  living  standards,  there  will  be  some  natural  and  even
warranted divergence in growth and inflation in the course of this process.
BIS Review 22/2000
4
While the single monetary policy is determined by developments in the euro area as a whole, looking
also at the performance in the individual Member States is necessary to gain a better understanding of
area-wide developments.
... and the outlook for the French economy
With this in mind, let me now say something about the outlook for the French economy - and to point
out  that  it  is  indeed  favourable.  The  cyclical  developments  in  France  combine  moderate  inflation,
below the euro area average, and strong economic growth, above the euro area average. Towards the
end of the decade, France has thus contributed to a great extent to stabilising the prospects of the euro
area  economy.  In  particular  last  year,  and  in  contrast  with  other  large  economies  of  the  area,  the
French economy has proved resilient in terms of activity and stable in terms of prices. Looking at the
headline  figures  for  1999,  an  estimated  3.2%  real  GDP  growth  for  the  fourth  quarter  and  a  0.6%
annual  average  increase  in  consumer  prices,  the  conclusion  can  be  drawn  that  economic  agents  in
France have so far successfully adapted to the new euro-wide macroeconomic context associated with
the single monetary policy.
With  a  view  to  the  near  future,  available  indicators  and  forecasts  suggest  similarly  favourable
prospects for France as for the euro area as a whole. According to recent results from industrial and
consumer  surveys,  both  entrepreneurs  and  households  remain  confident  about  their  short-term
prospects.  The  optimism  of  the  latter  is  best  reflected  in  the  historically  high  level  of  consumer
confidence  and  stems  partly  from  the  on-going  improvement  of  the  situation  on  the  labour  market.
Household consumption, which has been resilient in 1999 despite the temporary economic slowdown,
is  therefore  expected  to  continue  to  grow  rapidly  this  year.  As  far  as  enterprises  are  concerned,
business confidence is in line with the historically high levels reached in 1998 and entrepreneurs have
kept  on  signalling  well-filled  order  books.  With  capacity  utilisation  rates  some  2  percentage  points
above  their  long-term  average,  the  overall  positive  environment  can  be  expected  to  contribute  to
dynamic  investment  expenditure.  This  would  be  reinforced  by  other  major  determinants  for
investment.  Irrespective  of  the  positive  influence  of  monetary  policy  on  financing  conditions,
companies’ financial positions can indeed be expected to remain healthy, while re-payment difficulties
would continue to ease.
Not surprisingly in this context, there is a broad consensus among forecasters on a scenario of rapid
economic growth in France, with inflation remaining within the definition of price stability for the two
years  ahead.  So far,  the  consensus  forecast  predicts  that  real  GDP  could  increase  by  some  3.4%  in
2000 and by 3.0% in 2001, while consumer prices will grow by 1.2% in both years, although more
recent forecasts indicate that prices could rise more rapidly. It is also widely expected that growth will
be sustained by both domestic and external demand and will result in continued employment growth
and further reductions in unemployment.
This is a bright picture and we should wish that it all comes true, not only in 2000 and 2001, but also
beyond. But, although this scenario for the coming years is a likely one, it is important to bear in mind
that it is subject to uncertainties. Some of them, like the event of an unexpected external shock, cannot
be  eliminated.  But  others  fall  within  national  responsibility.  Proper  economic  policies  and/or  an
adequate consensus among economic agents can in some cases be key factors in ensuring that crucial
pending issues are faced in a way compatible with sustained and non-inflationary growth.
Among the pending issues for the future of the French economy, the implementation and financing of
the 35-hour working week is certainly an important one. But other uncertainties also call for attention.
I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  maintaining  the  credibility  of  fiscal  consolidation.  In  this
regard, avoiding any relaxation of the fiscal stance, as well as reducing the risk of any deficit slippage
in the event of an unexpected growth slowdown are certainly key elements. Moreover, with a view to
external competitiveness, an explicit commitment on the part of the social partners to maintain wage
developments in line with productivity increases is an important factor.
More generally, France faces the same fundamental challenge as the other European economies. It can
be  summarised  in  the  following  short  question:  “How  can  one  develop  an  internal  dynamic  for
5
BIS Review 22/2000
sustainable  long-term  growth?”  This  is  a  crucial  challenge  if  one  wants  to  significantly  reduce
unemployment. And, at the same time, in an increasingly integrated world economy, one wishes the
euro area economy not to be too vulnerable to every external slowdown. By committing themselves to
fostering  low  inflation  and  sounder  public  finances,  public  authorities,  both  French  and  European,
have been working for years to develop the necessary background environment for such a domestic
dynamic.  The  relative  resilience  of  the  French  economy,  despite  the  recent  temporary  slowdown,
could be a sign of a successful policy mix in this regard.
Earlier in my speech I spoke about the “New Economy”, an appealing expression which is also being
used more and more when referring to the good performance of the French economy in the recent past.
However,  for  its  true  emergence,  two  important  elements  are  required.  First  is  the  commitment  to
maintain an environment with moderate developments in production costs and to pursue sound public
finances. Second is the need to continue and step-up the process of structural reforms. That is the only
way  to  foster  employability  of  the  labour  force  and  to  encourage  entrepreneurship,  leading  to
appropriate choices in terms of product specialisation and ultimately, high economic growth coupled
with macroeconomic stability.
BIS Review 22/2000
6
