Mr King considers the convergence of theory
and practice in monetary policy
Address by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the joint luncheon of the
American Economic Association and the American Finance Association, held in Boston on 7 January
2000.
  Introduction
1.
My theme today is the convergence between the theory and practice of monetary policy over the past
decade. That  is  why  I  have  titled  my  talk  “Monetary  Policy: Theory  in  Practice”.  But  it  is  really  a
story about people, places and, especially, institutions. For monetary policy, institutional arrangements
matter; none more so than the structure of central banks. Central banks have had a very good decade.
Their  reputation  has  never  been  higher,  and  they  find  themselves  in  a  position  of  power  and
responsibility unrivalled in their history.
At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  a  transformation  in  the  way  in  which  central  banking  has  been
conducted. Monetary  policy  used to  be a  dark  art, practised  by  magicians,  and  wrapped  in  secrecy.
When I joined the Bank of England in 1991, I was fortunate enough to be invited to dine with a group
that included Paul Volcker. At the end of the evening I asked Paul if he had a word of advice for a new
central  banker.  He  replied  -  in  one  word  -  “mystique”.  That  single  word  encapsulated  much  of  the
tradition and wisdom of central banking at that time.
It  is  truly  remarkable  how  much  has  changed  over  the  past  decade.  The  mystery  and  mystique  has
given way to transparency and openness. The increasing role of economists - both in central banks and
in the academic study of monetary policy - has played a major role in that change.
I shall illustrate my thesis of a convergence between the theory  and practice of  monetary  policy  by
reference  to  three  features  of  the  1990s.  First,  more  and  more  countries  have  adopted  inflation
targeting as their framework for monetary policy. Over the past year alone, a leading emerging market,
Brazil, and a major industrialised country, Switzerland, have adopted inflation targets.
Second, and linked to the spread of inflation targets, much attention has been paid to promoting the
transparency of policy. It is difficult to listen to a speech on domestic or international financial policy
these days, without hearing about transparency. And mine will be no exception. The communication
of policymakers’ intentions with a view to enhancing their credibility has come to play a central role
in monetary policy. The rise to prominence of inflation targets, on the one hand, and transparency, on
the  other,  reflect  the  central  importance  of  expectations  in  our  models  of  economic  behaviour.
Examples range from the rational expectations revolution to the analysis of the present state of Japan
as a liquidity trap.
The  third  feature  of  the  1990s  is  the  new  interest  in  monetary  policy  in  an  environment  of  low
inflation. This will require, as Alan Greenspan described to this luncheon two years ago, a “deeper
understanding of the economic characteristics of sustained price stability”. For practitioners of central
banking,  one  of  the  challenges  will  be  how  to  anchor  expectations  of  the  price  level  in  the  distant
future.  I  shall  suggest  that  inflation  targeting  can  easily  be  extended  to  incorporate  the  desirable
features  of  long  run  price  level targeting.  And  for theorists  of central  banking,  I  shall  argue  that  to
understand how monetary policy works will mean delving deeper into how quantities of money and
liquidity affect risk premia in a whole variety of financial markets.
But I want to start by describing the convergence of theory and practice in monetary policy over the
past  decade.  Inevitably,  much  of  what  I  shall  say  is  based  on  personal  experience  as  an  academic
turned central banker.
1
BIS Review 1/2000
 Economists in the policy world
2.
I joined the Bank of England as Chief Economist in the spring of 1991. It was an inauspicious start.
Within  three  weeks,  BCCI  had  collapsed,  sparking  a  continuing  debate  about  the  regulation  of
international banks. In 1992, sterling collapsed and the following year the rest of the ERM collapsed
as well. At the end of 1994, Mexico collapsed, followed in 1995 by the collapse of Barings. In 1996,
monetary and financial policies were in good shape, but, following measures to prevent the spread of
BSE,  the  British  beef  industry  collapsed.  In  1997,  it  was  the  turn  of  the  British  Government  to
collapse, followed later in the year by much of Asia. In 1998, Russia and then LTCM collapsed. And
earlier last year the Brazilian exchange rate regime collapsed. To most people’s astonishment, nothing
has so far collapsed in 2000. Not a promising track record you might think.
But I am in good company. Economists who move into the policy  world  belong  to  an international
club. And it is striking how many academics, having come to know each other well in one phase of
their  career,  have  continued  to  work  closely  together  on  policy  questions  at  the  international  level.
Whether  through  the  IMF  and  World  Bank,  or  through  groups  such  as  the  G7,  or  simply  bilateral
contacts, I have been struck by how often my path crossed with former friends and colleagues such as
Larry Summers, Alan Blinder, Janet Yellen, Alice Rivlin and Martin Baily in the United States, Stan
Fischer, Michael Mussa and Joe Stiglitz in international institutions, and Otmar Issing, Jacob Frenkel
and the late Michael Bruno in other central banks. More recently, John Vickers, Alan Budd,Willem
Buiter, Charles Goodhart and Sushil Wadhwani have all joined me as members of the new Monetary
Policy Committee at the Bank of England.
Of course, non-economists will always  point to the  dangers  of  delegating  decisions  to  the  so-called
experts. We all know the myriad jokes about economists. And the cult of the amateur is still revered
by many. On his appointment as Financial Secretary to the Treasury in the 1930s, Duff Cooper wrote
that,
“I  had  feared  that  my  limited  acquaintance  with  political  economy  and  my  ignorance  of
finance  would  prove  serious  handicaps,  but  within  a  week  of  my  appointment  I  had  to
wind-up a debate on currency in the House of Commons and, speaking without the slightest
knowledge  of  the  subject,  I  was  able,  by  drawing  attention  to  the  discrepancies  in  the
remedies  proposed  by  the  previous  speakers,  all  of  them  experts,  to  create  a  favourable
impression and to earn many congratulations.”
Fifty  years  of  amateurs  in  economic  policy  -  aided  and  abetted  by  an  economic  establishment  that
seemed to believe that inflation was always and everywhere a real phenomenon - led to two decades of
high and volatile inflation in Britain. Inflation averaged 13% a year during the 1970s, with a peak of
no  less  than  27%  in  1975,  and  7%  a  year  in  the  1980s.  Only  a  deep  recession  in  the  early  1990s
brought it to below 5%. For a country whose economic history was founded on a stable monetary and
fiscal  framework,  and  which  could  claim  that  prices  in  Germany  rose  in  only  one  month  (October
1923)  by  more  than  prices  had  risen  in  the  UK  since  the  arrival  of  William  the  Conqueror,  the
post-war record of economic management was a dismal failure.
This  experience  culminated  in  the  dramatic  and  forced  withdrawal  from  the  Exchange  Rate
Mechanism on 16 September 1992. There are moments when new ideas come into their own. This was
one  of  them.  In  the  weeks  after  our  departure  from  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism,  the  UK  had  a
floating exchange rate and no nominal anchor for the price level. Such an anchor was urgently needed.
We decided to adopt and formalise what we regarded as best practice in other central banks. This was
to look ahead at the likely  outlook  for  inflation,  given  current  policy,  and  to  adjust  interest  rates to
keep  inflation  on  track  to  meet  some  desired  level,  while  allowing  current  inflation  to  reflect
unexpected shocks in order to prevent widespread fluctuations in output and employment in the short
run. All this was embodied in a formal commitment to an explicit numerical inflation target at which
monetary policy should continuously aim, looking ahead about two years.
A  second,  and  crucial,  aspect  of  the  new  framework  was  the  commitment  to  transparency  and
openness about both the objectives of monetary policy and the reasons for individual decisions about
the level  of  interest  rates. This commitment  was  embodied, initially,  in  the  publication  of  a  regular
Inflation  Report  by  the  Bank  of  England.  First  published  at  the  beginning  of  1993,  our  quarterly
BIS Review 1/2000
2
Inflation Report has been the main vehicle by which the Bank explains to the public its views on the
economy. And it has been copied by a number of central banks around the world.
The next step was the granting of independence to the Bank by the new Labour government in May
1997.  An  inflation  target  and  an  emphasis  on  transparency  remained  at  the  centre  of  the  new
arrangements. The inflation target was defined as a symmetric point target of 2½%. The target is set
by  the  Government  and  the  achievement  of  that  target  is  delegated  to  a  new  Monetary  Policy
Committee (MPC) comprising nine members, five executive and four external non-executive members
who are professional economists. Decisions on interest rates are determined by majority vote among
the MPC at its monthly meetings and the minutes of the discussions, together with the voting record,
are  published  less  than  two  weeks  following  the  announcement  of  the  decision,  which  is  always  at
12 noon on the second day of the meeting. The whole process is systematic and transparent in a way
that would have been unthinkable only ten years ago.
After  2½  years,  the  arrangements  have  worked  well.  Fears  that  divided  votes  would  undermine  the
credibility of the Committee have proved unfounded. Differences of view there have been. Over the
past two years - 24 meetings in total - there have been only 4 occasions when the Committee has been
unanimous.  But  explaining  openly  to  the  public  the  nature  of  the  uncertainties  and  difficulties  in
judging the appropriate level of interest rates has proved successful. Indeed, it has added credibility to
the nature of the process. As I remarked in a speech last year, the motto of the MPC is “divided we
stand, united we fall”. The symmetric nature of the inflation target has made it easy to explain why
interest rates sometimes go down and sometimes go up, depending on the state of the economy and the
prospects for inflation.
Most important of all, the performance of the UK economy has been good. Since October 1992, the
average rate of inflation has been 2.6%. And, apart from one month, which was affected by the timing
of indirect tax increases, inflation has been between 2-3% for three years. Moreover, since 1992 the
growth  rate  of  output  has averaged  2.8%  a  year,  above  the  inflation  rate,  and  there  have  now  been
30 consecutive quarters of positive economic growth in the UK, an unparalleled period of growth in
the post-war period. Bond yields have fallen as the credibility of the new arrangements has improved.
When the UK left the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992, 10-year bond yields were more
than 100 basis points higher in the UK than in the US. Now, our 10-bond yields are actually lower
than those in the US.
So  much  for  recent  UK  experience.  But  why  have  a  dozen  or  more  other  countries  also  adopted
inflation targets and transparency?
The case for an inflation target and transparency
3.
The main case for an inflation target is the political economy of central banking: the incentives facing
central bankers and the process by which monetary policy is set. Paper money creates a temptation to
spring inflation surprises on an unsuspecting public. This problem of “time inconsistency” has led to a
long  and  rather  unproductive  debate  about  the  relative  merits  of  rules  versus  discretion.  Neither
extreme  is  attractive.  No  simple  -  or  for  that  matter  complicated  -  rule  exists  which,  if  followed
mechanically, would be a desirable way of setting monetary policy. Our knowledge of the economy is
inadequate. Any rule would soon be made redundant by the results of new research. A central bank
Governor  implementing  a  rule  would  live  in  fear  that  the  next  post  would  bring  a  NBER  working
paper showing that a new rule outperformed the existing one. For any rule to be feasible, there would
have to be a rule for updating the rule itself. And one could continue ad infinitum. This is not to say
that ideas such as the Taylor Rule cannot play a very valuable role in forcing central bankers to ask
themselves questions as to why interest rates have been set at the level they have. But their role is to
promote a serious intellectual discussion within the central bank, not substitute for it.
Equally, unfettered discretion exercised by central bankers deciding in secret is undesirable because it
does not provide incentives for good behaviour. Rule-like behaviour increases predictability, helping
to ensure that expectations are consistent with the stated inflation target. An explicit inflation target
should  also  constrain  the  central  bank  to  behave  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  the  target.  In  the
3
BIS Review 1/2000
words  of  Ben  Bernanke  and  Rick  Mishkin,  an  inflation  target  means  that  the  central  bank  has
constrained rather than unfettered discretion.
Constrained  discretion  allows  the  central  bank  to  implement  an  optimal  monetary  policy  reaction
function. An inflation target framework does not mean that monetary policy is concerned solely with
inflation.  Movements  in  commodity  and  oil  prices,  or  unexpected  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  or,
indeed, indirect taxes, may temporarily affect inflation. But the central bank should not try to offset
these in the short run. It chooses a horizon over which inflation is brought back to the target following
an  unexpected  shock  in  order  to  reduce  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  Since  inflation  is
defined as the increase in prices over the previous twelve months, any unexpected shock will remain
in  the  measured  inflation rate  for  at  least  twelve  months,  and  usually  longer  because  of  lags  in  the
transmission  mechanism.  Hence  it  seems  sensible  for  the  central  bank  to  target  inflation  something
like two years ahead.
It  is  crucial  to  explain  the  need  to  look  ahead.  Forecasts  are  probability  distributions,  not  point
estimates. It is disappointing that some forecasters still publish point estimates. And even worse, some
commentators provide annual awards for so-called “golden gurus” whose point estimates turn out to
be closest to the realised values of the variables which they were forecasting. This is rather like giving
the  Fields  medal  for  mathematics  to  the  winner  of  the  National  Lottery  for  their  understanding  of
number theory. And that is why the Bank of England publishes probability distributions for forecasts
in the form of fan charts for both inflation and output growth. It is also important to remind people
that, in assessing the performance of a decision-taking body, it can hit the target for the wrong reasons
as well as miss the target for the right reasons. There are both type one and type two errors.
A transparent monetary policy reaction function means that the news should be in developments of the
economy  not  in  the  announcements  of  decisions  by  the  central  bank.  It  is  of  course  tempting  for
central banks to make their own meetings the main story. But transparency should lead to policy being
predictable. Hence a successful central bank should be boring - rather like a referee whose success is
judged by how little his or her decisions intrude into the game itself.
Challenges for the future
4.
In the final part of my talk I would like to discuss two challenges for the future - the first for central
bankers and the second for researchers in money and finance.
Inflation targets may have been all the rage over the past decade, but the idea that monetary policy
should target the price level has a long and respectable pedigree dating back at least to Irving Fisher
and Maynard Keynes. The case for price stability suggests that it is the stability of the price level in
the long run which creates confidence in the monetary standard. Nominal contracts can then play an
important role. For example, the long-term lender will know what her return will be in real terms. In
contrast, under inflation targeting the variance of the price level increases without limit as deviations
of inflation from the target level are treated as bygones. There is base level drift in the price level.
So why not target the price level? The conventional answer is that to return prices to their target level
in the period following an initial shock would imply significant volatility of output. That is true. But
why  not  select  an  optimal  horizon  over  which  the  price  level  is  brought  back  to  some  desired
pre-determined path. And in the public eye there is a much less clear distinction between price level
and  inflation  targeting  than  in  the  academic  literature.  Let  me  give  a  simple  example.  As  I  have
explained, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee has an inflation target of 2.5% a year.
Members of the Committee are held accountable for their votes on interest rates by Parliament. At the
end of our terms of office, Parliament might well ask what the average inflation rate had been during
that period. Had we met our inflation target over our terms of office? But by asking that question the
implicit criterion would in fact be price level targeting. The Committee would be asking whether the
price  level  at  the  end  of  the  period  was  close  to  its  desired  pre-determined  path  implied  by  the
objective that prices should rise by 2.5% a year.
An average inflation rate target is, therefore, akin to price level targeting. And it can be achieved by a
policy reaction function that contains an error correction mechanism for deviations of the price level
BIS Review 1/2000
4
from  its  desired  path.  A  simple  example  of  this  would  be  a  modified  Taylor  Rule  in  which  the
arguments determining interest rates would include not simply the deviation of inflation from its target
and of output from its trend path, but also a term including the deviation of the price level from its
desired path. The key choice is the horizon over which the price level is brought back to its desired
path.  It  would  make  little  sense  to  try  to  do  so  quickly  because  that  would  indeed  induce  greater
volatility of output. But the benefits of predictability of the price level are seen in the longer run. So it
would make sense for the horizon relevant to the price  level  to  be  something  closer  to, say,  twenty
years, compared with a two-year horizon over which to aim to return inflation to its target. In this way
it  would  be  possible  to  combine  the  advantages  of  the  19th  Century  achievement  of  stability  and
predictability of the price level in the long run, with a 20th Century reduction in short run fluctuations
in inflation and output. Such an extension of inflation targeting would be a monetary policy fit for the
new century. Moreover, in circumstances, such as those in Japan, where short-term interest rates are
already zero,  and,  as stressed  by  Paul  Krugman,  monetary  policy  needs  to  raise  expectations of the
future price level, the mixture of price level and inflation targeting has exactly the desired impact on
expectations.
The second challenge is to research in money and finance. John Cochrane has recently surveyed the
“new  facts  in  finance”.  He  argues  that  the  most  natural  explanation  of  a  number  of  empirical
phenomena  in  finance  is  slowly  changing  risk  premia  related  to  business  cycles  and  aggregate
financial distress. The empirical failure over short time horizons of both the uncovered interest parity
(UIP) theory of exchange rates and the pure expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates
reflects factors that can be described as “risk premia”.
Why is this important for monetary policy? Consider the current debate on monetary policy in Japan.
Short-term interest rates have been virtually zero in Japan for the past year. Although there are now
signs  of  economic  recovery,  many  commentators  have  urged  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  expand  the
monetary  base.  Open  market  operations,  it  is  argued,  should  concentrate  on  purchases  of  long-term
government  bonds,  foreign  currency  or  even  private  sector  assets.  But  what  is  the  mechanism  by
which increases in base money affect demand and output when short-term interest rates are zero? It is
unlikely that the transmission mechanism is an increase in real money balances - they are too small
relative to other forms of wealth. Rather, an increase in the monetary base will affect demand by its
influence  on  the  yields  of  a  wide  range  of  assets.  But  with  short  rates  stuck  at  zero,  the  pure
expectations  theory  of  the  term  structure  and  the  UIP  theory  of  exchange  rates  provide  no  way  for
monetary policy to affect those yields, other than through changes in expectations of future monetary
policy.
But these theories ignore risk premia. If an increase in money can - as Marvin Goodfriend recently and
Allan  Meltzer  for  a  long  time  have  argued  -  reduce  the  marginal  value  of  liquidity  services,  then
monetary expansions will lower risk premia, raise asset prices and, in turn, raise demand and output.
The link between money and risk premia on a broader range of financial assets is likely to be through
the liquidity services afforded by money, which in turn is related to the “demand for immediacy”, to
use the terminology of Sandy Grossman and Merton Miller, over ten years ago, by the holders of those
assets. So a full explanation of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy - both at zero rates of
interest and more generally - will require a general equilibrium theory of risk premia, and how those
premia are affected by monetary policy.
It would be nice to think that, just as in cosmology where breakthroughs come from the joint study of
the  very  small  and  the  very  big,  insights  will  come  from  linking  the  high  frequency  analysis  of
individual  asset  prices  in  finance  with  the  low  frequency  study  of  business  cycles  in  monetary
economics. That would certainly merit a joint luncheon of your two associations!
Conclusions
5.
Over  the  past  decade, the traditional  mystery  and  mystique  of  central  banks  have  been  replaced  by
transparency  and  openness.  And  for  good  reason.  The  emphasis  on  expectations,  fundamental  to
modern macroeconomics, has been absorbed into practical central banking. And central banks, more
than any other part of government, have, around the world, been invaded by economists. The result
5
BIS Review 1/2000
has  been  a  growing  convergence  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  monetary  policy.  A  combination  of
inflation targets and transparency is a practical result of that convergence. Whether this application of
theory in practice is successful will be a major test of our profession. Experience so far suggests that
we should be, as central bankers always are, cautiously optimistic.
BIS Review 1/2000
6
