Donald T Brash: Central banks and financial system stability
in an uncertain world
Address by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to Belgian Financial
Forum, Antwerp Region, Brussels, on 6 June 2000.
 Introduction
I am very pleased to be here in Antwerp this evening, and to have the opportunity of sharing with you
some of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s views on promoting financial system stability.
Everybody in this room is confronted with uncertainty in their daily interface with financial markets.
For those of us who are central bankers or bank supervisors, the task is to guide the dynamic, complex
and unpredictable processes in financial markets towards outcomes that meet the policy preferences of
our country. For the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, our task is to deliver price stability and a sound
and efficient financial system within a liberal economic policy paradigm.
The uncertain world that we operate in can be highlighted by the relatively frequent and unpredictable
episodes  of  financial  instability  experienced  over  the  past  couple  of  decades.  Since  1980,  over
two-thirds of IMF member countries have experienced at least one serious banking-sector difficulty. In
some  countries,  bank  losses  nearly  or  completely  exhausted  the  banking  system’s  capital.  In  some
countries, financial  collapses  have  required  significant  fiscal  expenditure  to  resolve.  And,  as  we  all
know,  national  financial  crises  have  been  transmitted  to  other  countries,  threatening  not  only  the
economic well-being of those countries but also the stability of the international financial system as a
whole.
Oceans of ink have been spilt in analysing the causes of these crises. Most detached observers seem to
agree  that  the  underlying  problems  can  be  traced  to  certain  fundamental  weaknesses,  weaknesses
which clearly varied from country to country, but which have included poor quality credit analysis by
banks and other financial institutions, politically-directed lending by banks, the end of an asset price
bubble  (typically  real  estate),  sharply  increased  real  exchange  rates  in  a  pegged  exchange  rate
situation, distorted incentives in financial markets, and a lack of transparency in financial markets.
The widespread incidence and significant economic cost of financial sector problems have prompted
calls for concerted international action to promote the soundness of financial systems. These calls have
strengthened considerably over the last couple of years. The Basel Committee has been at the forefront
of this effort with the release of the Core Principles and proposals for a new Capital Accord. The IMF
is making evaluation of financial supervision and regulation part of its annual country reviews, and the
World  Bank  is  emphasising  the  strengthening  of  financial  infrastructure  as  an  important  part  of  its
structural  assistance  programmes.  While  these  international  initiatives  have  many  positive  features,
there are aspects that conflict with our approach to promoting soundness and efficiency of the New
Zealand financial system and give us some concern. I will elaborate on these in a moment.
At the national level, the preservation of a stable financial system remains one of the most challenging
tasks facing governments today. New Zealand is no exception.
Not  all  of  you  will  be  aware  that  New  Zealand  had  its  own  banking  system  problems  less  than  10
years ago. As a result of these problems, our largest bank would almost certainly have failed had the
government,  as  majority  shareholder,  not  been  willing  on  two  occasions  to  provide  a  substantial
capital injection. One very major financial institution (not a bank, but certainly a quasi-bank, and an
institution  which  was  in  the  process  of  applying  for  a  banking  licence)  did  fail,  one  of  the  largest
failures in New Zealand’s history. Another bank would have failed had its private sector shareholder
not been in a position to inject very large amounts of additional capital, and even after that was done
1
BIS Review 47/2000
the institution was eventually wound up. At no point did it look likely that the whole banking system
might fail, but we certainly had major problems with some of the largest participants in the system.
What lessons did we learn from that experience? There were of  course  a  whole  host  of  factors  that
caused  these  difficulties.  One  important  factor  was  the  sheer  inexperience  of  many  of  our  bankers:
they had been accustomed to a highly protected environment, and were ill-prepared to deal with the
demands of a deregulated environment. Nevertheless, I think there were four important lessons that are
worth sharing with you. While every country has to make judgements and decisions in the light of its
own particular circumstances – and certainly no two countries are exactly alike – some of the lessons
we learnt in promoting financial system stability may have relevance to other countries as well.
I  will  deal  with  the  monetary  policy  lessons  last  and  somewhat  succinctly,  leaving  most  of  my
comments  to  the  prudential  policy  lessons,  where  we  have  moved  away  from  the  more  traditional
‘rules-based’ approach to supervising banks. I have chosen to dwell mainly on the prudential policy
lessons, as it is here that our experience may have more relevance for you. I suspect that I do not have
much  to  offer the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  on  the  monetary  policy  front,  given  your  interests  are
likely to be more concentrated on monetary union issues with a single monetary policy for the euro
area now having been in operation for over a year. (As the issue of currency union for New Zealand is
currently a matter of public discussion in my country, if we have time I would welcome any comments
members of the audience might want to make on your experience with monetary union so far.)
Prudential policy lessons from New Zealand
Lesson 1: encourage banks to behave prudently
First, I believe it is important that banks are given every incentive to behave prudently. This may seem
a  self-evident  statement,  but  it  is  astonishing  how  frequently  the  importance  of  this  principle  is
ignored.  In  New  Zealand’s  case,  we  diminished  this  incentive  to  behave  prudently  by  allowing  the
view to go unchallenged that banks were effectively ‘sovereign risk’, or at least ‘too big to fail’. This
meant that bank creditors felt little need to assess the creditworthiness of the banks with which they
deposited  funds  -  banks  were,  it  was  widely  believed,  effectively  guaranteed  by  government.  Bank
boards and managements may have felt similarly protected against the possibility of failure, and made
loans with a disregard for risk which was, in some cases, breath-taking. This so-called ‘moral hazard
problem’ may have been particularly severe in the case of two of the three institutions which got into
serious difficulties in the late eighties, both of them owned wholly or in part by government. There
was  little  or  no  direction  of  their  lending  by  government,  but  the  management  of  both  institutions
certainly embarked upon lending transactions in the newly liberalised environment which rapidly got
them into serious difficulties.
For some of the other countries that have experienced financial instability in recent years, it is possible
that the incentive for banks to behave prudently was seriously eroded not only by the impression that
most  large  financial  institutions  would  not  be  allowed  to  fail  but  also  by  the  extent  to  which
governments  directed  the  lending  activities  of  the  banks  themselves.  After  all,  if  governments  are
going to become extensively involved in directing where banks should and should not lend, it is not
unreasonable if the banks and their creditors assume that governments will ‘see them right’ if things
go wrong. Bank management certainly has little incentive to carefully assess credit risk if, at the end
of the day, the decision on whether or not to lend will be made by the bank’s board under the influence
or direction of higher political authority.
At the moment, as we all know, there is  a  great  deal of  international  attention focused  on  how  this
problem of poor credit decisions in the banking sector can be dealt with. Most of the attention appears
to be on how to strengthen external regulation of the banking sector, and how to make banking more
independent of political influence. Certainly, freeing banks from political interference in their credit
decisions is very desirable, and strengthening ‘rules-based’ banking supervision is one possible way to
reduce the risks of future problems in the banking system.
BIS Review 47/2000
2
But we in New Zealand are not persuaded that strengthening ‘rules-based’ banking supervision is the
only way to proceed, or indeed is even necessarily the best way to proceed in all circumstances. When
we reviewed what we were doing in banking supervision in the early nineties, we became concerned.
At that time, we were conducting banking supervision along conventional Basel Committee lines. We
were gathering very large amounts of confidential information from banks on a quarterly (sometimes a
monthly) basis. We were laying down a large number of rules and limits designed to ensure that banks
behaved prudently.
Several  things  prompted  us  to  review  that  approach,  and  one  of  them  was  a  worry  about  the  risks
which  we  were  incurring  on  behalf  of  taxpayers.  What  would  happen  if,  despite  our  banking
supervision,  a  bank  were  to  get  into  difficulties?  Might  depositors  argue  that  they  wanted  full
compensation,  since  while  they  had  had  no  knowledge  of  the  bank’s  financial  condition  we  in  the
Reserve Bank were not only fully aware of that condition but were also responsible for laying down
the rules and limits by which the bank had been obliged to operate?
We consoled ourselves with the thought that our banking supervision was so good that no banks would
fail  under  our  watchful  eye.  But  then  we  looked  abroad  –  at  the  United  States,  at  Japan,  at
Scandinavia,  at  the  United  Kingdom  and  at  Australia.  We  found  banks  going  down  in  significant
numbers,  despite  some  extremely  professional  and  politically-independent  banking  supervision.  We
could not be confident that traditional banking supervision would prevent bank failure, and we could
be confident that, by being the sole recipient of detailed financial information on banks and the main
arbiter of what constituted prudent banking behaviour, there was a major risk that we would be held
liable, politically and morally if not legally, for any losses incurred by depositors.
Then we became aware of anecdotal evidence that our banking supervision was reducing the incentive
for  bank  directors  to  make  their  own  decisions  about  crucial  aspects  of  their  bank’s  operations.  In
other words, because the Reserve Bank was laying down maximum individual credit limits, and limits
on  open  foreign  exchange  positions,  and  guidelines  for  internal  controls,  some  bank  directors  were
assuming  that  they  were  necessarily  behaving  prudently  provided  they  were  operating  within  those
limits  and  guidelines.  They  stopped  addressing  the  risks  which  their  own  banks  were  facing  and
simply  complied  with  the  general  limits  and  guidelines.  To  the  extent  that  that  was  true  –  and  we
found  some  evidence  that  it  was  true  in  some  banks  –  we  concluded  that  our  banking  supervision
might actually be increasing the risk of bank failure, by reducing the incentive for bank directors and
bank managers to make their own careful assessment of risk.
The outcome of our review was to substantially strengthen disciplines on the directors and managers
of banks to operate their banks prudently, and to strengthen the ability of the marketplace to discipline
banks. We also retain a system of supervisory discipline, which we take very seriously. But we retain
only a few absolute rules within that framework, principally that all banks must at least meet the Basel
capital adequacy rules. We rely mainly on a requirement that banks disclose to the public a substantial
amount of financial and risk information quarterly. In addition, all bank directors must sign off these
quarterly statements, at the same time attesting to the fact that the internal controls of their banks are
appropriate to the nature of their banking business, and that those controls are being properly applied.
We in the Reserve Bank do not attempt to tell banks what those controls should look like, but directors
signing  those  quarterly  statements  without  making  a  careful  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  internal
controls are exposing themselves to very considerable legal risk in the event that their bank gets into
difficulty.
We have also gone out of our way on a number of occasions to make it clear to the public that neither
the  Reserve  Bank  nor  the  government  of  New  Zealand  is  guaranteeing  individual  banks,  and  we
published a booklet designed to assist the general public to interpret banks’ financial information.
None of these actions is a guarantee against imprudent bank behaviour of course, but we believe that
we  have  gone  a  considerable  distance towards  ensuring  that  banks  face  strong  incentives  to  behave
prudently. No bank operating in New Zealand is now owned by government, none is guaranteed by
government, none is obliged to lend to particular sectors or companies, and our supervision is based
heavily  on  mandatory  public  disclosure  and  director  attestations.  Three  years  ago,  Alan  Greenspan
commented that ‘regulation by government unavoidably involves some element of perverse incentives.
3
BIS Review 47/2000
If private market participants believe that government is protecting their interests, their own efforts to
do so will diminish.’1 We have tried to minimise those perverse incentives. As William McDonough,
President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking  Supervision,  said  in  March  this  year,  ‘… given  the  accelerating  pace  of  change  and
innovation  in  the  financial  services  industry,  our  notion  of  supervision  must  encompass  discipline
applied  by  the  marketplace,  as  well  as  official  supervision.’2  In  New  Zealand,  our  notion  of
supervision relies heavily on marketplace discipline.
Of course, to some extent our approach only works because there is a clear framework of company
law  which  makes  it  clear  that  company  directors  and  managers  have  unambiguous  responsibilities.
Having  agreed  accounting  rules  is  important.  Having  risk-proofed  payments  systems  is  important.
Having a vigorous media, with probing financial journalists, is also of great value, so that when a bank
is forced to disclose to the public a deteriorating financial position, or a breach of one of the few rules
we retain, there is at least a reasonable chance of that being picked up and sensibly analysed by the
media. Not all countries are so lucky. Where countries do not have this infrastructure in place, a more
hands-on  involvement  by  supervisors  in  banks’  activities  may  well  be  appropriate.  Where  this
infrastructure is in place, as it is in New Zealand, we believe that a supervisory regime based largely
on self-discipline and market discipline is a viable option.
I mentioned a little earlier that we have concerns about some of the international initiatives currently
underway to address financial  system  instability.  The  major  issue for  us is that  we  see  some  of the
initiatives  as  potentially  undermining  the  incentives  we  have  established  for  banks  to  behave
prudently.  While  there  is  increasing  recognition  of  the  need  to  harness  and  reinforce  market
mechanisms  in  the  pursuit  of  supervisory  goals,  at  the  same  time  the  international  supervisory
community appears to be moving towards an ever more prescriptive and intrusive approach to banking
supervision.  An  example  is  the  supervisory  validation  and  supervisor  intervention  proposals  in  the
Basel  Committee’s June  1999  consultative  paper  on  a  new  Capital  Accord.  If  these  proposals  were
implemented  in  New  Zealand,  they  could  considerably  weaken  market  incentives  and  distort  the
behaviour  of  bank  directors  and  managers.  We  see  this  occurring  as  a  result  of  the  supervisor
becoming  more  directly  involved  in  the  management  of  banks,  with  the  associated  risk  of  the
government being drawn in to underwriting banks in times of stress.
Another  potential  risk  for  us is that,  because  we  do  things  differently,  we  might  be  assessed  as  not
fully complying with the Basel Committee’s Core Principles and other international standards that are
being developed. The concern we have is that New Zealand banks might end up being penalised (for
example,  through  higher  borrowing  costs  if  risk  weights  in  the  Capital  Accord  are  linked  to
compliance with international standards). This could result if the process of assessing compliance with
international  standards  becomes  a  ‘one-size-fits-all’,  checklist,  mechanical  tick-the-boxes,  approach.
We  have  stressed  in  our  submissions  to  the  Basel  Committee  that  assessing  compliance  with  any
international standard needs to be focussed on looking at whether the substance, rather than the form,
of the standard is being met.
I should add that, notwithstanding these concerns, New Zealand strongly supports the introduction of
international standards. We consider international harmonisation and co-operation as very important in
what is rapidly becoming a ‘borderless’ global financial system. Our plea is that the implementation of
such standards be done with the appropriate degree of flexibility to adequately cater for the individual
circumstances of each country.
To  be  frank  with  you,  it  is  impossible  to  say  for  sure  whether  our  prudential  policy  approach  is
working or not. We have had no bank failures since the new policy was implemented, but then we had
1 Remarks by the Chairman of the Board of the US Federal Reserve System, Dr Alan Greenspan, at the annual conference
of the Association of Private Enterprise Education, Arlington, Virginia, 12 April 1997.
2
Speech by Mr William J McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, before The Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, on 24 March 2000
BIS Review 47/2000
4
no bank failures in the previous 100 years either (although we certainly had some banks which would
have failed, in the late eighties, had their shareholders not injected a lot more capital). Moreover, all
but one of the 17 banks in New Zealand are now foreign-owned, an increase in the proportion of banks
in  foreign  ownership  over  the  last  decade,  and  that  also  means  that  the  New  Zealand  case  is  not
necessarily a compelling demonstration of the validity of our market-based approach.
But  there  has  been  quite  a  lot  of  anecdotal  evidence  that  bank  directors  are  now  taking  their
responsibilities more seriously, and there seems to have been a marked increase in the attention given
to internal controls. We had a mild recession in the first half of 1998, and a related fall in the value of
the New Zealand dollar of some 30 per cent against the US dollar (from peak to trough), and our banks
came  through  this  with  absolutely  minimal  adverse  effects,  with  low  ratios  of  impaired  assets  and
continuing strong profitability.
So far at least, we are well satisfied by the way in which the new system is working.
To conclude what has been a long first lesson, let me illustrate my main point with a specific event. A
few months after the new system first came into operation, at the beginning of 1996, one bank was
obliged to disclose to the public the fact that it had had a credit exposure to its shareholder bank which
considerably exceeded the limit which we had stipulated for such exposure. The attention focused on
this  issue by  the  media,  and  indeed by  other  banks,  created strong  incentives  for  the  bank  never  to
repeat that mistake – quite probably stronger incentives than any threat of central bank sanction could
have created.
Lesson 2: beware of government ownership of banks and remove barriers to foreign ownership
The second lesson from the New Zealand experience in the late eighties is that the ownership of banks
is an important issue. For us, the issue was in part government ownership of banks and in part foreign
ownership of banks. The government-owned financial institutions almost without exception suffered
various degrees of financial difficulty – sometimes because their managers had undertaken imprudent
lending,  and  sometimes  because  they  had  been  obliged  to  invest  in  large  amounts  of  government
securities at sub-market interest rates. The large foreign-owned banks suffered to a much more limited
extent from the bad debts and losses which the government-owned banks experienced.
There  have  been  various  reasons  given  for  this  difference,  but  the  most  plausible  is  that  the  large
foreign-owned  banks  were  under  the  watchful  eye  of  experienced  parent  banks,  and  were  therefore
much  less  able to  stray  into  some  of  the  riskier  propositions  which  tempted  the  government-owned
institutions,  especially  in  the  years  immediately  after  the  banking  sector  was  liberalised  in  the
mid-eighties. (The newly-arrived foreign-owned banks, however, often did succumb to the temptation
of  lending  on  risky  propositions,  perhaps  because,  being  quite  small  both  in  absolute  terms  and  in
relation to their overseas parents, they were subject to much less intensive parental scrutiny.)
More  recently,  New  Zealand  has  been  running  a  very  large  balance  of  payments  deficit,  probably
amounting to more than 7 per cent of GDP at the present time. This balance of payments deficit has
been experienced at a time when the government itself is running a fiscal surplus. In other words, it
has  been  the  private  sector  which  has  been  borrowing  heavily  from  overseas,  not the  public  sector.
And while some of this borrowing has been done by the corporate sector directly, much of it has been
done by the banking sector. Comparable levels of overseas borrowing by banks in other countries have
been sufficient to make foreign lenders very nervous (for example, in some Asian countries in recent
years),  and  yet  similar  nervousness  has  not  been  at  all  evident  in  New  Zealand.  Why?  I  can  only
conclude  that  the  foreign  lenders  take  considerable  comfort  from  the  fact  that  most  of  the  banks
operating in New Zealand now are in fact wholly-owned by foreign banks, or are indeed branches of
foreign banks. Those parents are seen as being financially strong, and fully able to back the operations
of  their  New  Zealand  subsidiaries  or  branches.  (It  may  also  be  relevant  that,  overwhelmingly,  the
overseas borrowing being undertaken by New Zealand banks carries no foreign exchange risk for the
banks themselves.)
In some countries, there is political reluctance to allow foreign institutions unrestricted entry into local
banking sectors. I would have to say that, as a country where all but one of our 17 banks are owned
5
BIS Review 47/2000
and  controlled  overseas,  we  have  seen  absolutely  no  disadvantages  from  this  situation,  and  many
advantages.  We  have  a  financially  stable  banking  sector,  with  vigorously  competing  and  highly
innovative banks, all of them subject to the monetary policy influence of the central bank. I have no
doubt at all that the banking sector is considerably more stable than would have been the case had all
the banks been domestically-owned, whether in the private sector or in the public sector.
Monetary policy lessons from New Zealand
Lesson 3: keep prices stable
The third lesson from our experience has been the crucial importance for financial system stability of
keeping  prices  stable.  I  am  sure  that  for  this  audience  the  assignment  of  monetary  policy  to  the
objective  of  keeping  prices  stable  is  not  extraordinary,  as  evidenced  by  price  stability  being  the
primary objective of the single monetary policy of the Eurosystem. But let me comment on the link
between price stability and financial system stability.
By  the  late  eighties,  New  Zealand  had  experienced  nearly  20  years  during  which  consumer  price
inflation had been above 10 per cent almost without a break. Interest rates after adjustment for tax and
inflation were often strongly negative, and there was as a consequence a strong incentive to invest in
real estate and shares, using as much borrowed money as could be obtained. This was undoubtedly an
important contributor to the severe difficulties which both the corporate sector and some parts of the
banking  sector  experienced  when  monetary  policy  was  tightened  in  order  to  reduce  inflation  in  the
second  half  of  the  eighties.  Interest  rates  went  up  and  asset  prices  went  down,  and  several  banks
incurred very large losses as a consequence.
In  New  Zealand,  monetary  policy  has  been  directed  at  achieving  and  maintaining  domestic  price
stability since the mid-eighties, with the exchange rate being allowed to float freely since March 1985.
Prior to that, the objectives of monetary policy had been  much  more  confused.  In  New  Zealand,  as
indeed in many other countries, there had been a deeply engrained belief that monetary policy could be
used directly to achieve faster growth in output and employment. There was a widespread belief that
policy-makers  could  choose  to  tolerate  a  somewhat  higher  level  of  inflation  in  exchange  for  more
growth and a lower level of unemployment. (After all, Bill Phillips of Phillips Curve fame was New
Zealand’s  best  known  economist.)  Since  the  mid-eighties,  we  have  accepted  that  there  is  no  such
trade-off between inflation on the one hand and growth or employment on the other, and that the best
thing  monetary  policy  can  do  to  foster  sustainable  growth  in  output  and  employment  is  to  deliver
predictably stable prices, or a very low rate of measured inflation. And, of course, a sound banking
sector is more likely in an environment of steady economic growth.
Unfortunately, relatively low consumer price inflation is not always accompanied by low asset price
inflation. There is no single explanation for asset price inflation and, as New Zealand itself discovered
in the mid-nineties, with quite a strong increase in the price of both residential and rural property, it is
often extraordinarily difficult to restrain asset price inflation even when inflation in consumer prices is
low. Nevertheless, we are confident that monetary policy targeted on low consumer price inflation in
combination with a floating exchange rate is likely to result in a weaker and less sustained asset price
cycle than would otherwise be the case.
The problems caused by asset price inflation have been well illustrated in parts of Asia in recent years.
It is at least possible that asset price inflation in Japan in the late eighties – the reversal of which has
done so much damage to bank balance sheets in that country – was a consequence of monetary policy
being kept too easy for too long, whether to appease the United States after the Plaza Accord or for
some  other  reason  I  know  not.  Similarly,  it  may  well  be  that  if  central  banks  in  some  other  Asian
countries had not been so preoccupied with trying to avoid the appreciation of their currencies against
the  US  dollar  as  capital  flowed  into  these  economies  in  the  mid-nineties,  their  interest  rates  would
have  been  higher  and  asset  price  inflation  commensurately  reduced.  And  of  course  if  asset  price
inflation had been less, the over-investment in certain kinds of real estate would presumably have been
less and, with it, the subsequent fall in asset prices.
BIS Review 47/2000
6
Lesson 4: avoid pegging the exchange rate
And that brings me on rather naturally to the final lesson from New Zealand’s experience, and that is
the danger of pegging the exchange rate unless one is prepared to go all the way to full currency union
as you have done in Belgium, or at least to a currency board, as Hong Kong and some other countries
have done.
In New Zealand, we had a pegged exchange rate until March 1985, as I have mentioned. Prior to that
date, it was not uncommon for companies to borrow overseas, often at interest rates which were very
much lower than those within the high inflation New Zealand economy. Some companies made rather
spectacular losses when the New Zealand dollar was devalued from time to time, or when, even when
pegged, the New Zealand dollar depreciated against the currency in which the loan was denominated.
(Borrowing in Swiss francs was particularly popular, and particularly painful, for some companies.)
But the losses were probably fairly moderate in comparison to the loss which the government itself
incurred on behalf of taxpayers in 1984. In that year, the New Zealand dollar was devalued by 20 per
cent  after  a  foreign  exchange  crisis  and  the  government,  which  had  written  very  large  volumes  of
forward exchange contracts with companies trying to protect their positions, incurred losses of many
hundreds of millions of dollars.
Since March 1985, the New Zealand dollar has been freely floating, and indeed I suspect we may be
the only central bank that can claim not to have intervened directly in the foreign exchange market for
more than 15 years. (I say ‘directly’ because from time to time we did adjust monetary policy when
we felt that movements in the exchange rate seemed likely to threaten our single goal of low inflation.)
One of the benefits of this has been that, though many companies and banks have borrowed overseas,
none of this borrowing was undertaken in the belief that there was no currency risk involved. Overseas
interest  rates  were  frequently  much  lower  than  those  in  New  Zealand  but,  after  factoring  in  the
exchange rate risk, the incentive to borrow offshore in foreign currency was substantially reduced.
As a consequence, when, after a period of strong New Zealand dollar appreciation between early 1993
and early 1997, the New Zealand dollar fell by some 30 per cent against the US dollar, there were very
few  companies  unhappy  about that fall  – and indeed  plenty  of  exporters  who  were  delighted.  Even
fewer  of  our  banks  were  caught  out  by  the  depreciation,  and  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  none
incurred losses as a consequence of the move. Because they knew that the New Zealand dollar was
freely floating, they were careful to avoid taking on unhedged positions in foreign currency.
Conclusion
In conclusion, in a world of open capital markets, the challenges facing banks are very considerable.
Central banks can not prevent all banks from getting into trouble, and nor should they try to do so. But
central  banks  do  have  a  responsibility  in  all  our  countries  to  promote  the  stability  of  the  banking
sector.  In  my  own  view,  they  can  best  do  that  by  creating  strong  incentives  for  banks  to  behave
prudently;  by  discouraging  government  ownership  of  banks,  and  removing  barriers  to  the  foreign
ownership of banks; by keeping the focus of monetary policy on price stability; and by not creating the
impression that borrowing in foreign currency is a riskless activity. We learnt those lessons the hard
way.
7
BIS Review 47/2000
