Lars Nyberg: Issues in supervision of banks - the European experience
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Association  of
Professional Bankers, Colombo, Sri Lanka, on 26 August 2000.
 Background
First of all,  I  want  to thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  discuss  with  you  some  questions
concerning  the  supervision  of  banks.  The  issue,  I  understand,  is  quite  timely,  since  Sri  Lanka  has
embarked on an ambitious project of developing the financial sector, opening the banking system to
international influence and modernising it accordingly.
A sound and well functioning financial sector is a key to economic development. This statement may
sound  uncontroversial  in  your  ears,  but  it  is  not  always  accepted  by  the  general  public  and  by  the
politicians. The contributions of the financial sector are sometimes hard to explain in simple terms and
people tend to look at banks with suspicion. To create credibility and respect for the financial sector in
general and most importantly for banks, a proper and well-developed supervision is essential. Bank of
Sri Lanka has realised this and initiated a comprehensive upgrading of bank supervision. In my view
this is exactly the right point to start developing the financial sector.
Supervision,  however,  is  developing  quickly.  Supervising  a  traditional  highly  regulated  banking
system  is  far  different  from  supervising  a  deregulated  system  open  to  foreign  competition.
Furthermore,  going  from  a  state  of  strict  regulations  to  one  of  deregulation  implies  risks  for
undermining  banking  stability.  Many  countries,  not  least  my  own,  have  had  bitter  and  expensive
experiences from this.
Of course, all countries have specific national features in their banking systems. The main risks are
common  all  over  the  world,  however,  and  the  same  challenges  to  supervision  seem  to  appear
everywhere.  I  will  focus  on  some  important  issues  seen  from  my  perspective,  which  includes  the
experiences we gained during the Swedish banking crisis in the early nineties.
Deregulation
Why deregulate if the consequences may be so dangerous? The obvious answer is that regulations tend
to  create  inefficiency  and  prevent  the  domestic  banking  system  from  developing  in  response  to
international competition. The long run cost to society of extensive regulations is a poorly functioning
financial sector.
While regulations are usually put in place to decrease systemic risk they may indeed in the long run do
quite  the  opposite.  Strong  regulations  mean  that  banks  have  low  incentives  to  adopt  good  credit
policies  and  risk  management  techniques.  Supervision  tends  to  be  excessively  formal,  focusing  on
formalities rather than on actual risks. Nor are the regulations and techniques of supervision updated
often enough to foster the development of new activities and management of risks. Regulations shelter
the domestic banking industry from outside influence, which slowly tends to decrease efficiency and
increase systemic risk.
Furthermore, in a regulated environment the likelihood is large that some credits may be subsidised,
perhaps  even  channelled to  politically  desirable rather  than  economically  sound  projects,  leading  to
misallocation of resources.
Albeit  many  people  today  acknowledge  that  the  traditional  kind  of  regulations  do  not  produce  the
desired  results,  we  tend  to  keep  them  too  long.  Let  me  give  you  an  example.  In  Sweden,  we  had
foreign exchange controls in place until 1989. Even though it was obvious that the controls were easy
to circumvent and quite inefficient, the authorities were worried by what might happen if they were
1
BIS Review 66/2000
abolished. Perhaps there would be a huge capital drain? Hundreds of pages were written in attempts to
map the consequences, but no comfort was provided this way. Eventually the central bank decided to
go ahead in spite of the remaining uncertainty. To some surprise and some disappointment, nothing
particular happened in the market. The move had been anticipated and the controls inefficient enough
to allow the capital flows to adjust prior to the move.
Credit controls and interest rate regulation had been abolished in Sweden four years earlier, in 1985,
again  probably  far  too  late.  Some  people  argue  that  the  banking  crisis  we  had  in  the  early  nineties
might  have  been  much  less  severe  if  the  banking  system  had  been  forced  into  a  competitive
environment by deregulation a decade earlier.
Keeping regulations too long is a danger, getting rid of them too quickly is another. This may sound
peculiar, but let me again give you an illustration. When, in 1985, credit controls were abolished in
Sweden, they had been in operation for more than forty years. Since the authorities had decided on
how much each bank could increase its credit book every single month, there was really no need to
appraise  credit  applications  in  a  particularly  serious  manner.  Mortgage  credits  took  most  of  the
available credit volume and the remainder was allocated to safe projects. Credit losses in the banking
system were only a fraction of a percentage point of the credit stock each year. As a consequence, the
ability to appraise credit risk had slowly dwindled out of the banks. So, unfortunately, was the case for
the supervisors.
When credit controls were finally removed the volume of credit virtually exploded. All banks wanted
to increase their market shares and  there  was  plenty  of  pent-up  demand.  Many  loans  were  given  to
customers who, as it appeared later, were far from creditworthy and should not have passed a proper
credit appraisal. The regulations had been abolished at the wrong time and without realising what an
extended period of regulation had done to the ability of banks and supervisors to handle credit risk.
What can be learnt from this? Quite obviously, deregulating does not mean the abolishing of all rules
according to which banks should behave. There are good and well documented reasons for regulating
banks. Deregulation means the adoption of a new legal structure that is consistent with a competitive
market economy. The dilemma of regulation is to balance between having too little and too much. Too
much will stifle the banks, too little will lead to unsound risk taking. The traditional form of regulation
was to set very strict rules or to forbid banks from conducting certain activities. The modern form is to
be  more  flexible.  Regulations  set  the  boundaries  while  allowing  the  banks  to  operate  within  these
boundaries if they can prove that they have the skills and resources to do it in a sound manner. Modern
regulation puts much more responsibility on the banks themselves and their owners and management.
In Sweden, the former Banking Act actually prohibited the banks to engage in any activity that was
not explicitly permitted in the law. The new Banking Act starts at the other end, permitting the banks
to do whatever they find suitable except for certain activities that are explicitly forbidden.
Today’s financial institutions, instruments and markets are, of course, much more sophisticated than
earlier. There is also much broader diversity in the sector. For example, the needs of customers  are
satisfied in many different ways and by many different actors, certainly not only by banks.
As a consequence, modern regulation needs to be more flexible than in earlier days, when the market
was more homogeneous. The regulation should encourage competition and innovation, but at the same
time discourage unsound risk taking and generally unbecoming or even illegal behaviour. Only when
there are strong arguments should the regulator outright restrict or prohibit certain activities. Instead,
regulations should provide incentives for banks and others to behave in a sound manner. For instance,
capital requirements do not prohibit risky exposures, but they make them expensive to the bank.
Before moving somewhat deeper into the questions of supervision, there are some things to say about
risk management.
BIS Review 66/2000
2
Risk management
Risk management systems are at the core of modern banks. Banks must have consistent systems for
identifying,  monitoring,  controlling  and  managing  risks.  These  systems  must  be  endorsed  and
understood not only by credit officers, but also by the board and the management.
In a deregulated banking sector, the division of control and responsibilities in a bank is of particular
importance. Owners must take an active interest in the bank by setting broad strategic guidelines and
policies  for  risk  management  and  internal  controls.  Bank  boards  must  have  access  to  timely  and
adequate information and act on it when necessary. There must be a division of labour making it clear
to all members of management and staff what specific responsibilities they have.
From the Swedish banking crisis I would single out a few types of risk.
Credit risk in general, linked to the issue of collateral, was - as should be expected - the main problem.
It  was  our  experience  that  banks  coming  from  the  sheltered  world  of  strict  regulation  did  not  have
good and consistent systems for credit evaluation and documentation. Today, banks must have credit
policies, stating what kind of credits they wish to grant. Usually, small and simple loans are provided
at  branch  office  level,  but  larger  and  complicated  loans  are  provided  at  successively  higher  levels.
Banks  have  also  adopted  internal  risk  evaluation  systems  in  which  the  individual  loans  are  graded
according to their risk. Loan documentation is improved to facilitate monitoring of the loan but also to
ensure that the bank can collect on the loan in the event of a judicial process.
In Sweden, concentration of credit risk was a major problem during the crises. Some two thirds of the
losses were linked to the sharp price declines in real estate.
A  loan  and  its  collateral  must  be  evaluated  separately,  something  that  we  had  forgotten  during  the
many years of regulation. If the expected returns from the investment made by the loan are uncertain
or not adequate the loan should in most cases not be given, irrespective of the collateral. The reason is
that  the  collateral,  in  a  crisis  situation,  often  proves  to  be  worth  far  less  than  expected.  This  is
particularly true when it is tied to the borrower - such as when a company has put up its own building
as collateral.
The  linkage  between  credit  risk  and  foreign  exchange  risk  was  large  during  the  Swedish  banking
crises. This was seen also in the Asian crises in 1998. For example: Swedish borrowers wanted loans
in yen and German marks because the interest rates in these currencies were low. When the Swedish
currency  depreciated,  the  borrowers  could  not  repay  the  higher  loan  values  because  their  revenue
stream  was  in  local  currency.  The  banks  believed  themselves  to  be  hedged  against  the  foreign
exchange  risk  since they  were funded in  the  currency  of  the  loans  given,  but  they  failed  to  see  the
corresponding increased credit risk.
Other  risks  were  less  prominent  in  the  Swedish  crisis  but,  in  my  opinion,  will  be  of  increasing
importance to banks all over the world. Among those are  operational risks. Several recent financial
debacles, such as the Baring crisis, were due to operational risk. Even though the Y2K problem was
successfully  managed,  the  huge  computer  systems  of  banks  could  cause  large  losses  if  technical  or
other failures occur.
Another risk, which in my mind will become increasingly important, may be called “strategic risk”.
The financial market in most countries is highly competitive. In order to survive and prosper, banks
must  take  bold  decisions  on  new  activities,  new  establishments,  mergers,  technological  investments
and so on. Decisions like these have to be taken, but should they go wrong, banks may suffer large
losses and may even go bankrupt.
To handle these and other risks, internal controls and internal audit systems are becoming increasingly
important. The huge mass of information in modern banking makes it impossible for supervisors  to
monitor  individual  transactions.  They  must  rely  on  banks  to  maintain  reliable  internal  control
functions, which not only verify the accuracy of transactions and operations but also take a broader
view  of  the  bank’s  compliance  with  its  own  rules  and  policies  as  well  as  with  external  rules  and
policies.
3
BIS Review 66/2000
Supervision
Traditional supervision was of the type, which you may call “checking the ledger”, that is verifying
that all transactions are properly recorded and formally correct. To some extent this must remain, but
the  supervisor’s  efforts  in  this  sense  can  be  reduced  by  applying  modern  statistical  methods,  eg for
sampling, and by making sure that banks have adequate internal control systems.
Instead, supervision should be risk-oriented and focus on those activities, which pose significant risks
to  the  individual  bank  (differing  from  bank  to  bank).  Risk-oriented  supervision also  implies  stricter
supervision for large banks and for banks taking larger risks than others. Supervisors should focus on
evaluating  and  monitoring  risk  management  systems,  internal  controls,  corporate  governance,  and
information  systems.  This  calls  for  large  supervisory  resources  and  for  more  sophisticated  skills:
lawyers, but also economists, financial analysts, statisticians, mathematicians and accountants. If the
law permits, which indeed it should, the supervisor could call on outside experts to assist.
In  order  to  be  effective,  supervision  must  in  most  cases  be  conducted  on  a  consolidated  basis,  to
include  all  parts  of  a  financial  conglomerate  and  even  its  non-financial  affiliates.  The  increasing
blurring  of  boundaries  between  different  financial  activities  and  the  building  up  of  large  financial
conglomerates  make  consolidated  supervision  crucial.  Consolidation  includes  financial  as  well  as
non-financial  entities  within  a  country,  but  also  world-wide.  The  cooperation  and  exchange  of
information  between  supervisors  for  different  financial  activities  (banking,  securities  trading  and
insurance)  is  important,  domestically  as  well  as  globally.  Informal  or  formal  agreements  must  be
concluded  to  facilitate  such  cooperation.  Supervisors  should  not  license  banks,  or  their  affiliates,  if
their  organisational  structures  prevent  effective  supervision.  In  the  same  vein,  home  supervisors
should  not  allow  their  banks  to  establish  affiliates  abroad,  if  the  host  authorities  are  not  willing  to
exchange important information regarding developments affecting this affiliate.
Transparency  is  key.  Banks  should  be  induced,  by  force  and  voluntarily,  to  properly  disclose
information  of  their  activities  to  the  general  public.  Information  must  also  be  timely,  relevant  and
accurate.  In  this  way,  there  is  daily  “supervision”  of  the  bank  by  market  analysts,  depositors  and
others. It is understood that some bank activities are to be considered as strategic secrets which cannot
be divulged, but in my view these are fewer than we tend to think.
Hence,  a  related  subject  of  great  importance  is  the  issue  of  accounting.  To  create  transparency,
accounting rules, including valuation rules, must provide a clear picture and reflect the true situation of
a bank. Let me give you an example. A lingering problem in many countries is that banks hold large
amounts  of  non-performing  loans  to  companies,  even  those  that  are  state-owned  or  formerly
state-owned. The loans are usually not valued according to their realistic, low, values. In my view, this
is not helpful even if it seems to improve the financial statements of the banks. Nobody is fooled about
the actual situation because these bad loans are well known in the market. The loans should preferably
be transferred out of the books to some asset management company - priced at a realistic market value,
of course.
Under all circumstances, supervisors should require that banks have consistent and  true systems  for
the  valuation  of  loans,  performing  and  non-performing,  with  or  without  collateral.  These  systems
should also take into account the setting aside of adequate provisions for weak loans. These provisions
should reflect the expected losses to the bank. In calculating these losses, collateral may be taken into
account, but as earlier mentioned, it is important that the collateral is conservatively valued because its
value tends to decline sharply in a default situation.
For  any  country  aiming  for  a  credible  financial  system,  auditing  standards  must  be  high  and
approaching the best international practices. Furthermore, the supervisors should maintain close and
regular contacts with the major accounting and auditing firms in their country. This serves to provide
and  receive  information  on  individual  banks,  but  also  to  explain  and  to  get  feedback  on  the
development of new rules and regulations and how they are implemented in the market.
BIS Review 66/2000
4
Asset management companies
Before proceeding, I  would  like  to  make  a  few  points  concerning  the  asset  management  companies
(AMC’s) touched upon above, since these seem to be controversial in many countries. They certainly
were in Sweden during the peak of the crisis.
Asset  management  companies  are  simply  companies  to  which  a  major  part  of  the  non-performing
assets  of  a  bank  can  be  transferred,  given  that  these  loans  for  some  historic  reason  have  grown  to
become  a  considerable  part  of  the  bank’s  balance  sheet.  The  purpose  of  the  asset  management
company is to dispose of the assets as quickly and profitably as possible and then close down.
As I see it, there may be two main causes for such a transfer of assets. First, experience shows that
bankers are not best equipped to handle the restructuring and work out of collateral taken in by the
bank as a consequence of failing loans. Bankers may possibly be good at lending money and handling
minor non-performing loans, but they usually have little experience in reorganising industrial activities
and  managing  real  estate  companies  to  the  extent  required  in  an  AMC.  These  activities  require  a
different competence.
The trouble is that bankers often fail to see this, in particular if they have been heavily  involved  in
handling the failing credits. They talk about long term relations with the customer. They argue that the
loans could be kept in the book of the bank and that relevant competence could be hired. I strongly
believe that this is not true. If a proper restructuring is to be done, professional restructuring people
without historical relations to the customer should do it. Whenever I have been persuaded otherwise I
have later been proved wrong.
The  second  argument  for  transferring  the  non-performing  assets  is  related  to  this.  When  the
management of a bank has a large number of bad credits to take care of, that is exactly what they do.
All their capacity is used up taking care of problems and there is no time - and no money - to think
about  the  future.  This  is  disastrous  for  the  whole  organisation,  which  tends  to  become  backward
looking and defensive instead of forward looking and offensive. Only when the bad assets are out of
the books of the bank, the minds of the management and thus of the employees  can  become  aimed
towards the future.
Having decided to transfer the bad assets, the next obstacle will be to decide on the prices. The bank
usually considers the non-performing assets to be quite  valuable,  at  least  in  the  long  run.  Selling  at
what might be considered present market prices will create too big a hole in the balance sheet to make
management comfortable. The management of the new AMC quite naturally has a different view. It
has no wish to get assets into its balance sheet at values that later turn out to be excessively high.
According to my experience, it is important to listen to the AMC rather than to the bank if the purpose
is to get the restructuring done. If the management and board of the AMC can make reasonable profits
by  selling  its  assets,  which  indeed  is  the  purpose,  this  is  what  they  will  do.  However,  if  they  have
acquired the assets at too high prices, every sale will show a loss and they may even have to approach
the owners to get more capital. The owners will not like this, whether the company is owned by the
bank  which  delivered  the  assets  or  some  external  financial  investors.  Hence  the  board  will  avoid
showing losses and consequently little restructuring will be done.
Thus transferring assets at market prices is essential if the restructuring process is to work. The trouble
is that by doing this you may be forced to write down the assets in the books of the bank, since they
have not been valued correctly. This in turn will uncover the hole in the balance sheet and may require
a capital injection. And putting more capital into the bank may not be feasible at the time, for political
or for other reasons. At this point, you can always start a discussion of what market prices really are.
This happened in Sweden and it has happened elsewhere. But a hole in the balance sheet is always a
hole,  whether  you  decide  to  see  it  or  not.  Either  new  capital  must  be  put  into  the  bank  before  the
transfer  of  assets  or  it  must  be  injected  into  the  AMC  when  the  real  value  of  its  assets  becomes
obvious to everyone. Putting the money straight into the bank speeds up the restructuring process.
5
BIS Review 66/2000
Consolidated supervisory authorities
I  mentioned  that  supervision  should  be  conducted  on  a  consolidated  basis,  covering  activities  in
different financial and non-financial sectors. Should also the organisation of the supervisory authority
be  “consolidated”?  Several  countries,  including  the  UK,  Korea,  Australia  and  others  have  recently
moved  in  the  direction  of  creating  an  “FSA”  which  is  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  banks,
securities markets and insurance. In Sweden, we have had an FSA since 1990.
Is such a consolidation necessary and useful in all countries? In my view, the optimal structure of the
supervisory  authority  depends  on  the  structure  of  the  individual  country.  In  many  countries,  banks
conduct  the  most  important  financial  activities  while  securities  markets  are  less  important.  Here  at
least bank supervision must be independent, have adequate resources and skilled staff. This is crucial.
In many countries, bank supervision is a part of the central bank. This has benefited bank supervision
because the central bank usually has legal independence, adequate resources and can attract qualified
staff. Combining bank supervision with securities and insurance supervision will probably imply that
supervision  will  move  outside  the  central  bank,  since  securities  and  insurance  supervision  is  not
normally a task of central banks. In this sense, bank supervision may become weaker. In my view, in
markets where banks are dominating the financial sector and where the integration with securities and
insurance markets are less pronounced, keeping the supervision separate and within the central bank
makes good sense.
Having said this, I acknowledge that the present tendencies are for banks to merge with other financial
institutions, and for financial instruments to look increasingly alike whether they are created in banks
or  in  other  institutions.  These  tendencies  would  indicate  a  corresponding  need  for  supervision  of
different financial sectors to cooperate closer and closer and, perhaps, finally to merge. The trend is
clearly seen in Europe, reinforced by the common currency, but is gradually developing also in other
countries. As mentioned above, this is the way we have organised supervision in Sweden. But I do not
see  a  need  to  consolidate  the  supervisory  authorities  in  a  specific  country  until  the  structure  of  its
financial  markets  so  requires.  As  an  intermediate  step,  cooperation  agreements  between  the
supervisory authorities should be encouraged.
A strong rationale for locating bank supervision in a central bank is that bank stability is  of  crucial
importance for the conduct of monetary policy. In addition, a central bank has the powers to provide
liquidity - under normal as well as exceptional circumstances - to banks, for instance as a lender of last
resort.  To  do  this,  it  is  obvious  that  the  central  bank  must  have  full  knowledge  about  the  financial
situation of a bank.
However, there are also good arguments for keeping supervision separate from the central bank. There
may be a conflict between the role as supervisor and the role of being a lender of last resort. If a bank
would fail, being supervised by the central bank, the central bank may feel more inclined to provide
liquidity  support  than  is  economically  defendable.  Bankers  may  know  this  and  the  case  for  moral
hazard may therefore be stronger than with a separate supervisor. Rules for public administration of
troubled banks outside the central bank may give some help in this respect.
There  may  also  be  a  conflict  of  interest  relating  to  monetary  policy.  If  a  bank  fails  while  being
supervised  by  the  central  bank,  this  may  affect  the  central  bank’s  reputation  and  credibility.  In  my
view,  these  are  important  arguments,  because  credibility  of  the  central  bank  is  basic  not  only  to
systemic stability but also to the conduct of monetary policy.
What  is  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  relation  to  financial  stability  when  there  is  an  independent
supervisory authority? There are still remaining the increasingly important questions concerning  the
macroeconomic “oversight” or macro prudential supervision of the financial system.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  these  questions  often  tend  to  be  neglected  when  the  ordinary  supervision  remains  within  the
central bank, because they are in many ways different in character from the day to day supervision.
To effectuate its responsibilities of conducting monetary policy and ensuring a stable payment system,
a central bank must monitor the risks in the financial sector. In this capacity, the central bank is mainly
interested in systemic risks, not in the potential problems of individual banks  unless  these  are  large
enough to affect the whole system. The macro prudential analysis aims at identifying risks which are
BIS Review 66/2000
6
common to a number of banks and other financial institutions or markets, including payment systems.
Such risks often stem from the development of the macro economy. Volatile inflation developments or
exchange  rate  fluctuations  could  lead  to  problems  for  a  number  of  banks.  Asset  price  “bubbles”,
excessive  loan  concentrations  or  excessive  leverage  ratios  for  borrowers  might  do  the  same.  It  is
natural for the central bank to closely monitor such developments and take prompt action if it finds
that financial stability is endangered. In some cases it may not have the powers to take direct action
itself, but it may inform other parties, such as the political authorities or the supervisors, urging them
to apply necessary measures.
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  macro  prudential  analysis  does  not  mean  that  the  central  bank  is
duplicating  the  work  of  the  supervisory  authority.  We  do  not  examine  and  audit  the  individual
financial institutions, this is clearly the task of the supervisors. Most  of our information  is  gathered
from other sources, including from the supervisory authority itself.
An increasing number of central banks, eg those in England, Canada and Sweden have established a
structured  procedure  to  macro  prudential  analyses.  In  Sweden,  our  conclusions  are  published  in  a
semi-annual Stability Report, where we analyse the development of risks in the banking system and
where  we  state  our  overall  view  on  systemic  stability.  The  reports  have  increased  the  general
knowledge about the stability situation of the Swedish financial sector and they constitute the basis for
discussions with the financial institutions and with other authorities. Whether they will help us avoid
the next financial crisis is still to be seen.
International standards
Financial  systems  and  markets  are  increasingly  interlinked  across  the  country  borders.  In  order  to
avoid  international  financial  disturbances  all  countries  that  wishes  to  participate  in  cross-border
transactions  must  adhere  to  a  set  of  minimum  rules  for  regulation.  Also  supervision  must  reach
adequate  levels  in  all  countries,  including  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  between
supervisors in different countries.
In 1997, the Basel Committee took the initiative of writing the Core Principles for Effective Banking
Supervision.  Complying  with  the  Principles  constitutes  a  minimum  platform  for  any  country  that
strives to have basically sound regulation and supervision of banks. If I may say so, there is nothing
radically new with the Core Principles - all the underlying standards that countries are asked to fulfil
are  well  established  and  internationally  recognised.  The  main  use  of  the  principles  is  rather  as  a
yardstick,  whereby  a  country  can  evaluate  itself  in  order  to  identify  weaknesses  in  its  present
regulations  and  supervision  and  to  take  remedial  measures  to  improve.  There  are  national  and
international arguments for a country to adhere to the Core Principles.
The  domestic  argument  is  the  one  of  avoiding  or  reducing  the  impact  of  bank  problems,  not  least
because they are costly to the macro economy. While the Principles are not intended to prevent single
banks from failures, effective regulation and supervision should reduce potential risks and make them
easier to identify at an early stage. The international argument for compliance is that other countries
will  require  this  before  they  open  their  financial  markets.  The  fear  of  contagion,  implying  that
problems of one country spread into others, remains strong.
Conducting  an  evaluation  of  compliance  towards  the  Core  Principles  is  especially  helpful  when  a
country is in a stage of modernising its financial sector, such as Sri Lanka. The result of the evaluation
will identify weaknesses and can serve as a guide to reform measures. It is also the experience of other
countries  that  the  result  of  the  evaluation  may  be  a  useful  tool  for  the  supervisory  authority  in
convincing the politicians of needed legal and regulatory amendments.
Conclusions
I have touched upon a number of aspects of supervision, all in one way or another related to lessons
learned during the last ten years. I shall make no attempt to summarise, just return to my first point
that a high quality, risk-oriented and flexible supervision will create credibility for the financial sector
7
BIS Review 66/2000
and make it prosper. Inadequate and old-fashioned supervision based on rigid regulations will do right
the  opposite.  And  supervision  is  a  dynamic  concept.  The  tools  and  art  of  supervision  must,  in  all
countries, continuously improve along with the development of markets and market technology.
BIS Review 66/2000
8
