Mr Bäckström asks the question “Is there a new economy?”
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  a  conference  arranged  by  the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce and Veckans Affärer, held in Stockholm on 25 January 2000.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to attend this conference and discuss matters to do with the
question “Is there a new economy?”. Besides considering that issue, I shall be looking at other factors
that  may  affect  economic  developments  in  Sweden,  together  with  their  implications  for  the  future
construction of monetary policy.
Monetary policy aims at promoting economic stability
The Riksbank’s primary concern is, as we all know, the future path of inflation. But our deliberations
about how to keep inflation at a low and stable level can equally well be described as the Riksbank’s
endeavour, with the aid of the repo rate, to ensure that the economic trend in Sweden continues to be
favourable.  This  is  because  in  most  situations  the  task  assigned  us  by  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s
parliament) - “to maintain price stability” - amounts to acting so that the development of production
and employment in Sweden is as stable as possible.
There have certainly been times when a tightening of Swedish monetary and fiscal policy has led to an
economic downturn and increased unemployment. As a rule, however, this has happened when price
and wage increases had already taken off and the economy was therefore well on the way to becoming
overheated. This can be likened to a driver who has to slam on the brakes because the car is travelling
too fast and heading for the ditch. In such a situation, braking heavily is the only remaining chance of
avoiding a serious accident.
The best way of avoiding such a situation is continuously to adjust one’s speed - be it in a car or in
economic activity - to the prevailing conditions.
The speed limits on our roads are regulated, of course, by laws enacted by the Riksdag and are also
conditioned by the state of the road in question, the weather and other considerations. In the same way,
the rate of economic growth is subject to economic laws and the prevailing conditions.
Driving schools teach us to keep an eye on the road well ahead so that we can adjust the car’s speed in
good time. In that way, abrupt shifts can hopefully be avoided and, by continuously altering the car’s
speed and direction, the journey will be safe and stable.
The same applies in monetary policy. By looking into the future, it is possible to adjust the repo rate so
that a continued increase in production and employment is secured even if signs of a future increase in
inflation are discerned. The view is not always clear and the forecasts may be slightly off the mark. On
other occasions there may be an obstacle in the form of a disruption, such as the Asian crisis the other
year. In both cases, monetary policy must be adjusted to the economic laws but also to the conditions
that apply for the current phase of the journey.
What I mean is that interest rate hikes and cuts are a natural ingredient of a monetary policy for price
stability - a policy that ultimately aims for a stable development of production and employment.
The  favourable  economic  trend  in  Sweden  in  recent  years  is  in  fact  a  good  illustration  of  price
stability’s affinity with a stable expansion of output and jobs. Since the upturn after the crisis in the
early-1990s,  the  annual  GDP  growth  rate  has  averaged  around  3%,  the  number  in  employment  has
risen by almost 150,000 persons and the rate of inflation has been more or less around the target. This
has called for repo rate increases on some occasions and cuts on others.
1
BIS Review 6/2000
Rapid GDP growth during 1999
So at what speed is the Swedish economy currently travelling? What are the speed limits? And what
repo rate is appropriate for a safe journey?
According to the latest national accounts, published just before Christmas, the GDP growth rate for the
first three quarters of 1999 was over 3.5%. It is still difficult to tell just what happened in the fourth
quarter  but  demand  growth  seems,  if  anything,  to  have  accelerated.  An  unusually  active  Christmas
season appears to have resulted in a strong tendency for private consumption, for example. Leading
indicators in this respect point to a continuation of the strong development.
Historically, a real GDP  growth  rate above  3.5%  has not been sustainable for  very  long,  at  least  in
recent  decades.  It  is  rather  the  case  that,  for  a  safe  and  stable  journey,  the  normal  speed  limit  for
economic growth has been about 2%.
That  would  mean  that,  if  nothing  is  done,  today’s  high  growth  rate  will  lead,  sooner  or  later,  to
overheating  and  a  rising  rate  of  inflation.  Before  drawing  this  conclusion,  however,  we  need  to
consider whether the historical record blinds us to what the future has in store.
Is there a new economy?
This  brings  us  to  the  concept  of  a  “new  economy”.  This  concept  was  first  discussed  in  the  United
States when the paths of growth and inflation in the 1990s differed from the traditional pattern.
One explanation for this is said to be higher productivity growth, partly thanks to the new information
technology.  This  has  improved  the  workings  of  the  economy’s  supply  side.  It  follows  that  even
demand can rise more rapidly without leading to bottlenecks in supply that generate higher inflation.
Stronger demand stems in turn from expectations that better productivity growth will lead to increased
corporate  profits,  which  implies  higher  share  prices,  and  the  resultant  increase  in  wealth  results  in
higher private consumption. Thus, one of the central factors behind the notion of a break with earlier
economic patterns is the development of productivity.
In  the  United  States  it  does  look  as  though  productivity  growth  has  improved  in  recent  years.  An
important  reason  for  this  is  the  investment  boom  in  the  1990s.  Corporate  investment  has  almost
doubled since 1990 and a very large share has gone into new information technology. In that computer
prices have fallen so much, in real terms the level of investment in information technology has risen
by a factor of almost twelve. The productivity gains have sustained corporate profits and kept price
increases down. The massive investment has resulted in what is known as capital deepening, which
amounts to an increased capital input per employee. Many observers therefore consider that the  US
economy  is  now  capable  of  expanding  at  an  annual  rate  of  as  much  as  3%  to  3.5%  without
encountering shortages and an acceleration of inflation. In other words, the speed limit over there has
been raised.
A  similar  change  could  well  occur  in  other  countries  that  utilise  the  new  information  technology’s
potential benefits. But as far as Sweden is concerned, it cannot yet be said that productivity growth has
improved to the same extent. According to the statistics, the productivity trend for Sweden has moved
up by around 0.5 percentage points in the 1990s compared with the 1980s. That is the background to
the  common  estimate  that  over  a  longer  period  the  Swedish  economy  can  now  sustain  an  average
annual growth rate of between 2% and 2.5%.
There are certainly some encouraging signs in Sweden in the form of many new companies and young
entrepreneurs in the new information technology. And people in Sweden rank high as Internet users.
But  this  has  not  shown  up  in  the  macroeconomic  statistics  to  such  an  extent  that  there  would  be
grounds for supposing that the potential growth rate has moved up towards the US level.
A good indicator of whether conditions are in place for stronger productivity growth in the future is
the  existence  of  a  sufficiently  high  rate  of  economic  transformation,  for  instance  in  the  form  of
increased investment and a rapidly growing capital stock. There are few signs of this in the Swedish
economy, at least if one compares the 1990s with the 1980s.
BIS Review 6/2000
2
Neither  do  other  countries  in  Europe  yet  show  any  widespread  signs  of  what  is  called  the  new
economy. One reason may be that Europe is still in an earlier cyclical phase than the United States, so
that investment in new directions has not yet taken off. Given this optimistic interpretation, it should
be just a matter of time before the positive effects also materialise in Europe.
A more pessimistic reading could be that many European economies are instead less flexible and more
beset by rigidities, not least in the labour market, so that they have more difficulty in implementing
and subsequently benefiting from the new technology.
It might be argued that the high stock-market levels in some countries do represent an expectation of
higher productivity growth. Stock-market assessments of individual companies are expressed in share
quotations; the sum of these assessments and prices gives us an indication of what is expected of the
stock  market  as  a  whole and this  can  be  presumed  to  mirror  how  the  total  economy  is  expected  to
develop. And if current share prices are to be regarded as reasonable, there will clearly have to be an
appreciable  increase  in  future  profits.  This  can  then  be  interpreted  as  expectations  of  an  overall
increase in productivity and thus of a higher potential output. An alternative interpretation could  be
that  the  stock  market  is  at  least  partially  over-valued.  A  third  possibility  is,  of  course,  that  the
development of share prices is explained by a combination of these two factors.
All in all, it seems that one cannot yet be sure that economic relationships in Sweden have changed to
such an extent that a higher speed can be maintained continuously without risking an acceleration of
inflation. While there are signs of effects on demand that might be explained in the same way as in the
US  economy,  the  supply-side  effects  via  higher  productivity  growth  are  not  yet  as  clear  or  as
universal. It is conceivable that such effects on supply will materialise and the Riksbank must be alert
to that possibility. But we cannot count on such hopes in advance, particularly as they have not yet left
any mark on leading indicators, for instance in the form of rapidly rising investment.
What is the level of unutilised resources?
Another  aspect  of  the  speed  limit  to  economic  growth,  at  least  in  the  short  run,  is  the  level  of
unutilised resources.
An important component here is the extent of unutilised labour. Experience shows that the stability of
inflation has to  do  with  the  level  of  unemployment.  If  unemployment  falls  below  a  certain  level,  a
stronger  stimulation  of  production  and  employment  (by  means  of  a  more  expansionary  economic
policy,  for  example)  simply  leads  to  bottlenecks,  shortages  and  rising  inflation.  Instead  of  a
permanently higher level of employment, the end result is a return to higher unemployment.
This level of unemployment is not something that monetary policy can alter. It has to do with other
factors,  such  as  occupational  and  geographical  mobility,  the  propensity  to  take  the  jobs  that  are
available,  and  so  on.  Contributions  in  this  field  can  be  made  with  other  components  of  economic
policy but not, as I said, with monetary policy.
The problem we face is that unemployment’s critical level cannot be identified for certain and we do
not  know  when  shortages  and  rapid  wage  increases  will  actually  arise.  Estimating  these  matters  is
difficult and the results cannot be taken for granted. It is therefore hard to tell how much scope there is
for a temporary phase of economic growth above the long-term trend.
The ability to look ahead and formulate monetary policy cautiously is particularly important when an
economy is moving further and further along an upward phase. Otherwise there is a risk of price and
wage increases accelerating so that the brakes have to be applied more abruptly later on, leading to a
situation  that  is  worse  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  Thus  it  is  in  this  phase  of  rising
activity that we can be said to influence the depth of the next slowdown. It was the overheating in the
late-1960s, the mid-1970s and the end of the 1980s that set the stage for the subsequent deep troughs.
And  each  recession  was  worse  than  its  predecessor.  Looking  back,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  economic
policy ought to have been tightened much earlier than was the case on those occasions. At the same
time, it has tended to be difficult, not least in fiscal policy, to take such measures sufficiently early,
particularly  as  that  needs  to  be  done  before  the  problems  are  clear  to  everyone.  That  is  also  why
3
BIS Review 6/2000
pre-emptive interest rate hikes not infrequently encounter criticism from some quarters. But a central
bank has a job to do and must perform its statutory functions.
But  neither,  of  course,  should  monetary  policy  unnecessarily  obstruct  a  further  reduction  of
unemployment  if  that  is  feasible  and  firms  are  actually  able  to  recruit  labour  without  encountering
problems. This obviously entails complicated deliberations and assessments.
Unemployment  in  Sweden  is  still  historically  high.  That  might  suggest  that  the  labour  market  has
plenty of unutilised resources at its disposal, in which case the Swedish economy may be able to grow,
at least for a time, at a rate that is above its long-term speed limit.
Labour  shortages  to  date  have  been  most  marked  in  the  metropolitan  regions  and  other  university
cities.  The  recruitment  difficulties  have  mainly  concerned  technicians,  computer  specialists  and
construction  workers.  Although  the  proportion  of  firms  reporting  difficulties  in  filling  their  labour
requirements did not rise last year, recruitment problems did grow in certain regions and they spread
to additional occupations. Moreover, shortages of teachers and care personnel may arise in the future.
A  pattern  with  a  gradual  accentuation  of  labour  market  shortages  can  normally  be  expected  as  an
economy  moves  closer  to  its  capacity  ceiling.  There  may  also  be  a  growing  propensity  to  resort  to
labour disputes, as well as pressure on firms to compromise on their labour requirements in order to
keep  up  with  demand  for  goods  and  services.  Moreover,  the  negotiating  position  of  those  in
employment becomes gradually stronger and this may affect the outcome of wage negotiations. There
have already been some wage demands that represent growing tensions.
The Riksbank obviously has to keep a close eye on all this and take any steps that may be necessary in
good time. And, as I said, the longer the upward phase lasts, the greater is the probability of coming
close to the capacity ceiling, even though this cannot be identified exactly. Another question concerns
the speed at which it is healthy for the economy to approach this ceiling.
Today’s repo rate cannot hold over a complete cycle
It follows that, over a complete business cycle, the monetary stance cannot remain as expansionary as
it is at present. With a  repo  rate  at the  current low  level  of  3.25%,  the  economy  would  expand too
rapidly and reach a point where overheating occurs, leading to shortages and rising rates of wage and
price inflation. Our Executive Board expressed such ideas unanimously as recently as last month.
The economic advantage of looking ahead and raising the interest rate in good time is evident from
what has happened in the US economy since the beginning of 1994. In February that year the Federal
Reserve initiated interest rate increases and since then the rate has fluctuated between 4.5% and 6%,
which are more normal levels. This succeeded in preventing - let me repeat, in preventing - an increase
in inflation without causing the economy to enter a recession. On the contrary, the US economy will
soon have achieved the longest upward phase in the post-war era; the earlier record is due to be broken
next  month.  While  monetary  policy  has  not,  of  course,  been  solely  responsible  for  this,  the
achievement does demonstrate that a judicious interest rate increase can definitely contribute to a good
economic performance, provided the sustainability of growth is taken into account.
Neither  should  it  be  forgotten  that  in  the  past  two  years  the  Riksbank  lowered  the  repo  rate  from
4.40% to 2.90% in connection with signs that economic activity would be checked by the Asian crisis,
the  suspension  of  Russian  payments  and  problems  connected  with  the  American  hedge  fund
Long-Term Capital Management. These obstacles are now out of the way.
Conclusion
On Thursday next week the Executive Board of the Riksbank will be having this year’s first monetary
policy meeting. In the light of how we jointly consider that the economy will develop in the coming
years,  the  six  members  of  the  Board  will  decide  whether  the  repo  rate  is  to  be  increased  or  held
unchanged at 3.25% for somewhat longer. Today I have pointed to some of the factors I believe will
be discussed at the Board meeting.
BIS Review 6/2000
4
It will be a matter, as always, of basing the monetary policy decision on a comprehensive picture of
the  various  indicators  of  economic  activity  and  inflationary  pressure  that  the  Riksbank  follows
continuously. With the new Executive Board, it is also a matter of combining six individuals’ personal
perceptions  of  this  picture  and  of  policy’s  formulation  into  a  joint  picture  and  a  joint  interest  rate
decision.
There is no reason for me to anticipate matters. The result of our deliberations and joint assessment
will be present on Friday next week.
5
BIS Review 6/2000
