Mr Noyer considers the role of the central bank
in encouraging and safeguarding savings
Speech  given  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
EUROFONDS colloquium in Paris, held on 21 January 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure to be taking part in this EUROFONDS colloquium on savings. I should like to
take this opportunity to share with you some thoughts on the role of a central bank in encouraging and
safeguarding savings. This is indeed a crucial matter, since the level of savings largely determines the
long-term  level  of  productive  investment,  which  provides  the  basis  for  solid  and  stable  growth.
Moreover, the level and structure of savings affects, in various ways, the cost and means of financing
enterprises, the profitability of the financial sector and the distribution of income between generations
in view of the central issue of financing retirement.
I should like to focus my presentation, as I am sure you will understand, not on the central bank in
theory  but  on  the  role  of  the  Eurosystem  in  this  field,  that  is,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the
11 national central banks of the euro area. In addition, I shall say a few words on the impact of the
launch of the euro on the development and safeguarding of savings in Europe. I shall therefore develop
two points:
• 
By  safeguarding  price  stability,  the  Eurosystem  contributes  to  the  safeguarding  and
consolidation of savings.
 1.
The  creation  of  the  euro  is  leading  to  larger  and  more  integrated  financial  markets,
improving the allocation of financial savings.
By safeguarding price stability, the Eurosystem contributes to the safeguarding and
consolidation of savings.
The primary objective of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem, as laid down in the Treaty, is price
stability. This objective is founded on the conviction that price stability makes it possible to ensure the
full efficiency of the price mechanism and to avoid both arbitrary redistribution of wealth as a result of
inflation  as  well  as  the  costs  and  distortions  caused  by  uncertainty  and  periodical  adjustments  of
nominal values.
These positive effects of price stability obviously benefit savings. I personally see three aspects to this:
an  effect  on  the  protection  of  the  value  of  savings,  an  effect  on  their  structure  and  allocation,  and
finally an effect on the distribution of saving within society.
First,  by  aiming  at  price  stability,  monetary  policy  directly  preserves  the  real  value  of  a  large
proportion of financial savings. This is immediately obvious in the case of fiduciary money or sight
deposits which are remunerated only a little or not at all (which accounted for 39% of the monetary
aggregate M3 in 1999). However, fixed-term deposits are not totally safeguarded from inflation where
their remuneration is fixed over a specified period or where they only adjust to market rates after a
time lag. In the same way, the remuneration of fixed rate debt securities such as bonds only includes
expected inflation and is thus vulnerable to any unexpected change in inflation. It has been empirically
established that, as intuition suggests, the volatility of inflation increases as it rises, which implies that
risk premia are generally not in line with the real level of inflation. I should add that inflation creates a
well known fiscal bias when flows of interest to creditors include an inflation premium to cover the
depreciation in the value of financial capital during a period of inflation, and this premium, which is
not real income, is charged.
1
BIS Review 6/2000
In fact, in a situation where inflation rises unexpectedly a transfer of wealth occurs from the creditors
to the debtors. This interferes with the optimal allocation of savings (I shall return to this issue) when
the transfers of wealth do not correspond to the provision of a service or a real economic cost, but have
all the characteristics of a “windfall profit” or an exceptional loss. It can also result in a reduction in
the amount of savings in two ways: by discouraging agents’ propensity to save amounts subject to the
monetary hazard; and (because of the bias resulting from the depreciation in the nominal value of debt
and the fiscal distortion to which I referred) by transferring inflationary income from the private to the
public sector, which has a lower saving ratio.
Second, inflation not only affects the system of measurement of prices for goods and services, it also
affects the quality of indicators of profitability and of interest rates. By way of an example, the profits
of a firm can be artificially affected by differences between the posting dates of payments and receipts
or  by  the  incorporation  of  inflation  premia  into  flows  of  interest.  Of  course,  these  profits  could
possibly  include  a  real  gain  linked  to  the  reduction  in  real  interest  charges,  but  this  does  not
correspond to the intrinsic profitability of the firm. In the same way, the comparability and thus the
best  selection  of  different  investments  is  affected  by  the  inclusion  of  higher  inflation  premia  in
reported rates of return.
In addition, inflation discourages a long-term approach to efforts to save, as shown a contrario by the
developments  in  long-term  investments  following  the  shift  of  monetary  policies  in  Europe  towards
price stability in the last few years. The substantial share of life insurance investments of non-financial
agents in the euro area serves to illustrate the point. This has risen from 18% of investment flows of
non-financial agents in the euro area at the beginning of the last decade to 26% on average in 1997 and
1998.  In  the  same  way,  bond  issuance  in  Europe  intensified  notably  in  1999,  although  this  is  also
explained  by  the  disappearance  of  exchange  risk  within  the  euro  area  and  the  greater  depth  of  the
market.  Another  indication  of  this  trend  towards  the  consolidation  of  savings  is  that  the  long-term
financial liabilities of monetary financial institutions  in  the  euro  area increased notably  in  1999  (by
7.2% in the year to the end of November 1999).
Furthermore,  the  primacy  of  price  stability  contributes  to  improving  macroeconomic  stability,  thus
encouraging long-term investment. The reduction in real interest rates following the reduction in the
inflation premium works in the same way. I should like to note here that investment and saving are
two sides of the same coin (as shown in the national accounts, which include investment within gross
savings), i.e. the accumulation of physical or financial capital with a view to a future return.
Third, price stability has major implications for the social distribution of efforts to save.
Price  stability  is  especially  beneficial  for  the  less  well-off  sections  of  society,  which  often  lack
sufficient  information  to  protect  their  savings  in  a  period  of  inflation.  At  a  time  when  we  are  very
preoccupied  by  adjusting  working  hours and the retirement  age,  it  is  essential that  everyone  should
have the opportunity to save, i.e. to set aside part of their future income, relatively safely.
However,  the  principle  of  monetary  stability  very  clearly  highlights  the  issue  of  the  distribution  of
income between generations. In a situation where the proportion of public spending has reached a very
high level (in 1999 it accounted for 49% of GDP in the euro area, compared with only 39% in Japan
and 34% in the United States) and where government deficits are limited  by  the Treaty  and  can  no
longer be covered by inflation, the role of private savings in the future financing of retirement attains a
crucial dimension.
I  should  like  to  end  this  first  part  by  saying  that  the  positive  effect  of  price  stability  on  domestic
savings  naturally  contributes,  in  the  world  capital  market  we  live  in,  to  guaranteeing  the  lasting
attractiveness of the euro area for long-term financial investments by non-residents. This also requires
that  other  economic  policies  contribute  to  a  favourable  environment,  through  structural  measures
aiming at increasing flexibility in the labour market and efficiency in the markets for goods, services
and capital.
I have emphasised the effects of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy on the volume of savings and its
consolidation. The creation, with the euro, of a vast currency zone also contributes to a more efficient
management of savings.
BIS Review 6/2000
2
2.
The creation of the euro is leading to larger and more integrated financial markets,
improving the allocation of financial savings.
The  creation  of  the  euro  has  accelerated  the  development  and  integration  of  the  capital  markets  in
Europe,  which  have  been  helped  along  in  recent  years  by  financial  liberalisation  and  technological
innovation.
In effect, the single currency has removed the exchange risk between the countries of the euro area and
is facilitating the standardisation of debt instruments and their  management  on  a  much  larger scale.
This  integrating  effect  of  the  euro  has  been  most  evident  in  the  money  market,  by  virtue  of,  in
particular, the establishment of the large-value payment system TARGET, made available to the banks
by the European System of Central Banks. This integration has shown itself in, for example, the rapid
adoption by the market of reference rates for the euro area, such as the EONIA overnight rate or the
EURIBOR rate for maturities of less than one year. Above all, we have seen a total convergence in
short-term interest rates within the euro area.
In the bond markets, the integration of the markets remains incomplete, owing to: national differences
relating  to  property  rights  over  securities;  taxation,  accounting  and  supervisory  regulations;  and
payment  systems  (which  are  also  hindering  the  integration  of  the  short-term  securities  markets  and
repo  markets).  The  integration  of  the  bond  markets  is  nonetheless  progressing.  First,  we  have  seen
European  bond  indexes  become  standardised.  Second,  the  differences  in  rates  between  sovereign
issues  within  the  euro  area  fell  substantially  in  1998.  Furthermore,  1999  was  characterised  by  a
spectacular growth in euro bonds issued by private non-financial firms (a threefold increase, over the
first  ten  months,  compared  with  the  same  period  in  1998),  and  an  increasing  share  of  bonds  being
issued by small and low-rated companies.
In addition, integration in the stock markets is progressing, although they have to overcome barriers of
the  same  kind  as  those  I  have  just  mentioned.  In  addition  to  the  closer  links  between  stock  market
firms, a notable increase in transactions on the new European indexes has been observed. Moreover,
the  “new  markets”,  with  growth  figures  benefiting  greatly  from  the  establishment  of  the  large
European market, have expanded considerably.
The broadening of the capital markets and their greater integration are contributing to a more efficient
allocation of savings. First, this development is also leading to lower transaction costs and increasing
the  liquidity  of  the  traded  instruments  (which  in  turn  contributes,  ceteris  paribus,  to  reducing  the
absolute level of interest rates). Second, it is multiplying investment opportunities and increasing the
range on offer. At the same  time,  it  is fuelling  competition  between issuers,  investors,  and  even,  to
some  extent,  regulatory  systems  (as  shown,  for  example,  by  the  adoption  in  several  countries,
including France, of a legal framework for real estate bonds, modelled on the German Pfandbriefe).
Meanwhile, the deeper  market  calls for restructuring  and  rationalisation  of the finance  industry,  the
effect  of  which  would  be  to  strengthen  the  management  of  savings  in  Europe.  There  are  two  facts
which  illustrate  this  trend:  the  number  of  monetary  financial  institutions  (which  has  already  been
decreasing steadily for several years) fell by 5% in one year in 1999 (up to the end of November); and
the  total  value  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  involving  banks  in  the  euro  area  clearly  exceeded  (by
around 35%, according to certain private databases) the already high level recorded in 1998. In 1999 it
was also above the level of similar transactions reported in the United States.
Conclusion
Price  stability  and  the  creation  of  a  large  integrated  financial  market  are  therefore  beneficial  to  the
development of savings in the euro area and to their optimal allocation.
It would certainly be wise to ensure that certain financial imbalances are not allowed to jeopardise this
favourable environment.
Thus, insufficient fiscal consolidation leads to a continuous eviction by the states of a significant part
of the available private savings. In the same way, excessive taxation and wage increases out of line
with growth in productivity sap the dynamism from investment and consequently also from savings.
3
BIS Review 6/2000
Its  development  also  requires  a  certain  convergence  in  tax  systems.  Ultimately,  the  health  of  the
financial  sector  is  essential  to  the  protection  of  savings.  Although  the  Eurosystem  has  no  direct
authority in the field of prudential supervision, it monitors risk developments in the banking sector, as
it  does  more  generally  with  regard  to  developments  in  assets  prices,  where  these  could  potentially
affect overall monetary and financial stability.
In these areas, the role of the Eurosystem is always to uphold confidence in the currency, to contribute
to the smooth functioning of the financial system and to encourage prudent macroeconomic policies,
which influence the will and capacity to save.
BIS Review 6/2000
4
