Willem F Duisenberg: From the EMI to the ECB
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Banque  de
France’s Bicentennial Symposium, Paris, on 30 May 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to address such a distinguished audience on the occasion
of  the  Banque  de  France’s  bicentenary.  Surviving  for  two  hundred  years  in  a  sometimes  turbulent
economic  and  political  environment  constitutes  a  notable  achievement.  I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to
congratulate my  French  colleagues  and the  Bank  itself  on this  significant  accomplishment and look
forward to their continued success in the future as part of the Eurosystem - our name for the European
Central Bank (ECB) and the eleven national central banks that introduced the euro in January 1999.
The long history of the Banque de France stands in stark contrast with the youth of the institution I
represent today. Tomorrow the ECB will complete its first two years of existence. During this time,
the introduction of the euro and the subsequent conduct and implementation  of  the  single  monetary
policy  have,  in  my  view,  been  a  remarkable  success.  Most  importantly,  the  basis  for  lasting  and
credible price stability throughout the euro area has been solidified. Price stability has, in turn, helped
to create an environment where economic activity and employment can flourish. Economic prospects
in  the  euro  area  are  better  now  than  at  any  time  for  more  than  two  decades.  With  continued  wage
moderation, fiscal consolidation and the implementation of long overdue structural reforms to labour
and product markets, an extended period of sustainable economic growth is possible - provided that
the single monetary policy remains resolutely committed to the maintenance of price stability, taking
the  necessary  prompt  action  to  address  inflationary  pressures  as  they  emerge.  The  ECB  is  strongly
committed to this task.
The successful introduction of the euro did not occur by accident. Rather it was the result of a long and
painstaking  preparatory  process. This process  started in  Basel,  under  the  aegis  of the  Committee  of
Central Bank Governors. The Committee of Governors was central to the preparation of the Statute of
the  ESCB  and  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and,  after  the  signing  of  the  Treaty,  undertook  the  initial
groundwork  for  the  move  to  Monetary  Union.  After  its  creation  in  1994,  the  European  Monetary
Institute, as the institutional  precursor  to the  ECB foreseen  in  the Treaty,  took  over  the  preparatory
work. These preparations drew on the accumulated experience of central banks throughout the world,
but  -  of  course  -  especially  those  in the  euro  area.  In  this  sense,  the  long  history  of  the  Banque  de
France that we are celebrating today - as well as the experience of other central banks - has directly
contributed to the success of the ECB during its short initial existence.
In my remarks this morning, I will discuss some of the lessons drawn by the ECB from the rich history
of  central  banking.  My  comments  will  focus  on  three  aspects  of  monetary  policymaking:  the
institutional design of the central bank; the monetary policy strategy; and the operational framework
used to implement policy decisions.
The objective of monetary policy - price stability
Monetary policy is not omnipotent. Unfortunately, in the past, this was not always recognised in the
design of central bank mandates. Central banks were often charged with meeting several, potentially
conflicting,  objectives,  some  of  which  were  simply  unattainable  using  monetary  policy  alone.
Unsurprisingly,  the  resulting  inadequately  designed  institutional  frameworks  led  to  poor  overall
economic outcomes.
Today,  with  the  regrettable  experience  of  high  and  rising  inflation  in  the  1970s  in  mind,  the
capabilities and limitations of monetary policy are better - although still not universally - understood.
A broad consensus now exists that the maintenance of price stability is the appropriate objective  of
monetary  policy.  This  consensus  is  rooted  in  the  belief  that  monetary  policy  makes  its  best
1
BIS Review 44/2000
contribution  to  overall  economic  welfare  by  maintaining  price  stability  -  and  thereby  allowing  the
relative price mechanism to work more efficiently. It goes without saying that this is a consensus with
which I fully concur.
The institutional framework for the single monetary policy described in the Maastricht Treaty reflects
this economic consensus. Of course, the Treaty was written with the experience of European and other
central banks in mind. First and foremost, the Treaty clarifies the objective of the ECB. It establishes a
clear  hierarchy  of  objectives  for  the  single  monetary  policy,  with  price  stability  unambiguously
assigned overriding importance.
How  should  this  mandate  be  achieved?  The  experience  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  demonstrated  the
advantages of central bank independence in the pursuit of price stability. A monetary policy subject to
short-term political concerns and influences could not adopt the medium-term orientation required to
maintain stable prices credibly. Academic studies of the time consistency problem in monetary policy
offered an insight into this issue, while empirical evaluations showing a correlation between central
bank independence and greater price stability provided compelling supporting evidence. By the early
1990s,  the  benefits  of  central  bank  independence  had  become  conventional  wisdom.  An  increasing
number  of  central  banks  achieved  greater  institutional  independence.  This  worldwide  trend  was
reflected in the Maastricht Treaty, which made the ECB one of the most independent central banks in
the world.
Assigning  responsibility  for  an  important  public  policy  to  an  independent  institution  needs  to  be
accompanied  by  a  transparent  and  accountable  policy  framework.  In  a  democratic  society,  a  high
degree  of  transparency  and  accountability  in  monetary  policymaking  should  bolster  both  the
legitimacy  of  the  central  bank  and  public  support  for  its  price  stability  mandate.  At  the  same  time,
transparency and accountability impose an external discipline on policymakers which can add to the
credibility, and thereby the effectiveness, of monetary policy. The ECB has set high standards in both
regards  by  establishing  channels  for  communication  and  accountability  suited  to  the  specific,  and
distinctive, institutional and cultural setting in Europe.
I will return to the important issue of transparency in a moment, when I discuss the ECB’s monetary
policy strategy. With regard to accountability, let me simply highlight that, drawing on the successful
experience of several central banks, in October 1998 the Governing Council of the ECB decided to
publish  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  This  definition  of  price  stability  as  an  annual
increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2% provides
a clear yardstick against which the public, its elected representatives and agents in the media can hold
the ECB accountable.
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy
Within  this  institutional  framework,  how  should  price  stability  be  maintained?  This  question  is
addressed  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  It  is  obvious  that  the  development  of  the  ECB’s
strategic framework drew heavily on the experience of euro area NCBs prior to Monetary Union. This
is one area where the experience of national central banks was extremely influential and important.
Prior to the introduction of the euro, several central banks, including the Banque de France, assigned a
prominent  role  to  money  within  their  monetary  policy  strategy.  Some  announced  intermediate
monetary  targets,  while  others  adopted  monitoring  or reference  ranges  for  monetary  growth.  At  the
same time, other euro area central banks emphasised the role of inflation forecasts as the key monetary
policy  indicator.  Of  these,  several  proceeded  to  announce  direct  inflation  targets,  as  became
fashionable  in  the  1990s.  Furthermore,  many  NCBs  in  what  is  now  the  euro  area  were  pursuing
exchange rate targets within the context of the European Monetary System. In several cases, central
banks adopted various combinations of the above approaches.
This  rich  and  varied  experience  provided  the  context  in  which  the  ECB’s  strategy  was  designed.  I
should like to make two observations.
BIS Review 44/2000
2
First,  the  range  of  approaches  employed  by  NCBs  in  what  is  now  the  euro  area  was  considerable.
Nevertheless, once the commitment to price stability was affirmed, each of these approaches achieved
a large measure of success. The convergence of inflation rates to low and stable levels across the euro
area in the 1990s was a significant - and, in many quarters, unexpected - achievement. In my view, this
experience  offers  a  powerful  illustration  that  there  are  several  ways  to  achieve  and  maintain  price
stability.  The  strategy  adopted  by  a  central  bank  should  reflect  the  circumstances  that  it  faces,
including the initial conditions and consequent need for transition. Those who claim that there is only
one acceptable or efficient way to operate monetary policy fly in the face of history and experience.
Second,  on  the  basis  of  our  investigations  of  these  various  approaches  conducted  at  the  EMI,  we
concluded  that  the  differences  among  various  central  bank  strategies  -  differences  which  are  often
highlighted  in  the  academic  and  journalistic  debate  -  are  much  less  important  than  the  similarities.
Certain  key  elements  -  for  example,  affirming  a  commitment  to  the  objective  of  price  stability;
defining this objective clearly; evaluating a broad range of indicators, including monetary aggregates,
real  and  financial  variables  and  macroeconomic  forecasts  -  were,  in  fact,  common  to  all  successful
strategies.
Taking note of these two observations, the Governing Council of the ECB adopted a strategy which
aimed  to  maintain  some  continuity  with  the  strategies  pursued  by  NCBs  in  the  euro  area  prior  to
Monetary  Union  while,  at  the  same  time,  ensuring  that  the  new  and  distinct  challenges  facing
monetary policy in a wholly new currency area were appropriately addressed.
We  recognised  at  the  outset  that  the  key  feature  of  a  successful  strategic  framework  for  monetary
policy  can  be  described  in  very  simple  terms.  Monetary  policy  must  always  be  determined  in  the
manner which best serves the maintenance of price stability over the medium term.
In taking monetary policy decisions with the goal of price stability in mind, the Governing Council
relies on the information about the economic situation and the threats to price stability that is revealed
by  a  thorough  analysis  of  a  very  broad  range  of  economic  indicators.  As  NCB  experience  has
demonstrated, the relevant set of indicators is potentially very wide. In consequence, the ECB adopts a
“full information” approach, ensuring all the relevant information is encompassed in the analysis. To
impose some structure on this body of information, these indicators are organised in the context of the
strategy’s two pillars. Imposing such structure facilitates the pursuit of the strategy’s interrelated roles,
namely  the  promotion  of  an  efficient  internal  decision-making  process  and  the  creation  of  a  clear
external framework for the presentation and explanation of policy decisions to the public.
The first pillar of the strategy, which assigns a prominent role to money, reflects the fundamentally
monetary  origins  of  inflation  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  The  prominent  role  of  money  is
signalled by the announcement of a reference value of 4½% for the annual growth rate of the broad
monetary aggregate M3. It is crucial to recognise that we do not interpret the first pillar as either an
intermediate  monetary  target  or  solely  in  terms  of  the  reference  value.  The  first  pillar  embodies  a
thorough analysis of the components and counterparts of M3, which always takes place in the context
of other indicators. The aim of the analysis is to  extract  information  contained in the  monetary  and
credit data that is required by monetary policymakers to take decisions. In consequence, the analysis
naturally focuses on the information content of money regarding the outlook for price developments
considering both inflationary and deflationary risks. The first pillar therefore represents an approach
within  which  monetary  developments  are  the  main  determinants  of  the  evolution  of  the  price  level
over the medium term.
We  are  aware  that  the  conditions  needed  to  give  a  prominent  role  to  money  are  not  as  favourable
elsewhere  in  the  world  as  they  are  in  the  euro  area.  However,  in  the  euro  area,  all  the  available
evidence so far points to the existence of a stable relationship  between M3  and  price  developments
over  the  medium  term.  M3  and  other  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  also  demonstrate  leading
indicator  properties  for  future  price  developments.  In  the  end,  it  is  this  evidence  which  makes  us
confident that monetary and credit aggregates are an important indicator for assessing risks to price
stability.
The  second  pillar  of  the  strategy  is  associated  with  a  complementary,  but  more  eclectic,  approach,
which implies that a wide range of indicators is of relevance for monetary policy. While inflation is a
3
BIS Review 44/2000
monetary phenomenon over the medium term, at shorter horizons it will be influenced by many other
variables.  Changes  in  international  commodity  prices,  such  as  the  price  of  oil,  will  influence
developments  in  consumer  price  inflation.  Demand  and  cost  pressures  can  also  influence  price
developments in the shorter term. Moreover, policymakers will generally need to tailor their actions to
the prevailing economic circumstances, since the impact of monetary policy on the future evolution of
the price level at any specific time will depend on a host of factors which are not captured by monetary
data.  Analysis  under  the  second  pillar  is  intended  to  reveal  this  information,  giving  policymakers
greater insight into shorter-run price dynamics and their implications for monetary policy.
Monetary  policymaking  in  the  euro  area  has  to  reflect  the  complexities  and  uncertainties  which
surround  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  in  a  wholly  new  economic  entity.  These
uncertainties imply that no single approach is likely to be entirely reliable. The inherent uncertainty
faced by the central bank cannot simply be wished away. Reliance on a single indicator or forecast, or
a  single  model  of  the  economy  or  view  of  the  world,  would,  in  these  circumstances,  be  extremely
unwise. The strategy needs to incorporate the full range of relevant indicators and assess them in the
context of a variety of different models. In this respect, the two pillars complement one another. They
allow  for  a  structured  cross-checking  of  the  evidence  and  analysis  underlying  policy  decisions,
encompass all information and allow for various views of the structure of the economy.
The  academic  literature  and  other  external  commentators  are  slowly  coming  to  recognise  the
importance  of  “robustness”  in  monetary  policymaking  -  something  which  I  believe  has  been
understood by central bankers for some time. A successful monetary policy is not one that performs
“optimally” in the context of a specific model or given a particular view of the world. In the light of
our limited understanding of  how  the  economy  works,  no  single  model  is reliable  enough.  Rather  -
given the great uncertainty faced by central banks - a successful monetary policy should perform well
in a broad range of possible situations and across a variety of models or views of the world, each one
of which may capture important aspects of actual economic behaviour or may, ex post, turn out to be
close to reality.
Monetary  policymaking  is  therefore  complex.  The  two-pillar  strategy  chosen  by  the  Eurosystem  -
where these pillars represent distinct, yet complementary, approaches - captures this complexity in an
honest and genuinely transparent manner.
This naturally brings me to transparency - a topic of considerable and ongoing debate in the euro area.
In my view, the transparency of the monetary policy process is best understood as the extent to which
the  external,  presentational  role  of  the  strategy  is  consistent  with  the  internal,  decision-making
procedure. As a party to both the decision-making and the presentation of the single monetary policy, I
can assure you that the correspondence between the internal and external aspects of the Eurosystem’s
strategy is extremely close. Discussions in the Governing Council take into account, on the one hand,
an analysis of monetary developments and their implications for monetary policy and, on the other, an
assessment of other financial and economic indicators, including macroeconomic projections based on
conventional  forecasting  models  and  expert  judgement.  Comparisons  are  drawn  and  links  are  made
between  these  two  forms  of  analysis.  Decisions  are  based  on  the  information  revealed  through  this
exercise.  The  two-pillar  framework  that  is  used  to  explain  policy  decisions  to  the  public  therefore
mimics  rather  precisely  the  internal  decision  procedure.  Honesty  is  thus  at  the  heart  of  the
Eurosystem’s approach to communication.
An  inevitable  consequence  of  our  honesty  in  the  face  of  a  complex,  uncertain  and  changing
environment is that the ECB’s strategy cannot be simple, in the sense that it cannot be described using
a  single  indicator  or  forecast.  We  acknowledge  that  this  can  make  our  strategy  more  difficult  to
understand,  especially  at  the  outset.  Sometimes  the  strategy  is  accused  of  lacking  clarity  on  the
grounds that the two-pillar approach is rather complicated and therefore unclear. However, alternative
strategies  would  only  achieve  clarity  in  a  superficial  sense.  Rather  than  being  simple,  they  may
actually be simplistic - and therefore misleading.
Drawing  together  these  arguments,  let  me  emphasise  that  a  monetary  policy  strategy  should  not  be
seen as a machine that mechanically delivers policy decisions. There must be room for a diversity of
views,  for  deliberation  and  for  judgement  in  the  Governing  Council’s  discussion.  Monetary
BIS Review 44/2000
4
policymaking cannot be reduced to a reaction to a single figure, be it monetary growth or an inflation
projection taken from a model or a group of experts. Nor can monetary policy be formulated on the
basis of a single chart, however colourful. The ECB’s strategy provides scope for extensive debate and
the exercise of informed judgement, both of which are essential to policymaking. Taking an eclectic,
more diversified approach to inform policy judgements - as is implicit in the two-pillar approach - is
likely to lead to a better understanding of the economy, to produce better policy advice, allow better
policy  discussions  and  therefore  reduce  the  risk  of  policy  errors.  This  robust  approach  to  monetary
policymaking is at the heart of the ECB’s strategy.
The Eurosystem’s operational framework
Before concluding, I should also like to make a few additional remarks on the operational framework
used  to  implement  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  euro  area.  For  good  reasons,  the  design  of  the
operational framework was heavily influenced by the experience of NCBs prior to Monetary Union.
Maintaining  continuity  with  the  pre-existing  procedures  and  instruments  was  an  important
consideration. At the same time, the introduction of the single monetary policy offered an opportunity
to  design  the  operational  framework  afresh,  ensuring  that  best  practice  was  adopted  throughout  the
euro area.
The  resulting  framework  provides  for  a  broad  set  of  instruments  and  procedures  to  implement
monetary policy. Thus far, this framework has worked very effectively in clearly signalling the stance
of monetary policy and containing the volatility of short-term market interest rates. At the heart of the
framework is the so-called “corridor” for the overnight market interest rate, which is defined by the
interest  rates  on  the  deposit  and  marginal  lending  facilities.  With  the  help  of  the  minimum  reserve
system,  the  behaviour  of  the  market  rate  within  this  corridor  is  smoothed,  without  recourse  to
fine-tuning interventions by the authorities that might be prejudicial to the market orientation of the
system.  With these  features, the  ECB  has  a  very  simple  but  probably  also  one  of  the  most  modern
operational frameworks in the world.
Concluding remarks
Earlier this month I participated in a celebration of the 150th anniversary of the Nationale Bank van
België/Banque  Nationale  de  Belgique.  Today  we  celebrate  the  Banque  de  France’s  bicentenary.  It
would have been extremely foolish if the Eurosystem had not exploited the accumulated wisdom and
experience gained from the long and distinguished history of these institutions and those of the other
NCBs.  As  I  have  argued  today,  both the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  and  its  operational  framework  have
exploited  this  wisdom  to  the  full,  while  recognising  the  new  and  different  challenges  faced  by  the
single monetary policy in the euro area.
Let  me  therefore  finish  by  again  congratulating  the  Bank  on  its  bicentenary,  by  expressing  my
gratitude to all those who have dedicated their time and effort to the achievement of Monetary Union
and, finally, by wishing the Bank another 200 successful years - and more - as an important and vital
component of the Eurosystem.
5
BIS Review 44/2000
