Mr Bergström gives a speech on the Swedish economy: new or old?
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Kommuninvest,
Stockholm, on 1 March 2000.
 The Swedish upswing has now begun in earnest and GDP growth is estimated at around 3.5% per year
during  the  next few  years.  In  the  course  of  1999,  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  we  were  on  the
verge  of  an  upswing.  The  negative  atmosphere  after  the  Asian  crisis,  the  Russian  suspension  of
payments  and  the  problems  in  the  hedge  fund,  Long  Term  Capital  Management,  had  subsided  and
been  replaced  by  optimism  in  many  countries.  The  fact  that  the  financial  crises  did  not  have  such
negative effects on demand as many had feared can probably be partly accounted for by the relaxation
of monetary policy introduced by many central banks. The Riksbank was among these, reducing the
repo rate from 4.4 to 2.9% between spring 1998 and spring 1999. When the scenario of the Swedish
upswing was confirmed and as resource use was accordingly expected to increase, it was natural to
conduct a slightly more cautious monetary policy to avoid inflation accelerating.
Since November, the Riksbank has therefore increased the repo rate by 0.85 percentage points to 3.75.
However, this is still an expansive monetary policy in the sense that the short real interest rates are so
low that they should stimulate demand. And  this  is  how  it  should  be  when  375,000  people  are  still
unemployed  and  there  is  other  unused  capacity.  As  long  as  demand  is  lower  than  the  potential
production  level,  it  can  be  allowed  to  increase  more  quickly  than  the  potential  growth  rate  without
threatening  the  inflation  target.  According  to  the  Riksbank’s  assessment,  resource  use  is  now
increasing successively and will pass the potential level during the next few years.
Monetary policy considerations
It is easy to describe monetary policy in theory. Successful application of monetary policy in practice
is difficult, however. As the interest rate changes do not reach full effect until 1½ to 2 years, monetary
policy  decisions  have  to  be  based  on  assessments  of  inflation  quite  a  long  way  in  the  future.  It  is
particularly difficult to make forecasts if the economy is undergoing major structural changes. Most
forecast methods make use of experiences and correlation from earlier periods. During the nineties, the
Swedish economy  has  been in  a  strong  process  of adaptation  from  a  situation  with  major  problems
with  central  government  finances,  high  unemployment  and  high  inflationary  expectations  to  an
economy in which large parts can be described as being in balance. Central government debt has fallen
from 80% of GDP in 1995 to around 70% in 1999, foreign debt has fallen from a maximum of 40% of
GDP in 1993 to only just over 20% of GDP in 1999. The long-term inflation expectations have also
been stable around the 2% target for inflation for some time. It is true that unemployment continues to
be high but it is falling. This is the most promising development for 30 years: We have strong growth
at  the  same  time  as  we  have  balance  or  large  surpluses  in  central  government  finances  and  foreign
trade.
The challenge for monetary policy is not to dampen demand unnecessarily but neither should demand
be allowed to increase more than is compatible with the inflation target. In the long-term,  monetary
policy has, of course, no direct impact on the rate of growth although during a shorter period, demand
and growth are influenced by the interest rate set by the Riksbank. If, for instance, monetary policy is
made more stringent too late, there is a risk that inflation expectations will rise and gain a hold. To
restore inflation to the target, a longer period of stringent monetary policy will then be required with
weaker demand as a result. Then investment will also be throttled and capacity growth braked.
The inflation target has not only a value per se but is also first and foremost a means for creating the
prerequisites  for  stable,  sustainable  growth.  The  best  contribution  the  Riksbank  can  make  is  to
maintain the inflation target but there is no simple rule of action as to how monetary policy is to be
1
BIS Review 20/2000
conducted. According to the Riksbank Act, the overall objective for the activities of the Riksbank is to
maintain stable prices. However, according to the law, the Riksbank shall also support the objectives
of general economic policy without setting aside the inflation target, in order to maintain sustainable
growth and high employment.
As  the  Swedish  economy  is  approaching  balance  in  many  respects  and  the  long-term  inflation
expectations  accord  with  the  target,  the  conditions  for  carrying  out  monetary  policy  are  more
favourable in many ways than before.
This  does  not  prevent  there  being  many  components  of  uncertainty  now  as  well.  Major  structural
changes are taking place in the world economy to some extent driven on by information technology.
Deregulation, EU membership, and stiffer competition are other factors that can be assumed to have an
effect on the economy’s mode of functioning, although it is difficult to say how and over what period.
I am planning to take up some factors here in the risk scenario that must be taken into consideration in
the ongoing evaluation of monetary policy. One issue concerns the extent to which we, inter alia as a
consequence of the development of information technology, will see a higher productivity growth than
we  had  expected  and  which,  all  other  things  being  equal,  would  create  scope  for  higher  demand
without threatening the inflation target. Another way of putting this question is whether we can expect
to be on our way into something that is called “the new economy” in debate. Another issue which I
have discussed in more detail in earlier speeches is that there is reason to fear that wage formation will
not be able to cope with limitations set by the inflation target and productivity growth. How great, for
instance, is the risk for the old pattern of wage spirals and increasing inflation being repeated? In this
case,  the  Riksbank  may  be  obliged  to  carry  out  a  more  stringent  monetary  policy  to  counteract
growing inflationary pressure by subdued demand.
My ambition is not to give any answers but rather to point out what we have to take notice of in future.
Productivity development
An  important  component  of  the  analytical  framework  of  monetary  policy  is  accordingly  to  make
forecasts of potential growth. The supply of labour and productivity growth are important determining
factors  for  how  much  we  can  produce  in  the  long  term  in  our  country.  A  higher  potential  rate  of
growth creates, as I said earlier, scope for greater demand without inflationary pressure arising.
During  the1950s  and  1960s  and  until  the  beginning  of  the  1970s,  the  Swedish  economy  was
characterised  by  very  strong  growth  and  very  high  productivity  growth.  Labour  productivity  grew
from 1960-74 on average by as much as 4.3%. At the same time, inflation was low during these years.
The gross investment ratio was high and a large part of Sweden’s incomes were invested during this
period in expanding the productive capacity of the economy. Demand for goods could be satisfied at
the same time, without the balance of payments showing large structural deficits.
In  the  mid-1970s,  productivity  growth  declined  and  it  has  since  then  been  considerably  lower  than
during the good years earlier and from 1974 to 1994, the growth in labour productivity remained at an
average  of  1.4%.  At  the  same  time,  the  economy  was  characterised  by  high  inflation.  The  low
productivity growth was reflected by a drastic decline in the gross investment in relation to GDP in the
mid-1970s. A smaller part of the national disposable income was invested to build up the capital stock
(see diagram 1 and 2). Net investment measures the addition to the  capital  stock.  It  fell  on  average
from an average of 16% of disposable national income during the 1950s and 1960s to just over 5% at
the beginning of the 1980s. During this period, we also continually borrowed abroad to meet demand.
Since  1995,  productivity  and  the  investment  ratio  in  Sweden  have  increased  again,  although  the
improvement is modest and starts from a low level.
In  the  USA,  the  picture  of  growth  in  labour  productivity  has  in  rough  outline  displayed  the  same
pattern  over  time  as  the  Swedish  with  one  important  difference.  The  improvement  of  labour
productivity  since  1995  has  been  larger  in  the  USA  than  in  Sweden  in  contrast  to  the  earlier
twenty-year  period  when  labour  productivity  increased  by  about  as  much  in  both  countries.  In  the
USA, productivity growth between these periods has increased from 1.4 to 2.9% while productivity
BIS Review 20/2000
2
growth  between  the  same  periods  has  increased  from  1.4  to  1.9%  in  the  Swedish  economy  (see
diagram 3).
In  the  USA,  the  improvement  in  productivity  has  been  preceded  by  strong  increases  in  investment
throughout  the  1990s  and  investment  during  this  upswing  has  contributed  to  GDP-growth  to
considerably higher extent than during previous upswings. The great productivity increase is one of
the reasons why demand has been able to grow so strongly and for so many  years without inflation
accelerating.  The  questions  raised  are  what  underlies  the  US  development,  and  whether  there  is
anything to indicate that we will see the same development in Sweden. The new economy does not
seem to have come as far in Sweden as in the USA. We see no equivalent to the investment boom in
the USA or even for that matter to that in Sweden in the 1960s. The information technology will have
its main impact first when the new technology has penetrated the whole economy. To get that, huge
investment activity is needed which we still are waiting for.
There are many explanations for the successes of the American economy. In common to most of these
is reference to the economic policy carried out since the end of the 1980s. Price stability and a fiscal
policy  focused  on  budget  consolidation  have  been  highlighted  as  important  components  of  the
successful policy. The development of information technology and growth of IT related investments
have  probably  been  promoted  by  the  stable  economic  environment  and  been  an  important  driving
force behind the unparalleled upswing.
It is not then possible to see any clear signs in the Swedish economy that we are on our way into a
development similar to the American. At the same time, there are similarities, both with regard to the
reorientation  of  the  macroeconomic  policy  and  to  the  penetration  of  computers  and  information
technology  in  Swedish  society.  An  important  difference  between  USA  and  Sweden  is  that  use  of
resources in the American economy has been high for many years while the Swedish economy was in
a  downturn  for  practically  the  whole  of  the  1990s.  Investment  usually  increases  only  after  a  long
period of high capacity use. The focus on stable prices and budget consolidation also started later in
Sweden than in the USA. A very benevolent interpretation could be that we are moving in the same
direction as the USA but with some time lag. The USA also waited for a long time for the productive
effects of many computers introduced everywhere in the economy. The conclusion that can be drawn
now is that it is anyway still not possible to base monetary policy on a real acceleration of potential
growth.
Is consumption affected by increase in wealth?
The strong increases in prices in the Swedish stock market indicate that there are expectations among
those  who  handle  risk  capital  that  profits  will  increase  sharply  particularly  in  Swedish  IT-related
companies. In order for such a development to be realised, it is reasonable to assume that investment
must increase on a broad front. A risk with a strong increase in share prices before any visible signs of
potential growth accelerating is if consumption is strongly stimulated by households who own shares
increasing their wealth. An increase in demand that is not corresponded to by an increase in potential
growth increases inflationary pressure that the Riksbank must counteract by increasing interest rates.
However, increased interest rates also subdue increased investment, which is unfortunate, as it would
brake the growth of capacity.
It  has  been  difficult  during  earlier  periods  of  large  increases  in  share  prices  to  prove  that  Swedish
households  have  really  increased  their  consumption  as  a  result  of  increased  wealth.  During  recent
years,  however,  the  proportion  of  households  owning  shares  has  increased.  When  property  prices
increased sharply at the end of the 1980s, many households raised loans on their homes and used the
money  for  consumption.  A  low  housing  production  combined  with  growth  that  is  strongly
concentrated to the big city areas has contributed to housing prices again rapidly increasing in recent
years. This development can also stimulate consumption with the risks that I have just mentioned.
3
BIS Review 20/2000
Wage formation
Risks
A  further  factor  of  uncertainty  for  assessment  of  inflationary  pressure  in  the  ongoing  evaluation  of
monetary policy is wage formation. Here it concerns the risk that the wage formation processes have
not  yet  been  tested  in  such  a  strong  cyclical  upswing  as  we  now  seem  to  be  in.  The  mode  of
functioning of the labour market is also important for how quickly the Swedish economy can make use
of the opportunities created by technical innovations.
The nominal wage increases must in the long term be kept within the scope permitted by productivity
growth  and  the  2%  inflation  target.  Higher  wage  cost  increases  will  initially  either  lead  to  reduced
profit shares for businesses or higher inflation. However, sooner or later, excessively high wage costs
will  lead  to  lower  growth  either  because  the  Riksbank  is  obliged  to  counteract  an  increased
inflationary pressure with higher interest rates or to a reduction in the willingness to invest in Sweden
confronted with the prospect of reduced profit margins.
This year and next year pay negotiations are to take place for 2.3 million employees and the mode of
functioning of the labour market will then be seriously put to the test. The Swedish labour market has
previously had a tendency to generate wage-wage spirals. It has, for instance, been difficult to change
relative  wages  without  this  generating  compensatory  wage  increases.  The  fact  that  the  coming  pay
negotiations are taking place in a situation where it is expected that there will be a high demand for
labour increases the risk of the historical pattern being repeated. In some industries and regions there
are indications that a shortage of labour is developing. However, it is at the same time important to
bear in mind that we are a long way from the scarcity levels experienced at the end of the 1980s.
Another  challenge  for  wage  formation  is  that  the  first  pay  negotiations  taking  place  are  for  public
sector employees. In this sector, there are large groups that have obviously fallen behind in their pay
development, leading  to  shortages.  Among  these  are  certain categories  of  teachers  and  many  health
care employees. The Swedish labour market has not only had problems in dealing with pay balances
between different occupations. It has also found it difficult to tackle regional imbalances in the same
occupational  category  through  adaptation  of  relative  wages.  Shortage  of  labour  has,  for  instance,
particularly affected big city areas, although it has hardly affected relative wages between areas where
there is shortage and where there is unemployment, despite the  cost  of  living  and  not  least  housing
costs being lower outside the big cities. With a more flexible wage formation, the imbalances in the
labour market would probably be reduced.
Changes in a positive direction
The starting situation for the pay negotiations is thus not unproblematic. However, although there are
elements  that  cause  concern,  there  is  also  a  lot  to  indicate  that  the  process  of  price  formation  has
changed.
The  most  important  change  since  the  1970s  and  1980s  is  probably  the  change  in  the  target  for
monetary policy and the support and credibility attained by the inflation target. I am convinced that the
Riksbank’s inflation target is understood and accepted by trade union members, officials and leaders.
Knowledge  about  the  inflation  target  and  the  role  of  monetary  policy  has  become  widespread  in  a
quite different way to the fixed exchange rate norm. The fixed exchange rate regime basically required
that wage cost increases should be adapted to the surrounding world in order not to affect employment
negatively. When, despite this,  wages  rose  more  than in  our  competitor  countries,  employment  was
saved by recurrent devaluations. The high level of activity in the Swedish economy during the latter
half of the 1980s also played an important role. No wage formation system would have coped with the
overheating that existed at the end of the 1980s.
The insight that excessively high wage increases rather quickly lead to growth being dampened and an
increase in unemployment with a monetary policy focused on an inflation target, probably serves to
have a restraining effect on wage formation.
BIS Review 20/2000
4
Large  increases  in  real  wages  with  low  inflation  have  probably  increased  insight  into  the  value  of
price stability. During the past four-year period, real wages have increased on average by almost 4%
per year despite low nominal wage increases. This is to be compared with the fact that real wages only
increased by a half per cent per year during  the  period  of  high  inflation from  1975  to  1995  despite
nominal wage increases during these years totalling 8% on average. The development clearly indicates
that  there  has  not  been  a  positive  correlation  between  high  nominal  wage  increases  and  the
development of real wages.
High credibility for the goals of monetary policy has led to a reduction in inflation expectations. And
stable  inflation  expectations  per  se  reduce  the  risk  for  pay  negotiations  leading  to  higher  wage
increases than there is room for. Stable inflation expectations reduce the uncertainty of the parties as to
what  a  nominal  wage  demand  means  for  the  real  wage.  This  can  in  turn  reduce  the  risk  for  wage
spirals.
Increased  competition  in  globalised  markets  could  also  contribute  to  increased  flexibility  in  wage
formation.  Globalised  highly  competitive  commodity  markets  probably  reduce  the  ability  of
businesses  to  compensate  high  wages  by  price  increases.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  probable  that  the
strongly globalised capital market makes it more difficult for businesses to press down profit margins
even in the short run. A conclusion is that businesses’ opposition to wage costs increases that cannot
be sustained by productivity increases may have increased.
Another  change  in  the  Swedish  labour  market  is  the  tendency  towards  increased  short-term
employment.  This  could  eventually  increase  the  flexibility  of  wage  formation  and  increase
productivity. This development is particularly in evidence in the expanding services sector. According
to  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research,  the  proportion  of  time-limited  employment  has
increased from 10 to approximately 16% of the total number of employees between 1990 and 1998.
This development may have been reinforced by the difficult situation in the labour market during these
years but many believe that the trend will continue. New methods of compensation are also spreading.
Bonus wages, profit sharing and a 13th monthly wage are examples of components in wage formation
that increase flexibility in the labour market. Increased cost consciousness due to stiffer competition
can be a factor driving on this development. Although short-term employment in various forms may
reduce the inflationary pressure and make the labour market more flexible, this does not mean that this
development  is  always  positive  for  wage-earners  and  households.  Uncertainty  about  future  income
makes long-term planning more difficult such as having children and buying a house.
In order to reduce the risk of various groups in the labour market competing against one another to
drive up pay increases in a way that in the end creates a poorer outcome for all, various changes in the
forms of wage formation have been carried out and are planned. The most important is the so-called
Industry  Agreement  between  some  20  organisations  in  the  labour  market.  This  agreement  thereby
affects  some  20%  of  the  labour  force  and  includes  rules  that  reduce  the  risk  of  periods  without
agreements and rules that reduce the risk of conflicts breaking out.
In  the  state  sector,  adaptation  of  pay  bargaining  has  been  facilitated  by  the  frame  budget  process,
which entails that wage development in the export industry shall set the level for state wage costs.
With the intention of facilitating wage formation compatible with economic balance, the Government
introduced a bill in December last year that included proposals to create a new agency, the Mediation
Institute.  The  bill  includes  measures  that  aim  to  reduce  the  risk  of  conflict  breaking  out  and  are  to
come into effect if contractual solutions are not reached in some other way.
In conclusion
The state of the Swedish economy is better than for a very long time.
Inflation expectations have stabilised around the target and economic policy is focused on continued
consolidation  of  public  finances.  The  prerequisites  for  the  Riksbank  to  conduct  monetary  policy  so
that it contributes to stabilising growth around its long-term path are thereby improved.
5
BIS Review 20/2000
However, this does not mean that challenges are lacking with regard to striking the right balances in
monetary policy. I have discussed some of these. One is the assessment of productivity growth and the
potential growth in the next few years. There are still no signs that we will see a productivity growth
such  as  in  the  USA.  However,  we  must  carefully  follow  and  analyse  the  development  in  the  area
where  monetary  policy  is  formulated.  The  risk  of  incorrect  assessments  having  more  serious
consequences should, however, be small as changes in this area do not take place overnight.
Another component of the risk scenario is how wage formation and the labour market will function in
coming  years.  Negotiations  are  taking  place  in  an  economy  undergoing  strong  growth  at  the  same
time,  as  there  are  occupations  with  a  shortage  of  labour  where  pay  has  fallen  behind.  However,
changes  have  taken  place  in  the  Swedish  labour  market  that  permit  some  optimism  about
developments. Above all, this concerns the support for and understanding of the inflation target and
the low  inflation  expectations that  have  been  established.  Changes  in  the  forms  of  wage  formation,
which  have  been  carried  out  or  are  planned  work  in  a  positive  direction.  Finally,  globalisation  and
competition can have increased businesses’ cost consciousness. This may lead to a greater opposition
to wage increases and also that businesses in their drive to keep costs down endeavour to introduce
forms of employment that increase flexibility in the labour market.
In conclusion, it is important for the Riksbank as always to carefully monitor what is taking place in
the economy when conducting monetary policy.
Gross fixed investment as a per cent of GDP
Gross fixed investment
  Gross fixed investment, excl residential
Källa: SCB
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
Savings, Investments (net) and Current account
as a per cent of National Disposable Income 1950-96
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
20
15
10
5
0
-5
1950
55
1960
65
1970
75
1980
85
1990
95
D:\ex\d-sv\data\datany
Nettosparande
Nettoinvesteringar
Bytesbalans
                                                          (Net savings)        (Net investment)    (Current account)
Source: National accounts. Note: From 1986 reinvested capital gains is included.
Source: Lennart Berg
BIS Review 20/2000
6
Labour productivity growth
SWEDEN
USA
5
4,5
4
3,5
3
2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0
USA
SWEDEN
USA
SWEDEN
60-74
75-94
95-99
7
BIS Review 20/2000
