Willem F Duisenberg: Congratulatory speech at the
National Bank of Belgium’s 150th anniversary
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  official
celebration of the 150th anniversary of the National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, on 12 May 2000.
 It is a great honour to be invited to speak at this official celebration of the 150th anniversary of the
National Bank of Belgium (the Bank). Before I say anything else, let me first congratulate the Bank on
reaching this milestone in its history and allow me to congratulate in particular all those whose work
and dedication have ensured its place as a successful and well respected central bank.
As  we  have  heard  from  Prime  Minister  Verhofstadt,  the  Bank  enjoys  a  rich  and  extensive  history,
which dates back almost as far as the state of Belgium itself and during which time it has contributed
greatly  to  the  development  of  the  Belgian  economy.  It  is  also  a  time  in  which  the  tasks  and
responsibilities  of  central banks  have  evolved  to  such  an  extent  that  they  bear  little  resemblance  to
those of a century and half ago.
Since then historical, political and technological developments as well as advances in economic theory
have  caused  the  role  of  the  central  bank  to  evolve  and  mature.  They  have  also,  almost  invariably,
increased its importance. Of these changes one might first mention the economic consequences of war
and of the Great Depression, which focused the minds of economic thinkers and governments on the
role  that  macroeconomic  policies  should  play  in  achieving  higher  levels  of  economic  growth  and
welfare. Second, the end of the economic boom and the rise of inflation in the 1970s increased our
awareness  of  the  importance  of  sound  money  and  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  be  aimed  at
maintaining  price  stability.  Third,  the  disinflation  process  that  followed  served  to  emphasise  the
benefits  of  conferring  responsibility  for  this  policy  upon  an  independent  central  bank.  However,
among  those  developments  that  have  most  influenced  the  role  of  Europe’s  central  banks  in  recent
decades,  there  is  one  which  stands  out  as  being  pivotal.  I  am  referring,  of  course,  to  European
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).
It  is  now  more  than  30  years  since  the  Werner  Report  first  proposed  a  framework  for  replacing
Europe’s  national  currencies  with  a  single  European  currency,  more  than  20  years  since  the
establishment of the European Monetary System (EMS) and nearly 10 years since the signing of the
Maastricht Treaty, which committed EU Member States to achieving Monetary Union. In that time,
the efforts of Europe’s politicians and central bankers have confounded many sceptics by making the
euro an economic and political reality.
Clearly, the transition to a single currency did not take place in a vacuum. On the contrary, a number
of factors shaped the path towards EMU. Some of these factors had a positive impact. I am referring
here, in particular, to the remarkable progress that has taken place in establishing a climate of stable
prices throughout the European Union. This development undoubtedly reflects the consensus that now
exists among central bankers and politicians alike, concerning the appropriate role of monetary policy
in the general conduct of economic policy. Also, one should not forget the dramatic events of 1989,
which  not  only  led  to  German  unification  and  the  fall  of  the  Iron  Curtain  but  also  redefined  the
parameters of the economic and political environment in Europe.
Yet there were also other factors which, had it not been for the determination of those committed to
EMU, could have significantly delayed or even derailed the whole process. Of these, the EMS crisis of
1992-93 immediately springs to mind. As a result of this crisis, many of those who already doubted
the  feasibility  of  EMU  became  increasingly  sceptical  as  to  whether  we  would  actually  achieve  our
stated goal. Thus when we consider the events of the last decade in particular, we must appreciate that
1
BIS Review 41/2000
the driving force towards the introduction of a single currency was, above all, the political will of the
actors involved. In this regard, Belgium’s politicians and its central bankers should be congratulated
on the commitment that kept their country at the forefront of the integration process.
This  commitment  could  and  still  can  be  seen  at  various  levels.  At  the  political  level,  the  policies
pursued both by the Government and by the Bank ensured that the Belgian franc became a stabilising
force  in  the  EMS  and  that  Belgium  was  ready  to  be  a  founding  member  of  the  euro  area.  This
achievement owes a great deal to the efforts of many persons. I can only mention a few of them, such
as  former  Prime  Minister  Dehaene, the  former  Governors Verplaetse and  Godeaux,  and  the  present
Governor  Quaden,  who  is  often  seen  as  Mr.  Euro  here  in  Belgium.  Equally,  sometimes  behind  the
scenes, I should recall the dedication of persons both from the Treasury and from the Bank for their
contributions to Monetary Union. Among them I should like to single out two individuals. The first is
Jacques  van  Ypersele  de  Strihou  who,  as  President  of  the  Monetary  Committee  at  the  end  of  the
1970s, played a particularly important role in the design and establishment of the EMS (small wonder,
if  you  realise  that  we  shared  a  room  as  junior  economists  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in
Washington,  D.C.  in  the  mid-sixties).  The  second  is  Jean-Jacques  Rey  who  made  two  especially
important contributions: first, as President of the Committee of Alternates of Central Bank Governors
at the time the EMU Chapter of the Maastricht Treaty was negotiated and, second, as Chairman of the
Monetary  Policy  Sub-committee  of  the  EMI,  which  developed  the  operational  framework  for  the
implementation of the single monetary policy which has worked so well since January 1999. Let me
finally mention Alexandre Lamfalussy who, as the first President of the European Monetary Institute,
played a key role in the process towards EMU. Without such figures, EMU would never have become
a  reality.  Since January  last  year, the  euro is a  reality. The  launch  of  the  euro  has  been  successful.
Inflation is low. Economic growth is robust in a climate of price stability. My message to you today is
clear. The internal stability of the euro will be maintained. The people, also here in Belgium, can be
confident that their savings and pensions will keep their value over time. This internal stability will
help  to  turn  the  current  upswing  into  a  long  period  of  high  economic  growth  and  falling
unemployment. Based on price stability and the strength of the euro area economy, the future of the
euro is that of a strong currency.
It  is  often  the  case  that  the  achievement  of  past  objectives  paves  the  way  to  new  and  exciting
challenges. And so it is now for the Bank, which, along with the other national central banks (NCBs)
of  the  euro  area  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  has  a  new  role  to  fulfil  as  part  of  the  European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) and of the Eurosystem. The importance of this role should not be
underestimated.
The Eurosystem operates in a decentralised manner. The single monetary policy could not therefore be
successful without the essential work carried out by the NCBs of which the Eurosystem is primarily
comprised.  In  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  performance  of  operations  by  the  NCBs
ensures  that  the  Eurosystem  benefits  from  their  extensive  operational  experience  as  well  as  the
contacts  built  up  with  the  credit  institutions  operating  in  their  domestic  financial  markets.  In  this
respect, the activities of the Bank are, and will surely continue to be, at least as extensive as they were
before.
As  a  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  Bank  has,  of  course,  maintained  a  number  of  important
responsibilities and has also acquired a number of new, shared competencies. In this regard I should
mention the important role of the Bank which stems from its participation in the various specialised
ESCB Committees. These Committees, which are composed of experts from the NCBs and from the
ECB, provide expertise in their fields of competence and greatly facilitate the decision-making process
of the Eurosystem. As a result, the Bank, along with the other NCBs of the Eurosystem, contributes
greatly to the development of common positions and shared standpoints on a comprehensive range of
issues that are of interest to the Eurosystem.
However, in my view, the Bank’s newest and most challenging role results from its involvement in the
formulation of the Eurosystem’s policies. Previously, the Bank was the sole monetary authority of an
important but nonetheless relatively small national economy. Now it forms part of a wider institution
BIS Review 41/2000
2
which is responsible for conducting the monetary policy of an economic area comparable in size to the
United States.
This  new  role  necessitates  an  increasingly  European  and  international  orientation:  a  European
orientation because the Governor of the Bank participates in meetings of the Governing Council as an
individual  who  is  bound  to  act  in  the  interests  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  rather  than  as  a
representative of a single Member State. As a result, the research and analysis carried out in the Bank
has  no  doubt  shifted  its  focus  to  an  even  greater  extent  than  before  towards  euro  area-wide
developments. The  international  orientation  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  euro  is  the  world’s  second
most important currency, making the Eurosystem an important player on the international stage.
I should not, however, dwell further on this, or on any of the Bank’s other current and future activities,
as I understand that Governor Quaden intends to speak about such matters and is much better placed to
do so than I. Let me therefore finish by once again congratulating the Bank on its 150th anniversary,
by expressing my gratitude to all those who have dedicated their time and effort to the achievement of
Monetary Union and, finally, by wishing the Bank another 150 successful years and more as part of
the Eurosystem.
3
BIS Review 41/2000
