Willem F Duisenberg: The role of the ECB at the international level
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual Meeting
of the Institute of International Finance, Inc (IIF), held in Prague, on 23 September 2000.
 Introduction
First of all, I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to address such a distinguished
audience. The Institute of International Finance (IIF) is the leading professional association of private
sector financial institutions acting at the global level. As such, the IIF serves as a prominent forum for
fostering a dialogue between the private financial community and policymakers on key issues, such as
the  prevention  of  financial  crises  and  the  architecture  of  the  international  monetary  system.  This
explains  why  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) follows the  IIF’s  initiatives  with  great  interest  and
why, this evening, I am pleased to be able to share some thoughts with you. Given the global nature of
the IIF’s activities and the concomitance of its Annual Meeting with the Annual Meetings of the IMF
and the World Bank, I shall focus on the international dimension of the ECB’s activities.
Let me start by recalling that, on 1 January 1999, the 11 Member States of what is now the euro area
transferred  their  monetary  sovereignty  to  a  new  supranational  institution,  the  ECB.  Since  then,  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  been  solely  responsible  for  deciding  the  euro  area’s  monetary
policy.  The  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  has  been  implementing  the  Council’s  decisions  mainly
through the national central banks (NCBs) of the countries which have adopted the euro. The ECB and
the  NCBs  together  form  the  “Eurosystem”.  Accordingly,  the  Eurosystem  is  the  central  bank  of  the
euro area, although it does not have a legal personality; this is only conferred upon the ECB and the
NCBs. On 1 January 2001 the euro area will welcome a new Member State, Greece. Moreover, in five
days - on 28 September 2000 - the Danish citizens will decide in a referendum whether their country
shall also adopt the euro.
The  Eurosystem  enjoys  full  independence  in  pursuing  its  statutory  mandate  to  ensure  and  maintain
price stability. “Independence”, however, does not mean “isolation”. The Eurosystem, in other words,
cannot  perform  its  tasks  without  establishing  appropriate  external  relations  with  both  market
participants and other policymakers.
This  evening  I  shall  focus  on  the  multilateral  relations  which  the  ECB - and  more  generally,  the
Eurosystem - maintains  with  other  policymakers  at  the  international  (ie  neither  euro  area  nor
European Union) level. These relations are promoted within organisations such as the IMF, the OECD
and the BIS, as well as in fora such as the G7 and the G20. I shall first provide a brief overview of the
current relations of the ECB and the Eurosystem, both from an institutional angle and from the point
of view of their rationale. Without wanting to be exhaustive, I shall then highlight a few challenges
which the ECB - and, more generally, the international official community - may be confronted with.
In  this  context,  I  shall  outline  the  ECB’s  assessment  of  a  more  specific  issue,  namely  the  issue  of
private sector involvement in the resolution of financial crises.
1.
The ECB and the process of international cooperation
Institutional framework
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  (the  “Treaty”)  stipulates  which  European
institutions are allowed either to speak or to act on behalf of the euro area at the international level.
The euro area, like the Eurosystem, has no legal personality. This implies that the euro  area  cannot
negotiate  and  conclude  public  international  law  agreements  or  become  a  member  of  international
organisations.  This  also  implies  that  the  euro  area  has  to  be  represented  externally  by  Community
institutions or bodies which have a legal personality; this means: (1) the Council of the Ministers of
1
BIS Review 79/2000
Finance and Economy of the EU (“ECOFIN Council”); and (2) the ECB and, in accordance with an
ECB  decision,  one  or  more  NCBs.  While  the  Treaty  provides  for  interaction  between  the  ECOFIN
Council and the ECB in a number of cases, these entities have well-defined responsibilities.
This legal framework provides guidelines to give the euro area a voice at the international level.  In
particular, when the external representation of the euro area in the field of international cooperation
involves the tasks entrusted to the Eurosystem, decisions are centralised in the hands of the Governing
Council  of  the  ECB.  This  facilitates  the  decision-making  process  with  regard  to  external
representation.  While  NCBs  may  participate  in  international  fora  depending  on  their  respective
memberships (eg G7, G10, G20), the participation of the ECB in all relevant fora gives continuity and
visibility to the external representation of the euro area.
The  roles  the  ECB  plays  in  the  international  community  differ  depending  on  the  Eurosystem  tasks
involved in international relations. In particular, the ECB can play three different roles. First, the ECB
is  a  primary  and  autonomous  counterpart  whenever  the  Eurosystem’s  exclusive  competencies
- ie monetary policy and related central banking tasks - are involved in international relations. Second,
with  regard  to  issues  related  to  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  the  ECB  shares  with  the  ECOFIN
Council  the  responsibility  for  both  consultations  with  third  parties - for  example  at  G7  level - and
communication  to  the  general  public.  However,  the  ECB  is  solely  responsible  for  deciding  foreign
exchange operations. Third, within the limits of the Eurosystem’s field of competence, the ECB can
advise other euro area policymakers on international issues. In specific circumstances the ECB may
also  act  as  a  “catalyst  for  cooperation”.  This  may  happen  when  the  Eurosystem  develops  common
views  on  issues  which  fall  within  the  competence  of  other  euro  area  authorities  (mainly  national
governments), but in which the Eurosystem has a strong institutional interest, in accordance with its
statute. This applies, for instance, to issues related to the stability of the global financial markets and
the  architecture  of  the  international  monetary  system.  In  dealing  with  these  issues,  the  ECB  may
provide value added to the development of common euro area positions to be taken at the international
level.
Rationale for cooperation
The  relations  of  the  ECB  with  other  policymakers  at  the  international  level  involve  a  number  of
cooperation activities designed to increase the “joint welfare” resulting from their policies.
Generally speaking, “international cooperation” takes place within the relevant organisations (eg IMF)
and  fora (eg  G7),  between  the  competent  authorities  of  different  countries  for  either  a  given  policy
(eg monetary  policy)  or  a  set  of  policies  (eg  macroeconomic  policies).  In  this  context,  the  term
“country”  should  be  understood  to  include  monetary  unions  such  as  the  euro  area.  In  principle,
cooperation can include a wide spectrum of activities, namely:
• 
• 
Consultation, which simply consists of a mutual exchange of information and views;
Surveillance, ie the systematic monitoring and assessment, by an independent organisation,
of the economic policies of its  members.  Within this  context, the international  community
may  also  develop  “standards”  and  “codes”,  which  constitute  a  form  of  multilateral
rule-making to be implemented on a voluntary basis; and
 Coordination, ie the agreement between separate policymakers to take and implement joint
decisions.
As I shall discuss, the Eurosystem is directly involved in most, although not all, of these activities.
The economic rationale for the ECB’s involvement in international cooperation activities rests on the
international externalities of domestic policies, ie spillover effects which policies in one economy can
produce on other economies via, for instance, interest rates, exchange rates and equity prices. The euro
area, however, is a large and relatively closed economy. The degree of trade openness of the euro area
is much smaller than that of its constituent countries. Measured by the average of exports and imports
as  a  share  of euro  area  GDP,  the  degree  of  openness  is  16%  in the  euro  area.  By  contrast,  prior  to
Monetary Union, the average export ratio of individual Member States stood at around 35% in 1997.
BIS Review 79/2000
2
This helps to understand both why the euro area is not affected by spillover effects to the same extent
as  small  open  economies,  and  why  the  Eurosystem  is  in  a  position  to  pursue  its  primary  objective
- maintaining domestic price stability - in the most effective way.
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  ECB  neglects  external  economic  developments  when
establishing the euro area monetary policy. On the contrary, the ECB takes these developments into
due  account  as  they  may  have  an  impact  on  domestic  economic  developments,  and  thus  on  price
stability.
The ECB’s approach to external economic developments has three implications for the participation of
the Eurosystem in the process of international cooperation in the area of macroeconomic policies.
First, a substantial component of the ECB’s cooperation is the reciprocal exchange of information and
views  within  international  organisations  and  fora.  Regular  consultation  on  external  economic
developments enhances the ECB’s ability to analyse the outlook for price developments in the euro
area.  By  taking  into  account  possible  spillover  effects  from  third  countries’  policy  actions,
consultation  plays  a  part  in  reducing  the  likelihood  of  misinterpreting  the  impact  of  external
developments on domestic variables. Given its voluntary nature, consultation does not impinge on the
ECB’s independence.
Second,  consultation  is  supplemented  by  international  surveillance.  In  this  case,  a  third  and
independent party, such as the IMF or OECD, regularly monitors and assesses the economic policies
of its members. In this regard, whenever the euro area monetary policy is under surveillance, the ECB
is  solely  responsible  for  interaction  with  the  IMF  and  OECD.  International  surveillance adds  to  the
ECB’s transparency as both the IMF and the OECD  make  their assessments  of  euro  area  economic
policies  available  to  the  public.  In  the  context  of  surveillance,  the  international  community  is  also
developing common understandings on a number of “rules of the game” to be implemented in each
individual country on a voluntary basis. An example is given by the IMF Code of Good Practices on
Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies. The selection of best practices and rules enhances
competition and transparency among policymakers, thus making the idea of good public governance a
central component of international cooperation.
Third, consultation and surveillance are the forms of international cooperation which are relevant to
the  ECB  in  the  area  of  macroeconomic  policies.  Any  form  of  ex  ante  international  coordination  of
monetary  policy  with  other  macroeconomic  policies  could  easily  be  incompatible  with  the
Eurosystem’s  mandate  and  independence.  Attempts  to  coordinate  ex  ante  would  not  only  blur  the
specific  responsibilities  of  individual  policymakers,  but  also  reduce  their  accountability.  In
determining  its  monetary  policy  stance,  the  ECB  should  and  does  take  into  account  all  relevant
information.  It  cannot  let  its  policy  be  determined  solely  by  the  current  and  future  course  of  other
policies. This could easily compromise the maintenance of price stability. The inappropriateness of ex
ante  policy  coordination  also  applies  to  the  more  specific  option  of  exchange  rate  coordination
between  large  economic  areas,  for  instance  by  setting  ranges  for  the  fluctuation  of  the  major
currencies.  In  this  regard,  I  should  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  reaffirm  that  the  ECB  does  not
pursue any exchange rate target. Our objective is to maintain stable prices in the euro area and not a
specific level of the euro’s exchange rate.
Last but not least, the Eurosystem takes part in the process of international cooperation not only in its
role as a “primary player” - ie when euro area monetary and exchange rate policies are involved - but
also  in  its  roles  as  advisor  to  other  euro  area  authorities  on  international  issues  and  “catalyst  for
cooperation”.  In  this  case,  international  cooperation  is  mainly  designed  to  ensure  global  financial
stability and enhance the architecture of the international monetary system. The economic rationale for
this kind of cooperation can be summarised as follows. First, financial instability can materialise even
with sound macroeconomic policies, as a result of factors such as inadequate supervision in emerging
market economies and so-called “contagion”, ie the international transmission of instability. Second, a
world divided into sovereign states has inevitably moved  more rapidly towards full capital  mobility
than towards common rules. The asymmetry between the free movement of capital, which takes place
on  a  global  scale,  and  policymaking,  which  remains  mainly  in  the  national  domain,  can  have
implications for financial stability and calls for enhanced international cooperation.
3
BIS Review 79/2000
The challenges ahead
2.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  challenges  ahead.  I  shall  distinguish  between  challenges  related  to  the
institutional framework for international cooperation and challenges pertaining to the specific contents
of international cooperation.
Institutional challenges
Over the past two years, the representation of the euro area in international organisations and fora has
been  decided  in  accordance  with  the  aforementioned  guidelines  laid  down  in  the  Treaty.  These
guidelines and decisions, however, have no  direct legal  bearing  on  the  statutes  and/or  internal rules
governing international organisations and fora. This implies a need for the gradual adaptation of the
traditional institutional framework for international relations. That framework was not tailored to the
involvement of monetary unions as such, nor to the advent of the Eurosystem - and, more generally,
the euro area - as a new actor in international relations. Until now, this process of adaptation has been
conducted  to  a  large  extent  on  the  basis  of  ad  hoc  solutions.  In  the  longer  run,  however,  a  more
fundamental approach may be needed.
A first challenge arises from the fact that the international intergovernmental organisations - the IMF
and  the  OECD - were  created  at  a  time  when  only  national  states  were  responsible  for  domestic
policymaking. As a result, only individual countries - and not the ECB and other representatives of the
euro area as such - are members of the IMF and the OECD, even if these organisations deal, among
other things, with the euro area monetary and exchange rate policy. Both the IMF and the OECD have
adjusted their internal rules to reflect the new context. In particular, the Executive Board of the IMF
has granted permanent observer status to the ECB, and the OECD has allowed the ECB to participate
in  the  work  of  its  relevant  committees  and  working  groups  as  a  separate  member  of  the  European
Community delegation alongside the Commission.
A  second  challenge  is  the  definition  of  an  adequate  representation  of  the  euro  area  in  those
international fora where both ministers and central bank governors are represented (eg G7 and G20).
Here  the  problem  raised  by  the  creation  of  the  euro  area  was  its  capability  to  speak - if  and  when
appropriate - “with one voice”. Specific arrangements between the euro area and its counterparts in the
various  fora  have  dealt  with  this  problem.  These  arrangements,  however,  may  still  call  for  some
improvement. For instance, it is true that issues such as the architecture of the international monetary
system fall primarily under the competence of individual euro area countries. The ECOFIN Council,
however, needs to gain an increasingly higher profile when these issues are discussed in the competent
fora (eg G7). This would strengthen the European stance and simplify the process for decision-making
at  the international  level.  In  this  respect,  the  Eurosystem  may  provide - as  I  will  discuss  afterwards
- significant value added to euro area governments. More generally speaking, the ECB would welcome
any  initiative  of  euro  area  governments  designed  to  enhance - in  compliance  with  the  respective
competencies of the ECOFIN Council and the Eurosystem - the credibility and clout of the euro area
in the international community.
The content of cooperation: the ECB’s assessment of “private sector involvement”
The other major challenge for the ECB and the Eurosystem in the years to come will be to become
more directly involved in the process of international cooperation beyond the area of macroeconomic
cooperation.  This  relates,  in  particular,  to  current  work  being  done  to  strengthen  the  international
financial architecture, which is close to the area of traditional competence and expertise of the central
banking  community.  The  Eurosystem  supports  this  process  for  two  reasons.  First,  because  the
achievement  of  its  primary  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  would  be
facilitated by a safer and more resilient international financial system. Second, because the statute of
the  Eurosystem  establishes  that  the  Eurosystem  shall  contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies
relating to the stability of the financial system.
BIS Review 79/2000
4
A wide range of topics could be discussed here. However, the interest that the IIF has shown in the
recent past in the issue of “private sector involvement” leads me to focus on the ECB’s assessment of
ongoing discussions.
Owing to changes in the magnitude and composition of capital flows, the private sector is playing an
increasingly important role in the financing of emerging market economies. According to recent IIF
estimates, in the 1990s 85% of total net inflows of capital to the major borrowing countries came from
the private sector. Such inflows averaged USD 170 billion per annum, compared with USD 35 billion
per annum in the 1980s. By contrast, net official flows averaged USD 30 billion per annum throughout
the 1990s and reached only USD 5 billion in 1999, their lowest level for over 20 years.
Despite  these  developments,  however,  in  times  of  financial  distress  the  role  of  the  official  sector
remains crucial in providing financial assistance to emerging market economies. It is true that informal
arrangements  are  in  force  in  order  to  facilitate  negotiations  with  the  main  creditors  of  the  private
sector. The so-called “London Club” has become a kind of permanent institution, like the Paris Club
for obligations vis-à-vis official creditors. However, the development of new instruments for lending
to emerging market economies and the increasing diversification of the creditor base, while facilitating
the  financing  of  the  countries  concerned,  render  negotiations  between  debtor  countries  and  their
private sector creditors more difficult in the event of a crisis. This explains why, so far, only ad hoc
measures have been developed in order to involve private sector creditors - on a case-by-case basis - in
the resolution of financial crises.
In addition to enhanced efforts to improve the communication channels between debtor countries and
their  creditors,  which  would  also  enhance  crisis  prevention,  the  ECB  would  support  a  move  to
strengthen  the  existing  framework  for  the  management  of  financial  crises.  Three  fundamental
principles may be helpful to this aim.
First, the framework should rely more on rules and less on discretion than was the case in the second
half of the 1990s. A case-by-case approach, lacking clear “rules of the game” on the respective roles of
private  and  official  sectors in times  of  distress, runs  the  risk  of  creating  the  perception  that  official
resources  would  provide  a  “safety  net”  if  need  be.  Such  a  perception  is  likely  to  distort  debt
management  on  the  borrowers’  side  and  risk  assessment  on  the  creditors’  side,  thus  engendering
problems of moral hazard on both sides.
Second, the IMF cannot - owing to its limited resources which do not match private capital outflows
- and should not - owing to moral hazard problems mentioned above - act as an international lender of
last  resort.  IMF  financial  assistance can  neither  be  unlimited  nor  cover  all  the  financing  needs  of  a
country.  The  IMF  should  rather  play  a  catalytic  role.  IMF  conditionality  in  the  form  of  adjustment
programmes  should,  in  conjunction  with  IMF  financing,  be  instrumental  in  improving  the  external
position of member countries and quickly restoring market confidence. Actual  ceilings  on  access  to
IMF financing facilities should also be established.
Third, as a logical consequence of limited official financing, the private sector should be involved in
the resolution of financial crises. It is a matter of fact that a country running into financial difficulties
will need to involve its creditors in one way or another. In this context, the crucial question is how
“orderly”  such  an  involvement  should  be.  In  their  efforts  to  secure  adequate  private  sector
involvement,  debtor  countries  should  try  to  reach  market-based  and  cooperative  solutions  with  all
classes of creditors, respecting comparable treatment among and within different classes.
We  are  convinced  that  a  strengthened  framework  based  on  these  principles  would  create  the  right
expectations  in  both  the  private  sector  and  the  official  sector.  It  would  also  allow  for  sufficient
flexibility to address specific cases in the course of a crisis.
Conclusions
I shall bring this talk to a close by drawing a few basic conclusions.
In  principle,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  should  simplify  international  cooperation  by  reducing  the
number of key players in the international arena.
5
BIS Review 79/2000
In this new streamlined international setting, the euro area can be expected to play a greater role and to
gain a higher profile.
In this respect, the ECB is already a potentially influential participant in the process of international
cooperation.  At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  is  a  new  player  in  this  process,  and  its  role  will  therefore
evolve over time.
BIS Review 79/2000
6
