Svein Gjedrem: Current monetary policy issues in Norway
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  at  the  General  Meeting  of  ACI  Norway,
held in Tromsø, on 19 August 2000.
 Introduction
I would like to start by expressing my thanks for being given the opportunity to give this presentation
of  monetary  policy  in  Norway.  I  will  start  my  presentation  with  a  brief  review  of  the  basis  for
monetary policy, and will go on to mention some of the considerations and reasoning behind Norges
Bank’s  recent  setting  of  interest  rates.  Finally,  I  will  turn  to  certain  structural  features  of  particular
importance to developments in the capital  account  balance  which can  shed light  on  the  relationship
between the setting of interest rates in Norway and international interest rate developments.
The basis for monetary policy
The  chart shows  movements  in the  krone  exchange  rate  between  1980  and  the  present.  There  have
been three major crossroads since 1986.
Chart 1
Krone exchange rate
 Following the last devaluation in May 1986, the Norwegian authorities decided to introduce
a  fixed  exchange  rate  system  for  the  krone.  The  monetary  policy  authorities  bound
themselves to the mast. Under this system, the interest rate was to be set solely with the aim
of maintaining exchange rate stability within narrow margins. At the same time, the krone
was  supported  through  extensive  exchange-market  interventions.  The  fixed  exchange  rate
system  led  to  a  gradual  slowing  of  price  inflation.  A  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy  also
helped  reinforce  the  credibility  of  the  choice  of  monetary  policy  regime,  since
unemployment in this period was lower than would otherwise have been the case.
1
BIS Review 67/2000
  In  December  1992,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  system  had  to  be  abandoned  following  a
sustained  period  of  unrest  and extensive  speculation  in  European  exchange  markets.  After
this the krone remained stable for several years without any significant changes to Norges
Bank’s policy response pattern. The stability of the krone during this period was largely due
to  the  Norwegian  economy  entering  a  period  of  balanced  growth.  Fiscal  policy  was  well
suited  to  economic  developments,  while  wage  inflation  was  moderate  and  oil  prices  were
relatively stable. The monetary policy instruments merely accompanied these developments.
Chart 2
Daily variation in the krone exchange rate
NOK per ECU/EUR
Daily variation in the
krone exchange rates
against ECU/EUR.
Percent
From late 1996 the krone became less stable: the value of the krone fluctuated substantially,
despite  more  active  use  of  monetary  policy  instruments  to  dampen  the  fluctuations.  This
period saw high levels of economic activity in Norway, coupled with marked cost inflation.
This coincided with considerable fluctuations in oil revenues and turbulence in international
financial markets, which had a contagion effect on the krone.
Developments since the end of 1996 indicate that the exchange rate is no longer ideally suited as an
operational  short-term  objective  for  monetary  policy.  Norges  Bank  is  not  in  a  position  to  fine-tune
movements in the krone exchange rate. When a central bank trades in its own currency to influence the
range of the exchange rate, market participants can exploit a situation whereby the exchange rate does
not reflect underlying market conditions. With free capital flows, this can trigger huge movements of
capital.  The  interest  rate,  which  is  the  Bank’s  primary  instrument  of  monetary  policy,  has  a  more
indirect, less predictable effect on the krone exchange rate, while the exchange rate may be affected by
a number of conditions beyond the control of the Norwegian authorities.
The Norwegian political authorities formulated Norges Bank’s mandate for the conduct of monetary
policy. The regulation reads as follows:
BIS Review 67/2000
2
“The  monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  by  Norges  Bank  shall  be  aimed  at  maintaining  a  stable
exchange rate against European currencies, based on the range of the exchange rate maintained since
the krone was floated on 10 December 1992. In the event of significant changes in the exchange rate,
policy instruments will be oriented with a view to returning the exchange rate over time to its initial
range. No fluctuation margins are established, nor is there an appurtenant obligation on Norges Bank
to intervene in the foreign exchange market”.
This mandate allows Norges Bank latitude for exercising discretion in its conduct of monetary policy.
Norges Bank has explained its interpretation of the Exchange Rate Regulation on several occasions,
not least in a letter to the Ministry of Finance dated 21 October 1999, often referred to as the budget
submission.  When  exercising  discretion,  Norges  Bank  attaches  importance  to  fulfilling  the
fundamental preconditions for exchange rate stability. To ensure stability in the exchange rate against
the euro, monetary policy instruments must be oriented towards reducing price and cost inflation to the
level aimed at by the European Central Bank. At the same  time,  monetary  policy  must  not in  itself
contribute to deflationary recessions, as this could undermine confidence in the krone. Hence, there is
no  conflict  between  gearing  monetary  policy  instruments  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  and  the
objective of a stable krone exchange rate over time.
In  the  budget  submission,  the  Bank  also  provided  information  about  key  policy  response  patterns
when price and cost developments and the basis for exchange rate stability are influenced by external
factors.
Price  and  cost  inflation  are  influenced  by  monetary  policy  through  a  number  of  channels.  When
interest rates increase, it becomes more profitable to save and to postpone consumption until a later
date.  Interest  expenses  exceed  interest  income  for  households  collectively,  meaning  that  a  rise  in
interest rates reduces real disposable income. The value of household wealth decreases, since interest
rate  rises  normally  lead  to  lower  house  prices  and  weaker  trends  in  securities  markets.  Growth  in
private  consumption  and  fixed  investment  slows.  Lower  demand  for  goods  and  services  may  also
affect enterprises’ profit margins.
Slower growth in domestic demand and production will curb growth in demand for labour. When the
effects of changes in interest rates reach the labour market, wage growth will be affected. Increases in
labour costs will in turn have an effect on inflation.
3
BIS Review 67/2000
A more direct channel between changes in interest rates and price and cost inflation is to be found in
the exchange rate. Under normal circumstances, a higher interest rate strengthens the exchange rate,
resulting in lower prices for imported goods (which account for approximately 40% of the goods and
services in the consumer price index). The change in the exchange rate will also affect earnings in the
internationally exposed sector and enterprises’ ability to raise wages.
The relationship between interest rates and the exchange rate is not stable. We have seen cases of the
exchange rate falling after a rise in interest rates when enterprises and financial operators assumed that
the interest rate rise would seriously undermine the basis for economic growth. On the other hand, a
low  interest  rate  which  fuels  higher  inflation  will  cause  the  krone  to  fluctuate  considerably.
Nevertheless,  as  long  as  monetary  policy  has  a  stabilising  effect  on  the  inflation  outlook,  we  will
generally be able to assume that raising interest rates strengthens the krone and that lowering interest
rates weakens it.
In  its  December  1999  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  presented  calculations  based  on  our
macroeconomic model which illustrated that an interest rate rise of 1 percentage point might reduce
price inflation by 0.3 percentage point after two years. This reduction is largely due to the effect on the
exchange rate. These calculations were based on the assumption of uncovered interest rate parity. An
interest rate rise will then result in an immediate appreciation of the krone, which is sufficient for the
interest rate differential between Norway and other countries to correspond to expectations of future
changes in the exchange rate. After three years the effect is somewhat less strong as a result  of the
depreciation of the krone, but at this stage domestic factors will gain in importance.
A number of comparative analyses have been published which study the effect of rises in interest rates
on inflation in different industrial countries.1 There is substantial variation in the calculations across
countries and between different analyses.
In  a  report  published  by  the Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,2  the  effect  of  an
interest  rate  rise  which  is  sustained  for  one  year  is  illustrated  using  simulations  in  the  bank’s
macroeconomic  model.  After  two  years,  inflation  has  fallen  somewhere  in  the  region  of  0.2  to
0.4 percentage point, dependent on the other assumptions. The report emphasises that the effects are
dependent  on  factors  such  as  the  general  state  of  the  economy  and  the  credibility  of  the  monetary
policy regime.
Calculations  carried  out  by  the  central  bank  of  Sweden,  published  in  its  December  1999  Inflation
Report, show effects comparable to those demonstrated in the English report.
It  is  not  uncommon  for  the  effects  of  economic  instruments  to  be  uncertain.  On  the  contrary.  This
means that we cannot fine-tune economic developments. The possibilities for conducting a successful
economic policy increase by proceeding gradually when economic developments require changes in
the interest rate.
Despite  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  speed  and  magnitude  of  the  effect  of  changes  in  interest  rates  on
inflation, there can be no doubt that higher interest rates lead to a reduction in price inflation. Almost
all the  analyses referred to  above  are  based  on  economic  models  which  have  been  quantified  using
historical  data,  as  have  Norges  Bank’s  calculations.  The  models  cover  some  of  the  channels  for
interest rate effects, but not all of them. There is evidence to suggest that changes in interest rates may
now have a greater impact on the economy, and more swiftly, in Norway and in other countries than
was formerly the case.
1 OECD (1999): EMU. Facts, challenges and policies, chapter 2, OECD, Guiso, Luigi, Anil K Kashyap, Fabio Panetta &
Daniele Terlizzese (1999): “Will a common European monetary policy have asymmetric effects?”, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, Economic Perspectives, 4th quarter.
2 Bank of England (1999): “The transmission mechanism of monetary policy”, The Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of
England.
BIS Review 67/2000
4
Consumer confidence indicator and interest rate differential
Chart 3
Chart  3  illustrates  the  correlation  between  changes  in  the  consumer  confidence  indicator  and  the
differential  between  long-term  and  short-term  interest  rates  since  1992.  The  consumer  confidence
indicator attempts to chart households’ confidence in and expectations concerning their own financial
situation and the nation’s economy, and represents a leading indicator for private consumption. The
differential between long-term and short-term interest rates is an indicator of the tightness of monetary
policy. A negative differential means that short interest rates are higher than long rates, and may be
taken as an indication that monetary policy is contractionary. The correlation between the interest rate
differential and the consumer confidence indicator would seem to imply that monetary policy, at least
in certain circumstances, has a swifter and stronger effect than previously assumed.
The  effects of  monetary  policy  are  channelled through  the real  economy  and  the  exchange  rate.  As
already mentioned, traditionally there has been a considerable lag before changes in the real economy
have  affected  price  and  cost  inflation.  However,  if  expectations  are  reflected  in  household  and
enterprise behaviour, prices may be affected more swiftly. If price expectations are affected, the effect
on  the  exchange  rate  will  be  intensified,  since  lower  price  inflation  in  isolation  implies  a  stronger
exchange rate. It is thus likely that there is a third channel which monetary policy can affect, which we
may  term  the  expectation  channel.  Developments  throughout the  1990s  would  seem  to  suggest  that
this channel is gaining in importance. However, it is difficult to quantify with any degree of accuracy
to what extent monetary policy affects price expectations. The relationship between monetary policy
and  price  expectations  is  probably  fairly  unstable.  This  will  be  dependent  on  confidence  in  the
implementation of monetary policy.
The Executive Board of Norges Bank currently assesses the Bank’s key rates eight  times  a  year  on
previously  announced  dates.  In  addition  to  making  decisions  on  interest  rates,  after  each  of  these
monetary  policy  meetings  the  Bank  issues  a  statement  on  its  assessment  of  probable  interest  rate
changes in the future. At the press conference on 9 August announcing the most recent rise in interest
rates, the following statement was issued: “today’s decision to raise interest  rates  brings  the  overall
increase in interest rates to 1.25 percentage points from the beginning of the year. This represents a
substantial step in the adjustment of the interest rate that is appropriate on the basis of the analyses in
the June Inflation  Report.  However, the probability  that  the  next change  in interest  rates  will  be  an
increase remains greater than the probability of a reduction”.
5
BIS Review 67/2000
the Bank’s interpretation of the mandate;
the policy response pattern in the use of monetary policy instruments as publicised;
In addition to the mandate  for  monetary  policy,  there  are  several other factors  of  importance to the
decisions made by the Bank, including:
• 
• 
• 
• 
These factors combined serve as a constraint for the Bank in almost the same way as exchange rate
movements did under the fixed exchange rate regime. Established courses of action may be set aside,
but only in the face of extraordinary conditions, for example when financial stability is in jeopardy.
assessments of probable interest rate changes in the future.
the analyses in the inflation reports; and
The predictability of the behaviour of the central bank helps diminish uncertainty for all participants in
the economy. This makes the Norwegian economy less exposed to doubt and speculation concerning
the  setting  of  interest  rates,  reinforcing  stability  in  the  formation  of  expectations  and  facilitating
smoother developments in long-term  interest rates.  Continuity  and  consistency  are  therefore  Norges
Bank’s best contribution to economic stability and exchange rate stability.
At the same time, however, the Bank’s leeway with regard to monetary policy is limited. Norges Bank
would have greater scope for manoeuvre if we were less open about our policy response pattern - if we
kept  our  cards  closer to  our  chest. This  would  enable  us  to  surprise  market  participants,  and  in  the
short term this might allow interest rate changes to have a greater impact. But enterprises and financial
operators  would  gradually  learn  from  experience  and  take  positions  to  guard  their  interests.  The
long-term  results  would  be  weaker  confidence  in  monetary  policy,  higher  interest  rates  and  risk
premia, lower investment and an unstable exchange rate.
Economic developments
Chart 4
Effective exchange rate for EUR
Nominal and real. Index 1995=100
There have  been substantial fluctuations  between  the  major  currencies  since  the  introduction  of  the
euro. In general, the euro has depreciated against other currencies. Some academic papers suggest that
the euro is undervalued. For instance, calculations in a working paper published by the IMF indicate
BIS Review 67/2000
6
that the nominal equilibrium exchange rate at the time of the introduction of the euro at the beginning
of 1999 was USD 1.26 per euro.3
Forecasts Norwegian krone
Market makers’ estimates
Expectations in money and foreign exchange markets seem to suggest that the euro is also considered
to be undervalued in relation to the Norwegian krone. Estimates from market-makers indicate that the
krone is expected to weaken against the euro over the next three to twelve months.
Chart 5
Other exchange rates
Index. January 1999=1000
The krone has depreciated against other currencies since the beginning of the year. It has weakened
considerably  against,  for  instance,  the  US  dollar  and  pound  sterling,  but  less  against  the  Swedish
krona.  Measured  by  the  trade-weighted  index calculated  as  a  monthly  average,  the  krone touched  a
record low level earlier this summer.
We  can  derive  indicators  of  market  expectations  concerning  future  exchange  rate  movements  and
inflation. Implied forward rates can be interpreted as the expected nominal interest rate between two
future  dates.  For  a  given  expected  real  interest  rate,  the  forward  rate  provides  some  indication  of
inflation expectations.
Chart 6
3 E Alberola, S Cervero, H Lopez and A Ubide (1999): “Global Equilibrium Exchange Rates: Euro, Dollar, “Ins”, “Outs”
and Other Major Currencies in a Panel Cointegration Framework”, IMF WP/99/175.
7
BIS Review 67/2000
Nordic forward rate differentials against DEM 16 August 2000
In the long term, ie up to ten years ahead, it is highly unlikely that market participants have specific
expectations  about  the  economic  situation.  If  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  is  the  same  between
countries, the differential between Norwegian and foreign long-term forward rates may be interpreted
as  the  differential  in  expected  inflation  plus  any  risk  premium.  The  risk  premium  may  be  partly
attributable to the limited volume of Norwegian financial markets. As such, the long-term forward rate
differential  between  Norway  and  Germany  may  be  interpreted  as  the  expected  inflation  differential
between Norway and the euro area in the future - plus any risk premium.
Chart  7  shows  that  the  forward  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  Germany,  ie  the  differential
between short-term interest rates at future dates, is gradually narrowing, and is not much greater than
for the other Nordic countries. I would like to emphasise, however, that calculations of this sort are
uncertain.
Probability distribution for NOK/EUR in one month
Chart 7
On  the  basis  of  the  prices  for  various  currency  options,  we  can  calculate  the  implied  probability
distribution for the krone exchange rate. In simple terms, one can say that the further to the left in the
diagram  the  figure  is,  the  higher  a  future  appreciation  of  the  krone  is  priced.  A  narrow,  symmetric
curve  -  or  a  bell  -  indicates  that  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  krone  exchange  rate  is
considered  to  be  relatively  slight,  and  that  the  risk  of  a  depreciation  or  appreciation  is  priced
BIS Review 67/2000
8
symmetrically.  The  chart  shows  that  the  implied  probability  distribution  for  the  krone  has  changed
over time. Uncertainty surrounding the future krone exchange rate appears to have diminished.
Probability distribution for USD/EUR in one month
Chart 8
The corresponding bell for the exchange rate between the euro and the US dollar indicates that there is
considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  exchange  rate  between  the  two  currencies.  Since
autumn 1999 this uncertainty has mounted, while at the same time the euro is expected to fall against
the US dollar.
Chart 9
GDP mainland Norway
Projections for 2000 from Inflation Reports December 1998 to June 2000
The assessment of the economic outlook has changed over the past 18 months. A year and a half ago
(in the March and June 1999 Inflation Reports) we forecast a period of slower growth in the mainland
economy. We were uncertain as to how long it would take for the decline to be reversed. The basis for
these  projections  was  high  cost  increases  peculiar  to  Norway  following  the  1998  wage  settlement,
together with low international demand in the wake of the Asian crisis, low oil prices, sluggish price
trends for other Norwegian export goods, and major restructuring in key manufacturing sectors.
9
BIS Review 67/2000
We assumed that there was a relatively high risk of a major recession. The greatest uncertainty with
regard to setting interest rates was linked to developments in the sheltered sector, where price and cost
pressures remained strong. A relatively tight central government budget for 1999 laid the foundations
for curbing growth in the sheltered sector.
On the basis of these analyses and the approved government budget for 1999, Norges Bank announced
that it would be easing its monetary policy stance. The key rates were lowered in five stages by a total
of  2.5  percentage  points  in  the  course  of  the  first  nine  months  of  1999.  This  helped  stabilise  the
Norwegian economy, and hence the krone.
The outlook for the global economy and the Norwegian economy improved unexpectedly quickly. It
now appears that the period of slower growth in the Norwegian economy was in fact over by summer
1999. The upswing in the global economy spread to the Norwegian economy through strong export
growth  and  higher  prices  for  Norwegian  exports.  At  the  same  time,  demand  in  the  sheltered  sector
remained  buoyant.  There  was  also  slippage  in  government  budget  spending  allocations  throughout
1999.
Private  consumption  continues  to  rise,  fixed  investment  is  increasing  in  service  sectors,  and
unemployment remains low.
The decline in petroleum investment is necessitating restructuring and lower production levels in some
Norwegian manufacturing sectors. Developments so far indicate that this turnaround has been offset
by continued high employment growth in the public sector, private services and non-petroleum-related
manufacturing.
Chart 10
Wage shares by industry
Labour costs as a percentage of factor income
However, enterprises’ financial position is vulnerable. The growth in labour costs in the latter half of
the 1990s left its mark on profitability. Both in manufacturing and other industries, labour costs as a
percentage of factor income have increased since the mid-1990s.
The  analysis  in  the  June  2000  Inflation  Report  indicates  that  consumer  price  inflation  in  2001  and
2002 may exceed levels which are consistent with exchange rate stability over time. The risk of rising
wage  and  price  inflation  has  increased,  while  there  now  appears  to  be  little  risk  of  a  pronounced
recession over the next two years.
On the basis of developments in the Norwegian economy and the future outlook, Norges Bank raised
its key rates by 0.25 percentage point as of 13 April, by 0.5 percentage point as of 15 June  and  by
0.5 percentage point as of 10 August. As already mentioned, this represents a substantial step in the
adjustment  of  the  interest  rate  that  is  appropriate  on  the  basis  of  the  analyses  in  the  June  Inflation
BIS Review 67/2000
10
Report. However, in the light of recent trends in the economy and the balance of risks, the probability
that the next change in interest rates will be an increase is greater than the probability of a reduction.
Coordination of economic policy
The experience of the 1970s and 1980s shows that, in the long term, monetary policy is not suitable
for influencing competitiveness or  the  size  of the internationally  exposed  sector.  Any  attempt  to  do
this  through  the  use  of  monetary  policy  instruments  will  inevitably  lead  to  instability.  However,
fundamental real economic forces of this kind can be shaped through the use of fiscal policy.
Although monetary policy is not suitable for influencing competitiveness, exchange rate fluctuations
may  provide  an  early  warning  that  the  internationally  exposed  sector  is  on  the  verge  of  losing  or
gaining strength in the contest for economic resources. A sound basis for exchange rate stability is a
fiscal policy which manages to smooth fluctuations in domestic demand and production, coupled with
well functioning income determination. The primary difference between Norway and countries which
have chosen to base their monetary policy regime on an inflation target is to be found in the interaction
between monetary policy and fiscal policy.
The role of the Petroleum Fund
The  Norwegian  economy  is  small  and  open.  Fluctuations  in  oil  prices  and  oil  revenues  pose  a
considerable  challenge  to  Norwegian  economic  policy.  The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  plays  an
important  role  in  stabilising  developments  in  the  mainland  economy.  A  large  portion  of  the  central
government’s  oil  and  gas  revenues  is  invested  abroad  through  the  Petroleum  Fund.  Balance  in  the
Norwegian  krone  market  is  maintained  by  investing  foreign  exchange  earnings  abroad,  thereby
curbing the effect of fluctuations in oil prices on the krone exchange rate.
Some  of  the  petroleum  revenues  are  used  to  finance  central  government  budget  expenditure.  The
portion  used  by  oil  companies  in  Norway,  partly  to  finance  investment,  also  has  an  effect  on  the
mainland economy.
The  portion  of  central  government  oil  revenues  that  is  not  used  domestically  is  credited  to  the
Petroleum Fund’s account in Norges Bank. Norges Bank acquires foreign exchange equivalent to the
allocation to the Petroleum Fund. Foreign exchange earnings from the state’s direct financial interest
in oil activities (SDFI) are transferred directly to Norges Bank, while the remainder is purchased in the
market. The Petroleum Fund’s capital, as well as the return on this capital, is invested abroad.
The accumulation of capital in the Petroleum Fund serves as a channel for distributing oil revenues
among  generations  and  contributes  to  stable  government  finances  in  the  long  term.  The  larger  the
Petroleum Fund is, the less dependent we will be on petroleum revenues in the future.
The  Petroleum  Fund  shall  also  serve  as  a  buffer  against  short-term  fluctuations  in  oil  revenues.  As
large portions of the revenues from oil activities accrue to the state, fluctuations in oil prices and oil
revenues will primarily result in changes in allocations to the Petroleum Fund. Since all of the capital
in  the  Petroleum  Fund  is  invested  abroad,  such  changes  will  in  principle  not  influence  the  level  of
activity in the economy. This makes the Norwegian economy more robust to fluctuations in oil prices
and thus less dependent on oil, even in the short run.
11
BIS Review 67/2000
Chart 11
Petroleum activity in 2000
We may say that oil revenues enter the Norwegian economy through an external and internal circular
flow. The  distinction  between the external and internal  circular flow is important  for  exchange  rate
stability. This means, among other things, that short-term changes in oil prices shall not influence the
orientation of economic policy. If the distinction between the two circular flows were to break down,
and the use of oil revenues were to fluctuate more in step with oil prices, we would have an unstable
economy, and hence an unstable exchange rate.
Let  us  assume  that  the  oil  price  temporarily  increased  by  NOK 10  per  barrel,  or  a  little  less  than
USD 1.50 per barrel. This is a small change in oil prices, well within normal variations from one year
to the next. Central government revenues - and thus the budget surplus - would then increase by about
NOK 8 billion the first year and NOK 10-11 billion the following year, which is equivalent to nearly
1%  of  Norway’s  annual  GDP.  If  the  higher  revenues  are  used  in  the  economy  through  higher
expenditure or reduced taxes  in  the  central  government  budget, aggregate  domestic  demand  will  be
affected. Higher expenditure requires an increase in the public sector’s use of real resources, primarily
labour.  One  per  cent  of  GDP  is  then  a  substantial  figure.  If  the  increase  in  oil  revenues  is  used
domestically  in  this  way,  it  would  correspond  to  nearly  half  of  the  annual  growth  in  the  mainland
economy in a normal year. If the private sector of the economy is also expanding, and the economy is
already close to capacity limits,  this policy  will  swiftly  lead  to strong  pressures  on  resources  in the
economy.  This  will  result  in  a  rise  in  wages  and  prices.  This  policy  would  also  lead  to  unstable
conditions in the foreign exchange market. The idea behind the Petroleum Fund is that the revenues
from an increase in oil prices of this magnitude shall accrue to the Petroleum Fund and be invested
abroad, and that the increase in oil prices shall not influence the rest of the budget. In that case higher
revenues  will  not  influence  the  domestic  economy,  but  be  invested  abroad  through  the  Petroleum
Fund.
Structural features of the capital account balance
The  current  account  surpluses  are  related  to  substantial  earnings  from  oil  and  gas  exports.  These
revenues accrue to the state and oil companies and the capital paid in provides a basis for exports of
capital.  In  the  last  five  years  the  central  government  has  exported  capital  not  least  through  the
Petroleum Fund’s investments.
BIS Review 67/2000
12
Balance of payment
Selected items 1996-1999
In NOK billions
When  petroleum  revenues  are  excluded,  the  current  account  shows  large  deficits.  In  recent  years,
however, capital outflows from some sectors of the mainland economy have been considerable. Large
asset managers such as life insurance companies and securities funds accumulated substantial holdings
of foreign equities and bonds in the last half of the 1990s. Portfolio investment abroad reflects a desire
to  diversify.  In  the  period  1996-May  2000  the  capital  outflow  from  the  Petroleum  Fund,  insurance
companies and securities funds came to  altogether  NOK 350  billion.  In  the  same  period the current
account surplus came to NOK 220 billion.
This capital outflow has largely been matched by loans raised abroad by banks and other Norwegian
enterprises. Norwegian banks have been an important importer of foreign capital. Net capital inflows
to  banks  amounted  to  about  NOK 140  billion  in  this  period,  with  short-term  capital  accounting  for
almost half.
Chart 12
Banks’ gross foreign debt
Percent of lending
13
BIS Review 67/2000
Since 1995 there has been a shift towards higher foreign funding in the banking sector. Banks have
financed the widening difference between customer deposits and lending from foreign sources. Chart
12  shows  that  a  large  portion  of  foreign  borrowing  has  been  short-term.  In  1998,  lending  growth
slowed and customer deposits increased, and growth in banks’ foreign debt came to a halt.
In recent years we have thus recorded exports of long-term capital that are considerably higher than
the current account surplus. The substantial net outflow of long-term capital from the private sector
may partly reflect a thin Norwegian capital market. The Norwegian bond market is not very developed
and the value of equities in the Norwegian market in relation to GDP is very low.
Net fixed investment rate and productivity growth in manufacturing
Percent
Chart 13
It is also worth noting that according to highly uncertain national accounts figures, fixed investment is
now at a very low level and there is little growth in productivity in Norwegian manufacturing. There
are  few  signs  at  the  moment  that  the  “new  economy”  has  reached  this  segment  of  the  Norwegian
business sector.
The trend towards net exports of long-term capital, as seen in the table, and the tentative explanations
that  have  been  provided  may  shed  some  light  on  why  the  effective  krone  exchange  rate  has  been
relatively weak for the last few years, despite large current account surpluses and short-term interest
rates on a par with or higher than in other countries.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 67/2000
14
