Christian Noyer: The euro in 2000 - principal features
of the European Central Bank’s monetary policy
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Recoletos Forum,
held in Madrid, on 29 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you here at the Recoletos Forum in Madrid.
In order to provide you with the perspective of the European Central Bank (ECB) on the performance
of the euro as the single currency of the euro area, it will be helpful if I begin with a review of the
objective  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and  its  underlying  strategy,  as  well  as  the  operational
framework of the Eurosystem (ie the ECB and  the  11 national  central  banks  of  the  countries  which
have  introduced  the  euro).  After  I  have  made  some  comments  both  on  monetary  and  economic
developments which have taken place in the euro area and on the risks to price stability as they have
appeared in the first months of 2000, I shall outline the responsibilities of the individual policy areas in
achieving  and  sustaining  high  growth  in  an  environment  of  price  stability.  I  shall  then  discuss  the
euro’s role in the financial markets. Finally, I shall conclude with a view on the general prospects for
the euro area and its single currency.
The monetary policy objective, strategy and operational framework
As is well known, the main objective of the Eurosystem is the maintenance of price stability. From
today’s  perspective,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  seems  to  be  the  natural  objective  of  central
banks. Looking back at the postwar decades, however, reveals that this objective has not always been
assigned to central banks, even less achieved. At the same time, it shows the negative consequences of
a monetary policy which is not strictly geared towards price stability. In particular, the experience of
the  1970s  and  early  1980s  clearly  confirmed  the  following  three  principles:  first,  that  inflation  is  a
clear obstacle to sustained economic growth; second, that central banks cannot afford to pursue several
different, potentially contradicting objectives; and, finally, that their independence is essential in order
to secure this medium-term objective for the common good.
For this reason, the Eurosystem has been assigned the clear objective of maintaining price stability. In
order to make this objective more precise and explicit, the Governing Council of the ECB has decided
that  price  stability  should  be  defined  as  “a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%”. According to this definition, price stability
“is to be maintained over the medium term”.
In order for the Eurosystem to achieve price stability, there is a need for a clear strategy, for adequate
and timely monetary decisions and for an efficient operational framework, in order to ensure that these
decisions are effectively transmitted to the financial sector and ultimately to the whole economy.
Let me first say a few words about the Eurosystem’s strategy. It is based on two pillars, the first of
these being a prominent role for money, and the second a broadly based assessment of the outlook for
price developments. Inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon; thus, giving money a prominent
role in its monetary policy analysis is quite natural for a central bank geared towards price stability.
The important role assigned to money is reflected in the announcement of a reference value of 4½%
for  the  annual  growth  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  Current  M3  growth  is  analysed  and
interpreted  in  relation  to  this  reference  value.  Under  normal  conditions,  substantial  or  prolonged
deviations of monetary growth from the reference value would signal risks to price stability over the
medium term. For the euro area, this relationship is empirically well founded. Available econometric
evidence suggests the existence of a stable relationship between M3, the euro area price level and a
1
BIS Review 58/2000
small  number  of  other  area-wide  macroeconomic  variables.  Moreover,  there  is  solid  evidence  with
regard to the leading indicator properties of M3 for future price developments. While there can be no
doubt as to the relevance of monetary growth for inflation in the medium term, short-term changes in
the  stock  of  money  may  be  influenced  by  factors  unrelated  to  future  spending  and  future  inflation.
Thus, the Eurosystem does not react mechanically to short-term deviations of monetary growth from
the  reference  value.  Instead,  monetary  developments  are  analysed  very  carefully  in  order  to  extract
their  information  content  with  regard  to  future  inflation.  If  this  analysis  suggests  that  monetary
developments  are  a  threat  to  future  price  stability,  monetary  policy  will  respond  in  a  manner
appropriate to counter this risk.
In parallel with the monitoring of monetary aggregates, the ECB also pays close attention to various
other  indicators  which  may  signal  inflationary  risks  or  tensions:  this  is  the  second  pillar  of  the
monetary strategy. Indeed, while inflation is a monetary phenomenon over the long term, it is useful in
the  short  to  medium-term  to  detect those  inflationary  tensions  in  the  economy - reflected  in  various
real and financial indices - which are not captured by monetary aggregates.
With these two pillars and the various indicators, monetary policymaking in the euro area may appear
complex,  but  this  reflects  the  complexities  and  uncertainties  which  surround  the  transmission
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  in  modern  economies,  and,  even  more  so,  in  the  new  economic
environment  created  by  the  changeover  to  the  euro.  Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  must
rely on a whole range of indicators and on a variety of models which help to sharpen and crosscheck
the analysis.
The efficiency of monetary policy does not rely only on a careful analysis of the monetary, financial
and economic situation, but also on the ability to explain monetary policy decisions to the public in a
convincing manner. In the case of the Eurosystem, this is an even more arduous task than usual, as the
single monetary policy must cope with a new environment and be explained to a public from different
cultural  backgrounds  on  the  basis  of  new  indicators  and  data.  Our  choice  is  to  base  this
communication on transparency. This means that our external presentation of monetary  policy  must
fully reflect the internal analysis and discussions which take place within the Governing Council. I can
personally assure you that this is the case. Our internal discussions are organised in such a way as to
ensure  a  full  and  thorough  assessment  of  the  two  pillars  I  have  just  described.  Our  external
communications fully reflect this.
In addition to a well-defined and informed strategy, the monetary policy of the Eurosystem must rely
on an efficient operational framework, that is, on a set of instruments and procedures necessary for the
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Thus  far,  this  framework  has  proved  successful  in  clearly
signalling the stance of monetary policy, in steering short-term market interest rates and in providing
liquidity to the banking system in an efficient manner. At the heart of the framework are the weekly
refinancing operations which were conducted at interest rates broadly in the middle of the interest rate
corridor, which is set by the rates on the two standing facilities. A minimum reserve system ensures
the existence of a liquidity deficit in the banking system, which is necessary for the conduct of these
weekly open market operations. The credit institutions need only comply with the minimum reserve
requirement  on  average  within  the  reserve  period.  This  contributes  to  the  stabilisation  of  money
market developments. A key element for the functioning of the operational framework has been the
TARGET payment system. This payment system interlinks the 15 national real-time gross settlement
systems and the ECB’s payment system, by providing a uniform platform for the processing of cross-
border payments in real time. It has allowed a single interbank market interest rate across the euro area
to prevail.
Overall, the operational framework of the Eurosystem has proved efficient in providing liquidity to the
banking system. This does not mean that this framework is rigid. On the contrary, it must adapt to the
situation and evolution of the money market in the euro area. In this regard, the Eurosystem switched
from a fixed to a variable rate tender for its refinancing operations on 8 June 2000. Let me make clear
that  this  technical  decision  does  not  in  any  way  modify  the  stance  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary
policy,  nor  does  it  preclude  renewed  use  of  fixed  rate  tenders  in  the  future.  The  sole  aim  of  this
BIS Review 58/2000
2
changeover is to address the severe overbidding problem which developed in the context of the fixed
rate tender procedure.
Monetary and economic developments in the euro area
Turning from theory to practice, I shall now consider current monetary and economic developments in
the euro area.
As you know, the Governing Council of the ECB raised the rate of its main refinancing operation, and
that of the deposit facility and the marginal lending facility by 0.5 percentage points to 4.25%, 3.25%
and 5.25% respectively on 8 June. This decision was based on the conclusion that both pillars of the
monetary policy strategy pointed to upward risks to price stability in the euro area in the medium term.
Let me elaborate on this.
With  regard  to  monetary  developments,  M3  growth  has  deviated  from  its  reference  value  since  the
beginning  of  1999.  This  deviation  has  increased  further  since  the  beginning  of  2000.  Thus,  the
three-month  average  of the  annual  growth  rates  of M3,  covering  the  period  from  February  to  April
2000,  increased  from  5.9%  in  the  preceding  three-month  period,  to  6.3%.  As  a  consequence,  the
deviation  of  M3  growth  from  the  reference  value  of  4½%  rose  to  almost  2 percentage  points.  The
assessment  of  there  being  ample  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  was  further  supported  by  the  continuing
rapid expansion of lending to the private sector. The annual growth rate of lending to the private sector
stood at a very high level throughout 1999 and in the first few months of 2000. Important determinants
underlying  this  development  are  strong  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  very  favourable
industrial and consumer confidence. It must also be noted that real lending rates, although they have
been  rising  since  the  spring  of  last  year,  are  still  lower  in  real  terms  than  those  observed  at  the
beginning of 1999. Overall, money and credit developments signalled an upward risk to price stability
which had to be counteracted.
The new monetary data for May which was released this morning broadly confirmed this assessment.
The three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3, covering the period from March to May
2000 remained unchanged at 6.3% and loans to the private sector continued to grow rapidly.
Let me now discuss the outlook for growth and inflation. This is a rather pleasant task, as the prospects
for strong growth are very favourable. Indeed, let me reiterate our conviction that they have not been
this favourable in many  years. If central bankers are famous for anything, it  would  normally  be for
guarded rather than for exuberant views. So, for a central banker, this assessment is quite something. I
therefore hasten to fill you in on some of the underlying details.
The consensus view emerging from the forecasts currently available is that of strong economic growth
of  over  3%  in  the  euro  area  both  this  year  and  next.  This  is  clearly  more  than  most  forecasters
expected  at  the  end  of  last  year,  when  projections  were  still  very  much  made  in  the  light  of  the
previous crises witnessed in emerging market economies. Since then, there has been a strong upturn in
growth in the second half of last year. Available short-term indicators suggest that growth will also be
strong in the first half of this year, in line with current forecasts.
The positive outlook for euro area growth incorporated in current forecasts is supported by favourable
conditions for growth from both the domestic and the external side. The growth in domestic demand
has proved highly robust in the face of the slowdown which followed the Asian crises. The fact that
confidence indicators are currently at or close to record highs is fuelling  expectations that  domestic
demand  growth  will  also  be  strong  this  year  and  next.  Continued  strong  employment  growth  and
increasing  capacity  utilisation,  among  other  factors,  should  underpin  the  expansion  of  private
consumption and investment. On the external side, there are now increasing signs that the upturn in
growth  in  the  global  economy  has  been  stronger,  more  rapid  and  more  broadly  based  than  was
expected at the end of last year. Reflecting this favourable external environment, the growth in euro
area exports should remain strong.
3
BIS Review 58/2000
There are, of course, some uncertainties surrounding euro area growth prospects. These come mainly
from the external side. They are mostly linked to a possible pronounced slowdown in the US economy
and the ensuing negative effects on the growth of the world economy.
In the present context of strong growth, the outlook for inflation should be examined thoroughly. In
this regard, the risks to price stability remained persistently, up until our recent decision on interest
rates, on the upside. According to the forecasts currently available, consumer price inflation in 2000
and 2001 is generally projected to be slightly below 2%. This is clearly higher than was expected in
the respective forecasts at the end of last year and early this year. We should, of course, bear in mind
that these forecasts are snapshots of economic prospects as they appear at a particular point in time.
They  are  typically  surrounded  by  a  fair  degree  of  uncertainty  and  they  are  highly  conditional  on  a
number  of  specific  assumptions.  Oil  prices  and  exchange  rates  are  prominent  examples  of  such
forecast  assumptions.  The  movements  in  these  variables  in  the  past  few  months  show  how  quickly
such  assumptions  can  move  out  of  line  with  actual  developments.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  the
forecasts  currently  available,  some  of  these  explicitly  assume  that  short-term  interest  rates  will  rise
over the forecast period. I think that it is fair to say that without this assumption projected inflation
would most likely have been higher in the forecasts concerned.
Thus, the inflation outlook for the euro area gave a very clear signal to monetary policy: namely that
there was no reason for complacency and that monetary policy had to react. The developments in oil
prices and the exchange rate have led to a strong rise in import prices. The (lagged) effects of this rise
in consumer prices are unlikely to have fully materialised as yet. In the context of the aforementioned
prospects for strong economic growth in the euro area, the protracted rise in import price inflation in
the past few months clearly gave rise to a greater danger of a spillover to domestic sources of inflation,
such  as,  for  instance,  firms  aiming  at  raising  or  restoring  profit  margins.  These  risks  had  to  be
counteracted.
With our monetary policy we are contributing to the conditions for high, sustained, non-inflationary
growth. Since November of last year, the Governing Council of the ECB has decided to raise interest
rates by a total of 175 basis points. Admittedly, this is not negligible. Given the strong economic data,
the continuously high level of confidence and the continued strong growth of money and credit, the
increase  in  interest  rates  does  not  mean  that  the  ECB  has  put  the  brakes  on  growth.  Economic
expansion  in  the  euro  area  is  now  strong  enough  not  to  be  hurt  by  a  gradual  adjustment  of  the
monetary  policy  stance. The interest  rate  moves  are providing  a  clear  signal  to  market  participants,
social  partners  and  policymakers  that  the  ECB  is  determined  to  counter  inflationary  dangers  in  a
timely fashion, and that the prospects for price stability in the euro area remain good. This is also of
great importance for the longer-term potential of the euro.
The responsibilities of individual policy areas in ensuring sustained non-inflationary growth
This brings me to a crucial issue: the single currency is the joint responsibility of all policymakers and
Member States. Monetary policy is strictly geared towards the maintenance of price stability and thus
also makes an important contribution to strong growth in output and employment. However, monetary
policy  needs the support of  other  policy  areas.  This  is  best  achieved  by  having  specific  roles,  clear
mandates and agreed responsibilities for the individual policy areas. Let  me  go  into  these in a  little
more detail.
The  best  contribution  which  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustainable  growth  is  to  achieve  price
stability.  Indeed,  inflation  entails  numerous  costs  and  creates  an  uncertain  economic  environment.
This is harmful to an optimal allocation of resources and thus hampers economic growth. Some costs
of inflation are quite tangible, as is the case with those induced by the periodic revision of prices and
indices or the increasing cost and time spent in cash transactions. More generally, increased inflation
is  accompanied  by  increased  volatility  of  inflation.  Stable  high  inflation  has  almost  never  been
observed,  and  is  seemingly  a  contradiction  in  terms.  This  volatility  of  inflation  creates  uncertainty
which  affects  economic  and  social  decisions.  For  instance,  wage  negotiations  and  settlements  are
complicated by the necessity of establishing some form of indexing system with frequent revisions;
interest rates incorporate a risk premium, which increases the cost of financing; the volume and the
BIS Review 58/2000
4
direction of long-term saving and of investment are affected by unnecessary uncertainty with regard to
the future level of prices. Finally, as high inflation is never well predicted, price increases will create
undue wealth transfers between economic agents or sectors. This will bias the indicators of economic
return,  and  divert  time  and  resources  for  the  purposes  of  either  sheltering  or  taking  profit  from
inflation.
To summarise, price stability is a  prerequisite for  the  efficient functioning  of  the  system  of  relative
prices. A well-functioning relative price mechanism reflects the demand for, and cost of, goods and
services in a market economy and allows an optimal allocation of real and financial resources.
The contribution made by price stability to sustainable growth also has a social aspect. In the long run,
economic  growth is likely  to  be  affected  by  a  situation  in  which  undue  and  non-transparent  wealth
transfers occur, which give rise to social discontent and eventually undermine the stability of society.
For  instance,  inflation  creates  a  well-established  fiscal  bias,  as  tax  bands  may  not  be  sufficiently
updated or because interest incomes are taxed, whereas they incorporate a risk premium which does
not  constitute  an  effective  income  in  itself,  but  rather  compensates  for  the  depreciation  of  financial
capital.  In  addition,  inflation  mostly  affects  social  classes  less  able  to  protect  themselves  against
changes in nominal prices, if only because the larger part of their financial assets is held in a current
account  with  no  or  fixed  interest.  Moreover,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  inflation  tends  to  discourage
long-term saving, especially that directed towards pension funds. This prevents people from securing
their savings for long-term purposes in a reliable way. In the long run this could affect the people’s
sense of belonging to society.
As John Stuart Mill once said, money (we might say price stability) is one of those instruments whose
importance  is  only  felt  when  put  out  of  order.  Over  the  last  century,  the  European  economies  and
societies have had sufficient experience of this to value the wisdom of this judgement. Times may, of
course, have changed. You may think that this concern is now a bit old-fashioned. I would just say that
monitoring  and  combating  inflationary  pressures  is  a  permanent  task.  It  is  an  essential  feature  of  a
market  economy  that  it  will  generate  inflationary  or,  less  often,  deflationary  tensions  from  time  to
time. It is not because the river is regulated that the dam is useless!
What about the other policy areas? How can they best contribute to sustaining high non-inflationary
growth?  Taking  stock  of  the  broad  policy  developments  currently  observed  in  the  euro  area  might
suggest  that  there  is  little  to  worry  about.  Recent  wage  settlements  have  been  relatively  moderate,
public finances have improved, deregulation and liberalisation are under way in a number of sectors,
and  there  are  signs  that  labour  markets  are  gradually  becoming  less  rigid.  However,  while  it  is
acknowledged  that  progress  is  being  made,  it  is  also  clear  that  there  is  still  quite  some  way  to  go.
Further  efforts  are  required  in  all  these  policy  areas  in  order  to  create  the  best  conditions  for  the
current  upswing  in  economic  activity  to  be  turned  into  a  period  of  sustained  strong  growth  in  an
environment of price stability.
For fiscal policies the challenge and opportunity is to use the current economic expansion to intensify
the necessary further consolidation of public finances. In a number of Member States the budgetary
situation is still too far from reaching the targets specified in the Stability and Growth Pact, namely
that budgets are to be in surplus or at least close to balance. Moreover, the recent reduction in deficits
has  been  greatly  helped  by  the  relatively  low  levels  of  interest  rates  and  by  improving  economic
conditions.  According  to  most  forecasts,  fiscal  trends  over  this  year  and  the  next  even  point  to  a
procyclical  stance  rather  than  to  prudent  anticyclical  policies.  The  overriding  goal  for  fiscal  policy
should be to shelter governments’ budgets from normal cyclical fluctuations, but also from unexpected
shortfalls  in  revenues  and  interest  rate  increases.  In  addition,  governments’  budgetary  policies  also
need  to  urgently  address  longer-term  issues  in  the  context  of  the  imminent  problem  of  ageing
populations. Many governments are as yet insufficiently prepared for this problem, inasmuch as they
are  still  highly  indebted  and  are  not  pursuing  the  structural  reform  of  public  transfer  systems  with
sufficient vigour.
The assessment that much has been achieved, but that, at the same time, much remains to be done, also
holds  true  in  the  case  of  general  economic  policies.  The  structural  reform  of  labour  and  product
markets remains the key to achieving significant reductions in unemployment. There is by now broad
5
BIS Review 58/2000
consensus on the fact that the larger part of the still very high level of unemployment in the euro area
is  of  a  structural  nature.  Only  flexible  labour  markets  will  prevent  bottlenecks  from  emerging  and
triggering upward pressures on prices at a relatively early stage of the current economic upswing.
Looking  at  the  regulatory  reform  process  across  the  euro  area,  a  good  deal  of  deregulation  and
liberalisation  of  previously  sheltered  sectors  have  taken  place  in  recent  years.  There  remains
significant scope for further action along these lines. In regulated industries, a low level of competition
is often accompanied by a high level of public ownership. Privatisation and regulatory reform should
thus be seen as mutually reinforcing measures. The favourable impact of such measures in terms of
lower price increases has become clear in the case of the telecommunications and energy sectors. This
should  be  encouragement  enough  to  step  up  efforts  in  other  sectors.  Notwithstanding  significant
demands on labour mobility in the short term, increased competition in  previously  sheltered  sectors
will usually result in longer-term employment gains.
Responsible  wage  policies  are  of  crucial  importance  for  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  and  the
creation of  new jobs. Wage  growth  has  been  relatively  moderate  in  the  past  year. The  outcomes  of
recent  wage  bargaining  in  the  individual  Member  States  signal  that  it  will  also  remain  moderate
throughout the current year, and possibly next year too. What is required is lasting wage moderation
which simultaneously ensures consistency with price stability and allows for net employment gains. In
times of high unemployment, this means that real wage increases should not fully exploit productivity
increases.  By  accepting  these  responsibilities,  the  social  partners  would  be  acting  in  their  own
interests. Monetary policy needs to, and will, be conducted in such a way that the partners in the wage
bargaining process can be confident that price stability will be maintained.
Overall, the point which I made earlier in respect of monetary policy also holds for other policy areas:
there is no reason for complacency. At the same time, with all the appropriate policies in place, the
momentum of sustainable non-inflationary growth could eventually be even stronger than is currently
anticipated. This would indeed mean a great step for the euro into the year 2000 and beyond.
The euro and the financial markets
The  creation  of  the  euro  has  accelerated  the  development  and  integration  of  the  capital  markets  in
Europe, which, in recent years, have also been fostered by financial liberalisation and technological
innovation. This also contributes to high growth, as more efficient financial markets help in allocating
funds  to  their  best  use.  In  effect,  the  single  currency  has  removed  the  exchange  risk  between  the
countries  of  the  euro  area.  It  is  facilitating  the  standardisation  of  debt  instruments  and  their
management on a larger scale. This integrative effect of the euro has been most evident in the money
market,  by  virtue  of,  in  particular,  the  establishment  of  TARGET,  the  large-value  payment  system.
This integration has shown itself in, for example, the rapid adoption by the market of reference rates
for the euro area, such as the EONIA overnight rate or the EURIBOR for maturities of less than one
year. Above all, we have seen a total convergence in short-term interest rates within the euro area.
In  bond  markets,  the  integration  of  markets  remains  incomplete,  owing,  for  instance,  to  national
differences in respect of taxation, accounting and supervisory regulations and payment and settlement
systems. Nevertheless, the integration of bond markets is progressing. We have seen European bond
indices become standardised. The differences in rates between sovereign issues within the euro area
fell substantially in 1998. Furthermore, 1999 was characterised by a spectacular growth in euro bonds
issued by private non-financial firms. These issues increased by almost 300% in 1999, as compared
with 1998. The increase was particularly large for issues with a lower rating. For example, issues with
a Baa rating increased by 500%, albeit from a very low level. From a global perspective, the growth in
the  bond  market  is  contributing  to  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro.  In  1999,  international  bond
issues  denominated  in  euro  amounted  to  40%  of  total  worldwide  bond  issues.  This  constitutes  an
amount comparable with bond issues denominated in US dollars.
In the same way, the integration of stock markets is progressing, although they will have to overcome
barriers  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  I  have  just  mentioned  in  relation  to  the  bond  markets.  A
notable increase in transactions on the new European indices has been observed. Moreover, the “new
BIS Review 58/2000
6
markets”, with growth figures benefiting greatly from the establishment of the large European market,
have expanded considerably. Finally, the announcement of stock exchange alliances and mergers over
recent months reflects the logic of stock market integration and will accelerate the process.
As I have said, the broadening of the capital markets and their greater integration are contributing to a
more efficient allocation of savings. First, this development is leading to lower transaction costs and is
increasing the liquidity of the traded instruments. This, in turn, will contribute, all other things being
equal,  to  reducing  the  absolute  level  of  interest  rates.  Second,  it  is  multiplying  investment
opportunities, increasing the range on offer and fuelling competition between issuers. Meanwhile, the
deeper  market  calls  for  a  restructuring  of  and  rationalisation  in  the  finance  industry.  This  should
strengthen the management of savings in Europe. To illustrate this trend, let me recall that the total
value of mergers and acquisitions involving banks in the euro area clearly exceeded the already high
level  recorded  in  1998.  In  1999  it  was  also  above  the  level  for  similar  transactions  reported  in  the
United States.
Conclusion
As I said in my introduction, price stability is the principal objective of the Eurosystem. It is on the
basis of this general objective that we assess real and financial developments. It is also the principal
criterion  on  which  monetary  policy  should  be  judged.  This  principle  of  price  stability  can  be
considered  a  major  precondition  for  sustainable  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  the  years  to  come.  The
current  environment  is  favourable:  the  business  cycle  in  the  euro  area  is  oriented  upwards,
technological innovation is contributing to more efficient production schemes, the creation of the euro
is a powerful factor in restructuring European economies and unemployment is falling as a result of, in
part, structural reforms implemented by governments. It is up to economic policymakers in the euro
area  to  pursue  liberalisation,  flexibility,  fiscal  consolidation  and  public  efficiency.  It  is  up  to
consumers and producers to reap all the benefits of this favourable environment.
7
BIS Review 58/2000
