Gazi Erçel: Risk management - within reserve management policies
Opening remarks by Mr Gazi Erçel, Governor of the Central Bank of Turkey, in the Conference titled
“Current issues in reserves management for central banks in Europe, Middle East and North Africa”
which has been organized by the World Bank Treasury in Istanbul on 4-5 May 2000.
 I am delighted to be with you today to offer some general remarks about reserve management, and our
approach to risk management, at the Central Bank of Turkey. Before starting my speech, I would like
to thank the World Bank for organizing this conference which, I believe, will be most beneficial to all
of us. I am sure most of the important subjects related to new developments in reserve management
will be covered in detail at this meeting. However, let me briefly comment on recent developments in
managing  risk  within  reserve  management  and  share  our  experience  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey
with you.
A  string  of  disaster  stories  dominated  the  financial  news  coverage  during  the  last  two  decades.  A
variety  of  factors  could  be  cited  as  possible  causes  of  these  events.  They  include  shortcomings  in
economic  policy,  inadequate  supervision  and,  in  most  cases,  poor  risk  management  by  the  market
players themselves. Beyond that, the basic issue is the financial system’s vulnerability to unforeseen
events. We all learned much from these bad experiences but we are living in a changing world. These
changes can be good or bad for those affected by them. Change therefore leads to risk, the prospect of
gain or loss and the risk of loss is something that we must all be aware of. To be aware of risks does
not  mean  eliminating  them  from  our  lives,  which  is  certainly  impossible,  nor  does  it  mean  that  we
should do nothing about risks and accept consequences fatalistically. It means: we must manage risk.
To manage risks we must decide what risks to avoid and how we can avoid them; what risks to accept
and on what terms to accept them; what new risks to take on and so on.
Both theory and practice of risk management have developed enormously in the last two and a half
decades.  The  theory  has  developed  to  the  point  where  the  risk  management  is  now  regarded  as  a
distinct sub-field of the theory of finance and risk management has become a separate subject in the
master’s and MBA programs. The subject has attracted a huge amount of intellectual energy not just
from finance specialists but also from specialists in physics. The most important factor contributed to
this  transformation  of  risk  management  was,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  the  high  level  of
instability in financial markets. The other factors were rapid developments in information technology,
huge  increase  in  trading  activity  and  development  of  new  financial  instruments,  namely,  derivative
instruments.
As  a  result  of  these  developments  along  with  the  globalization  of  financial  markets,  every  trading
institution has become more exposed to changes all over the world economies and financial markets.
This has led all institutions including central banks to develop new processes in their organizations to
manage the risks in a more systematic way, although they used to have had implicit risk management
practice. Parallel to these developments in risk management, the practice of reserve management by
most  of  the  central  banks  has  changed  significantly  over  the  last  decade.  Once  characterized  by
passive short-term investment strategies to preserve principal value and maintain maximum liquidity,
many central banks now use a broad range of instruments, extend their portfolio duration and develop
performance benchmarks. This increased attention to risk management and new approach to reserve
management by central banks has come about not because of any change in central bank missions, but
because of the growing recognition that the conduct of core businesses inevitably involve exposure to
financial  risks  and  also  because  of  increased  attention  to  the  contribution  of  central  bank  profits  to
national treasuries. Advances in financial risk management brought  more scope for central banks to
consider  increasing  their  portfolio  returns  together  with  maintaining  the  desired  level  of  liquidity,
which is the primary target for central banks.
1
BIS Review 38/2000
identifying the key financial flows;
determining the appropriate time horizon;
Then, the important question of how an effective risk management system can be developed, comes
out.  The  answer  to  this  question  does  not  change  depending  on  the  objectives  and  the  size  of  the
institution.  Only  for  more  complex  organizations,  a  more  extensive  technological  infrastructure  is
needed.  Let’s come  to  the  answer to  the  question then.  To  have  a  well  established,  in  other  words,
efficient risk management system, first we need to develop the risk culture within our organizations
meaning that we need to make sure that at all levels every person understands the risks the institution
is exposed to. It is the responsibility of top management to provide that kind of information by having
a clear approach to risk, its appetite for risk and assigning responsibility for assuming and controlling
risks.  Therefore,  the  first  step  in  risk  management  process  is  to  identify  the  risks  the  institution  is
exposed  to  and  to  quantify  those  risks.  Effective  risk  management  requires  that  a  consistent
methodology  be  developed  for  analyzing  risk.  Important  steps  in  risk  management  analysis  are  as
follows:
• 
• 
• 
• 
As you all know, most progress has been made in the measurement of market risk and much work is
now being done in many places to construct models for a better management of credit risk. Difficulties
with credit risk measurement lies in the lack of statistics about individual default probabilities. Even if
these default probabilities can be estimated reasonably accurately, it is still rather difficult to combine
them into portfolio assessments. The reason for that partly stems from the lack of statistical knowledge
about  the  interaction  between  variables.  Therefore,  the  models  mostly  tend  to  rest  on  simplified
assumptions based on subjective judgments. I do not want to go into details about the technical aspects
of the risk measurement methods, but I would like to emphasize that it is necessary to combine them
with sound judgment and common sense. Since these models are no more than simplified and limited
images of the real world, they are better to be used having this fact in mind and the decisions must be
taken not solely relying on the results of these models. The results should be supported with scenario
analysis, stress testing and most importantly with the sound judgment of the decision makers.
defining the institution’s return objectives and views toward risk.
setting a benchmark;
Another  important  aspect  of  risk  analysis  is  that  it  should  be  integrated,  meaning  that  the  analysis
results for different risk types should be comparable with each other to facilitate decision making. It
necessitates that the assumptions, data, valuation models used in analyzing different types of risks be
the  same  or  at  least  consistent  with  each  other.  Organizationally,  the  integration  of  risk  analysis
requires that there be a single, common risk management authority for the whole organization.
At the beginning, it might not be easy to look at risk on an institution wide basis. Since it requires a
considerable  amount  of  capital  to  be  invested  either  in  terms  of  technology,  or  in  terms  of  staff.
Besides that, the risk management system must be flexible enough to adjust to the rapid developments
in this area. So, at the end, the risk management system should be established in a way to allow the
management to compare risk on a consistent “apples for apples” basis even for those risk factors such
as operational and legal risk, where limited data is available.
As I mentioned earlier, the management not only has to set standards for its risk policies but also has
to ensure that they are disseminated to and understood by the staff who are affected by them. I think
this point is worth restressing since it is impossible to launch the risk culture without ensuring those
kind of communication channels in the organization.
 At this stage, I would like to say a few words about reporting and monitoring which are important
steps to complete the risk management process. Reporting and monitoring is really important to check
the  system’s  efficiency.  Because  of  this,  the  risk  management  function  has  to  have  an  independent
reporting  line  to  provide  assurance  that  the  institution  is  assessing  its  risks  effectively,  and  is
complying  with  its  own  risk  management  standards.  With  this  functionality,  reporting  is  the  key
component of any risk process, because it is basically the window into the risk management results
and  the  means  of  communicating  risks  the  institution  is  exposed  to.  Therefore,  data  collection  and
BIS Review 38/2000
2
processing need to be highly efficient so that accurate risk results are available in time and within the
necessary level of confidentiality.
At the Central Bank of Turkey, we established a risk management division about two years ago. The
need for such a division came as a result of multiple factors. These factors can be grouped into two as
external  and  internal. The external  ones as  I  have  just  mentioned in the first  part  of  my  speech  are
rising volatilities in financial markets, rapid developments in information technology, huge increase in
trading activity and development of new financial instruments along with the globalization of financial
markets. The internal  factors are accumulation  of net  reserves starting  from  1997  and  the  increased
responsibility of our bank in terms of its leading role in the Turkish financial markets.
As our work on risk management has progressed during the establishment process, we have seen that
our reserve management needed to be restructured to have an efficient risk management. Within this
context, although we did not change our primary objectives of having enough liquidity and preserving
safety,  we  decided  to  consider  the  return  factor  also.  Therefore,  we  separated  our  reserves  into
different  tranches  serving  different  purposes,  one  for  operational,  one  for  liquidity  and  one  for
investment  as  in  the  case  of  most  central  banks  changing  their  approach  to  reserve  management.
Within  this  framework,  we  developed  a  performance  benchmark  for  our  reserves  to  evaluate  our
performance  on  a  risk-adjusted  basis.  The  benchmark  reflecting  the  neutral  position  has  been
constructed in line with the objectives, the asset-liability structure and the liquidity needs of the bank
for a one-year period. And it is going to be reconsidered periodically.
The  Risk  Management  Division  in  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  is  in  the  process  of  establishing  a
system to carry out risk analysis and to feed the results to the appropriate units. For the last year or so,
duration and Value at Risk (VaR) figures reflecting interest rate and currency risks of the FX reserves,
and liquidity indicators such as current ratio (percentage of liquid assets in total of liabilities) are being
observed. However, these reports are not yet part of a comprehensive risk measurement and control
system. Although they give an idea of the general level of market and liquidity risk levels, the actual
risk exposure will be clearly seen only after the reserves portfolio is restructured and the benchmarks
are included in these reports.
The risk management process related to market risk that we plan includes daily marking to market of
benchmark  portfolios;  monitoring  risk  limits  determined  in  terms  of  currency  and  duration  limits;
daily  measurement  of  actual  portfolio’s  VaR  figures  for  currency  and  interest  rate  exposure;
monitoring liquidity ratios and reporting these figures to the top management weekly including stress
testing  report.  There  is  no  specified  global  risk  tolerance  limit  but  our  institutional  objectives  and
constraints are reflected in portfolio benchmarks. In terms of performance evaluation comparison of
actual  and  benchmark  portfolios  returns  are  going  to  be  monitored  daily  and  reported  to  the  top
management periodically.
For  credit  risk  management  side,  a  transaction  limit  is  assigned  to  each  counterparty,  covering  all
types of credit risks and market risks. The limits are marked to market daily and reflect the amount of
exposure that the bank is willing to take with each counterparty. The credit limits are set by employing
an  internal  scoring  model  that  incorporates  the  counterparty’s  external  credit  ratings,  financial
information, and some other qualitative information such as the quality of relationship with our bank
and  the  support  status,  ie  the  possibility  of  getting  help  from  the  government  in  case  of  financial
difficulty. The credit rating of the country in which the bank operates is also considered. Reports about
limit monitoring are produced regularly.
I would like to conclude my remarks by underlining once again how important it is to have an efficient
risk  management  to  protect  our  reserves  from  financial  instabilities  all  over  the  world.  We  need  to
watch the rapid changes in reserve management in terms of technological developments and in terms
of economic conditions very closely and adapt our institutions to these changes right away.
3
BIS Review 38/2000
