William J McDonough: Future challenges for bankers and bank supervisors
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before
the  106th  Annual  Convention  and  Financial  Services  Forum  of  the  New  York  State  Bankers
Association, held in New York on 6 April 2000.
 I am pleased to be with you today to discuss the new world that bankers and bank supervisors alike
face in the  wake  of  historic  financial reform  and  continuing  technological  and  financial  innovation.
Clearly,  these  are  exciting,  heady  times.  The  American  banking  system  has  just  posted  its  eighth
consecutive year of record earnings, exhibiting substantial resilience and strength in rebounding from
the troubles of the late 1980s and early 1990s. In doing so, banks have contributed substantially to, and
benefited enormously from, the longest economic expansion in our nation’s history. Simply put, most
people in our country have never had it so good. And yet even as we celebrate our good fortune, we
must bear in mind that this very prosperity exposes the seemingly unstoppable US economy to certain
very real risks.
Today I would like to discuss the important issue of maintaining sound lending practices at this critical
juncture  in  the  extraordinary  economic  cycle  we  are  enjoying.  I’ll  also  address  the  impact  of
technology on banking, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Modernization Act, and conclude with an
update on the effort to revise the Basel Capital Accord.
Unprecedented economic prosperity
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, we find ourselves at an unprecedented moment in the nation’s
economic history. The US economy has just completed its 37th consecutive quarter of expansion, the
unemployment  rate  is  at  its  lowest  level  in  three decades and  labor  force  participation  by  our  adult
population  is  at  its  highest  rate  since  the  Second  World  War,  when  these  statistics  included  the
millions  of  Americans  in  uniform.  Meanwhile,  inflation  has  remained  all  but  dormant,  something
thought not to be possible when the economy is growing so rapidly and unemployment is so low. Our
prosperity is the envy of the world, and our economic model is acknowledged everywhere to be one
that  works.  It’s  not  perfect,  nor  is  it  applicable  in  every  detail  to  countries  with  different  histories,
cultures  and  values.  Still,  it  is  clear  that  in  the  longer  run  the  market  is  better  at  allocating  scarce
resources than any version of a command economy.
Importance of maintaining sound credit standards
The remarkable duration of the current economic expansion and the strength of the banking system are
not coincidental events. Without an effectively functioning banking system for encouraging, collecting
and deploying society’s savings in a fair and impartial way into productive investments, there would
be little hope for our economy, or any other, to mobilize the real  resources  necessary  for  economic
growth and stability.
With this in mind, one of my major concerns going forward is the quality of bank lending. Banks are
now at a critical phase in the credit cycle. After years of high quarterly profits, low delinquency rates
and comfortable capital ratios, it is easy to forget the fundamentals of sound lending. And, as any good
coach will tell you, it’s the fundamentals, the basics, that make or break your performance.
The  most  important  of  the  fundamentals  is  maintaining  rigorous  credit  standards,  especially  in  an
environment of increased competition for new and existing customers. Experience teaches us that the
worst loans are often made in the best of times. And because things are awfully good at the moment, I
can’t  help  but  remind  bankers  and  supervisors  alike  that  the  sun  doesn’t  always  shine  so  brightly.
1
BIS Review 32/2000
Indeed, sometimes it even rains. To paraphrase Mark Twain, reports of the business cycle’s demise are
greatly exaggerated.
In circumstances this favorable, loan officers must make doubly certain that there is every reason to
believe that the loans they make are collectible. This is especially important for younger bankers who,
given  the  length  of this  expansion,  have  never  experienced  a serious  recession  and  may  mistakenly
view current conditions as ordinary rather than as exceptional. Lending granted on that erroneous basis
would  have  grave  consequences  for  the  industry’s  ability  to  weather  weaker  economic  conditions
which are, to be sure, inevitable.
From a supervisory perspective, I believe it is time for us to exercise an extra measure of caution. We
must ensure that banks’ lending decisions continue to reflect a disciplined approach, one that matches
a clearly defined risk appetite - and a well understood risk capacity - with a real sense of the returns
that  are  necessary  to  cover  that  risk.  I  see  such  a  supervisory  approach  as  increasingly  essential  to
counterbalance the pressures of the fiercely competitive markets in which banks are operating.
Maintaining  sound  credit  standards  is  one  of  several  significant  challenges  banks  currently  face.
Another is that the spectacular rise in equity values and mutual funds has put competitive pressure on
the  core  deposit  base.  As  these  lower-cost  funds  have  been  replaced  with  funding  from  the  capital
markets,  principally  commercial  paper,  pressures  on  interest  margins  and  liquidity  have  intensified.
Such  funding  shifts  raise  the  important  risk-management  questions  of  how  well  institutions  will
function under stressful conditions, and whether enough has been done to maintain adequate liquidity.
The decline in stable core deposits has also been coupled with a steady rise in average loan maturities,
indicating a growing exposure to liquidity and interest rate risk.
Another challenge is to maintain pricing that appropriately reflects risk amid fierce competition - from
other banks and from non-banks. Some institutions are responding to these pressures by moving lower
on the credit-quality spectrum in a reach for higher nominal yields. Too many lenders learn too late the
difference between nominal and risk-adjusted yields. Other institutions are beginning to recognize that
non-traditional  lending  programs,  when  done  right,  may  have  hidden  costs  in  the  form  of  higher
overhead and increased management attention.
Clearly,  then,  these  are  not  trouble-free  times.  Banking  is  a  business  of  identifying,  measuring  and
managing risk, and significant risks remain, even as we enjoy remarkably favorable circumstances.
New opportunities
Of course, these also are times of enormous opportunity for banks. The rapid pace of technological
advancement and recent legislative changes are opening  new  frontiers for  banks  and other  financial
institutions.
For example, the convenience of the Internet is changing how consumers shop for financial products
and services and with which providers they establish relationships. In response, some institutions are
seeking  alliances  or  mergers  to  broaden  the  range  of  products  and  services  they  offer,  such  as  the
proposed acquisition of US Trust, a bank offering advisory services to high net worth individuals, by
Charles Schwab & Co., one of the largest discount brokerage firms.
Once  viewed  mainly  as a  cost  center,  technology  now  is  increasingly  seen  by  banks  as  a  means  to
enhance the value of customer relationships through cross-selling and improved customization. As a
result, developing an Internet platform and other technological capacities is a major priority for many
financial service providers. Indeed, a recent survey reported that US bank managers for the first time
cited investments in Internet technology as their top budget priority, ahead of other traditionally key
budget items such as investments in call centers and brick-and-mortar branch networks.
The  focus  on  the  Internet  as  a  distribution  channel  is  eroding  boundaries  between  financial  service
providers and technology firms. Banks are increasingly providing technology services to customers,
such as providing account reconciliation software. Likewise, technology firms are making inroads into
services once thought the domain of banks and brokerage firms, such as financial planning or paying
BIS Review 32/2000
2
bills.  Banks  and  brokerage  firms  are  also  partnering  with  Internet  “portals”  such  as  Yahoo!  and
America Online to offer services to Internet users.
It is still far too early to determine just how, or to what extent, the Internet will change the financial
services sector. For instance, it is important to  note that,  with few  exceptions,  most  banks  view  the
Internet as an important supplementary distribution channel and not as a replacement for branches that
give you a physical presence in the communities you serve. Moreover, the true value of cross-selling
remains uncertain, and the ability to collect and use personal data will have to be balanced against the
demand for more protection of consumer privacy. On the commercial side, the largest institutions are
actively pursuing the emerging “business-to-business” e-commerce markets, but the experience there
is still too fresh to offer much insight into how those markets will evolve.
As we struggle with our own assessment of the impact this remarkable technology is having on the
industry,  supervisors  must  take  care  that  our  efforts  to  ensure  the  safe  and  sound  operation  of  the
financial markets do not stifle innovation and vitality the Internet is injecting into our economy. To
that  end,  we  are  developing  examination  methodologies  and  supervisory  guidelines  for  banks  with
Internet operations, and, with our colleagues in other jurisdictions, are assessing cross-border  issues
raised by e-banking.
Of course, the other great source of new opportunity for banks and other financial institutions is the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Financial  Modernization  Act,  which  President  Clinton  signed  into  law  last
November. As you know, the Act repeals those provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 and the
Bank  Holding  Company  Act  of  1956  that  restrict the  ability  of  bank  holding  companies  to  affiliate
with securities firms and insurance companies. The Act authorizes bank holding companies that are
well-managed and well-capitalized to become “financial holding companies” (FHCs) and to engage in
a diversified range of financially related activities, including commercial banking, securities dealing
and underwriting, and insurance agency and underwriting activities.
Passage of the Act is of truly historic significance, effecting reform that we at the Federal Reserve, and
many of you, have supported for years. Together with the repeal of inter-state branching restrictions,
the Act provides long-overdue modernization of our banking laws, making them more consistent with
marketplace  realities  and  the  needs  of  today’s  financial  services  customer.  Management  will  now
enjoy  greatly  enhanced  freedom  and  flexibility  in  determining  how  to  best  deliver  products  and
services to the marketplace, and the market will judge the correctness of those choices.
Some have perceived the newly authorized powers to benefit only large bank holding companies. This
is  not  correct.  The  strategic  freedom  the  Act  provides  is  available  to  all  banking  organizations,
regardless  of  size.  Indeed,  more  than  two-thirds  of  initial  institutions  seeking  to  become  financial
holding companies have assets of less than $1 billion. Institutions will have to decide for themselves
how, or even whether, they should take advantage of the newly authorized activities to build value for
their customers and shareholders.
Many  franchises  will  succeed  by  focusing  on  traditional,  face-to-face  banking,  which  continues  to
have  real  economic  value.  Newer  technological  capacities  and  techniques  are  awe-inspiring,  to  be
sure, but effective and profitable banking is ultimately about trust, and human nature hasn’t changed -
we still appreciate a face across the desk. In addition, as some large organizations have become even
larger through mergers, many community banks have been able to attract customers whose needs have
not been met by larger institutions.
How  institutions  pursue  new  opportunities  will  be  just  as  important  as  their  decision  whether  to
pursue. It is one thing to gain FHC status and begin to prudently experiment with new powers, and
quite  another  to  dive  head-long  into  the  deep  end  of  the  pool  with  full-scale  acquisitions  or  rapid
expansion into  new  businesses.  Personally,  I  am  encouraged  that  we  have  not  seen  a  tidal  wave  of
public  announcements  declaring  large-scale  affiliations  among  banking,  brokerage  and  insurance
firms.  Passage  of the  Act  may  well  lead  to  a  few  more  mergers  among  larger  firms  specializing  in
different  financial  service  sectors  and  aiming  to  take  advantage  of  perceived  synergies  and  cost
advantages.  But  we  shouldn’t  be  surprised  if  the  Act  has  only  limited  immediate  structural  impact.
This view is based on several observations:
3
BIS Review 32/2000
   On the commercial bank/securities side, the Act to a great extent reflects structural reality.
Following the liberalization of the rules governing so-called Section 20 subsidiaries in 1996,
several dozen securities firms were acquired by bank holding companies over the 1998-99
period. There are now 51 active securities affiliates, most of them in this district. I think that
most bank holding companies that want to engage in securities dealing are doing so already.
On  the  insurance  side,  many  banks  have  been  engaged  in  agent  activities  for  some  time,
particularly following the Supreme Court’s 1996 Barnett Bank decision. However, it remains
unclear  whether  more  than  just  a  few  banks  have  real  interest  in  underwriting  insurance.
Moreover, many insurance firms are mutual companies, which would prevent mergers and
acquisitions, at least until they became stock companies.
Another  factor  that  may  slow  merger  activity  is  that  the  strategic  trend  among  the  vast
majority  of  bank  holding  companies  in  the  United  States  has  been  toward  specialization  -
focusing on core businesses or a core customer base, which in turn determines the type of
products and services offered.
In past years, some criticism has been leveled at the industry for announcing mega-deals in what was
perceived to be a response to peer pressure, rather than compelling economic reasons. I’d like to think
that the disappointing post-acquisition results of some of these unions have taught the industry to think
more strategically, and to weigh more carefully all the pros and cons of pursuing such transactions.
Deciding what combination of traditional and new activities will best create long-term economic value
for your customers and shareholders will be a leading challenge as you contemplate the future of your
organizations.
Challenges for supervisors
The continuing evolution of the financial services industry and a newly modernized legal framework
also pose significant challenges to supervisors. What are the objectives of supervision in the twenty-
first century? How can those objectives be best pursued? Let me say first of all that there is no easy,
single answer to these questions. The modern financial marketplace is too dynamic, too complex. We
at  the  Federal  Reserve,  along  with  our  domestic  and  international  colleagues,  are  working  hard  to
devise  a  flexible,  multi-faceted  strategy  that  emphasizes  prudence  and  problem  prevention,
compatibility with the market, and a close and cooperative working relationship between the private
and public sector.
With  these  priorities  in  mind,  I  believe  there  are  three  essential  elements  of  a  modern  supervision
framework - effective bank-level management, market discipline and official supervision.
Effective bank level management includes sound corporate governance, rigorous internal controls and
effective  risk  management.  Together  these  elements  represent  the  first  and  most  important  line  of
defense against potential problems. This is increasingly the case as the activities of banks and other
financial institutions become more complex and more global.
The  second  line  of  defense  against  financial  instability  is  market  discipline,  which  has  become  an
increasingly  important  ally  of  the  official  supervisor.  Of  course,  effective  market  discipline  is  not
possible  without  meaningful  public  disclosure  and  more  selective  additional  disclosure  to
counterparties. While significant progress has been made in recent years, it unfortunately remains the
case that disclosure practices have not kept pace with the rapid changes in banks’ business activities
and risk exposures, and how these exposures are measured and managed.
For this situation to be fully remedied, notions of what is proprietary information and what should be
in the public domain need to change. Knowing a company’s appetite for risk and its approach to, and
methodologies  for,  managing  risk  is  essential  to  understanding  the  risks  of  being  a  shareholder,  a
creditor  or  a  counterparty.  I  strongly  encourage  all  financial  market  participants  -  commercial  and
investment  banks,  domestic  and  foreign  -  to  approach  the  issue  of  disclosure  as  users  of  financial
statements  rather  than  as  issuers.  Clearly,  a  full  appreciation  of  risk  cannot  be  achieved  without
BIS Review 32/2000
4
sufficient  information.  What  we  need  to  know  about  each  other  to  be  comfortable  and  secure  in
making our credit decisions should drive the debate.
While effective bank level management and meaningful market discipline are crucial elements of an
overall strategy for promoting and preserving financial stability, neither can substitute for the critical
role  played  by  official  supervision.  While  banks  perform  functions  that  are  indispensable  to  the
success of any market economy, these same functions, by their very nature, introduce risks  that  are
capable  of  undermining  the  prospects  for  such  success.  This  reality  was  acknowledged  by  Adam
Smith over two centuries ago in his seminal tract The Wealth of Nations. It is with this fundamental
reality  in  mind  that  governments  have  long  recognized  that  banking  and  other  financial  institutions
must be subject to some form of regulation and official oversight.
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley supervisory framework
The  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  presents  major  challenges  to  US  supervisors.  Under  the  terms  of  the
Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  serve  as  the  umbrella  supervisor  of  all  bank  holding
companies, including the newly authorized FHCs. However, the Act envisions oversight of the bank
by  the  appropriate  banking  agency  and  functional  supervision  of  individual  non-bank  subsidiaries  -
that  is,  SEC  oversight  of  broker/dealers  and  oversight  of  insurance  companies  by  state  insurance
departments. While the Act permits the Federal Reserve, under specifically defined circumstances, to
seek information directly from or even examine non-bank subsidiaries of FHCs, the Act also stipulates
that  the  Fed  must  rely  “to  the  fullest  extent  possible”  on  publicly  available  information,  externally
audited financial statements, and reports and other information submitted to the functional supervisors.
We at the Federal Reserve take this aspect of our revised role - sometimes referred to as “Fed-lite” -
very seriously. Clearly, it was not the intention of Congress to replace outdated and overly restrictive
aspects of Federal banking law with a needlessly onerous and redundant regulatory regime. Moreover,
functionally  regulated  firms  should  be  able  to  compete  on  an  equitable  basis,  whether  or  not  they
happen to be affiliated with a bank. To minimize regulatory burden and avoid duplication, the two-
tiered framework of umbrella supervision of financial holding companies and functional regulation of
their subsidiaries requires enhanced cooperation and coordination among Federal and state supervisory
authorities.  Efforts  are  well  underway  among  the  relevant  Federal  and  state  financial  services
authorities to establish agreements and procedures to effectively implement Congress’ mandate.
Before moving on, I want to address the topic of community reinvestment in the context of Gramm-
Leach-Bliley. As you may be aware, over the course of debating and negotiating the details of the Act,
some members of Congress wanted to strengthen CRA requirements, while others wanted them rolled
back.  In  the  end,  of  course,  the  two  sides  compromised.  Some  have  argued  that  those  desiring  to
weaken CRA prevailed because, among other things, the Act extends the interval between compliance
examinations for highly rated institutions. I disagree with this perspective.
Under the new law, bank holding companies cannot become financial holding companies or engage in
any  financial  activities  newly  authorized  by  the  Act  unless  all  of  their  depository  institutions  have
CRA ratings of satisfactory or better. And should any depository institution subsidiary of an approved
FHC  subsequently  fail  to  maintain  a  satisfactory  CRA  rating,  the  FHC  would  be  prohibited  from
commencing any new financial activities. In this way, the Act extends the ramifications of poor CRA
performance  to  potential  nonbank  activities.  It  also  provides  powerful  incentives  for  expansion-
minded companies to achieve and maintain at least satisfactory CRA ratings. In my view, this amounts
to a reaffirmation of the key principles of the Community Reinvestment Act.
Revision of the 1988 Basel Accord
Let me move on to the Basel Committee’s major initiative to revise the Capital Accord. The primary
tool of capital regulation currently is the set of minimum ratios that were devised in 1988 by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, which I have the honor to chair. Without question, the  Accord
5
BIS Review 32/2000
was  a  milestone  achievement  -  for  the  first  time,  supervisors  in  G-10  countries  were  able  to  use  a
common yardstick for assessing banks’ capital adequacy.
But  the  Accord  has  a  number  of  serious  shortcomings.  It  does  not  adequately  differentiate  among
degrees  of  credit  risk  and,  as  a  result,  banks  have  had  incentives  to  take  on  higher  risk  exposures
within broad risk categories. Banks have also tended to engage in transactions that lower regulatory
capital requirements without reducing economic risk. For example, through asset securitization a bank
may physically transfer assets off its balance sheet, but still retain some or even all of the associated
risk. In addition, it has proved difficult to incorporate into the Accord’s simple risk-weighting scheme
the  innovations  of  the  last  decade  in  the  way  banks  manage  and  mitigate  risk.  As  credit  risk
management  techniques  advanced,  and  as  the  importance  of  managing  operational  risk  has  been
increasingly recognized, the long run relevance and efficacy of the Basel Accord has been eroded.
In June of last year, the Basel Committee released a Consultative Paper laying out its vision for a new,
more refined capital adequacy framework  - one that more accurately distinguishes degrees of  credit
risk,  and  that  is  appropriate  for  banks  of  varying  levels  of  sophistication.  The  Consultative  Paper
represents  an  evolution  in  the  Committee’s  approach  to  capital  adequacy  because,  in  addition  to
establishing minimum capital requirements, it places increased emphasis on the supervisory review of
capital adequacy and the role of market discipline.
We refer to these elements - minimum capital standards, supervisory review and market discipline - as
the “three pillars”. Together these pillars mutually reinforce safety and soundness by aligning capital
relative  to  risk  and  by  encouraging  prudent  risk  management.  This  evolution  in  the  Committee’s
thinking follows from much of its recent work on risk management and surveys on banks’ disclosure
practices. It is also consistent with the broader notion of supervision that has evolved since the original
Accord.
An  important  objective  of  the  Consultative  Paper  was  to  convey  the  Committee’s  thinking  and  to
solicit the industry’s input. As you may know, the formal consultative period on the proposed capital
framework ended just a few days ago, on 31 March. We are very pleased by the response. Comments
have been received from a broad range of industry participants including banks of varying sizes, some
of  which  I  see  represented  here  today,  banking  associations,  securities  firms,  central  banks  and
supervisory agencies, as well as rating agencies.
It  will  take  some  time  to  thoughtfully  and  thoroughly  review  all  of  the  comments  received.  Still,  I
thought it would be useful to discuss some of the major themes we’ve been able to identify. Based on
the views expressed by industry participants and the work the Committee is currently engaged in, I can
tell you that we are firmly committed to the use of banks’ internal ratings as an approach for setting
regulatory capital requirements.
Internal ratings
Many of you in the industry have noted that a capital regime based on banks’ internal ratings, which
reflect a wide range of information about borrowers, can prove to be quite sensitive to the level of risk
in  a  bank’s  portfolio.  From  a  supervisory  standpoint,  an  internal  ratings-based  approach  can  also
provide  banks  with  the  proper  incentives  to  improve  their  risk  management  practices,  which  is
consistent with our overall objectives for revising the Accord.
With  this  in  mind,  the  Committee  is  actively  exploring  how  to  link  banks’  internal  ratings  to  a
regulatory capital scheme. We are seeking to develop flexible approaches since all banks wishing to
use internal ratings may not yet be able to generate the complete set of information necessary to tie
ratings to capital requirements. Thus, for at least some banks, we are investigating the possibility that
some of the information would have to be supplied by the supervisor, even while the core elements
were supplied by a bank’s internal ratings scheme.
As an important first  step in  developing  these approaches, the  Basel  Committee has been  gathering
information  about  banks’  internal  ratings  systems,  and  assessing  both  “best”  practice  and  overall
sound practice in this area. In January of this year, the Committee released a paper on the range of
BIS Review 32/2000
6
current practices in banks’ internal ratings systems. As the Committee builds on this work to develop
operational  proposals,  we  will  be  focusing  on  the  need  for  banks  to  have  robust  standards  and
procedures  governing  the  assignment  of  internal  ratings,  as  well  as  the  need  for  the  Committee  to
establish appropriate supervisory guidelines. In this vein, we will be working to ensure that disclosure
practices  regarding  internal  ratings  systems  play  an  important  role  in  the  ongoing  supervisory
validation of these approaches.
External ratings
Of  course,  I  also  expect  that  a  revised  standardized  approach  will  be  a  critical  element  of  the  new
capital  adequacy  framework.  As  you  may  know,  last  June’s  consultative  paper  described  a  revised
standardized  approach  building  on  the  current  Accord  by  tying  risk  weights  to  external  credit
assessments, such as credit ratings. In other words, OECD membership would no longer be relied on
for setting regulatory capital for sovereign or bank claims. For example, loans to similarly-rated banks
located in OECD and non-OECD countries would receive the same risk weight.
Industry  participants  have  expressed  support  for  the  use  of  external  ratings  as  an  alternative  to  the
current  OECD/non-OECD  distinction.  Comments  have  also  been  received  in  favor  of  incorporating
greater credit risk differentiation into the standardized  approach,  particularly  for  credit  exposures  to
corporate  entities.  Some  respondents  have  suggested  that  this  might  be  achieved  by  introducing
additional risk buckets into the framework. In considering suitable options, the Committee will have to
balance technical complexity with a realistic understanding of practical considerations.
The  Committee  also  is  addressing  what  some  observers  have  noted  is  the  potential  for  introducing
greater  cyclicality  via  a  more  risk-sensitive  capital  framework.  That  is,  the  capital  requirements  for
loans  to  troubled  borrowers  will  tend  to  increase  at  just  the  point  when  such  trouble  is  becoming
apparent. This is an important point, and one that must be given serious consideration. It is my view
that  the  global  financial  system  needs  to  move  toward  addressing  potential  credit  problems
preemptively - before these problems have time to grow from minor disturbances to major disruptions.
A more risk-sensitive capital framework should help ensure that banks hold appropriate capital behind
high-risk credits in the first place, and thus reduce the cyclical tendency for retrenchment that often
follows problems with such loans.
Credit risk mitigation techniques
Greater recognition of the benefits of risk mitigation techniques - such as collateral, guarantees  and
credit derivatives - also is at the forefront of the Committee’s work in revising the Accord.
The  Committee  learned  a  great  deal  from  recent  consultations  with  over  50  banks  and  industry
associations within the G10 on their methods for mitigating credit risk. We are now evaluating how
best to incorporate the risk reducing benefits of such techniques, while  at the  same  time  addressing
potential  residual  risks  that  may  arise  from  their  use.  For  example,  changes  in  the  market  value  of
collateral received may result in a failure to fully cover the value of the underlying credit exposure.
Residual risks could also arise when the maturity of the credit protection provided is shorter than that
of the underlying exposure.
As I mentioned, we are now evaluating the comments received on the Consultative Paper and aim to
publish, by early next year, a comprehensive set of proposals that will be responsive to the industry’s
input. I am confident that the broad goals we set out in June of last year - a “three-pillared” up-dated
approach  to  capital  adequacy  -  will  remain.  We  will  achieve  our  objectives  through  risk-sensitive
capital requirements, effective supervisory oversight as a complement to minimum capital standards,
and  recognition  of  the  role  that  market  discipline  can  play  in  encouraging  prudent  risk-taking  by
banks.
7
BIS Review 32/2000
Conclusion
I believe all of us  are  beginning  the twenty-first  century  with  an  ambitious  agenda.  In  pursuing  the
objectives  of  sustained  prosperity  and  a  modern,  flexible  yet  stable  financial  system,  we  must  all
acknowledge  that  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  have  a  critical  role  to  play.  While  the
perspectives of market participants and official supervisors may differ from time to time, our objective
is the same - to maintain a strong and vibrant financial system. Indeed, it is evident to me, as a former
commercial  banker  and  now  as  a  supervisor,  that  only  if  we  work  together,  each  meeting  our
responsibilities  and  reinforcing  the  other,  will  we  be  able  to  successfully  manage  and  supervise  a
rapidly evolving, ever-more complex financial services industry.
BIS Review 32/2000
8
