Jürgen Stark: Future trends in central banking
Dinner Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Conference
“The next 25 years in African Economic Development”, Bank of Botswana, on 6 July 2000.
 Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  convey  the  congratulations  of  the  President  and  the  entire  Deutsche
Bundesbank on the 25th anniversary of the founding of the Bank of Botswana. I am aware that the
Bank  of  Botswana,  with  its  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  -  the  conditions  for  which  were
improved  still  further  in  1997  following  the  modernisation  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana  Act  -  has  for
years  been  making  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  much  above-average  performance  of  the
Botswanan economy in Africa, even if a number of structural adjustments still need to be made. With
its responsible budgetary policy  and  well-developed  democratic  system,  Botswana  is  a  widely-rated
model for Africa.
“Who does not know the past, will not come to terms with the future”,1 said Golo Mann, a well-known
German  historian  and  publicist, some  years  ago.  That statement is  also true  of  the  future  of  central
banking.  Let  me  therefore  start  with  a  brief  look  back  at  the  recent  history  of  central  banking  as  a
starting point for highlighting some aspects of the challenges that will face us in future.
In the middle of the 20th century, after the end of the Second World War, Germany - perhaps more
than any other country - was searching for a new economic policy paradigm that would mark out a
course for the future. At that time, a decision was made (at least in the western part of Germany) in
favour of implementing free market principles. That decision - as the Wirtschaftswunder, Germany’s
much-cited “economic miracle” showed - was to produce notably successful results.
Apart  from  those  fundamental  policy  decisions  that  set  the  future  course  for  a  market  economy,
however, that notable success was also due to an unqualified commitment of monetary policy to the
objective  of  price  stability.  Following  the  devastating  experience  of  war  inflation,  and  after  the
subsequent  currency  reform,  the  parliament  of  the  young  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  made  that
price-stability  objective  the  primary  task  of  the  newly  established  central  bank.  This  decision  was
anything but a matter of course at a time when Keynesianism was shaping economic policy thinking
not  only  in  most  other  industrial  countries  but  also  in  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  itself.  The
Federal Republic’s  monetary  approach  and  the  perception  of  the  Bundesbank’s  role  and  task  acting
together with those who bear political responsibility were - as we are now aware - far ahead of their
time.
That is true not only in terms of the primary commitment to the objective of price stability but also
with  regard  to  the  instruments  and  the  regulatory  framework  in  which  the  central  bank  acted.  The
central  banks  and  governments  in  most  industrial  countries  were  placing  their  trust  in  the
administrative  management  of  monetary  and  financial  activity  by  attempting  to  influence  financial
flows - domestically, by means of selective credit controls and interest-rate regulations and, externally,
by  imposing  capital  controls.  In  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  by  contrast,  the  opening-up  of
borders for capital movements and the liberalisation of interest rates began at an early stage. At that
time, the foundations were laid for the D-Mark’s subsequent reputation and attractiveness, which was
to make the young German currency the second most important international investment and reserve
currency next to the US dollar - something which happened more quickly than seemed desirable in the
light of financial markets which were then still “underdeveloped” in some respects.
1
“Wer die Vergangenheit nicht kennt, wird die Zukunft nicht in den Griff bekommen”
1
BIS Review 56/2000
How  much  ideas  about  an  efficient  monetary  policy  varied  within  the  group  of  industrial  countries
during the post-war period became very clear in the seventies. Economic policy thinking at the time
was that a given level of output - and thus full employment - could be achieved at any time if only the
right  mix  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  were  to  be  deployed.  Inflation  was  understood  more  as  a
“lubricant” of dynamic economic growth and not as an undesirable development which, in the longer
run, results in severe losses of growth and welfare. It took until the end of the seventies before there
was a broad acceptance of the bitter finding that unemployment cannot simply be combated by higher
inflation. The markets quickly saw through the fact that monetary policymakers were playing with the
money illusion of the market participants - on which the Keynesian approach relied.
In effect, monetary policy in many countries at the end of the seventies was faced with the “wreckage”
of high inflation and high unemployment as well as growing losses of credibility. In many cases, the
Keynesian experiment was bought at a high price.
In the light of those realisations, there was a fundamental paradigm change in monetary policy in the
later seventies and early eighties in favour of an approach unambiguously geared to price stability. At
the same time, the set of monetary policy instruments was brought more closely into line with market
conditions, and interest rates in the financial markets as well as cross-border capital transactions were
liberalised.  This  sea  change  in  monetary  policy  was  accompanied  by  a  general  reorientation  of
economic  policy  which  compelled  the  government  to  concentrate  on  its  primary  functions,  thus
creating greater scope for the development of market forces. This reorientation of monetary policy has
not been without success. During the past twenty years, inflation has been reduced to a much more
acceptable level in the industrial countries, thus making it possible to speak at least virtually of price
stability in the majority of countries.
Over the past few decades there has arisen an international consensus about monetary policy that is
geared to price stability. The evident success of such a policy in the nineties paved the way for a single
monetary policy in Europe. As a result, with the start of European monetary union at the beginning
of 1999 the conditions for tension-free broad-based growth have improved.
The experience of German monetary policy and that of other central banks has taught us that, besides
the  unambiguous  commitment  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  independence  of  the  monetary
policy decision-makers is a basic precondition for that success. Independence means, first of all, that
the central bank is independent of the government in formal terms with regard to the deployment of its
monetary policy instruments. The Maastricht Treaty provides the European System of Central Banks
with an even greater degree of independence, in fact, than was stipulated earlier by the legislators of
the  Bundesbank  Act.  The  central  bank’s  formal  independence  of  the  government  has  to  be
accompanied by material independence which ensures that the monetary policy decision-makers can
take their decisions in isolation from the interests of the government. For that reason, the agreements
on  European  monetary  union  provide  for  terms  of  office  for  the  ECB’s  management  that  are  of
adequate length and rule out premature dismissal. Furthermore, the independence of monetary policy
in Europe is protected by the Maastricht Treaty prohibiting the ECB from financing budgetary deficits
and by the fact that the exchange-rate arrangements of the governments are clearly subordinated to the
primary objective of price stability.
After roughly 18 months, in which responsibility for monetary policy has resided with the European
Central  Bank,  it is  undoubtedly  still too early  for an  overall  assessment.  However,  the  fact  that  the
changeover to the euro took place so smoothly can already be put down as a success. Moreover, the
interest-rate  decisions  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  since  last  autumn  have  demonstrated  the
promptness and  determination  with  which the  ECB is  countering  signs  of inflationary  tensions. We
may  be  confident  that  the  central  banks  participating  in  EMU  and  the  ECB  constitute  a  reliable
bulwark  against  inflation.  In  saying  that,  we  have  to  guard  against  misconceptions.  The  danger  of
inflation is not dead simply because the current statistics are showing comparatively stable prices for
most of the industrial countries. The fight against inflation will not have been won until inflation has
disappeared once and for all from the range of attractive policy options. The struggle to create a stable
environment remains the prime task of the central banks.
BIS Review 56/2000
2
Does that mean “business as usual”? No, that is certainly not how I see the future of central banking.
The increasing globalisation of the markets and the resulting structural changes mean that the central
banks are facing challenges on a scale that cannot easily be grasped at present. It is possible that we
shall be forced to recognise that the move in monetary policy towards instruments that are more in line
with the market - which was, in principle, very much welcome - may cause difficulties that we cannot
yet  properly  assess  in  an  environment  in  which  market  conditions  have  changed.  What  will  be  the
implications, for example, if the traditional funding of enterprises by credit institutions is increasingly
replaced by funding through other financial intermediaries and from other sources, such as insurance
enterprises and securities issues, which are not subject to direct monetary policy control? And what
will be the implication for monetary policy if the term “money stock” simply slips out of our grasp
because no one is able to say any longer with any certainty what money is or what it is not? Just think
of the possibilities of the Internet and the increasing use of electronic money. What repercussions will
this have on the transmission channels of monetary policy and, by extension, on the effectiveness of
monetary policy?
Above all, the fiercer competition in the financial markets and the increasing blurring of boundaries
between money and other financial assets, and between banks and non-banks will reduce individual
institutions’ scope to set their own interest rates. In other words, in future it will be more difficult for
the banks to pass on the central bank’s interest-rate moves to their customers with a time lag or only to
a limited extent. This is likely to result in monetary policy stimuli being transmitted more quickly via
the interest-rate channel, which is fundamentally welcome from the point of view of the central bank.
Nevertheless, this will bring about changes to the established mechanisms of the transmission process,
which might - at least for a time - give rise to certain problems of interpretation for monetary policy.
Furthermore, the increasing securitisation of assets means that greater attention will have to be given
to the impact of central bank policy on the capital market rate and its implication for the real sector.
But we shall probably have to adjust to the fact that the increasing growth and use of the internet is
opening up new possibilities in the financial sector which are not without risk from the point of view
of the central banks. The growing use of e-money in payments may, at times, lead to some problems
of data interpretation. As long as flows of e-money are dominated by domestic banks, however, this
will not result in any lasting impairment of monetary policy, since we possess the instrument of - by
all means, remunerable - minimum reserves. At all events, the existence of minimum reserves ensures
that  broader  monetary  aggregates  remain  closely  related  to  the  provision  of  central  bank  money.
Consequently, it will be important to create the statutory framework for making all enterprises wishing
to issue e-money subject to banking supervision and minimum reserve requirements.
The  situation  would  be  somewhat  different  if,  say,  residents  were  to  use  money  supplied  by  a
non-resident issuer for domestic transactions on a significant scale. This might loosen the relationship
between  the  national  money  stock  and  the domestic  transaction  volume  and  cause  the  money  stock
indicators  to  lose  some  of  their  informative  value.  On  the  other  hand,  the  processing  of  payments
abroad  harbours  new  risks  for  the  market  players  -  risks  that  make  a  sharp  growth  in  such
arrangements appear, if anything, unlikely on account of differences in the legal frameworks for the
guaranteeing of deposits, for example. Thus, it can hardly be assumed that the emerging changes will
descend  on  us  abruptly  without  us  being  able  to  respond.  The  volume  of  e-money  issued  is,  at  all
events, still very small at present.2
In summary I would like to reiterate three points:
1. 
There is now a worldwide consensus that monetary policy  -  as  independent  as  possible  of
political  influence  -  should  be committed  primarily  to  the  objective  of  price  stability.  The
experience  of  the  industrial  countries  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  at  least,  showed  that  an
2
In April, electronic money accounted for no more than 0.05 % of the currency in circulation in Germany and such shares
are, if anything, likely to be even smaller for the other countries of the euro area..
3
BIS Review 56/2000
2. 
3. 
inflationary policy only harms the development of the economy. Or to put it another way:
price stability is the best precondition for sustained growth.
The  benefits  of  the  paradigm  change  that  took  place  in  the  late  seventies  and  the  early
eighties are now becoming apparent. Inflation has been largely brought under control and, in
most industrial countries, it is more or less already possible to speak of price stability. That
does not mean, of course, that  we  central  bankers  have  to  fear that  we  shall  soon  become
superfluous.  Price  stability  is  a  good  that  has  to  be  earned  every  day  anew  -  vigilance  is
therefore still the prime necessity for monetary policymakers.
But  in  another  respect,  too,  there  is  no  cause  for  us  to  be  complacent  or  satisfied  with
ourselves  and  take  a  back  seat.  New  challenges  are  on  the  horizon.  I  see  no  occasion  for
pessimism, however, when faced with the advancing globalisation of the financial markets
and intensifying competition in the financial sector: they may call for flexible  adjustments
and  changes  but  are  not  a  fundamental  impediment  to  an  effective  monetary  policy.
Established economic relationships may change or become looser, but this will not prevent
monetary policymakers from being effective in performing their task of ensuring the internal
stability of their own currency in the future as well.
BIS Review 56/2000
4
