Mr Latter takes a central banker’s look
at new challenges in a rapidly changing environment
Speech given by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at
The Asian Treasury Forum 2000, held in Hong Kong on 22-23 February 2000.
 There was a time, many years - or more likely decades - ago, when it seemed that the main role of the
company treasurer, if  indeed there  was  any  such  identifiable  position  in  the  company,  was  to  make
sure  that  enough  money  had  been  transferred  from  time  deposits  to  current  account  before  each
month’s  pay  day;  and  it  seemed  that  the  main,  possibly  the  only,  function  of  a  company’s  finance
director was to make sure that the accounts were compiled, audited and filed on time.
How times have changed. Not only has there been a ceaseless escalation in the range and complexity
of financial instruments available to us all, and in the sophistication of accounting, but there has also
been  an  inexorable  rise  in  the  expectations  which  others,  such  as  shareholders  or  executive  boards,
have as to what can be delivered from the financial side of a business. As a central banker I feel some
empathy with those who find themselves sandwiched between pressure on one side from their masters
to achieve ever lower funding costs or ever better returns from financial investments, and persistent
enticements on the other side from bankers claiming that you could be freed of all that pressure if you
simply subcontracted everything into their capable hands.
Treasury has come to be regarded in many instances as a separate profit centre. The treasurers of some
major corporates are nowadays acknowledged as being at least as significant players in the financial
markets as are the banks themselves. There are some well-known examples where the profitability of
an enterprise in the manufacturing or services sector has been sustained by deft treasury and financial
management for considerable periods when the mainstream business has itself been floundering. And
there are also examples, alas, where reputable companies have been brought to their knees by flawed
financial management. You probably don’t have an easy life, but you won’t need me to tell you that.
I find myself wondering whether or for how long the financial scene will continue to be one of such
rapid change as we have been witnessing in recent years; and what the implications are, for any or all
of us here, of recent and prospective developments in financial products and infrastructure.
It is difficult to put a starting date on  the  financial revolution  which  I  am  attempting  to  describe - I
mean  the  era  of  sophisticated  asset  and  liability  management  techniques,  of  ever  more  exotic
derivative  and  hedging  products,  and  so  on.  But  I  guess  it  got  going  during  the  1970s.  Why  not
before? It seems that for most of the preceding postwar years banking and finance enjoyed a rather
cosy  and  protected  existence  around  the  world.  Capital  controls  and  domestic  regulation  tended  to
constrain the scope for competition or diversification; many domestic banking sectors were cartelised
to a significant degree, or in some cases state controlled; cross-border migration was, for one reason or
another, rather rare. All in all, the incentive and scope to innovate were weak by today’s standards.
The  environment  changed  quite  quickly  when  national  administrations  began  to  deregulate  their
financial sectors at the micro level and to free up movements of capital at the macro level.
Just as importantly, the electronic data processing revolution began to open up avenues for financial
engineering  that  could never  have  been  dreamt  of  before.  In  the  dealing  rooms  of  London - then  as
now  the  world’s  leading  international  financial  centre - professional  mathematicians  moved  in
alongside,  or  even  displaced,  the  “barrow  boys”.  Perhaps  I  should  explain  that  the  barrow  boy
stereotype  was  a  Cockney  young  man  from  the  east  end  of  London  with  probably  no  very
accomplished  formal  education  but  with  strong  mental  arithmetic  and  trading  skills,  acquired  from
working  on  market  stalls.  Such  people  were  until  then  regarded  by  many  as  possessing  the  best
qualifications to become dealers or floor traders in the City of London.
1
BIS Review 15/2000
The IT revolution has not of course been a static one. Since the introduction of the first computers into
financial product development and trading, computing power has grown exponentially. New vistas and
previously unimaginable complexities for trading strategies have thus continually opened up; and the
ever-increasing speed of processing and communication has progressively rewritten the definition of
“time critical”.
The stream of innovation requires us not only to master the mathematics but also to assimilate a whole
new  vocabulary  of  jargon - designed,  no  doubt,  to  make  the  underlying  mathematics  more  easily
digestible.  For  example,  I  received  a  document  from  a  leading  international  bank  the  other  day
explaining to me that the butterfly involved three tenors where the middle was the bullet and the wing
was the barbell; moreover I could long a two-five-ten by being long the two and the ten, each for a
PV01 of half the sum for which I should short the five; in so doing I could profit from a bow at five
but would be indifferent to any directional move provided it was parallel. Meanwhile, our universities
today probably devote more teaching time to gamma trades than to gamma rays; I’m not sure whether
we, as citizens of the world at large, should be elated or depressed by this.
But  the  world  of  finance  is  moving  forward  not  only  in  the  realms  of  such  highly  complex  or
sometimes - dare one say - gimmicky instruments. Continuous change and innovation are observable
at  the  more  prosaic  level  too.  Looking  at  Hong  Kong  alone,  over  the  past  year  there  has  been  an
impressive list of innovations, actual or planned, in the financial sector. These are not necessarily all
of specific interest to the corporate treasurer but are nonetheless significant in a more general context.
Thus,  first,  we have  established a  reciprocal link  with  South Korea for access to  each  other’s  bond
settlement and custody systems (following earlier links of this sort with Australia and New Zealand).
Next,  Hong  Kong  has  launched  the Tracker  Fund  as a  means  of  disposing  of  part  of  the  Exchange
Fund’s Hong Kong dollar equity portfolio; although this bears many characteristics of a conventional
index-tracking  unit  trust,  it  also  has  some  unique  innovative  features.  In  addition,  the  Hong  Kong
Mortgage  Corporation  has  successfully  introduced  its  first  mortgage-backed  securities  programme.
And  notes  issued  by  HKMA  and  HKMC  have  been  listed  on  the  stock  exchange  for  the  first  time.
Finally,  we  are  preparing  a  US dollar  clearing  system  which  we  hope  will  offer  a  wider  range  of
facilities  than  any  other  offshore  clearing;  I  would  not  want  today  to  anticipate  the  more  detailed
announcements about the planned timetable for this project, which we expect to make shortly.
The foregoing is not necessarily an exhaustive list of changes which are being implemented here. And,
assuming that Hong Kong is by no means the only place where new ideas are being developed across
the financing spectrum, I am led to the conclusion that there is little prospect of any immediate let-up
in the pace of global product innovation in finance.
That  is  a  conclusion  reached  from  merely  observing  what  is  at  present  happening  in  the  financial
world, but it does raise questions as to where in all of this lies the scope for extra value added and
profit. If one assumes that the overall levels of savings and of investment demand in the economy are
little affected by micro developments in the financial sector, then it follows that innovations, in order
to be profitable, must be continually exploiting new arbitrage opportunities, new and more  efficient
ways of serving customers, and so on. One can understand how, over the years, the increased level of
competition in finance, both within and between countries, as well as the communications revolution
and the IT revolution, have provided the basis for extraordinary gains in efficiency. But will this trend
continue? Indeed, can it? Might the financial sector now be encountering sharply diminishing returns
from innovation, in which case much of the new effort put into designing new products would prove to
be  an  expensive  mistake?  Or  would  it  perhaps  be  more  accurate  to  describe  it  as  an  expensive
necessity, since, if you don’t do it, someone else will? In the intensely competitive environment you
can’t afford to be left behind, but will, or can, everyone still make profits?
I pose these as questions, but I’m afraid I don’t have any conclusive answers. Yet I suspect that we
may continue to be pleasantly surprised by the fruits which this ongoing revolution can bear. While it
is certainly clear that finance is by and large a hugely competitive business, we observe that many of
the participant institutions are enormously successful and profitable. At the same time, however, those
of us with responsibilities for regulation, whether for purposes of consumer protection or in order to
ensure systemic stability, are surely justified in imposing capital and liquidity requirements designed
BIS Review 15/2000
2
to  make  the  institutions  proof  against  the  sort  of  setbacks  which  too  intense  competition  may
eventually bring to some.
Of  course,  the  scare  story  of  impending  diminishing  returns  and  so  on  has  been  told  many  times
before. What, if anything, is new, as we set off into the new millennium? I believe there are two new
ingredients, both concerning the internet. They are access and speed. They are of course related.
We can all now enjoy direct access to almost anyone and anything, anywhere, without having to go
through  intermediaries - other  than  electronic  ones.  We  are  all  aware  that  a  degree  of  caution  is
required here. For example, the HKMA supervises the banks that are located in Hong Kong, and it is
unlawful for anyone to solicit for deposits in Hong Kong without authorisation. But if you click onto
the website of someone in a far-off country and are seduced into transferring funds into a deposit with
them,  we  may  not  be  able  to  help  you  if  things  subsequently  go  wrong.  This  is  a  fairly  simplistic
example and I’m sure that everyone in this audience, at least, would be alert to the risks and would act
with the  necessary  caution.  But  the  proverbial  man  in  the  street,  who  may  nowadays  have  his  own
internet access, may be more gullible. Moreover, there may be products on offer that are more subtle
and  beguiling  than  a  straight  deposit,  and  very  seductively  packaged  too;  all  of  us  here  today  are
potential victims to some sort of dupe; it is a brave person, or perhaps an arrogant one, who would
deny that vulnerability.
A  still  more  significant  manifestation  of  the  internet,  with  potentially  sinister  consequences,  is  the
speed  which  it  brings  to  all  dealings.  Generally  we  marvel  at  the  instant  availability  of  up-to-date
information, and the capability to act upon it, if we so desire, by a return click of the mouse. If the
response is simply an e-mail message to a friend or colleague, the scope for loss or damage may be
limited, but, even then, how often do we later rue the impulsive riposte? How many times do we go to
bed composing the most fantastic letters or office memos, only to wake up the next morning to realise
that they were wholly over the top, too effusive or too offensive, tactless, or whatever. The trouble is
that nowadays we do not have to wait to respond until we can reach the other person on the phone the
next day, or mail him a letter, or hand him an office memo; by the time we awake the next morning it
may already  be too late  to  censor our folly;  we  may  have  clicked  the  send  button  the  night  before.
Worse  still,  in  an  increasing  number  of  instances  our  counterparty  will  actually  expect  a  response
almost immediately. The phrase, “Let’s sleep on it”, wasn’t born for nothing, but now it may not be
allowed.  If  you  are  executing  major  financial  decisions  by  a  mouse  click,  the  scope  for  subsequent
embarrassment may be substantial, to say the least.
What  I  find  slightly  worrying  is  that  the  economics  of,  or  business  case  for,  continuing  financial
innovation and the quest for new efficiencies may depend in large part on successful exploitation of
opportunities that can be seized only if you are able and willing to respond with lightning speed. The
ultimate manifestation of this is programmed trading, where the computer virtually takes the decision
for you. As history bears witness, such strategies are as good, but only as good, as the assumptions that
are  programmed  in,  be  they  about  economic  forecasts,  covariances  between  various  events,  or
whatever.
But even if we felt that these particular strategies were foolproof, there are a myriad of other financial
transactions which can only really be consummated by a conscious human decision. The home buyer
faced  with  a  choice  between  taking  a  mortgage  from  bank  A  or  bank  B  is  unlikely  to  have  a
sophisticated  and  reliable  mathematical  model  with  which  to  compare  the  offers  and  determine
conclusively  his  choice.  But  the  culture  nowadays,  bred  at  least  in  part  by  the  technological
feasibilities of the IT era, is one which is likely to place the home buyer under much greater pressure
to reach a quick decision than his parents would have been a generation ago, or even his brother five
years ago, for fear of losing the best offer - if only he could assess which was the best. There is less
time to reflect; less time to seek out disinterested advice.
There are of course some areas of finance which appear relatively untouched as yet by this revolution.
In the realm of corporate finance, in every jurisdiction so far as I am aware, the documents seeking
shareholder  support  for  a  merger,  for  example,  are  still  required  to  be  sent  by  post,  and  with  a
reasonable minimum notice period for response. I wonder how long it will be before documents will
be deemed to have been delivered to shareholders so long as they were sent by e-mail or posted to the
3
BIS Review 15/2000
person’s interactive television; and the response period may be compressed on the assumption that you
can  pick  up  your  mail  wherever  you  are  and  at  any  time.  All  of  this  may  sound  fanciful  for  the
moment, but is not impossible at some stage.
What we still need, but may be in danger of losing, is the chance to pause for breath. We need time not
only to think things through for ourselves but also to consult others. If, having dispensed with your
human stockbroker because you resented paying his level of commission, you buy a company’s shares
via  the  internet  at  what  you  think  is  a  bargain  price,  but  in  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  a  couple  of
minutes previously the company issued a profits warning, you have only yourself to blame. But you
may have felt forced into dealing in that manner by peer pressure, or for fear of loss of face if some
colleague in the office starts boasting about what a killing he has been able to make on such-and-such
a  “day-trading”  deal.  If  that  is  indeed  a  fair  characterisation  of  the  atmosphere  which  many  of  us
nowadays breathe, then I have to say that I find it rather distressing. We ought not to feel embarrassed
to confess confusion, to seek advice or indeed to pay for advice.
So, we live in a very challenging and pressurised environment. I am in no doubt in my own mind that
the  revolution  which  has  swept  through  finance  in  the  past  quarter  century  has  been  beneficial  to
institutions and customers alike. We have, I think, now entered a phase where the basic margins may
be narrower, where temptations may be greater and more varied, where the pressures to move quickly
may be much stronger, and where of course the risks may therefore be rather greater. We all need to
exercise skilful discernment and judgement, and I am sure this is as true for corporate treasurers and
finance directors as for the rest of us. But it is not my intention to be a killjoy; as I have suggested,
there will continue to be exciting new opportunities to explore; and I wish you all a fruitful couple of
days here doing just that.
BIS Review 15/2000
4
