Mr Hayami: Price stability and monetary policy
Speech  given  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Research  Institute  of
Japan, in Tokyo, on 21 March 2000.
 I  am  honored  to  be  invited  to  this  meeting  and  given  an  opportunity  to  address  such  distinguished
guests.
More than a year has passed since the Bank of Japan launched the zero interest rate policy in February
1999.  During  that  time,  Japan’s  economy  has  shown  significant  improvement  thanks  to  aggressive
monetary easing, fiscal stimulus measures, and the restoration of financial system stability. Underlying
conditions  for  the  recovery  of  private  demand  such  as  business  fixed  investment  and  household
consumption  have  also  continued  to  improve.  Nevertheless,  we  still  need  to  carefully  monitor  the
effects of such improvement on the spending behavior of households and firms, particularly since the
economy is faced with various structural problems. And, in view of the fact that Japan’s budget deficit
is the largest among major industrial countries, it should be noted that further stimulus from the fiscal
policy side is not an easy option.
Under such circumstances, voices calling for additional measures on the monetary policy front have
tended to become louder. And, some have begun to argue for tolerating a little bit of inflation. In fact,
we have been receiving an increasing number of questions asking our views on “inflation policy” and
inflation  targeting.  Though  there  is  no  single  definition  of  inflation  policy,  it  includes  all  policies
which  somehow  artificially  create  inflation  or  inflationary  expectations.  Before  responding  to  the
questions, we first need to review the significance of price stability. In this regard, the Bank of Japan
has  recently  announced  that  it  will  conduct  a  comprehensive  study  on  price  stability,  and  today’s
speech can be regarded as a prelude to such study.
1.
Why is price stability important?
Significance of price stability
The  new  Bank  of  Japan  Law  which  came  into  effect  in  April  1998  stipulates  that  the  objective  of
monetary  policy  is  to  “contribute  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy  through  the
pursuit of  price  stability”.  When  we emphasize  the  importance  of  price  stability,  we  are  sometimes
criticized  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  only  concerned  with  inflation  regardless  of  current  economic
conditions. Let me start by explaining that such criticism is not to the point.
Price stability is important because it provides the foundation for all kinds of economic activity and
the people’s livelihood.
The  market  economy  is  a  structure  within  which  firms  and  households  make  decisions  regarding
consumption and investment based on prices of individual goods and services. And, the general price
level is a concept that consolidates individual prices of various goods and services traded in a country.
In  other  words,  the  levels  of  individual  prices  can  be  evaluated  against  the  general  price  level  as  a
yardstick.  In  this  framework,  price  stability  means  that  this  yardstick  is  reliable.  If  so,  changes  in
consumer preferences and the progress of technological innovation will be efficiently translated into
changes in individual prices. Thus, firms will be able to use changes in relative prices as a signal for
their future business strategy. From a macroeconomic viewpoint, when the economic environment is
continuously changing, stable prices facilitate the smooth reallocation of such resources as labor and
capital  and  also  technological  innovation  in  response  to,  for  example,  consumer  trends,  thereby
ensuring sound economic growth over the long run.
1
BIS Review 26/2000
If prices fluctuate considerably and the yardstick becomes unreliable, then the signaling  function  of
individual prices will be greatly weakened. In this case, labor and capital will not be easily transferred
to growth industries, and the inefficient allocation  of resources  will  ensue.  In  addition,  an  economy
with unstable prices will likely experience unstable business cycles. This, in turn, will make it difficult
for firms and households to formulate prospects regarding profits and income, which obstructs sound
investment activity. Thus, if price stability is impaired, the long-term growth rate will decline.
Furthermore, price fluctuation distorts income distribution. For example, if inflation occurs, those with
financial assets which are fixed in nominal terms, such as bank deposits, will see a fall in their real
value. Conversely, those with financial liabilities will benefit from a reduction in their real value. As a
result, inequality between those with assets and those with liabilities will arise. In contrast, if deflation
occurs, the reverse inequality will follow.
Policy objective of the Bank of Japan
As such, price stability lays the foundation for sound economic development from the viewpoint  of
both efficiency and fairness.
The Bank of Japan has been aiming at price stability that is neither deflationary nor inflationary. It is a
mistake to think that the Bank is concerned only with inflationary risks.
This can be understood from the conduct of monetary policy in the recent period. In February 1999,
the Bank embarked on drastic monetary easing, namely the zero interest rate policy. And in April, it
made clear its firm intent to maintain this policy until deflationary concerns are dispelled.
In view of current economic conditions and price developments, Japan’s economy is judged not to be
in the middle of deflation. What is frightening about deflation is that it induces a vicious circle called a
deflationary spiral whereby price declines reduce corporate profits and wages which, in turn, leads to a
slowdown  in  business  activity  and  further  price  declines.  These  can  be  called  “pernicious  price
declines”. In fact, there was a very high risk of Japan’s economy falling into a deflationary spiral up
until around the spring of 1999, but concern over such risk materializing has greatly subsided in the
past  year.  Both  CPI  and  WPI  have  been  almost  level.  Corporate  profits  have  been  increasing  and
economic  activity  gradually  picking  up.  Though  it  is  true  that  prices  of  a  number  of  products  have
been declining, this is against the backdrop of various revolutionary changes including the so-called IT
revolution, that is, the progress of technological innovation in information and telecommunications, as
well as  the revolution in  distribution networks  represented  by  the  emergence  of so-called  “category
killers”. Such phenomena cannot necessarily be regarded as pernicious price declines.
Nevertheless, the Bank has been continuing its  extremely  accommodative  policy  symbolized  by  the
zero interest rate policy. This is because, in our judgment, we might again face the risk of pernicious
price  declines  until  such  time  we  can  be  confident  that  Japan’s  economy  has  achieved  a  recovery
underpinned by private demand.
As such, the Bank of Japan has been conducting monetary policy by paying due consideration not only
to inflation but also to deflation.
2.
Problems with inflation policy
Two views of inflation targeting
Recently there have been various discussions on setting a specific numerical target to the inflation rate
in order to achieve price stability, namely inflation targeting.
At the outset, it should be noted that two different views have been discussed in Japan under the title
of inflation targeting. Originally, inflation targeting is a policy framework to enhance the transparency
regarding the conduct of monetary policy and to strengthen the credibility of the commitment to price
stability. However, not a few advocate so-called inflation targeting in the same vein as inflation policy.
BIS Review 26/2000
2
Thus, before discussing inflation targeting in its original concept, let me say a few words about the
problems involved with inflation policy.
Inflation  policy  is  not  a  well-defined  concept.  Most  typically,  as  Professor  Krugman  of  MIT
advocates, it is a policy which aims at a somewhat high inflation rate of 4 to  5%  and  mobilizes  all
possible  measures  to  achieve  this  target.  Professor  Krugman  appears  to  have  asserted  this  rather
extreme policy prescription based on a very pessimistic view of Japan’s economy. As a matter of fact,
however, Japan’s economy has started to improve. And, it is our judgment that, under such economic
conditions, we should never adopt a policy that is contrary to price stability.
There is a variation of inflation policy that says a moderate inflation rate of 2 to 3% is tolerable and it
may vitalize economic activity. However, given the current situation in Japan where prices are almost
level, such a proposal is tantamount to artificially creating inflation. Furthermore, to implement such a
proposal,  many  have  suggested  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  should  increase  its  outright  purchase  of
government bonds or underwrite them. Some even advocate that the Bank of Japan should purchase
stocks or real estate. Thus, what started as a proposal aiming at a moderate inflation rate of 2 to 3%
under the disguise of inflation targeting for price  stability  has  ended  up  being  the same  as  inflation
policy in that inflation should be artificially created at any cost.
Inflation is no solution to economic problems
Regarding inflation policy, first and foremost, I would like to point out that inflation is no solution to
economic problems. Inflation policy assumes that moderate inflation will revitalize economic activity,
alleviate  the  debt  burden  of  firms  as  well  as  financial  institutions,  and  relieve  the  fiscal  deficit
problem.  Apparently  those  who  advocate  inflation  policy  argue,  while  taking  due  account  of  its
negative effects, that the intended positive effects would be greater than the negative effects under the
current  situation.  But,  if  we  look  more  closely,  the  intended  positive  effects  themselves  would  not
likely be achieved.
Needless  to  say,  financial  markets  today  are  sufficiently  developed  in  major  industrial  countries,
including Japan, and integrated on a global scale. And thus prospects for the economy and prices in
Japan are of considerable interest to investors worldwide. Here, let us assume that the Bank of Japan
announces  a  target  inflation  rate  and  market  participants  both  at  home  and  abroad  believe  that  the
announced  target  will  be  achieved.  A  well-developed  financial  market  would  immediately  discount
this announcement and long-term interest rates such as the yield on government bonds would rise even
before we actually observed inflation. In theory, the nominal interest rate is defined as the sum of the
real interest rate and the expected rate of inflation. Therefore, with such an announcement, the nominal
interest  rate  would  be  pushed  up  by  the  same  degree  as  the  rise  in  the  expected  rate  of  inflation,
leaving the real interest rate, which influences economic activity, unchanged.
Furthermore, since uncertainty regarding the future normally increases as inflation rises, there would
be a greater possibility that long-term interest rates might rise more than the amount corresponding to
the  increase  in  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  because  of  risk  premium  accompanying  higher
uncertainty.  If  this  happened,  the  debt  burden  of  firms  and  the  fiscal  deficit  would  likely  increase
rather than decrease in real terms. The increase in long-term interest rates would also have an adverse
impact on economic activity such as business fixed investment. Therefore, a policy to create inflation
would most likely turn out to be counterproductive to the objective it was initially intended to achieve.
Those proposing the solving of economic problems by way of inflation often refer to the experiences
of  history  or  developing  countries.  But,  compared  to  such  experiences,  Japan  today  is  placed  in  a
totally  different  situation  in  terms  of  the  development  of  its  financial  markets  and  globalization.
Indeed, we would face the problem I just mentioned whether the target inflation rate were 4 to 5% or
2 to  3%.  In  this  regard,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  what  Japan  needs  now  is  an  increase  in  real
economic growth, not a rise in inflation.
3
BIS Review 26/2000
Difficulty of controlling inflation
The  second  point  is  that  inflation  is  most  likely  uncontrollable  once  triggered.  Once  inflationary
expectations take a firm hold on society, they tend to proliferate. Workers would demand higher wage
increases than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.  If  wage  costs  rise,  firms  would  try  to  pass  them  on  to
product prices. Such an economy has a built-in risk of increasing inflationary pressure.
Some argue that since the Bank of Japan is an independent central bank, it can raise the inflation rate
to 2 to 3% and then contain it around that level even if there exists further upward pressure. However,
if we tried to contain inflation after it had gained momentum, we would need very strong monetary
tightening, which might result in a substantial deterioration of economic activity and a steep climb in
unemployment. While it is true that the Bank of Japan has the power to contain inflation, it is also true
that enormous costs would be imposed on society to suppress inflation once triggered.
In fact, prevailing thought in major industrial countries until the 1970s held that economies would be
better  off  if  a  little  inflation  were  tolerated.  Partly  because  of  such  lax  monetary  policy,  the  world
economy experienced high inflation from the 1970s through the first half of the 1980s. And to contain
such inflation, many countries had to experience such hardships as higher unemployment. Because of
such bitter historical experience, major industrial countries have now discarded the idea that a little bit
of inflation will improve economic activity. Mainstream thinking now says that price stability should
be maintained by a policy which prevents inflation from arising in the first place.
Problems with further monetary easing
The third point concerns measures to create inflation. In Japan, we have already exhausted orthodox
monetary easing measures. Even if we wanted to create very modest inflation, we would have to resort
to  such  unorthodox  measures  as  an  increase  in  our  purchase  of  government  bonds  or  even
underwriting them. But here it should be noted that there is a risk that the negative side effects might
be quite large once the Bank implemented such unorthodox measures. The severity of Japan’s fiscal
situation has attracted attention from all over the world. Thus, if the Bank of Japan started purchasing
government bonds in large quantities, credibility in them would most likely be impaired. Long-term
interest  rates  would  rise  because  of  a  higher  risk  premium  occasioned  by  a  deterioration  in  the
creditworthiness of the Japanese government. Adoption of such  a drastic  policy  would run  the  high
risk of eroding not only fiscal discipline and the smooth functioning of financial markets but also the
credibility of Japan itself.
Effects of the zero interest rate policy
Having  said  all  this,  we  should  ask  ourselves  whether  there  is  anything  more  to  do  in  terms  of
monetary policy. As a matter of fact, the zero interest rate policy is an extremely powerful policy tool
for monetary easing. Under the framework that the zero interest rate policy will be maintained until
deflationary concerns are dispelled, if uncertainty about the economic outlook increases, the timing of
lifting the zero interest rate policy will be automatically delayed. By taking account of this automatic
prolongation of current monetary policy, long-term interest rates will promptly decline. Thus, the zero
interest rate policy is powerful in that it possesses flexibility of automatically absorbing, to a certain
extent, the effects of any negative shock on the economy.
Currently,  Japan’s  economy  has  started  to  improve.  Industrial  production  continues  to  rise,  and  the
increase  in  corporate  profits  is  being  confirmed.  Though  there  remains  uncertainty  regarding  the
future, we have been observing quite a number of new developments in such areas as information and
telecommunications.  At  this  juncture,  I  believe  it  very  important  to  promote  structural  reform  and
create an environment conducive to revitalizing the corporate sector while the economy is underpinned
by fiscal and monetary policy.
BIS Review 26/2000
4
3.
Inflation targeting
Original inflation targeting
Next, let me talk about the original concept of inflation targeting. Basically, it is a policy framework
that emphasizes the strong commitment of the central bank to maintaining price stability and enhances
the transparency regarding the conduct of monetary policy.
Inflation  targeting  has  been  adopted  by  such  countries  as  the  United  Kingdom,  New  Zealand,  and
Sweden  since  around  1990.  For  example,  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  target  inflation  rate  is  set  at
2.5%  for  a  price  index  roughly  equivalent  to  CPI.  At  its  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Committee
meetings,  the  Bank  of  England  discusses  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  determines  any  necessary
change  in  interest  rates  taking  due  account  of  the  time  lag  for  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  to
materialize so as to bring inflation to around 2.5% over the span of two years. Once every quarter the
Bank of England releases an inflation report in which it explains the conduct of monetary policy and
describes prospects for the economy and prices during the course of the following two years.
While implementation of inflation targeting differs from country to country, the fundamental common
factors are (a) setting a target inflation rate, (b) conducting monetary policy with the aim of achieving
the  target  over  the  medium  term,  and  (c)  making  available  a  substantial  amount  of  information
including  the  economic  outlook  which  is  the  basis  for  policy  judgment.  It  should  be  noted  that  the
central bank is not required to achieve the target inflation rate in the short run. The aim of inflation
targeting is to contain inflationary expectations and enhance accountability regarding monetary policy
by making a numerical target the medium-term objective.
This  original  concept  of  inflation  targeting  may  have  some  merits.  In  fact,  we  have  discussed  the
subject a number of times in our Monetary Policy Meetings. However, at the moment, I think adoption
of such a framework in Japan presents many difficult problems.
Price developments in Japan
As far as prices are concerned, they have been very stable in Japan.
Inflation targeting was originally adopted as a policy framework geared toward price stability by those
countries who were suffering from high inflation. For example, in the United Kingdom, the average
rate of inflation was more than 5% during most of the 1980s, reaching 7 to 8% in 1990 and 1991. And
in 1992 inflation targeting was introduced. In the case of the United Kingdom, setting a target inflation
rate at 2.5% is equivalent to announcing a strong commitment to containing inflation and maintaining
price stability.
In  contrast,  since  the  early  1980s  when  the  effects  of  the  Second  Oil  Shock  waned  in  Japan,  the
average rate of  CPI  increase  has  been  very  low  at around  1%,  and  was  only  3%  at the  peak  of  the
bubble period when the economy was overheated. In the case of Japan, prices  have  been extremely
stable for nearly twenty years. Thus, we have not been put in  a  situation  where  we  have  to set  any
inflation  target  to  maintain  price  stability  even  if  we  have  not  solved  such  difficult  problems  as
defining and measuring price stability.
New price revolution
The problem of defining and measuring price stability is whether we can set an appropriate numerical
target for inflation based on a specific price index.
In addition to this  rather  difficult  problem,  we  need  to  consider the  possibility  that  major industrial
countries, including Japan, are entering a “new price revolution era”. Such development has been born
of the rapid expansion of economic activity related to information and telecommunications, in other
words the  “IT  revolution”.  This  is  characterized  by  extremely  rapid  technological innovation  which
induces price declines through the improvement in productivity and the development of new products.
Since  the  mid-1990s  the  United  States  has  witnessed  stable  and  low  inflation  under  extremely  low
5
BIS Review 26/2000
unemployment,  partly  because  economic  expansion  has  been  supported  by  the  IT  revolution.  This
phenomenon contradicts past experience.
In  addition  to  this  worldwide  IT  revolution,  Japan  has  been  experiencing  dramatic  changes  in  its
distribution and service industries which can be seen as a revolution in distribution networks.
The  progress  of  technological  innovation  and  the  revolution  in  distribution  networks  raise  two  big
questions when analyzing prices. The first is whether prices of new products and price developments
under  the  new  distribution  networks  are  appropriately  reflected  in  price  indexes.  This  is  the
oft-discussed  issue  of  biases  in  price  indexes.  In  view  of  the  large  number  of  new  products  and
distribution networks available, this issue might have become more serious than previously envisaged.
The second question is how to assess the price declines due to such revolutionary changes. If the IT
and distribution network revolutions continue under the current situation of zero inflation, we cannot
rule out the possibility that the economy could recover while the inflation rate is negative in terms of
the  existing  price  indexes,  even  though  they  may  not  sufficiently  incorporate  these  revolutionary
changes. And, in the case where cost reductions continue thanks to technological innovation, even if
the inflation rate is statistically negative it would not be appropriate to judge the economy as being
deflationary as long as it is recovering steadily.
When  the  environment  surrounding  prices  is  likely  experiencing  dramatic  changes,  we  have  to
carefully  examine  whether  it  is  possible  to  set  an  appropriate  target  for  inflation  based  on  existing
price indexes.
Desirable rate of inflation
Whether  an  optimal  inflation  rate  should  be  exactly  zero  percent  or  a  small  but  positive  number  is
another  argument  worth  noting.  Following  are  some  of  the  reasons  why  the  optimal  inflation  rate
could be a small but positive number. First, as I mentioned, it appears not so easy for existing price
statistics to fully incorporate actual price declines due to such factors as the revolution in distribution
networks.  This  is  the  problem  related  to  the  upward  bias  of  price  indexes.  Second,  since  nominal
wages  hardly  ever  decline,  which  is  because  of  the  so-called  downward  rigidity  of  nominal  wages,
economic adjustment would proceed more smoothly with a positive rate of inflation. Third is the zero
boundary  problem  for  interest  rates.  Since  nominal  interest  rates,  which  can  be  controlled  by  the
central bank, never fall below zero, room for further monetary easing would be limited if conditions
worsened. In this regard, there is an argument that it is better to have a positive rate of inflation as a
cushion so that the central bank can maintain room for maneuvering when a policy response is needed.
Indeed, this argument may be related to the fact that countries which adopted inflation targeting set, in
principle, a positive target for inflation, including the United Kingdom which has 2.5% inflation as a
target.
However, careful examination seems warranted as to whether these discussions and the examples of
foreign  countries  could  be  directly  applied  to  Japan.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  bonuses  have  fallen
substantially  and  labor  costs  have  been  reduced  by  utilizing  part-time  workers  and  temporary
employment  agencies  over  the  past  one  to  two  years,  the  downward  rigidity  of  nominal  wages  in
Japan’s labor market may not be so strong as has been argued. The idea of tolerating a certain positive
rate of inflation to ensure a cushion for monetary policy seems to be something like putting the cart
before the horse. As you may know, Japan has had an average inflation rate of only slightly over one
percent for nearly twenty years. Thus, it would need a very good reason to accept an inflation rate of
2 to  3%.  At  this  juncture,  we  should  carefully  examine  the  content  of  price  stability  that  best
contributes to the sound development of the national economy by taking due account of the features
and structure of Japan’s economy.
Toward enhanced transparency of monetary policy
As  I  have  just  described,  there  seem  to  exist  a  number  of  difficult  problems  in  applying  inflation
targeting to Japan in the way it is adopted in some foreign countries. As a matter of fact, not only the
Bank  of  Japan  but  also  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  European  Central  Bank  are  cautious  about
BIS Review 26/2000
6
adopting such a framework. Nevertheless, it  is  true that  the  Bank  of Japan is  keenly  aware that  the
transparency of monetary policy should be further enhanced.
Since it is impossible to foresee the economic outlook with certainty, we can neither predetermine the
timing of any future policy changes nor set mechanical criteria for deciding policy changes. In fact,
even in countries adopting inflation targeting, there is no rule whereby the central bank automatically
tightens monetary conditions if inflation hits a certain target rate. In any country, monetary policy is
based on the central bank’s judgment of future price developments, which are influenced by various
factors  such  as  demand  at  home  and  abroad,  wages,  oil  prices,  foreign  exchange  rates,  and
technological innovation. In the conduct of monetary policy, the central bank needs to make an overall
judgment by examining the effects of all these factors on prices. In this sense, the overall judgment of
the central bank is important regardless of whether a framework like inflation targeting is adopted or
not. In other words, adoption of inflation targeting does not mean that people will be able to know in
advance when and by how much the policy interest rate will be changed.
The transparency of monetary policy is, after all, nothing more than clarifying what monetary policy is
aiming at, and disclosing, to the extent possible, the overall judgment of the central bank with respect
to current and future economic and financial conditions. With respect to the former, the new Bank of
Japan Law clearly stipulates that price stability is the objective of monetary policy. With respect to the
latter, the Bank has been trying to explain its overall judgment as clearly as possible in its Monthly
Report on Recent Economic and Financial Developments and minutes of Monetary Policy Meetings.
Such disclosure is stipulated in the new Bank of Japan Law. We thus believe that the transparency of
monetary policy has been considerably enhanced compared with the situation under the old law.
At the same time, we should be well aware that behind the heated discussion on inflation targeting,
market participants and the public are calling for more transparency with respect to monetary policy.
Truly, greater transparency is also important for the  central  bank  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  smooth
transmission of policy effects. Furthermore, we recognize that it is an important mandate of the Bank
of Japan to plainly explain our thinking on the conduct of monetary policy and price stability.
our basic thinking regarding price stability;
the measurement of prices, namely, issues regarding price indexes;
Bearing  such  recognition  in  mind,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  conduct  a  comprehensive  study  on  the
concept of price stability and issue a report by around summer. The issues for study include:
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Since  I  have  often  been  asked  about  the  relationship  between  this  comprehensive  study  on  price
stability and the lifting of the zero interest rate policy, let me say a few words on this issue.
issues related to the numerical quantification of price stability.
the evaluation of recent price developments in Japan; and
The comprehensive study that we have undertaken is intended to review our basic thinking regarding
price stability with a view to enhancing the transparency of monetary policy over the long run. And it
should be understood that it is independent from the current conduct of monetary policy. Hence, it is
not  directly  related  to  such  issues  as the timing  of  lifting  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  or  conditions
which must be fulfilled for lifting such policy. In other words, it does not imply that the zero interest
rate policy will not be lifted  until the study  is  completed  nor  that it  will  be  lifted  once the study  is
completed.
Conditions for lifting the zero interest rate policy can be likened to those for a patient in a hospital
coming out of the intensive care unit, while our basic study on price stability is similar to a medical
study of how to maintain health and physical strength in normal times.
With respect to the condition for lifting the zero interest rate policy, we have clearly stated that we will
maintain the current zero interest rate policy until deflationary concerns are dispelled.
7
BIS Review 26/2000
Concluding remarks: until deflationary concerns are dispelled
4.
I would like to conclude my remarks today by addressing the question of how we might decide that the
economy has reached a stage where deflationary concerns have been dispelled.
What is of central concern in our conduct of monetary policy is to avoid a deflationary spiral, which is
a vicious circle of price declines and recession. However, it is difficult to define this spiral by such
simple figures as a certain percentage decline in CPI. To reiterate, we cannot necessarily conclude that
a situation is deflationary solely from a negative inflation rate when the IT and distribution network
revolutions are in full swing. To the contrary, even if inflation is level statistically, stagnant demand
would indicate future declines in prices and corporate profits, which means that deflationary concerns
have yet to be dispelled. Thus, price developments must be assessed together with underlying factors.
Furthermore, the most important point when judging whether deflationary concerns are dispelled is to
analyze whether there exists pressure for pernicious price declines stemming from shrinking demand
or a widening output gap.
In other words, if we become confident that economic recovery is sustained and that the output gap
continues  to  narrow,  then  we  can  say  that  deflationary  concerns  have  been  almost  dispelled  and
Japan’s economy could leave the intensive care unit. In this regard, we need to have clearer indication
that  the  economy  is  on  a  self-sustained  recovery  path  led  by  private  demand,  not  by  policy  and
external factors.
Private  demand  basically  consists  of  household  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment.  While
both  are  necessary  for  sustainable  growth,  business  fixed  investment  is  believed  to  play,  in  many
cases,  a  more  important  role  in  giving  impetus  to  a  virtuous  circle  of  a  self-sustained  recovery.
Recently, the environment surrounding private demand has been gradually improving as evidenced by
higher corporate profits and the improved sentiment of firms and consumers. It is crucial whether such
improvement will lead to increased spending. The Bank of Japan will carefully monitor the economy
with focus on the strength of private demand centering on business fixed investment.
Today,  I  have  tried  to  share  our  thoughts  with  you  on  price  stability  and  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy by referring to inflation policy and inflation targeting. As always, I would appreciate it if you
would continue to give us your understanding and support.
BIS Review 26/2000
8
