Mr Greenspan presents the Federal Reserve’s semi-annual report on the
economy and monetary policy to the US House of Representatives
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, US House of Representatives on
17 February 2000.
 I appreciate this opportunity to present the Federal Reserve’s semi-annual report on the economy and
monetary policy.
There is little evidence that the American economy, which grew  more  than  4%  in  1999 and  surged
forward at an even faster pace in the second half of the year, is slowing appreciably. At the same time,
inflation  has  remained  largely  contained.  An  increase  in  the  overall  rate  of  inflation  in  1999  was
mainly a result of higher energy prices. Importantly, unit labor costs actually declined in the second
half of the year. Indeed, still-preliminary data indicate that total unit cost increases last year remained
extraordinarily  low,  even  as  the  business  expansion  approached  a  record  nine  years.  Domestic
operating profit margins, after sagging for eighteen months, apparently turned up again in the fourth
quarter,  and  profit  expectations  for  major  corporations  for  the  first  quarter  have  been  undergoing
upward  revisions  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  -  scarcely  an  indication  of  imminent  economic
weakness.
The economic forces at work
Underlying this performance, unprecedented in my half-century of observing the American economy,
is a continuing acceleration in productivity. Non-farm business output per workhour increased 3¼%
during  the  past  year  -  likely  more  than  4%  when  measured  by  non-farm  business  income.  Security
analysts’  projections  of  long-term  earnings,  an  indicator  of  expectations  of  company  productivity,
continued to be revised upward in January, extending a string of upward revisions that began in early
1995. One result of this remarkable economic performance has been a pronounced increase in living
standards  for  the  majority  of  Americans.  Another  has  been  a  labor  market  that  has  provided  job
opportunities  for  large  numbers  of  people  previously  struggling  to  get  on  the  first  rung  of  a  ladder
leading to training, skills, and permanent employment.
Yet those profoundly beneficial forces driving the American economy to competitive excellence are
also  engendering  a  set  of  imbalances  that,  unless  contained,  threaten  our  continuing  prosperity.
Accelerating productivity entails a matching acceleration in the potential output of goods and services
and a corresponding rise in real incomes available to purchase the new output. The problem is that the
pickup  in  productivity  tends  to  create  even  greater  increases  in  aggregate  demand  than  in  potential
aggregate  supply.  This  occurs  principally  because  a  rise  in  structural  productivity  growth  has  its
counterpart  in  higher  expectations  for  long-term  corporate  earnings.  This,  in  turn,  not  only  spurs
business investment but also increases stock prices and the market value of assets held by households,
creating  additional  purchasing  power  for  which  no  additional  goods  or  services  have  yet  been
produced.
Historical  evidence  suggests that  perhaps  three  to  four  cents  out  of  every  additional  dollar  of  stock
market wealth eventually is reflected in increased consumer purchases. The sharp rise in the amount of
consumer  outlays  relative  to  disposable  incomes  in  recent  years,  and  the  corresponding  fall  in  the
saving rate, has been consistent with this so-called wealth effect on household purchases. Moreover,
higher stock prices, by lowering the cost of equity capital, have helped to support the boom in capital
spending.
1
BIS Review 13/2000
Outlays prompted by capital gains in excess of increases in income, as best we can judge, have added
about 1 percentage point to annual growth of gross domestic purchases, on average, over the past five
years. The additional growth in spending of recent years that has accompanied these wealth gains as
well as other supporting influences on the economy appears to have been met in about equal measure
from increased net imports and from goods and services produced by the net increase in newly hired
workers  over  and  above  the  normal  growth  of the  work  force, including  a  substantial  net inflow  of
workers from abroad.
But these safety valves that have been supplying goods and services to meet the recent increments to
purchasing power largely generated by capital gains cannot be expected to absorb an excess of demand
over supply indefinitely. First, growing net imports and a widening current account deficit require ever
larger portfolio and direct foreign investments in the United States, an outcome that cannot continue
without limit.
Imbalances  in  the  labor  markets  perhaps  may  have  even  more  serious  implications  for  inflation
pressures. While the pool of officially unemployed and those otherwise willing to work may continue
to  shrink,  as  it  has  persistently  over  the  past  seven  years,  there  is  an  effective  limit  to  new  hiring,
unless immigration is uncapped. At some point in the continuous reduction in the number of available
workers willing to take jobs, short of the repeal of the law of supply and demand, wage increases must
rise  above  even  impressive  gains  in  productivity.  This  would  intensify  inflationary  pressures  or
squeeze profit margins, with either outcome capable of bringing our growing prosperity to an end.
As  would  be  expected,  imbalances  between  demand  and  potential  supply  in  markets  for  goods  and
services  are  being  mirrored  in  the  financial  markets  by  an  excess  in  the  demand  for  funds.  As  a
consequence,  market  interest  rates  are  already  moving  in  the  direction  of  containing  the  excess  of
demand in financial markets and therefore in product markets as well. For example, BBB corporate
bond rates adjusted for inflation expectations have risen by more than 1 percentage point during the
past two years. However, to date, rising  business  earnings  expectations and  declining  compensation
for risk have more than offset the effects of this increase, propelling equity prices and the wealth effect
higher.  Should  this  process  continue,  however,  with  the  assistance  of  a  monetary  policy  vigilant
against emerging macroeconomic imbalances, real long-term rates will at some point be high enough
to  finally  balance  demand  with  supply  at the economy’s  potential in  both the financial  and  product
markets. Other things equal, this condition will involve equity discount factors high enough to bring
the  rise  in  asset  values  into  line  with  that  of  household  incomes,  thereby  stemming  the  impetus  to
consumption relative to income that has come from rising wealth. This does not necessarily imply a
decline in asset values - although that, of course, can happen at any time for any number of reasons -
but rather that these values will increase no faster than household incomes.
Because there are limits to the amount of goods and services that can be supplied from increasing net
imports  and  by  drawing  on  a  limited  pool  of  persons  willing  to  work,  it  necessarily  follows  that
consumption  cannot  keep  rising  faster  than  income.  Moreover,  outsized  increases  in  wealth  cannot
persist  indefinitely  either.  For  so  long  as  the  levels  of  consumption  and  investment  are  sensitive  to
asset values, equity values increasing at a pace faster than income, other things equal, will induce a
rise  in  overall  demand  in  excess  of  potential  supply.  But  that  situation  cannot  persist  without  limit
because the supply safety valves are themselves limited.
With foreign economies strengthening and labor markets already tight, how the current wealth effect is
finally contained will determine whether the extraordinary expansion that it has helped foster can slow
to a sustainable pace, without destabilizing the economy in the process.
Technological change continues apace
On a broader front, there are few signs to date of slowing in the pace of innovation and the spread of
our newer technologies that, as I have indicated in previous testimonies, have been at the root of our
extraordinary productivity improvement. Indeed, some analysts conjecture that we still may be in the
earlier  stages  of  the  rapid  adoption  of  new  technologies  and not  yet in sight  of  the  stage  when  this
BIS Review 13/2000
2
wave  of  innovation  will  crest.  With  so  few  examples  in  our  history,  there  is  very  little  basis  for
determining the particular stage of development through which we are currently passing.
Without doubt, the synergies of the microprocessor, laser, fiber-optic glass, and satellite technologies
have brought quantum advances in information availability. These advances, in turn, have dramatically
decreased business operational uncertainties and risk premiums and, thereby, have engendered major
cost reductions and productivity advances. There seems little question that further major advances lie
ahead. What is uncertain is the future pace of the application of these innovations, because it is this
pace that governs the rate of change in productivity and economic potential.
Monetary policy, of course, did not produce the intellectual insights behind the technological advances
that  have  been  responsible  for  the  recent  phenomenal  reshaping  of  our  economic  landscape.  It  has,
however,  been  instrumental,  we  trust,  in  establishing  a  stable  financial  and  economic  environment
with  low  inflation  that  is  conducive  to  the  investments  that  have  exploited  these  innovative
technologies.
Federal budget policy has also played a pivotal role. The emergence of surpluses in the unified budget
and of the associated increase in government saving over the past few years has been exceptionally
important to the balance of the expansion, because the surpluses have been absorbing a portion of the
potential excess of demand over sustainable supply associated partly with the wealth effect. Moreover,
because the surpluses are augmenting the pool of domestic saving, they have held interest rates below
the levels that otherwise would have been needed to achieve financial and economic balance during
this period of exceptional economic growth. They  have,  in  effect,  helped  to  finance  and  sustain the
productive private investment that has been  key  to  capturing  the benefits  of the  newer technologies
that, in turn, have boosted the long-term growth potential of the US economy.
The  recent  good  news  on  the  budget  suggests  that  our  longer-run  prospects  for  continuing  this
beneficial process of recycling savings from the public to the private sectors have improved greatly in
recent years. Nonetheless, budget outlays are expected to come under mounting pressure as the baby
boom  generation  moves  into  retirement,  a  process  that  gets  under  way  a  decade  from  now.
Maintaining  the  surpluses  and  using  them  to  repay  debt  over  coming  years  will  continue  to  be  an
important  way  the  federal  government  can  encourage  productivity-enhancing  investment  and  rising
standards  of  living.  Thus,  we  cannot  afford  to  be  lulled  into  letting  down  our  guard  on  budgetary
matters, an issue to which I shall return later in this testimony.
The economic outlook
Although the outlook is clouded by a number of uncertainties, the central tendencies of the projections
of the Board members and Reserve Bank presidents imply continued good economic performance in
the United States. Most of them expect economic growth to slow somewhat this year, easing into the
3½-3¾%  area.  The  unemployment  rate  would  remain  in  the  neighborhood  of  4-4¼%.  The  rate  of
inflation for total personal consumption expenditures is expected to be 1¾-2%, at or a bit below the
rate in 1999, which was elevated by rising energy prices.
In preparing these forecasts, the Federal Open Market Committee members had to consider several of
the crucial demand- and supply-side forces I referred to earlier. Continued favorable developments in
labor  productivity  are  anticipated  both  to  raise  the  economy’s  capacity  to  produce  and,  through  its
supporting  effects  on  real  incomes  and  asset  values,  to  boost  private  domestic  demand.  When
productivity-driven wealth increases were spurring demand a few years ago, the effects on resource
utilization and inflation pressures were offset in part by the effects of weakening foreign economies
and a rising foreign exchange value of the dollar, which depressed exports and encouraged imports.
Last year, with the welcome recovery of foreign  economies  and  with the  leveling  out  of  the  dollar,
these factors holding down demand and prices in the United States started to unwind. Strong growth in
foreign economic activity is expected to continue this year, and, other things equal, the effect of the
previous appreciation of the dollar should wane, augmenting demand on US resources and lessening
one source of downward pressure on our prices.
3
BIS Review 13/2000
As  a  consequence,  the  necessary  alignment  of  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand  with  the  growth  of
potential aggregate supply may well depend on restraint on domestic demand, which continues to be
buoyed  by  the  lagged  effects  of  increases  in  stock  market  valuations.  Accordingly,  the  appreciable
increases in both nominal and real intermediate- and long-term interest rates over the last two years
should act as a needed restraining influence in the period ahead. However, to date, interest-sensitive
spending has remained robust, and the FOMC will have to stay alert for signs that real interest rates
have not yet risen enough to bring the growth of demand into line with that of potential supply, even
should the acceleration of productivity continue.
Achieving  that  alignment  seems  more  pressing  today  than  it  did  earlier,  before  the  effects  of
imbalances  began  to  cumulate,  lessening  the  depth  of  our  various  buffers  against  inflationary
pressures.  Labor  markets,  for  example,  have  tightened  in  recent  years  as  demand  has  persistently
outstripped even accelerating potential supply. As I have previously noted, we cannot be sure in  an
environment  with  so  little  historical  precedent  what  degree  of  labor  market  tautness  could  begin  to
push unit costs and prices up more rapidly. We know, however, that there is a limit, and we can be
sure that the smaller the pool of people without jobs willing to take them, the  closer  we  are to  that
limit. As the FOMC indicated after its last meeting, the risks still seem to be weighted on the side of
building inflation pressures.
A central bank can best contribute to economic growth and rising standards of living by fostering a
financial environment that promotes overall balance in the economy and price stability. Maintaining
an environment of effective price stability is essential, because the experience in the United States and
abroad has underscored that low and stable inflation is a prerequisite for healthy, balanced, economic
expansion.  Sustained  expansion  and  price  stability  provide  a  backdrop  against  which  workers  and
businesses can respond to signals from the marketplace in ways that make  most efficient use of the
evolving technologies.
Federal budget policy issues
Before closing, I should like to revisit some issues of federal budget policy that I have addressed in
previous congressional testimony. Some modest erosion in fiscal discipline resulted last year through
the use of the “emergency” spending initiatives and some “creative accounting”. Although somewhat
disappointing, that erosion was small relative to the influence of the wise choice of the Administration
and the Congress to allow the bulk of the unified budget surpluses projected for the next several years
to build and retire debt to the public. The idea that we should stop borrowing from the social security
trust fund to finance other outlays has gained surprising - and welcome - traction, and it establishes, in
effect,  a  new  budgetary  framework  that  is  centered  on  the  on-budget  surplus  and  how  it  should  be
used.
This  new  framework  is  useful  because  it  offers  a  clear  objective  that  should  strengthen  budgetary
discipline. It moves the budget process closer to accrual accounting, the private-sector norm, and - I
would hope - the ultimate objective of federal budget accounting.
The new budget projections from the Congressional Budget Office and the Administration generally
look reasonable. But, as many analysts have stressed, these estimates represent a midrange of possible
outcomes  for  the  economy  and  the  budget,  and  actual  budgetary  results  could  deviate  quite
significantly  from  current  expectations.  Some  of  the  uncertainty  centers  on  the  likelihood  that  the
recent spectacular growth of labor productivity will persist over the years ahead. Like many private
forecasters, the CBO and the Office of Management and Budget assume that productivity growth will
drop  back  somewhat  from  the  recent  stepped-up  pace.  But  a  distinct  possibility,  as  I  pointed  out
earlier, is that the development and diffusion of new technologies in the current wave of innovation
may still be at a relatively early stage and that the scope for further acceleration of productivity is thus
greater than is embodied in these budget projections. If so, the outlook for budget surpluses would be
even brighter than is now anticipated.
But there are significant downside risks to the budget outlook as well. One is our limited knowledge of
the forces driving the surge in tax revenues in recent years. Of course, a good part of that surge is due
BIS Review 13/2000
4
to the extraordinary rise in the market value of assets which, as I noted earlier, cannot be sustained at
the pace of recent years. But that is not the entire story. These relationships are complex, and until we
have detailed tabulations compiled from actual tax returns, we shall not really know why individual
tax revenues, relative to income, have been even higher than would have been predicted from rising
asset  values  and  bracket  creep.  Thus,  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  this  so-called  “tax
surprise”,  which  has  figured  so  prominently  in  the  improved  budget  picture  of  recent  years,  will
dissipate  or  reverse.  If  this  were  to  happen,  the  projected  surpluses,  even  with  current  economic
assumptions, would shrink appreciably and perhaps disappear. Such an outcome would be especially
likely if adverse developments occurred in other parts of the budget as well - for example, if the recent
slowdown in health care spending were to be followed by a sharper pickup than is assumed in current
budget projections.
Another  consideration  that  argues  for  letting  the  unified  surpluses  build  is  that  the  budget  is  still
significantly short of balance when measured on an accrual basis. If social security, for example, were
measured on such a basis, counting benefits when they are earned by workers rather than when they
are paid out, that program would have shown a substantial deficit last year. The deficit would have
been large enough to push the total federal budget into the red, and an accrual-based budget measure
could conceivably  record  noticeable  deficits  over the  next  few  years,  rather  than  the  surpluses  now
indicated by the official projections for either the total unified budget or the on-budget accounts. Such
accruals take account of still growing contingent liabilities that, under most reasonable sets of actuarial
assumptions, currently amount to many trillions of dollars for social security benefits alone.
Even if accrual accounting is set aside, it might still be prudent to eschew new longer-term, potentially
irreversible  commitments  until  we  are  assured  that  the  on-budget  surplus  projections  are  less
conjectural than they are, of necessity, today.
Allowing surpluses to reduce the debt to the public, rather than for all practical purposes irrevocably
committing to their disposition in advance, can be viewed as a holding action pending the clarification
of  the  true  underlying  budget  outcomes  of  the  next  few  years.  Debt  repaid  can  very  readily  be
reborrowed to fund delayed initiatives.
More fundamentally, the growth potential of our economy under current circumstances is best served,
in my judgment, by allowing the unified budget surpluses presently in train to materialize and thereby
reduce Treasury debt held by the public.
Yet I recognize that growing budget surpluses may be politically infeasible to defend. If this proves to
be the case, as I have also testified previously, the likelihood of maintaining a still satisfactory overall
budget position over the longer run is greater, I believe, if surpluses are used to lower tax rates rather
than to embark on new spending programs. History illustrates the difficulties of keeping spending in
check, especially in programs that are open-ended commitments, which too often have led to larger
outlays than initially envisioned. Decisions to reduce taxes, however, are more likely to be contained
by  the  need  to  maintain  an  adequate  revenue  base  to  finance  necessary  government  services.
Moreover, especially if designed to lower marginal rates, tax reductions can offer favorable incentives
for economic performance.
Conclusion
As the US economy enters a new century as well as a new year, the time is opportune to reflect on the
basic  characteristics  of  our  economic  system  that  have  brought  about  our  success  in  recent  years.
Competitive  and  open  markets,  the  rule  of  law,  fiscal  discipline,  and  a  culture  of  enterprise  and
entrepreneurship should continue to undergird rapid innovation and enhanced productivity that in turn
should foster a sustained further rise in living standards. It would be imprudent, however, to presume
that  the  business  cycle  has  been  purged from  market  economies  so long  as  human  expectations  are
subject to bouts of euphoria and disillusionment. We can only anticipate that we will readily take such
diversions in stride and trust that beneficent fundamentals will provide the framework for continued
economic progress well into the new millennium.
5
BIS Review 13/2000
