Joseph Yam: Speech at the Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 33rd Asian
Development Bank Annual Meeting, held in Chiang Mai, on 6-8 May 2000.
 Mr President, I would like first to express my gratitude to the people and Government of Thailand for
their  generous  hospitality  in  hosting  this  year’s  Annual  Meeting  of the  Asian  Development  Bank.  I
would  also  like  to  thank  the  Bank’s  management  and  staff  for  the  excellent  arrangements  for  this
meeting.
Mr  President,  notwithstanding  the  devastating  Asian  financial  turmoil  of  1997-98,  the  development
record  of  Asia  in  recent  times  has  been  impressive.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  has  played  an
important role in making this impressive record possible and I must, in this first Annual Meeting of the
Bank  in  the  new  millennium,  record  my  appreciation  of  the  good  work  that  the  Bank,  since  its
establishment, has done for our region.
But like everything else, and everybody else, the Bank could have  done even  better  for  Asia  had  it
been  able  to  foresee,  and  promote  policies  capable  of  pre-empting  the  financial  crisis  which  has
brought so much suffering and disruption to the region. In our enjoyment of the Asian miracle, we,
whether within or outside the region, were all oblivious of the risks associated with the explosion of
international  finance  that  we  have  recently  been  experiencing.  But  as  markets  attained  a  global
dimension,  encouraged  by  financial  liberalisation  and  the  advance  of  information  technology,  they
became  far  less  tolerant  of  weaknesses  than  before,  and  the  markets  responded  to  weaknesses  with
harsh punishments, which many considered grossly unfair.
But  this is the reality  that  we  face.  And  if  we  are to  continue  to  benefit  from  the  greatly  enhanced
efficiency  of  global  financial  markets  in  international  financial  intermediation  -  a  process  that  has
contributed so much to development - we have to get on with the necessary reforms. These include the
domestic structural reforms to the financial and corporate sectors, to make sure that we can manage the
risks and cope with the volatility that are part of that efficiency. And, to the extent that consensus can
be reached, they also include measures to strengthen the international financial architecture.
Thus, with some encouragement from the Bank and from others, and more importantly, urged on by
the brute forces of the market, significant progress has been made in the domestic structural reforms of
individual economies  in  the  region.  I  applaud  the  progress  and  the  achievements;  and  I  sympathise
with the pain and suffering which they have entailed. With the economic recovery of the region now
well under way and international funds flowing back into the region, I would also urge a continued
commitment  to  structural  reforms  and  caution  against  complacency.  It  must  be  recognised  that
structural reforms, and specifically financial sector reform, is of crucial importance if this recovery is
to be turned into sustainable economic growth. A bank with the mandate to promote development in
Asia must surely have a role to play in all this and I look forward to greater involvement of the Bank,
in whatever capacity, in maintaining the momentum of structural reforms in Asia.
Mr President, the efficiency of financial markets in the region in performing the important function of
financial intermediation has been found lacking. There has been notably little disagreement about the
desirability of developing domestic and regional bond markets. But there has also been little progress.
And  there  has  been  no  lack  of  explanation  of  why  this  is  the  case.  The  often  quoted  impediments
include the lack of clearing and settlement infrastructure, the absence of a broad institutional investor
base,  the  lack  of  a  benchmark  yield  curve,  low  liquidity,  and  so  on.  While  these  impediments  are
recognised  and  are  being  tackled  earnestly  by  national  authorities,  there  is  one  problem  that  has
attracted relatively little attention so far. The problem relates to the generally low credit ratings of the
Asian issuers, including the sovereigns, granted by the international rating agencies.
1
BIS Review 38/2000
I do not wish to provoke a debate on the objectivity and reliability of the ratings and the rating process
of  the  international  rating  agencies.  The  reality  is  that  many  Asian  governments  and  corporations
receive credit ratings that are lower than the minimum thresholds acceptable to institutional investors,
including  the  managers  of  official  reserves.  There  is  certainly  merit  in  strengthening  the  dialogue
between the Asian issuers and the international credit agencies to facilitate a better understanding of
the  Asian  situation  by  the  rating  agencies  and  improve  the  transparency  and  accountability  of  the
rating  process.  There  is  also  a  case  for  considering  whether  it  is  advisable  or  viable  to  establish
national  or  regional  credit  rating  agencies,  with  or  without  support  from  the  authorities.  On  top  of
these,  I  think  there  is  a  need  to  consider  the  introduction  of  market-based  mechanisms  for  credit
enhancement or guarantees.
In Asia, I am aware of problems encountered by private sector initiatives in this field. It has proved
difficult objectively to assess and manage the risks involved in such operations. Indeed, one feature of
the recent explosion of international finance is market volatility that has been much higher than had
been thought possible in the light of historical experience. But I think we have learnt from the recent
years of financial turmoil and I hope we are now in a better position to identify and therefore properly
price the risks involved in the provision of credit enhancements or guarantees. What, for example, the
Bank and the Miyazawa Plan have achieved in the provision of credit guarantees to several sovereign
bond  issues  after  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  could  also  be  achieved  and  expanded  through
market based arrangements.
Credit  enhancement  is  quite  common  in  the  developed  markets.  In  the  US,  the  credit  guarantee
companies  were  insuring  around  US$ 278.5  billion  of  debt  securities  at  the  end  of  1998.  The
availability and use of credit enhancement facilities have become a basic ingredient of mature bond
markets. It will be useful to examine how this could be promoted in the region. This promises to give a
much-needed boost to the development of the bond market in the region.
Mr President, let me end by expressing confidence that the Bank, under your leadership, will be able
to play a more pivotal role in the development of Asia as it steps into a new era in which technology
presents an abundance of opportunities as well as risks.
BIS Review 38/2000
2
