Joseph Yam: The WTO - China’s future and Hong Kong’s opportunity
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  JP,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  a
conference co-sponsored by the Cato Institute and the Hong Kong Centre for Economic Research on
“Globalisation,  the  WTO,  and  Capital  Flows - Hong  Kong’s  legacy,  China’s  future”,  held  in
Hong Kong, on 4 September 2000.
 I feel honoured to be invited to deliver the keynote address at today’s conference on the implications
of China’s prospective entry into the World Trade Organisation (WTO). This is a timely conference
for, although the arrangements for China’s entry into the WTO are not yet signed and sealed, it looks
very likely that they will be agreed soon. The Cato Institute takes a special interest in the relationship
between economic change and government policy throughout the world, and it is appropriate that it
should be following this historic event closely. The Hong Kong Centre for Economic Research - now,
I note, more than 20 years old - has established a solid reputation for independent research into public
policy  and  economic  affairs:  it is  therefore  well  positioned  to  provide  the  Hong  Kong  and  regional
perspective. It also seems right to me - despite the heavy rainfall we’ve been having this summer - that
Hong Kong should be the venue for this conference. The reasons, I hope, will  become  clear  in  this
address. On behalf of the Hong Kong SAR Government, I extend a warm welcome to all of you who
are visiting Hong Kong from overseas, particularly those who are here for the first time: I hope that
this will be an enjoyable and memorable stay.
The broad implications of China’s accession to the WTO
What will China’s accession to the WTO mean for China and the rest of the world? For China - which
is already the world’s ninth largest trading entity - it will mean more external trade, and external trade
of a better quality. There will be substantial tariff reductions among China’s existing trading partners
and there will be access to more trading partners for China. At the same time, China will be cutting its
tariffs  on  a  broad  range  of  products,  from  agricultural  to  industrial.  Tariff  reductions  allow
comparative  advantage  greater  play.  They  will  help  eliminate  trade  distortions  and  facilitate  more
efficient allocation of resources among the trading partners, thus further promoting economic growth
globally. The World Bank’s estimates give an indication of the growth potential of China’s trade on its
accession to the WTO. China’s share in world exports will double in the space of five years: from the
present 3.7% to around 7.3% by 2005. China’s share in world imports is expected to rise marginally
faster than its share in exports: from the present 3.4% to 7.2% in five years’ time.
This doubling in China’s share in the world’s external trade will be complemented by an opening to
the  world  of  large  sectors  of  the  economy  that  have  hitherto  been  closed  to  external  investors:  the
telecommunications,  financial  services  and  distribution  industries,  for  example,  and  a  variety  of
technical and professional services. These are all areas with enormous potential in China. They have
already,  over  the  past  decade,  seen  dramatic  change  and  expansion  through  the - still  raging -
revolution in information technology.  WTO  entry  will  give  them  a  further  boost  by  breaking  down
restrictive  barriers  and  opening  the  channels  for  direct  investment  and  technology  transfer  from
outside. Increased foreign competition in these areas will force Chinese enterprises to speed up their
reforms to meet the challenges. From a larger and longer perspective, further economic liberalisation
and integration into the global economy will undoubtedly be a stimulus to regulatory, institutional and
cultural change within China: I note that this is an important theme in today’s conference, although it
seems to be a matter of some considerable debate what path, or paths, that change will follow. The
general view, nevertheless, is that WTO entry will mean growth, integration and globalisation for the
mainland’s economy.
1
BIS Review 68/2000
The implications for Hong Kong
The view on the implications for Hong Kong are, on the other hand, somewhat divided. At the extreme
end of the spectrum there are those who believe that China’s WTO entry will be one more nail in the
coffin, one more noose around the neck, for Hong Kong: that the diversion of business that will result
from the now well-advanced infrastructural development in China’s coastal cities and the direct access
provided  through  WTO  membership  heralds  the  demise  of  Hong  Kong’s  historical  role  as
intermediary  between  China  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  support  of  this,  the  impressive  physical
developments in Shanghai, the readiness - and the skill - with which our colleagues on the mainland
are embracing the English language and the internet, the important regulatory reforms are all cited as if
it will only be a matter of a couple of years or so for all the business now going on in Hong Kong to be
lifted  up  and  poured  into  the  millions  of  square  feet  of  gleaming  new  office  space  now  waiting  in
Pudong.
The outlook is, I think, somewhat more complicated, and a great deal more positive, than this scenario
suggests. And it is worth adding that we have seen so many nails hammered into Hong Kong’s coffin
that the coffin is now more metal than wood. According to some, in the past few years alone Hong
Kong  has  been  diagnosed  with  a  whole  collection  of  terminal  diseases  brought  by  the  handover  in
1997,  the  recent  regional  financial  crisis,  the  “threat”  not  just  from  Shanghai  but  also  from  Seoul,
Singapore  and  Sydney,  the  high  cost  of  doing  business,  declining  educational  standards,  worsening
pollution and, believe it or not, too stable a currency as well, and a whole host of other factors. The
impending “catastrophe” of China’s entry into the WTO is the latest spectre on the horizon, and no
doubt when that one passes without incident more demons will be conjured up. Yet, in this moribund
state, we are still managing to struggle along with GDP growth - projected for this year - of 8.5% and
export growth at double-digit rates in recent quarters.
The World Bank projections on the effects of WTO entry - a doubling in the space of five  years  of
China’s  share  in  international  trade  (which  is  itself  projected  to  grow  at  the  rate  of  about  6%  per
annum) - suggests that the business “creation effect” stimulated by WTO accession will far outweigh
the “diversion effect”. There should, in brief, be more than enough work to keep both Shanghai and
Hong Kong busy for a long time to come, and more than enough skill and enterprise available in both
cities  to  enable  each  to  focus  on  the  opportunities  that  WTO  entry  will  bring.  There  will  be  some
similarity in functions, but there will also be scope for each city to develop its own characteristics as a
financial centre. The logical trend in financial services, given the continuation of exchange controls on
the mainland, in contrast to the free flow of capital in and out of Hong Kong, as enshrined in the Basic
Law, seems to be for Shanghai to develop as China’s domestic financial centre and for Hong Kong to
develop  as  its international  financial centre.  But there is  no reason  why  they  should  be  deliberately
constrained to these roles. China has room for at least two global cities. Nor is there any reason why,
in the event the mainland attains the financial and other freedoms enjoyed in Hong Kong, Shanghai
should  not  have  a  go  at  the  business  of  international  finance,  or  why  Hong  Kong,  with  its  highly
sophisticated financial infrastructure, to facilitate efficient international as well as domestic financial
intermediation, should not have a go at the RMB business. A little competition is no bad thing, as long
as it is fair competition, and Hong Kong’s free enterprise is very good at it. The only residual worry is
that  the  playing  field  might  be  a  tilted  one,  involving  subsidies  and  other  forms  of  support  or
protection from the authorities. But WTO entry is thankfully conditional upon the removal of many of
these obstacles to free and fair competition, to the advantage of those that are good at this game and
are prepared to embrace it.
The broad implications of China’s WTO entry for Hong Kong are perhaps best divided into the near-
term impact and the longer-term impact. The near-term impact is, I think, unequivocally positive for
Hong Kong. For general trade our estimates  within the  HKMA  suggest  that,  although  our  domestic
exports to the mainland will be largely unaffected by the WTO terms, our re-export trade, involving
the movement of goods to and from the mainland through Hong Kong, will be considerably boosted,
and  should  raise  our  annual  GDP  growth  rate  by  somewhere  between  0.5%  to  1%.  In  terms  of
financial,  technical  and  professional  services,  which  are  increasingly  taking  centre  stage  in  Hong
Kong’s  economy,  the  near-term  outlook  is  even  more  encouraging.  These  industries  will  be
considerably  boosted - and  enriched - by  the  Chinese  enterprises  that  are  seeking  to  upgrade  their
BIS Review 68/2000
2
capabilities and governance methods to handle increased business and meet foreign competition, and
by overseas investors who need advice on how to make the best of the opportunities on the mainland.
There are clear signs that this boost is already in progress, in anticipation of WTO accession.
The longer-term impact (let’s say beyond the five-year horizon) is less clear. It is quite reasonable to
expect that Hong Kong’s intermediary role in many areas will be eroded, as traders on the mainland
deal  directly  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Yet,  the  view  from  the  market  seems  to  be  that,  while  a
declining proportion (but not a declining amount) of China’s goods will physically pass through Hong
Kong, Hong Kong companies will continue to play an important intermediary function in sourcing the
products and identifying the markets. Beyond this, it is  likely  that  Hong  Kong’s role  will  gradually
change from one of intermediary into one of proprietor. The further liberalisation of China’s economy
offers  immense  opportunities  for  Hong  Kong  investors,  who,  apart  from  possessing  the  necessary
wealth, have a number of distinct advantages. They have a common language and culture with their
counterparts on the mainland. They have an immense and very detailed knowledge of the  mainland
business  landscape,  and  a  great  deal  of  practical  experience.  They  also  have  proximity  and  well-
established connections. This will no doubt be a profound change in role for Hong Kong. But I also
have no doubt that Hong Kong will be able to cope well, just as it did over its history of economic
development, from entrepot to manufacturing centre to international business centre.
Those of you who speak with businessmen and women in Hong Kong - who are the backbone of our
economy - will probably hear that many of them are already establishing or reinforcing their links, or
opening branch offices across the border in anticipation of China’s WTO entry. This trend is already
quite evident in the larger companies. The Hong Kong-based company that operates our container port
facilities is expanding its operations into the newly modernising ports of the mainland. In new sectors,
such as internet services, Hong Kong companies have been among the first to grasp the opportunities
on the mainland. The outlook for Hong Kong investment on the mainland is one of both sectoral and
geographical diversification: from the mainly manufacturing activities that grew up in the Pearl River
Delta  in  the  1980s,  to  a  variety  of  activities  spread  over  a  much  larger  region.  And,  like  the
establishment of the Special Economic Zones close to Hong Kong nearly a quarter of a century ago,
China’s entry into the WTO will underline the truism that the more China opens to the world, the more
Hong Kong benefits.
The implications for banking and financial service
Physical trade and the less visible trade in services require a financial infrastructure in the same way
that new buildings need plumbing and electrical wiring. We expect that the “creation effect” of WTO
entry will result in a surge in banking business on the mainland. There are two main elements in this
process. The first is the greater demand for banking services, resulting from the growth induced by the
effects of WTO accession. The second is the financial deepening, stimulated by more rapid financial
liberalisation,  greater  banking  competition,  and  product  innovation  induced  by  the  terms  of  WTO
accession. These processes have positive implications for domestic banks incorporated in the mainland
and for foreign banks, including banks incorporated in Hong Kong.
For  the  domestic  banks,  expanding  business  and  the  challenge  of  foreign  competition  provide  an
impetus for reform and innovation. The banking reforms currently in progress in China are proceeding
well. These include, among other things, the establishment of asset management companies to carve
out the bad assets inherited from the days of policy lending. They also include the full introduction of
commercial principles  and  market-based  credit  policies,  and  improvements  in  accounting  standards.
There will also be a profound impact on the governance and culture of the commercial banks, in terms
of much better transparency and accountability, especially if these banks are to be floated as intended.
To  meet  foreign  competition,  they  will  also  put  much  more  emphasis  on  recruiting  good  people,
including those studying abroad, and giving them proper training. A good example is the recent joint
venture between Qinghua University and Harvard Business School to provide extensive training for
bank managers in the mainland. They will also need a much clearer business and IT strategy, which
could include the need for consolidation. WTO entry will mean a phased opening of China’s banking
market to foreign banks. Restrictions on foreign banks’ operations, in terms of the scope of business,
3
BIS Review 68/2000
clients  and  geographical  coverage,  will  be  gradually  relaxed.  There  is  therefore  a  strong  need  for
China’s  banks  to  gear  up  and  gird  themselves  for  the  challenges  that  will  be  posed  by  their
sophisticated foreign competitors.
For foreign banks, the opportunities brought by financial liberalisation on the mainland, in the context
of WTO, are immense. In two years’ time, foreign banks will be able to conduct RMB business with
Chinese enterprises in Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tianjin and Dalian. Within five years, they will be able to
deal  with  all  Chinese  enterprises  without  any  geographical  restriction.  The  obvious  advantages  for
Hong  Kong’s  banks  in  this  process  are  the  same  advantages  that  have  taken  Hong  Kong’s  other
industries  into  the  mainland.  Hong  Kong’s  banks  were  among  the  first  to  open  branches  on  the
mainland, especially in the southern cities: they know China well, speak the language, have extensive
branch networks, and maintain strong relationships, some of which have grown up over more than a
generation.  There  are  niches  in  which  Hong  Kong’s  banks  should  maintain  and  extend  their
competitive  advantage.  For  example,  they  should  be  able  to  continue  to  derive  substantial  business
from the extensive involvement of Hong Kong companies in the manufacturing and retail sectors in
China, in the form of private or joint venture enterprises. Given also that about 40% of the mainland’s
trade is routed through Hong Kong, Hong Kong’s banks will have an unrivalled advantage over other
banks in capturing the increased demand for trade and related financing services. As the largest source
of  foreign  direct  investment  in  the  mainland,  and  as  China’s  main  financial  conduit  and  funding
centre, Hong Kong will stand to benefit considerably from the increased demand for banking services
in China.
There are, however, potential diversion effects that Hong Kong, and in particular Hong Kong’s banks,
will have to consider and address if they wish to make the best out of their competitive advantages.
Size will be an issue for banks wishing to enter the banking market on the mainland. Although size is
not necessary a good indication of quality, it is a convenient regulatory tool, and I do not see, at least
in the foreseeable future, any likelihood of relaxation in the size criterion of USD 20 billion. I have
been in regular dialogue with the People’s Bank of China on this, and I can understand and appreciate
the constraints imposed by the terms of the WTO negotiations on any relaxation which may facilitate
the consideration of entrance by smaller Hong Kong incorporated banks, along with foreign banks of
similar size.  So the question  of  consolidation - which  already  has  other  advantages  to  commend  it -
arises again. It is also quite natural that foreign banks will find it attractive to deal directly with the
mainland,  rather  than  through  Hong  Kong.  But  there  should  still  be  factors  that  encourage  them  to
continue to use Hong Kong as a base. For example, given economies of scale, it is much cheaper for
foreign banks to cover their China operations through their Hong Kong offices, rather than incurring
the  additional  costs  of  setting  up  a  new  office  in,  say,  Shanghai.  Also,  contrary  to  the  established
wisdom, the cost advantages are not always on Shanghai’s side: corporate tax, for example, is twice
what it is in Hong Kong. Other positive inducements include the efficiency and sophistication of Hong
Kong’s financial markets, and the critical mass that goes with being the world’s fourth largest banking
centre and seventh largest foreign exchange centre.
We have in Hong Kong a pool of professional expertise trained in all facets of international business: a
skilled local workforce, which is well educated, computer-literate, productive, disciplined and highly
trainable;  in  addition  to  a  foreign  expertise  attracted  by  rich  business  opportunities  and  an
international,  cosmopolitan  orientation,  with  English  as  the  business  language.  Without  wishing  to
labour the elements that make up a free economy - which the Cato Institute has set out so well - I think
it is worth highlighting the point that Hong Kong scores extremely high on all of them. It enjoys the
rule of law and the free movement of information, capital and human resources. It has efficient and
clean government, a market-oriented economic policy, a non-intrusive but effective regulatory system,
and a low and simple tax regime. It treats domestic and overseas companies on equal terms and has a
liberal policy on employing foreigners with expertise. In short, Hong Kong possesses almost all of the
conceivable  favourable  economic,  legal  and  political  attributes  for  attracting  banks  and  other
organisations to set up their regional headquarters here.
Our estimate, within the HKMA, is that, for Hong Kong’s banking sector, as for trade generally, the
“creation  effect”  of  China’s  entry  into  the  WTO  will  significantly  outweigh  the  “diversion  effect”.
Hong  Kong’s  banking  sector stands to  benefit  substantially  from  the  increased  demand  for  banking
BIS Review 68/2000
4
services  in  China.  This  will  have  a  boosting  effect  on  Hong  Kong’s  lending  business  to  China,
provided  that  Hong  Kong  can  continue  to  improve  its  infrastructural  framework  and  its  regulatory
regime so that the diversion effect is minimised. Developments in these areas, including the recently
opened US dollar clearing system and the substantial regulatory reforms currently in progress, suggest
that we are on the right track.
Monetary implications
Turning to the implications for monetary policy, I am happy to observe that we have moved some way
beyond  the  misunderstandings  that  have  often  clouded  the  view  from  outside  of  Hong  Kong’s
monetary  relationship  with  the  mainland.  The  old  myths  that  1997  would  mean  that  the  renminbi
would  replace  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  or  that  Beijing  would  take  control  of  Hong  Kong’s  extensive
foreign  reserves  are  now  dead  and  buried  after  three  highly  successful  years  of  experience  of  “one
country,  two  monetary  systems”.  More  recently,  the  current  issue  of  speculation  surrounding  the
renminbi - and one which is far more grounded in reality - is the question of whether its exchange rate
will be given greater flexibility in the near future. This revives the old question of how far the Hong
Kong dollar will be affected by movements in the renminbi, which has some connection with China’s
prospective  WTO  accession,  and  it  is  therefore  worth  examining  the  rationale  behind  it,  and  the
implications.
First,  however,  since  there  is  some  confusion  on  this  point,  it  is  helpful  to  clarify  the  difference
between  flexibility  and  convertibility.  Convertibility  means  the  ability  of  a  currency  to  be  freely
exchanged into foreign currencies, either for trade (current account convertibility) or for  investment
(capital account convertibility). The  renminbi  enjoys  current  account  convertibility  but  is  not  freely
convertible for capital account transactions. Flexibility means the degree to which the exchange rate is
allowed to fluctuate before there is intervention by the central bank. At present, there is flexibility in
the  exchange  rate  of  the  renminbi,  in  that  the  exchange  rate  is  determined  by  “market”  supply  and
demand, although the central bank remains the ultimate banker in the market. The renminbi has indeed
been trading within a very narrow band in the past few years. The narrowness I think reflects China
having acted responsibly, against the background of financial turmoil in Asia, in not allowing greater
flexibility in the renminbi exchange rate to add destabilising volatility to Asian currencies. However, a
number  of  observers,  including  the  IMF,  now  believe  that  there  is  scope  for  more  flexibility.  But,
while  most  observers  regard  full  convertibility  as  a  desirable  long-term  goal,  few  believe  that  any
significant moves will be made in that direction in the near term. This means that, even if the renminbi
were  to  be  given  more  flexibility,  it  would  probably  still  be  subject  to  the  existing  exchange  rate
controls.
The immediate consideration for policymakers on the mainland and markets is whether, with greater
flexibility, the renminbi  would  go  up  or  down.  China’s  persistent current  account  surpluses  suggest
that it should appreciate. But the market does not seem to feel this way. The non-deliverable forward
exchange rate for the purchase of US dollars is continuously at a significant premium. The difference
in views may have two explanations. One is the large amount of negative errors and omissions in the
balance of payments, which many presume to indicate unidentified capital outflows. The second is the
concern that many have that WTO accession will precipitate, at least initially, a surge in imports that is
greater than the surge in exports.
Why, then, should flexibility be a matter for consideration? There could be a number of advantages
from the perspective of the mainland. For example, allowing more interaction of supply and demand
of  foreign  exchange  for  current  account  transactions  may  serve  as  a  kind  of  market  smoothing
mechanism,  especially  as  the  short-term  volatility  of  trade  flows  may  increase  with  the  WTO
accession. The renminbi exchange rate should also be able to respond more to the underlying trends in
external  trade.  Greater  flexibility  may  also  permit  exchange  rate  adjustments  in  pursuit  of  other
macroeconomic  objectives.  Should  greater  flexibility  in  renminbi  be  pursued,  I  believe  that  there
would be advantages, in the interests of transparency and market confidence, for the mainland to set
out clearly what it expects to achieve by the measure, especially in the absence of any move towards
fuller  convertibility.  If  the  benefits  are  in  doubt,  or  if  the  underlying  motivation  is  misunderstood,
5
BIS Review 68/2000
there could be an adverse impact on  general  sentiment,  which  would  be  manifested  in  the  financial
markets.
We  all  know  how  sensitive  financial  markets  can  be,  and  this  sensitivity  somewhat  blurs  the  Hong
Kong response to the prospect of greater flexibility in the renminbi’s exchange rate, in particular its
impact  on  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  exchange  rate.  Together  with  the  confusion  between  the
convertibility of a currency and the flexibility in an exchange rate, this sensitivity perhaps explains the
rather excited off-the-cuff response given earlier this year by the group of Hong Kong businessmen to
Premier Zhu Rongji when the subject was raised in a meeting among them. As a result, there was this
message to me that we in the HKMA should examine the matter carefully. We have since done so and
I  have,  in  July,  provided  Premier  Zhu  with  a  response,  through  Governor  Dai  Xianglong  of  the
People’s Bank of China. The gist of the response is that, on the basis of economic fundamentals, there
is no reason why the Hong Kong dollar should be impacted by changes in the renminbi exchange rate.
But things get a little more complicated when market sentiment enters the picture. During the Asian
crisis, the market perceived a strong correlation between the Hong Kong dollar and the renminbi. This
was partly attributable to misconceptions about the economic - and perhaps the political - relationship
between Hong Kong and the mainland, and partly due to the market’s practice of regarding the Hong
Kong dollar as a proxy hedge for the renminbi. Over the past year or so, however, the renminbi and
the Hong Kong dollar have become substantially decoupled in the eyes of the market. This decoupling
can  be  most  easily  read  by  comparing  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  forward  spread  and  the  renminbi’s
non-deliverable forward exchange rate, which tracked each other very closely until the end of 1998,
when  they  began  to  diverge.  The  decoupling  suggests  that  the  market  has  drawn  the  obvious
conclusion from the fact that, since the linked exchange rate was introduced in 1983, the renminbi has
depreciated by  more  than  70%,  while,  during  the same  period, the  Hong  Kong  dollar  has remained
rock  solid.  And  this  was  confirmed  by  the  calmness  with  which  the  market  took  the  raising  of  the
possibility of greater flexibility for the renminbi exchange rate by Premier Zhu.
Our own study further suggests that, contrary to popular intuition, a devaluation of the renminbi might
actually provide a stimulus to the Hong Kong economy: this is because the positive impact on demand
arising from the complementarities between the two economies would outweigh the negative impact
of any loss of competitiveness in those relatively few activities where the two economies remain in
competition with each other. Such complementarities are in part reflected in Hong Kong’s role as a
major entrepot for  mainland  exports.  For  any  renminbi  devaluation,  while  Hong  Kong’s own  direct
trade balance with the mainland will deteriorate, our re-exports of mainland origin should rise. Indeed,
with  the  surge  in  mainland  re-exports  activities  since  the  early  1980s,  the  margins  earned  on  such
re-exports  are  now  larger  than  all  other  components  of  Hong  Kong’s  trade  with  the  mainland
combined.
Conclusion
I have suggested in this address that China’s accession to the WTO will bring benefits to Hong Kong
on a number of fronts. WTO entry will see a vast and rapid increase in China’s external trade. Not all
of  this  additional  trade  will  go  through  Hong  Kong,  but  nor  will  it  all  avoid  Hong  Kong.  More
important still, the stimulus to liberalisation, globalisation and better corporate governance will expand
and  deepen  Hong  Kong’s  well-established  role  as  a  fund  of  professional  expertise,  a  centre  of
international experience and a source and channel of investment. Hong Kong’s banking sector, with its
strong  reputation  and  long  involvement  in  mainland  business,  stands  to  benefit  greatly  from  the
liberalisation in this area, providing that it can position itself to make the best out of the opportunities.
In the monetary sphere, the various predictions about the future development of the renminbi in the
light of WTO membership - which include the possibility of greater exchange rate flexibility - would
most likely  have  positive  implications  for  Hong  Kong’s economy  as  a  whole,  and  should  create no
difficulties for Hong Kong’s entirely separate and soundly based currency.
The  role for  Hong  Kong  in  the  context  of  a WTO  that includes  China,  would,  I  believe,  give  even
fuller scope for the qualities that, in the assessment of the Cato Institute, make Hong Kong the freest
economy in the world. All of this therefore leaves a small question in my mind about the title of this
BIS Review 68/2000
6
conference, and I hope the organisers will forgive me for raising it. The phrase “Hong Kong’s Legacy,
China’s Future” has a bit of a morbid ring about it. It suggests that we in Hong Kong are bequeathing
something to China before we breathe our last, and that you are assembled here for a funeral, or at
least a deathbed scene. This cannot, surely, be the intention behind the conference. The programme
suggests otherwise, and I am confident that, as the day unfolds, you will be hearing plenty of evidence
to show that there is a great deal of life left in this city and in the people who inhabit it. Step outside of
this  building  and  you  will  see  it  for  yourself.  I  have  tried  to  suggest  in  this  address  that  both
Hong Kong and the mainland stand to gain much from China’s accession to the WTO. Like most new
developments  on  the  mainland,  WTO  entry  presents  enormous  opportunities  for  Hong  Kong,
providing that we prepare and position ourselves to make the best out of them.
7
BIS Review 68/2000
