European Central Bank Press Conference introductory statements
Introductory statements given by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, held in Frankfurt on 2 March
2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The Vice-President and I are here today to report on the outcome of today’s meetings of the General
Council and the Governing Council of the ECB.
The Governing Council conducted its regular examination of the outlook for price developments in the
euro  area.  After  reviewing  the  evidence  available  from  both  the  first  and  the  second  pillar  of  the
monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem, the Governing Council decided to maintain the interest
rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  at  3.25%  and  the  interest  rate  on  the
marginal lending facility and that on the deposit facility at 4.25% and 2.25% respectively, i.e. at the
levels  determined  a  month  ago.  The  Governing  Council  also  concluded  that  the  balance  of  risks  to
price stability in the medium term remains on the upside. These upside risks will need to be monitored
and assessed continuously in order to ensure that timely action can be taken, if and when required.
The  main  elements  of  our  assessment  of  the  latest  information  on  monetary,  financial  market  and
other economic developments are as follows.
Starting with the monetary indicators covered under the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy, the
three-month  average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  for  the  period  from  November  1999  to
January 2000  was  5.7%,  compared  with  6.0%  in  the  last  quarter  of  1999.  The  reduction  was
determined  by  a  base  effect,  since  the  monthly  increase  in  M3  in  January  1999  was  exceptionally
strong,  reflecting  the  special  environment  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary
Union. At the same time, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector remained high, at 9.5%
in January  2000.  Overall,  the  prolonged  deviation  of  M3  growth from  the reference  value  of  4½%,
especially  when  seen  in  conjunction  with  the  dynamic  growth  of  credit,  indicates  that  liquidity
conditions in the euro area remain generous.
With  regard  to  the  second  pillar,  as  usual,  the  Governing  Council  examined  a  broad  range  of
indicators.  Starting  with  long-term  nominal  interest  rates,  there  was  little  change  in  the  course  of
February. The yield curve remained relatively steep, thus indicating expectations of strong economic
growth in the period ahead.
Such expectations are partly based on the favourable outlook for the world economy. A key element
underlying this positive outlook is the fact that the US economy is continuing to grow at a high rate,
but  the  strong  recovery  and  the  acceleration  of  growth  in  other  areas  also  support  this  view.  The
strongest  level  of  performance  is  currently  being  recorded  in  emerging  market  economies  in
South-East Asia, while the broad outlook in Japan remains uncertain.
There is also  further evidence  that economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  continued  to  expand  strongly
after the third quarter of last year. While euro area estimates for the fourth quarter of 1999 are not yet
available,  data  for  individual  Member  States  point  to  continued  robust  output  growth.  In  addition,
area-wide industrial confidence increased further around the turn of the year and consumer confidence
remained at the high level reached in the last two months of 1999. The cyclical upswing should extend
well into 2000 and continue thereafter. This is also confirmed by available forecasts, which point to
real GDP growth of slightly over 3% in 2000. As for 2001, the economic expansion in the euro area is
generally expected to continue at a similar pace.
Developments  in the exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  which  do  not  reflect  the  underlying  strength  of  the
euro area  economy,  remain  a  cause  for  concern.  Their  upward  impact  on  import  prices  is  having  a
1
BIS Review 19/2000
negative effect on the price climate and is thereby increasing the risks to price stability in the medium
term.
With regard to most recent developments in consumer price inflation, as measured by annual increases
in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), the upward movement has continued. In January
2000  the  annual  rate  of  HICP  inflation  was  2.0%,  up  from  1.7%  in  December  1999.  As  in  earlier
months, the latest upward movement is the result of the increase in energy prices, which, on an annual
basis,  reached  12.0%  in  January.  Excluding  the  more  volatile  components,  namely  energy  and
seasonal food, HICP inflation in January increased slightly to 1.1% on account of somewhat higher
price increases for non-energy industrial goods.
While it is likely that annual inflation rates will fall again in the course of 2000, owing to base effects
related to the price of oil, monetary policymakers need to look beyond developments over the next few
months,  i.e.  policy  will  need  to  focus  on  the  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  Indeed,
whereas most forecasts still point to average inflation of below 2% in 2000 and 2001, they are based
on rather favourable assumptions and generally seem to imply a pattern which is characterised first by
decreasing  rates  of  inflation  in  the  course  of  this  year  and  then  by  more  fundamental  upward
tendencies  later  on.  Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  concluded  that  vigilance  is
required  and  pointed  to  several  factors.  First,  developments  in  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  will
need to be analysed continuously in order to assess upward risks to price stability. Second, in view of
the improving economic conditions, the potential spillover of large and protracted increases in import
and  producer  prices  into  consumer  prices  will  need  to  be  assessed  carefully.  In  this  context,
developments in the exchange rate and in oil prices will play a major role.
It  will  be  essential,  both  for  maintaining  price  stability  and  for  reducing  the  high  level  of
unemployment, that wage settlements remain moderate and do not themselves contribute to inflation
expectations, which would also endanger the sustainability of the current upswing. Fiscal policies can
make a substantive contribution to maintaining favourable economic conditions by using the current
upswing as an excellent opportunity to proceed swiftly towards fulfilling the objectives of the Stability
and Growth Pact. Economic conditions and perspectives in the euro area appear to be better at present
than at any time in the past decade. Growth is strong, employment is expected to increase further and
the still very high level of unemployment should continue to fall. Remaining vigilant to counter upside
risks to price stability and pursuing structural reform is the foundation for a sustained period of strong
economic growth and a lasting process of job creation.
Finally, I should like to draw your attention to two items not directly linked to today’s meeting of the
Governing Council.
First, I should like to inform you that on 30 March 2000 the Governing Council will meet for the first
time outside Frankfurt, namely in Madrid. The meeting will be followed by a press conference. It is
our intention that Governing Council meetings will be held in other euro area Member States twice a
year. In the second half of this year it is envisaged that the Governing Council will meet in Paris.
Second, on 2 and 3 November 2000 the ECB will hold its first Central Banking Conference. The topic
of the conference will be “Why price stability?” and it will take place in Frankfurt. The ECB’s Central
Banking Conference, which will be organised biennially, will bring together invited participants from
central banks, international and European institutions, academia and the press. As of today, regularly
updated information, including a preliminary programme, will be provided on the ECB’s website. The
final programme for the conference and all the papers, comments and a summary of the discussions
will be made available on the ECB’s website in due course.
BIS Review 19/2000
2
