Mr McDonough discusses sound banking
systems: a new growth imperative
Speech by Mr William J McDonough, President of the Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before
The Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, on 24 March 2000.
 I  am  delighted  to  be  with  you  today.  It’s  a  special  pleasure  to  be  among  so  many  old  friends  and
colleagues.
It’s also a great pleasure to be in Singapore under such happy and promising circumstances. Just two
years ago, financial and economic conditions throughout Asia were rather grim and the outlook was
uncertain.  But  since  then,  to  the  great  credit  of  the  people  of  Asia,  significant  progress  has  been
achieved. In Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and especially Korea, meaningful headway has been made
toward  recapitalizing  the  banking  systems,  ridding  banks’  balance  sheets  of  problem  assets,  and
improving supervisory and regulatory frameworks.
And that hard-earned progress on the banking front is already bearing fruit. The economic contraction
that  devastated  so  many  in  the  region  has  generally  been  halted  and  even,  in  some  countries,
impressively  reversed.  Equity  markets  have  rebounded  impressively,  and  yields  on  government
securities have been cut by nearly two-thirds as foreign capital has begun to return. Without question,
this is truly a remarkable turnaround.
It must also be acknowledged that the economies of Asia are not out of the woods just yet. Important
and even difficult work still lies ahead. At this critical juncture in the Asian recovery process, I think it
is  worth  reviewing  just  how  important  a  stable  banking  and  financial  system  is  to  the  health  and
vitality of any market economy - and particularly emerging market economies - and the crucial role
that  supervision  plays  in  achieving  and  preserving  financial  stability.  Indeed,  effective  supervision
represents a crucial cornerstone of financial stability,  both locally  and  globally.  It  is  also  clear  that,
given the accelerating pace of change and innovation in the financial services industry, our notion of
supervision must encompass discipline applied by the marketplace, as well as official supervision.
With  these  thoughts  in  mind,  and  noting  the  critical  role  banks  play  in  a  market  economy,  in  my
remarks  today  I  will  discuss  the  nature  and  form  of  an  effective  supervisory  framework  for  the
21st century,  addressing  the  role  to  be  played  by  banks  themselves,  the  broader  marketplace  and
official supervisors. On the subject of official supervision, I will address the Basel Committee’s Core
Principles for Effective Supervision, and then conclude with a discussion of the Committee’s major
initiative to revise and refine the 1988 Capital Accord.
Banks’ role in a market economy
Let me first discuss the crucial role banks play in a market economy. While specific arrangements may
vary from country to country reflecting differences in history, custom and culture, the basic principles
are common to nearly all market economies.
Bringing savers and borrowers together
As we all know, starting a business, expanding an existing business, or embarking on any other kind of
creative  or  entrepreneurial  enterprise,  requires  money  -  investment  capital.  Therefore,  any  society’s
long-term economic prospects are best served when households and businesses freely decide to save
part of their current income.
But the decision to save is not, in itself, sufficient to ensure economic growth and prosperity. Some
institutional  mechanism  must  exist through  which society’s  savings  can  be  collected  and  channeled
1
BIS Review 27/2000
into productive investments. Moreover, because savers will naturally perceive risk in parting with their
money, they must be induced to entrust their savings to that institution that can then put their capital to
work in sound and productive ways.
For  this  to  happen,  a  class  of  financial  institutions  must  exist  that  the  public  views  as  a  safe  and
convenient outlet for its savings, where at least some fraction of those savings are maintained in the
form  of  highly  liquid  assets,  and  assets  by  which  payments  for  goods  and  services  can  be  made
quickly, easily and safely.
The single dominant class of institution that  has  emerged  to  play  this  crucial  role  of  intermediating
between savers and borrowers is the commercial bank. In virtually all countries, banks function as the
repository of a large fraction of society’s liquid savings and the entities through which payments are
made.  Even  in  mature  industrial  societies  with  highly  developed  capital  markets,  the  commercial
banking system continues to be the most important single element of the financial system.
Transaction accounts - the means of intermediation
The prominent position of banks in the financial systems of market economies around the world stems
from their unique role as the issuers of transaction accounts. Transaction accounts are bank liabilities
that are immediately payable on demand at face value - “at par” - and that are readily transferable to
third parties. Because a depositor may transfer or convert into currency the balance of a transaction
account on demand, such accounts are often referred to as “demand deposits”. Owners of transaction
accounts can withdraw deposited funds, write checks up to the full amount in the account, or transfer a
portion  or  the  full  amount  of  the  account  to  a  third  party.  The  liquidity,  acceptability  and
transferability of these accounts induce savers to entrust their savings to banks, and facilitate the broad
range of transactions that sustain economic activity.
The unique capacity to incur liabilities that are payable on demand at par distinguishes banks from all
other  kinds  of  institutions,  and  is  the  determining  characteristic  that  enables  banks  to  perform  their
essential functions  in  a  market-based  economy.  Banks  are  also  the  only  type  of  institution  that  can
create transaction accounts by way of the lending function, and thereby expand the money supply by
way of the money multiplier. The flexibility of credit and liquidity that banks provide - stemming from
this unique capacity to create transaction account liabilities - is vital to the smooth development and
growth of market-based economies.
Other essential functions
This money-creating capacity also  enables  banks  to  perform  other  essential functions.  For  example,
banks serve as the primary and back-up source of liquidity for other classes of institutions, financial
and non-financial. Even in advanced financial systems, the capital markets rely heavily on the banking
system to meet day-to-day cash flow needs and to provide standby financing facilities. In addition, the
banking  system  is  the  mechanism,  or  transmission  belt,  by  which  the  policies  of  the  central  bank
regarding money and credit creation are implemented, and the pace of economic activity determined.
Simply  stated,  without  an  effectively  functioning  banking  system  for  encouraging,  collecting  and
deploying  society’s  savings,  providing  the  means  for  quick  and  reliable  payment,  and  performing
these  other  essential  functions  I’ve  just  mentioned,  there  would  be  little  hope  for  any  economy  to
mobilize the real resources necessary for economic growth and stability. If money and credit are the
lifeblood of a market economy - and they are - the banking system is its beating heart.
Public confidence - the key to intermediation
But banks’ ability to collect and mobilize society’s savings by attracting deposits is only half of the
story. Their ability to retain those deposits is just as critical. This may seem an obvious point, but the
retention side of the banking equation is too often forgotten or overlooked.
The  willingness  of  savers  to  entrust  their  money  to  a  bank  presupposes  that  those  savers  have
confidence  in  the  financial  integrity  of  the  institution  -  in  other  words,  that  their  savings  will  be
BIS Review 27/2000
2
available when they need or want access to them. If that confidence is undermined, society’s ability to
collect and deploy its savings will be impaired, and the principal means to economic growth and rising
living standards - intermediation by banks - will be short-circuited. With this reality in mind, it must
be acknowledged that, in the final analysis, commercial banks have only one asset that really matters -
public confidence.
Sound lending - the key to preserving public confidence
The key to maintaining the financial integrity of any banking company - and, therefore, to preserving
the  all-important  asset  of  public  confidence  -  is  the  credit  process.  If  credit  is  extended  carelessly,
banks are likely to incur losses, which in turn will undermine their ability to honor deposit obligations.
And  if  banks’  ability  to  honor  deposit  obligations  falls  into  question,  if  the  public’s  confidence  is
undermined, households and businesses will likely rush to redeploy their savings, raising the specter of
a flight to cash and real assets with all the associated implications for inflation and destabilizing runs
on banks. The best defense against this serious and very real threat is for banks to extend credit wisely,
objectively and impartially.
In this connection, it should be emphasized that, because of the inherently partisan nature of politics,
and for other reasons as well, the government or state is not well-equipped to make credit decisions.
Recent experience here in Asia, and before that in the former command economies of Eastern Europe,
makes clear just how dangerous “policy lending” can be. Decisions as to who gets credit and who does
not must be left to private initiative within a context where those making the decisions have a major
stake - their own capital and economic livelihood. If the system is working properly, those receiving
credit  will  be  the  most  efficient,  competitive,  and  profitable  -  those  most  capable  of  producing  the
stream of goods and services that will enable the economy to grow and, as a result, for living standards
to rise.
The purpose of supervision - preserving financial stability
This,  then,  is  the  fundamental  tension  of  commercial  banking  -  how  to  meet  the  credit  needs  of  a
healthy and expanding market economy, which necessarily entails the taking of calculated risks, and
yet  preserve  the  confidence  of  depositors  whose  savings  are  the  raw  material  that  enable  banks  to
perform their essential functions. Negotiating that tension, helping banks meet that challenge, is the
critical task of supervision.
And so what is the purpose of supervision in the 21st century? What are the objectives? How can those
objectives  be  best  pursued?  Let  me  say  first  of  all  that  there  is  no  quick-fix  or  single  answer.  The
21st century financial marketplace is too dynamic, too complex, and supervisors must work within the
political realities of our respective nations. Instead, what I envision is a flexible, multi-faceted strategy
that emphasizes prudence and prevention, compatibility with the market, and that fosters a close and
cooperative partnership between the private and public sector.
effective bank-level management;
With  these  priorities  in  mind,  I  believe  there  are  three  essential  elements  of  a  modern  supervision
framework:
• 
• 
• 
Let  me  discuss  each  of  these  in  turn,  noting  that  each  should  reinforce  the  others  to  effectively
promote a safe and sound financial system.
market discipline; and
official supervision.
Effective bank-level management
Primary responsibility for the safe and sound operation of a banking institution lies with its board of
directors and senior management. The purpose of the board of directors is to oversee the development
3
BIS Review 27/2000
of the overall strategy of the organization and the decisions made by senior management in pursuit of
those strategic objectives. The role of senior management, in turn, is to oversee day-to-day decisions
made within the organization and to ensure their consistency with long-term objectives and policies as
determined by the board.
capable and experienced management;
independent and competent outside directors;
There  are  several  aspects  to  effective  bank-level  management.  First,  I  would  underscore  the
importance of good corporate governance, the basic elements of which include:
• 
• 
• 
• 
Together, these elements contribute to an overall operating process conducive to long-term health and
prosperity. A tightly run ship with a disciplined crew led by an experienced and competent cadre of
officers is far better able to survive a long journey that will inevitably confront sudden storms.
a coherent corporate strategy and business plan; and
clear lines of responsibility and accountability.
Closely related to good corporate governance and critical to any banking institution’s well-being is a
rigorous  internal  control  apparatus.  Of  course,  effective  internal  control  systems  have  always  been
centrally  important  to  sound  banking.  This  point  becomes  clear  if  we  consider  for  a  moment  their
basic purposes:
• 
to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  the  bank’s  and  its  customers’  assets  are  safeguarded,
that  its information is timely  and  reliable,  and  that  errors  and  irregularities  are  discovered
and corrected promptly;
 to promote the bank’s operational efficiency; and
to  ensure  compliance  with  managerial  policies,  laws,  regulations  and  sound  fiduciary
principles.
With these purposes in mind, it is clear that the success of any banking organization depends on the
effectiveness of its internal control apparatus. And never has this been more true than today. As the
activities of commercial banks have become increasingly diverse and complex, internal controls have
become critically important to the sound and successful execution of banks’ strategic objectives.
I want to stress this point as strongly as I can. As a former commercial banker myself, I know there is
a powerful temptation for management to focus its attention and resources on the front office - those
areas and individuals that generate profits for the institution. But if something goes wrong in the back
office,  it  can  quickly  become  the  most  important  aspect  of  a  bank’s  operations.  It  is  essential  that
sufficient resources, staff  and  managerial  attention  are  devoted to  the  back  office and internal  audit
functions.
Firmly  rooted on  the  foundation  of  good corporate  governance  and  rigorous  internal  controls  is  the
central importance of effective risk management. As I mentioned earlier, banking by its very nature is
a business of taking calculated risks. If they didn’t take risks, banks could not perform their essential
functions  in  a  market  economy.  But  sound  banking  also  entails  the  prudent  management  of  those
unavoidable risks. Each banking institution must have in place the technical systems and management
processes necessary to identify the risks associated with its activities - lending and otherwise - and to
effectively measure, monitor and control those risks.
But even if an institution has an effective risk management and control structure in place, that structure
must  also  be  accompanied  by  the  institutional  management  culture  required  to  ensure  that  written
policies  and  procedures  are  actually  translated  into  practice,  with  buy-in  at  all  staff  levels.  And
ultimately, an institution’s culture is determined - once again - by the board of directors and the senior
management it chooses to install. Management must take active steps to ensure that their commitment
to  an  operating  environment  that  includes  effective  risk  management  and  rigorous  controls  filters
down the line of the organization.
BIS Review 27/2000
4
To  summarize,  these  aspects  of  effective  bank  level  management  -  good  corporate  governance,
rigorous internal controls and effective risk management - constitute a kind of internal safety net and
represent  the  first  and  most  important  line  of  defense  against  potential  problems.  And  this  will
increasingly  be  the  case  as  the  activities  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  become  more
complex and more global.
Market discipline
After effective management at the bank level, the second line of defense against financial instability is
market discipline. As financial institutions and their activities become more complex, diversified and
global, market discipline becomes an even more important ally of the official supervisor.
Of  course,  effective  market  discipline  is  not  possible  without  meaningful  public  disclosure.  While
significant progress has been made in recent years, it unfortunately remains the case that  disclosure
practices have not kept pace with the rapid changes in banks’ business activities and risk exposures,
and  with  how  these  exposures  are  measured  and  managed.  For  this  situation  to  be  fully  remedied,
notions of what is proprietary information and what should be in the public domain need to change.
Knowing a company’s appetite for risk and its approach to, and methodologies for, managing risk is
essential  to  understanding  the  risks  of  being  a  shareholder,  a  creditor  or  a  counterparty.  I  strongly
encourage  all  financial  market  participants  to  approach  the  issue  of  disclosure  as  users  of  financial
statements rather than as issuers. What we all need to know about each other to be comfortable and
secure in making our credit decisions should drive the debate, rather than concerns about proprietary
information.
There is little question about the urgency of achieving dramatic progress in this area. Clearly, a full
appreciation of risk cannot be achieved without sufficient information. All of us know that there is no
greater enemy to a stable financial marketplace than a loss of confidence - and  nothing  undermines
confidence more than a lack of reliable information. Discipline imposed by markets might not always
be pleasant, but more, higher quality information - in a word, transparency - bolsters the confidence of
depositors and other creditors and therefore makes doing business easier and more secure.
Here in Asia, as in other markets, more work needs to be done to improve the quality of disclosures
regarding traditional banking activities. Time and again experience has shown that in periods of stress,
insufficient or inaccurate information about asset quality can lead to rumors and overreactions in the
marketplace, creating the potential for problems to spread to institutions that may otherwise be in good
health.
Of course, progress on the disclosure front will be limited until accounting standards are enhanced to
ensure proper valuation and to reflect innovations over the past decade, both in terms of new products
and modern risk management techniques. Accounting systems serve a variety of purposes, but none
more important than helping creditors make rigorous  decisions  as  to  which  enterprises  meet  market
tests of efficiency, competitiveness, and profitability that are necessary for those enterprises to fulfill
their  obligations.  Sound  accounting  systems  also  enable  investors  to  determine  the  value  of
enterprises,  and,  in  so  doing,  assist  in  attracting  capital,  both  foreign  and  domestic.  With  these
important  purposes  in  mind,  ongoing  efforts  to  enhance  accounting  standards  worldwide  should
continue and even intensify.
There is also a need for greater harmonization of accounting standards across  countries. We  simply
must  get  to  a  point  where  supervisors  and  market  participants  alike  can  analyze  and  compare  all
internationally active financial institutions on a consistent basis. And it will not be possible to have
uniform  capital  standards  until  we  have  achieved  some  consistency  in  accounting  standards  across
countries.  I’ll  have  more  to  say  about  market  discipline  and  its  role  in  the  evolving  framework  of
regulatory capital in a few moments.
Role of supervisors
While effective bank level management and meaningful market discipline are crucial elements of an
overall strategy for promoting and preserving financial stability, neither can substitute for the critical
5
BIS Review 27/2000
role  played  by  official  supervision.  While  banks  perform  functions  that  are  indispensable  to  the
success of any market economy, these same functions, by their very nature, introduce risks  that  are
capable  of  undermining  the  prospects  for  such  success.  This  reality  was  acknowledged  by  Adam
Smith  over  two  centuries  ago  in  his  seminal  tract  The  Wealth  of  Nations.  And  it  is  with  this
fundamental reality in mind that governments have long recognized that banking and other financial
institutions must be subject to at least some form of regulation and official oversight.
The reasons for  official supervisory  intervention  in  the  banking  system,  and  in the financial  system
more generally, can be summed up as promoting financial stability and minimizing systemic risk. This
is a broad mandate - one that encompasses the responsibility to ensure that markets operate in a fair,
transparent and efficient manner, and that participants comply with the rules of the game.
Indeed, supervisors bring a number of comparative advantages to the table that enable them to play
this  critical  role  in  the  broader  supervisory  framework.  First,  supervisors  have  clear  incentives  to
monitor risks to the financial system as a whole. While each financial institution is best positioned to
monitor its own risk exposure, it does not have the incentives to internalize the costs it may impose on
other financial institutions should it experience difficulties.
Second, supervisors are able to obtain and monitor proprietary information about an institution’s risk
exposures, its management information systems and its internal controls when such information is not
publicly disclosed.
Third, supervisors are in a unique position to observe trends across groups of financial institutions and,
based on these insights, to provide the industry with a perspective on what constitutes best practice.
Fourth, official supervision is needed to enforce compliance with applicable laws and regulations. We
have  observed  that  poor  compliance,  beyond  simply  being  wrong,  can  result  in  serious  operational
problems, including capital allocation  deficiencies,  managerial oversights  and increased  reputational
risk. As we have seen, such problems can threaten the wellbeing of a financial institution and carry the
potential for systemic risk.
Finally, supervisors are able to assure that prompt corrective actions are taken when serious financial
or  other  problems  are  identified,  particularly  if  the  problems  are  not  known  to  the  market.  The
importance of the role  supervisors  can play  in problem  cases,  both  through  public  enforcement  and
through other less visible means, cannot be overstated.
Changes in the financial services industry present new challenges for how official supervision is to be
carried  out  most  effectively.  It  is  clear  that  the  fundamental  approach,  scope  and  methodologies  of
official  supervision  must  evolve  in  line  with  the  way  financial  institutions  manage  their  activities,
which increasingly is along business lines rather than legal entities.
With  this  in  mind,  we  as  supervisors  should  continue  our  efforts  to  develop  a  more  dynamic,
risk-focused  and  process-oriented  framework,  reflecting  the  reality  that  banks  and  other  financial
institutions  are  increasingly  able  to  alter  their  risk  profiles  at  will.  By  “risk-focused”,  I  mean  that
supervisory  resources  should  be  directed  at  the  most  material  risks  to  which  the  institution  and  its
capital are exposed, given its array of business activities. By “process-oriented”, I mean that examiners
and  auditors  should  ascertain  whether  management  processes  and  methodologies  are  sufficiently
rigorous  and  effective,  given  the  institution’s  identified  risks.  Institutions  that  demonstrate  a  sound
control structure and effective management processes should be subject to less intrusive supervision
than institutions that do not have this essential infrastructure in place.
As I alluded to earlier, specific supervisory arrangements, practices and techniques vary from country
to  country  depending  on  differences  in  culture,  financial  system  structure  and  internal  political
realities. Having said that, a set of basic principles can be identified that should guide all supervisors
in  an  increasingly  interconnected,  global  financial  marketplace.  In  1997,  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking  Supervision  issued  a  set  of  twenty-five  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision
intended to serve as a benchmark against which the effectiveness of particular supervisory regimes can
be  assessed.  If  you’re  not  familiar  with  the  Principles,  I’m  pleased  to  bring  them  to  your  attention
today.
BIS Review 27/2000
6
The  Core  Principles  document  brings  together  concisely  all  of  the  fundamental  elements  needed  to
carry out effective bank supervision - a remarkable achievement in its own right. Equally important, in
my view, the document also balances the desire to set high standards for supervisory practices with the
pragmatic recognition that not all countries are in the same stage of financial market development. As
such, the Core Principles document is of particular importance for developing market economies, as it
establishes a clear set of standards against which each country’s current approaches and progress can
be measured.
It should be emphasized that, in attempting to craft a document that would have the legitimacy, quality
and  flexibility  to  meet  the  needs  of  bank  supervisors  around  the  world,  the  Committee  made  a
conscious effort to consult broadly throughout the various stages of the project, and particularly with
supervisors from emerging market nations. Some might argue that such extensive consultation slows
down  the  process  and  dilutes  the  final  product.  I  strongly  disagree.  Only  through  this  inclusive
approach could we design comprehensive principles with broad applicability and support.
Last  October,  the  Basel  Committee,  in  cooperation  with  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  produced  a
follow-up document called the Core Principles Methodology. This report was initiated in response to
requests from a number of countries for additional guidance on how to interpret and implement  the
Core  Principles.  The  methodology  document  provides  specific  criteria  for  evaluating  and
implementing  each  Core  Principle.  One  set  of  criteria  focuses  on  issues  deemed  essential  for  the
minimum  implementation  of  the  Core  Principles;  the  other  focuses  on  those  issues  deemed  to
represent “best practice”. The IMF and the World Bank currently use the new methodology to assess
the banking sectors in individual countries.
It should be stressed that the most important efforts to implement the Core Principles are occurring in
individual countries  and,  with  this  in  mind,  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  approximately  120  countries  -
including  many  here  in  Asia  -  have  now  endorsed  the  Core  Principles.  Without  the  support  and
backing  of  national  authorities  to  follow  through  with  the  implementation  of  these  principles,  our
broader efforts simply cannot be effective.
In  this  connection,  the  Basel  Committee  has  long  recognized  the  need  for  effective  training  of
participants  in  the  global  supervision  community,  and  over  the  years  has  sponsored  numerous
programs  which  have  been  beneficial  in  allowing  supervisors  from  different  countries  to  share
experiences and exchange ideas for improved practices. In 1998, the Basel Committee, along with the
Bank for International Settlements, jointly established the Financial Stability Institute, which conducts
leadership training of supervisors in emerging market countries and facilitates technical assistance.
This May, the Basel Committee plans to bring together supervisors from emerging market countries
and representatives from the IMF and World Bank to discuss the lessons learned from this initiative.
The May meeting is part of the Committee’s ongoing commitment to ensure that the Core Principles
remain current and relevant to bank supervisors worldwide.
Let me move on to the Basel Committee’s initiative to revise the 1988 Accord. As you know, capital
has played, and continues to play, an important role in the supervisory tool kit. Adequate capital helps
ensure that shareholders monitor the risk of financial institutions, and that management puts in place
and maintains appropriate oversight mechanisms to help prevent problems from surfacing in the first
place.  Should  an  institution  experience  difficulties,  capital  serves  as  a  buffer  to  absorb  losses  and
reduce the risk of spillover from a problem institution to other financial institutions.
The primary tool of capital regulation currently is the set of minimum ratios that were devised in 1988
by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. They were set forth in an agreement known as the
Basel  Accord,  and  were  adopted,  among  other  reasons,  to  address  the  slide  in  international  capital
levels that was occurring over the previous decade. The Accord was clearly a milestone achievement -
for  the  first  time,  supervisors  in  G10  countries  were  able  to  use  a  common  yardstick  for  assessing
banks’ capital adequacy.
But  the  Accord  has  a  number  of  serious  shortcomings.  For  example,  it  does  not  adequately
differentiate among degrees of credit risk and, as a result, banks have had incentives to take on higher
7
BIS Review 27/2000
risk  exposures  within  broad  risk  categories.  Banks  have  also  tended  to  engage  in  transactions  that
lower capital requirements without reducing economic risk.
In addition, it has proved difficult to incorporate into the Accord’s simple risk-weighting scheme the
innovations of the last decade in the way banks manage and mitigate risk. As market risk management
techniques developed, we were able to incorporate a state-of-the-art, value-at-risk approach in a 1996
Market  Risk  Amendment.  Still,  as  credit  risk  management  techniques  have  advanced,  and  as  the
importance of operational risk management has increasingly been recognized, it has become apparent
that the long run relevance and efficacy of the Basel ratios as an indicator of capital adequacy has been
eroded.
Supervisors  have  long  known  that  analyzing  simple  capital  ratios  in  isolation  can  lead  to  incorrect
conclusions about the relative strengths of institutions. Thus, we also have relied on a review of banks’
capital  plans  and  on  market  discipline  to  assess  capital  adequacy.  In  June  of  last  year,  the  Basel
Committee formalized the link between these elements when it released a Consultative Paper laying
out our vision for a new, more refined capital adequacy framework.
In addition to establishing minimum capital requirements, the proposed framework  places increased
emphasis on the supervisory review of capital adequacy and the role of market discipline. We refer to
these elements - minimum standards, supervisory review and market discipline - as the “three pillars”.
Together these pillars mutually reinforce safety and soundness by aligning capital relative to risk and
by encouraging  prudent risk  management.  This  evolution  in  the  Committee’s thinking  about  capital
adequacy  follows  from  much  of  our  recent  work  on  risk  management  and  the  surveys  we  have
conducted on banks’ disclosure practices. It is also consistent with the broader notion of supervision
I’ve discussed today.
We  encourage  comments  on  the  Committee’s  proposals  from  both  supervisors  and  industry
participants through 31 March 2000 - which is next week - and plan to publish, hopefully early next
year,  a  comprehensive  set  of  proposals  that  will  be  responsive  to  the  comments  and  input  we  have
received.
Let me highlight briefly each of the three pillars and provide some perspective on the key challenges
that  the  Committee  faces  in  relation  to  each.  The  first  pillar  is  minimum  capital  requirements.  To
address  the  shortcomings  in  the  1988  Accord,  the  Basel  Committee  has  proposed  two  primary
approaches:
• 
an enhanced standardized approach  that ties  risk  weightings to  external  credit assessments
such as credit ratings; and
 an  internal  ratings-based  approach  that  would  begin  by  mapping  internal  risk  ratings  into
standardized risk weightings, but might eventually evolve into something closer to the full
use of credit risk models.
Each approach treats the trade-off between simplicity and accuracy somewhat differently and thus one
or the other is likely to be relevant to banks with different levels of sophistication. Most importantly,
both  proposed  approaches  attempt  to  introduce  greater  risk  sensitivity  into  the  minimum  capital
standards to address the unfortunate incentive problems that have evolved from the 1988 Accord.
Some  observers  -  including,  perhaps,  a  few  in  this  room  -  have  noted  that  the  effort  to  incorporate
greater risk-sensitivity into the framework inevitably introduces procyclicality into our standards. That
is, the capital requirements for loans to troubled borrowers will tend to increase at just the point when
such trouble is becoming apparent. This is an important point, and one that we at the Committee are
working to address. It is my view that the global financial system needs to move toward addressing
potential  credit  problems  preemptively  -  before  these  problems  have  time  to  grow  from  minor
disturbances into major disruptions. To best accomplish this objective, any supplements to regulatory
capital  should  be  incremental  or  graduated,  rather  than  a  sudden  ratcheting  that  could  potentially
reinforce a cyclical downturn.
The  second  pillar  in  the  proposed  new  capital  adequacy  framework  has  to  do  with  the  supervisory
review  of capital  -  a  critical  complement  to  minimum  capital  requirements. The  Consultative  Paper
BIS Review 27/2000
8
proposes that supervisors should ensure that each bank has sound internal processes in place to assess
the adequacy of its capital based on a thorough evaluation of its risks. In evaluating the strengths and
weaknesses of a bank’s internal allocation process, supervisors would draw on, among other things,
their knowledge of best practices across institutions.
I want to stress that this proposed approach in no way intends to replace the judgment and expertise of
bank management, or to shift responsibility for capital adequacy to supervisors. On the contrary, it is
well  understood  that  bank  managers  have  the  most  complete  understanding  of  the  risks  their
institutions face, and it is they and the bank’s directors who have primary responsibility for overseeing
those  risks. The task  for  supervisors in this  framework  is  to  evaluate  how  well  banks  are  assessing
their  capital  needs  relative  to  their  risks,  including  whether  banks  are  appropriately  addressing  the
relationship  between  different  types  of  risks.  Most  importantly,  in  proposing  this  second  pillar  the
Basel Committee intends to foster a more active dialogue between banks and their supervisors.
The  third  element  in  the  proposed  new  capital  adequacy  framework  is  market  discipline.  As  I
discussed  earlier,  more  extensive  disclosure  and  a  greater  dependence  on  market  discipline
complements  improvements  in  bank-level  management,  official  supervision  and  minimum  capital
standards.  Some  areas  that  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  believe  are  good  candidates  for  greater
disclosure  would  include  components  of  regulatory  capital,  risk  concentrations  and  transactions
involving recourse, such as securitizations.
To the extent that banks develop disciplined internal approaches to evaluating capital adequacy, and
greater disclosure enhances market discipline, supervisors will be able to place greater reliance on all
three pillars and reduce regulatory inconsistencies. The common interest is to keep the Basel standards
as a floor sufficient to ensure financial soundness, but above which banks themselves will choose to
operate.
Conclusion
In  conclusion,  we  clearly  have  an  ambitious  agenda  for  perfecting  and  refining  the  supervisory
framework for the twenty-first century. In implementing this agenda, we should always keep in mind
the  fundamental  objective  -  preserving  financial  stability  so  that  banks  and  the  broader  financial
system can effectively perform their critical functions in a market economy. There is no question that
the  more  effectively  a  banking  and  financial  system  operates,  the  more  likely  the  economy  is  to
flourish and the citizens of that society to prosper.
This is particularly true in many emerging market economies that have a relative scarcity of savings in
relation to their large-scale investment needs. The banking sector in emerging market economies also
tends  to  be  more  concentrated  and  represents  a  larger  share  of  the  domestic  financial  system,
suggesting that, if problems occur, they are likely to have an amplified effect on the real economy and
on the fiscal cost associated with bank rescue and resolution costs.
In  pursuing  the  objective  of  financial  stability,  we  must  also  acknowledge  that  both  the  public  and
private sectors have a critical role to play. While the perspectives of market participants and official
supervisors may differ from time to time, our objective is the same - to maintain a strong and vibrant
financial system over the long term. Indeed, it is clearly evident to me, as a former commercial banker
and  now  as  a  supervisor,  that  only  if  we  work  together,  each  meeting  our  responsibilities  and
reinforcing  the  other,  will  we  be  able  to  successfully  manage  and  supervise  a  rapidly  evolving,
ever-more complex financial services industry.
9
BIS Review 27/2000
