Donald T Brash: Can the Reserve Bank ignore the current increase in inflation?
Speech by  Dr  Donald T  Brash,  Governor of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Electralines
Business Breakfast Forum, on 2 August 2000.
 Introduction
In  the  middle  of  May  this  year,  when  the  Reserve  Bank  last  issued  a  quarterly  Monetary  Policy
Statement, we projected inflation in the June quarter to be just 0.3 per cent, and inflation in the year to
March 2001 to be just 1.6 per cent.
What a lot can change in two and a half months! Even before that May Statement was published, the
Government  had  sharply  increased  the  tax  on  cigarettes,  adding  around  14  per  cent  to  their  price.
Within  hours  of  the  publication  of  that  May  Statement,  the  trade-weighted  measure  of  the  New
Zealand dollar had depreciated close to its lowest level in history. Within weeks of the publication of
that May Statement, the price of petrol had increased by some 15 per cent, the result of a sharp further
increase in the international price of oil and of the depreciation of the New Zealand dollar.
As  a  result,  it  was  clear  well  before  the  announcement  of  the  actual  inflation  figure  for  the  June
quarter, of 0.7 per cent, that inflation for that quarter would considerably exceed our original estimate
of 0.3 per cent, and that inflation for the year to March 2001 will almost certainly considerably exceed
our estimate of 1.6 per cent.
Some  commentators  are suggesting  that  inflation is  now likely  to exceed  3  per  cent  for  the  year  to
December 2000, and almost all commentators are at least expecting inflation to well exceed our mid-
May estimate.
What  does  this  imply  for  the  way  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  implements  monetary  policy?  It  is
clearly inappropriate for me to speculate on what we may or may not do when we release our August
Monetary  Policy  Statement  in  two  weeks’  time,  but  I  want  to  use  this  occasion  to  reiterate  and
emphasise  some  of  the  points  relevant  to  this  issue.  In  all  cases,  these  points  have  been  made
previously, but I suspect that some of them may have been forgotten or ignored.
Of caveats and underlying inflation
The first point to reiterate is that, from the time I signed my very first agreement with the Minister of
Finance (the Hon David Caygill) in early 1990, shortly after the passage of legislation requiring the
Reserve Bank to use monetary policy to deliver price stability, the Bank has been expected not to react
to price changes arising from things like big changes in international prices and changes in indirect
taxes.
We used to refer to these things as “caveats”, and to calculate the inflation rate excluding the impact of
such  “caveatable”  shocks.  For  convenience,  we  used  to  refer  to  the  inflation  rate  excluding  such
caveatable shocks as the “underlying inflation rate”.
In  the  agreement  I  signed  with  the  present  Minister  of  Finance,  the  Hon  Dr  Michael  Cullen,  in
December  last  year,  as  in  the  agreement  signed  with  the  Rt  Hon  Winston  Peters  in  late  1997,  the
wording is slightly  different  from  the  wording  used  in  1990,  but the  substance  is  the  same,  namely
that:
“There is a range of events that can have a significant temporary impact on inflation as measured by
the CPI, and mask the underlying trend in prices which is the proper focus of monetary policy. These
events  may  even  lead  to inflation  outcomes  outside  the  target range.  Such  disturbances include,  for
example,  shifts  in  the  aggregate  price  level  as  a  result  of  exceptional  movements  in  the  prices  of
1
BIS Review 62/2000
commodities  traded  in  world  markets,  changes  in  indirect  taxes,  significant  government  policy
changes that directly affect prices, or a natural disaster affecting a major part of the economy. When
disturbances of (this) kind…arise, the Bank shall react in a manner which prevents general inflationary
pressures emerging.”
And the Reserve Bank is directed to ignore, or “look through” in the jargon, the price effects of such
events not in order to make my life easier but to make  your life easier. In other words, the Bank is
directed  not  to  react  to  such  one-off  price  shocks  on  the  grounds  that  trying  to  offset  them  would
involve more economic cost than would be warranted. For example, while monetary policy could in
principle be tightened aggressively so that other prices in the economy would fall sufficiently to offset
the direct price effects of an increase in the international price of oil, the Minister has decided, and I
have agreed, that doing that would involve more economic and social damage than could be justified.
We no longer calculate “underlying inflation” in the way we used to do, and that is true for a whole
raft  of  reasons,  including  the  fact  that  there  was  always  some  public  suspicion  that  “underlying
inflation” was a Reserve Bank invention to help Don Brash keep his job. But the reality which that
term reflected is as valid today as it was a decade ago. In other words, we are not interested in trying to
use monetary policy to suppress the price changes which emanate from international oil price changes
or from changes in indirect taxation.
And when we look forward to the end of the year, it seems pretty clear that much of the sharp increase
in inflation which is now expected by most commentators will be the direct result of such factors, and
should as a result be ignored by the Reserve Bank in setting monetary policy.
Partly because we expressly don’t react to certain kinds of price changes, actual inflation can often be
expected  to  fluctuate  over  quite  a  wide  range  -  certainly  over  the  full  0  to  3  per  cent  range,  and
occasionally  outside  that  range.  And  we  set  interest  rates  with  the  objective  of  keeping  inflation
somewhere near the middle of the target range in one to two years’ time precisely because we know
that  in  practice  there  will  be  all  sorts  of  unexpected  shocks  and  developments,  ranging  from  Asian
crises  to  changes  in  cigarette  taxes,  which  will  move  prices  both  up  and  down,  away  from  that
mid-point. We improve our chances of having inflation remain within the target range most of the time
by constantly aiming to keep inflation near the mid-point  of the range  in the  medium-term.  But  we
recognise  that  there  will  be  all  kinds  of  developments  which  will  result  in  somewhat  different
outcomes, and indeed should result in somewhat different outcomes.
But  it  is  crucially  important  to  stress  that  the  Reserve  Bank  can  ignore  the  impact  of  these  one-off
“shocks” to the inflation rate only if we New Zealanders do not use them as an excuse to start a more
generalised and enduring increase in the inflation rate.
If a doctor, in reviewing his or her fees, says “Well, the CPI went up by 3 per cent, so I had better put
up my fees by 3 per cent also”, then we have a problem.
If a producer of widgets sees that the CPI has increased by 3 per cent, and automatically puts his prices
up too, then we have a problem.
If local authorities see a 3 per cent increase in the CPI as adequate justification for them to increase
rates and fees by that amount, then we have a problem.
And if wages and salaries are automatically increased by 3 per cent to compensate for the increase in
the CPI, then we have a problem.
The reality is that, when the international price of oil goes up - to use the current example - we New
Zealanders become poorer, and it is utterly futile to suppose that we can compensate ourselves for that
fact by giving ourselves higher incomes. To the extent that some New Zealanders succeed in winning
such compensation, the gain is achieved at the expense of other New Zealanders, since in aggregate
we are all worse off.
To  put it  bluntly,  if  the  Reserve  Bank  is to  be  able  to  “look  through”  the  impact  of  things  like  the
increase in petrol and cigarette prices in implementing monetary policy, we New Zealanders also need
to “look through” the impact of those things on the CPI. To the extent that we don’t, and instead seek
compensation for the impact of those things on the CPI, the Bank will need to tighten monetary policy
BIS Review 62/2000
2
to a greater extent. The only alternative would be permanently higher inflation, and that would help
nobody and hurt those least able to protect themselves.
In recent years, the Reserve Bank has been happy to report that inflationary expectations are now well
anchored at a low level. We have been able to say that, as a result, we expect that smaller adjustments
in interest rates will be required to maintain price stability, and of course this is good news. It would
be a tragedy if sloppy thinking by price setters, and a return to an indexation mentality, meant that the
benefits of those lower inflationary expectations were lost.
The impact of the exchange rate on inflation
The second point I want to reiterate is the relevance of the exchange rate to inflation.
The  exchange  rate  has  two  effects  on  the  inflation  rate.  First,  there  is  the  more  or  less  immediate
impact  of  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  on  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  which  are  traded
internationally, or which could be traded internationally. We know, for example, that when the New
Zealand dollar depreciates the New Zealand dollar price of oil goes up, and the price of petrol goes up
with it,  quite  apart  from  any  impact  of  an increase in the international  price  of  oil  measured  in  US
dollars.  Similarly,  the  price  of  milk  goes  up,  even  though  milk  is  not  imported,  because  the  New
Zealand  dollar  price  of  milk  on  the  international  market  goes  up  with  the  depreciation  of  the  New
Zealand  dollar.  These  so-called  “direct  price  effects”  of  a  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  typically
affect New Zealand’s inflation rate quite quickly, usually within six to 12 months.
We used to think that a 1 per cent depreciation in the exchange rate would produce an increase in the
inflation rate of about 0.3 per cent within 12 months as a result of these more or less immediate direct
effects. But for some years now, the impact of a change in the exchange rate seems to have produced a
much  smaller  impact  on  inflation  than  that,  for  reasons  which  are  not  entirely  clear.  The  same
relatively  mild  impact  of  exchange  rate  movements  on  inflation  has  been  observed  in  Australia,
Canada, and the United Kingdom in recent years.
But whether the impact is as big as we thought it was in the early nineties or as small as it seems to
have been more recently, we now recognise that this short-term impact of movements in the exchange
rate is not something which always calls for a monetary policy response. This is because the effects of
such exchange rate movements on the inflation rate may have come and gone before adjustments in
monetary policy can have much offsetting effect on the inflation rate.
But  again,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  ability  not  to  react  to  the  temporary  inflation  movements  associated
with exchange rate changes depends on whether we New Zealanders accept that the direct price effects
of exchange rate depreciation are not matters which justify our seeking compensation through higher
incomes. If we collectively seek such compensation, then the Bank is faced not with a one-off price
level  adjustment  but  with  the  potential  for  ongoing  upwards  pressure  on  prices.  In  that  event,  we
would  have  no alternative  than  to  lean  against that  by  running  a  somewhat  tighter  monetary  policy
than otherwise.
The  second  way  in  which  the  exchange  rate  is  relevant  to  inflation  is  through  the  effect  which  the
exchange rate has on the demand for New Zealand-produced goods and services. When the exchange
rate depreciates, goods and services produced in New Zealand become cheaper relative to the price of
goods and services produced abroad. Foreigners seek to buy more of the goods and services produced
here,  and  so  also  do  New  Zealanders.  In  other  words,  our  exports  become  more  price-competitive
overseas,  and  domestically-produced  goods  and  services  become  more  price-competitive  vis-à-vis
imports.  Those  producing  exports  and  import-substitutes  see  an  increase  in  their  sales.  If  they  are
operating  at  full  capacity,  they  will  seek  to  expand  production  by  increasing  investment  and  hiring
more staff.
And this is great - until such time  as the  demand  for additional  resources  from  exporters  and those
producing  import  substitutes  collides  with the  demands  for  resources emanating  from  the  domestic,
so-called “non-tradable”, parts of the economy.  If the total demand for resources is greater than the
resources available, then at some point inflation will begin to develop.
3
BIS Review 62/2000
So  in  assessing  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy,  the  Reserve  Bank  can  not  ignore  these
indirect effects of the exchange  rate on  the  total  demand  for  New  Zealand  goods  and  services. The
exchange rate is always relevant to assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy.
Does this mean that the Reserve Bank has some secret exchange rate target, or perhaps some secret
exchange rate floor? Does it mean that we might increase interest rates to “prop up” the exchange rate?
Absolutely not. It just means, to repeat, that we have to set overnight interest rates in recognition of
these medium-term effects of the exchange rate on total demand. If the export sectors, and the sectors
supplying  import  substitutes,  were  demanding  more  resources  than  the  domestic  sectors  of  the
economy were willing to release, then interest rates would need to rise somewhat to avoid that conflict
generating on-going inflation.
Does  this  mean  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  resurrected  the  Monetary  Conditions  Index  (MCI)?
Absolutely not again, if by that is meant: are we seeking some semi-automatic movement in interest
rates to offset movements in the exchange rate? If the exchange  rate  moves,  either  up  or  down,  we
always have to try to assess the reasons for that movement. It may be, for example, that a depreciation
in  the  exchange  rate  reflects  actual  or  potential  weakness  in  international  commodity  prices  which
would  have  a  disinflationary  impact  on  the  economy  fully  offsetting  the  inflationary  impact  of  the
depreciation, thus requiring no offsetting interest rate increase.
But  the  exchange  rate  does  affect  the  demand  for  New  Zealand-made  goods  and  services,  and
therefore has medium-term implications for the inflation rate. So while we can often ignore the direct
and relatively immediate price effects of movements in the exchange rate, assuming that these direct
price effects do not generate “second-round” inflation pressures, we can not ignore these medium-term
implications.
Monetary policy and the balance of payments deficit
Finally, allow me some observations on the relationship between monetary policy and the balance of
payments.
I have often argued that monetary policy has no ability to influence the balance of payments deficit,
certainly on any kind of sustainable basis. Indeed, I do not even know whether, if I were instructed to
use monetary policy to reduce the deficit (through the Government’s using the so-called “over-ride”
provision in the legislation), I would be tightening or easing monetary policy. Tightening policy would
presumably  cause  the  exchange  rate  to  appreciate,  making  the  deficit  larger,  but  might  also  slow
domestic demand, making the deficit smaller. The problem arises from the fact that no central bank
has discovered a reliable technique for changing the mix of monetary conditions so that, for example,
monetary  policy  could  be  tightened  through  an  increase  in  interest  rates  without  at  the  same  time
putting upward pressure on the exchange rate.
I have also argued in the past that, eventually, in a situation where the exchange rate is floating and the
government  is  running  a  fiscal  surplus,  the  balance  of  payments  deficit  would  reduce  of  its  own
accord.  That  is  based  on  a  recognition  that,  in  those  circumstances,  a  balance  of  payments  deficit
reflects the fact that the private sector is spending more than its income - or in other words, is a net
borrower  -  and  that  this  situation  is  unlikely  to  continue  indefinitely.  At  some  point,  either  New
Zealanders  will decide to  borrow  less  or  foreigners  will  decide  to  lend  us  less.  If  foreigners  tire  of
lending us their savings before  we  New  Zealanders  tire  of  borrowing  them,  the  likely  outcome  is a
change  in the  mix  of  monetary  conditions,  in the direction  of a  lower exchange  rate  and  somewhat
higher interest rates. We know that such a change in the mix of monetary conditions tends to reduce
the balance of payments  deficit  (and  if  we  had  had  any  doubts  on this  score  they  would  have  been
allayed by the speed at which the large balance of payments deficits which some Asian countries had
prior to the recent crisis were converted into surpluses).
The concern which I have expressed on previous occasions, however, is about the social and economic
costs which might be paid if the change in the mix of monetary conditions takes place too abruptly, as
it certainly did in the Asian crisis economies.
BIS Review 62/2000
4
It is at least possible, however, that what we have been witnessing in recent months is in fact a gradual
change in the mix of monetary conditions of the sort which will, over the next few years, see quite a
significant reduction in the balance of payments deficit. Certainly the exchange rate, on any measure,
is  at  an  historically  low  level  and  is  providing  strong  stimulus  to  export  industries  and  to  those
producing import substitutes. Interest rates are not at a particularly high level - indeed, they are well
below the levels reached in the mid-eighties and mid-nineties, at least in nominal terms - and I suspect
that  that  may  have  something  to  do  with  the  fact  that  New  Zealanders  are  getting  a  little  less
enthusiastic about borrowing at much the same time as foreigners are getting a little less enthusiastic
about lending us their savings.
But it is important that we all understand what curing the balance of payments deficit implies.
It implies that for a period of some years those producing exports and import substitutes will enjoy
rather  stronger  levels  of  growth,  in  sales  and  incomes,  than  those  producing  goods  mainly  for  the
domestic market. In plain English, that means that farmers, export manufacturers, fishing companies,
tourist operators, and the like are likely to be relatively prosperous, while those in industries such as
construction and retailing may be somewhat less so.
It implies that consumption spending may grow rather more slowly than total disposable income, with
the difference going into increased saving.
It  implies  that  interest  rates  may  favour  savers  rather  than  borrowers  for  a  period,  and  that  as  a
consequence household sector borrowing may grow more slowly than household sector income, rather
than substantially faster than household sector income, as for the last 15 years.
None of these changes would be good or bad in themselves, though no doubt there would be many
who would welcome signs that we New Zealanders have an ability to live within our means.
But they would certainly involve changes which we would all need to be mindful of in interpreting
economic  indicators.  For  example,  whereas  once  upon  a  time  the  state  of  the  residential  building
industry was of fundamental importance in assessing the strength of the New Zealand economy, it may
well  be  that  over  the  next  few  years,  as  resources  are  attracted  into  export  and  import-competing
industries,  the  residential  building  industry  becomes  a  little  less  important  in  a  relative  sense.
Similarly, the rate at which consumer spending grows may slow somewhat in the years ahead, after a
period during which it grew substantially faster than household sector income. At the same time, we
may see strong growth in industries, and regions, which have a heavy emphasis on exporting.
Mr Chairman, as you can see, I have been careful to avoid giving even the slightest hint about what
the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  saying  in  its  Monetary  Policy  Statement  in  two  weeks’  time.  But  I  have
appreciated this opportunity of putting that Statement into context, and repeating some of the messages
which may have been lost sight of in recent months. Most important of all, the Bank’s ability to ignore
the “spike” in inflation which seems likely to lie ahead of us depends crucially on the willingness of
New Zealanders themselves to ignore that spike in negotiating increases in their own incomes. If they
do not, there can not be the slightest doubt that monetary policy will need to be tighter  than  would
otherwise be the case.
5
BIS Review 62/2000
