Mr Roth remarks on the euro and Swiss franc: two sister currencies?
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank,
at the Swiss Business Association Annual General Meeting, Singapore, 24 February 2000.
 For  more  than  a  year  now,  the  euro  has  been  a  reality.  It  has  crowned  a  decade  long  process  of
monetary integration in Europe. The introduction of a common currency in eleven closely related, but
independent  countries  is  an  unique  experiment.  It  is  still  too  early  to  assess  all  the  far-reaching
implications of this monetary revolution. Therefore, the thoughts and remarks I am going to express
today can only be intermediate and provisional.
Consequences of the euro for the Swiss economy
1.
Switzerland  is  not  part  of  the  Monetary  Union.  It  is  nonetheless  deeply  integrated  in  its  European
environment through its geographic situation and its strong historical, cultural and economic links with
Europe. Over 50% of our exports go to countries of the euro-zone, while 70% of our imports come
from there. But, besides that, Switzerland has strong traditional links overseas, too. The US, Canada
and Japan account for 10% of our imports and 15% of our exports while emerging markets represent
4% and 10% respectively. Although concentrated on Europe, our foreign trade is geographically more
diversified  worldwide  than  that  of  other  small  open  European  economies  such  as  Austria,  the
Netherlands or Belgium.
For the first time in its history, Switzerland is surrounded by countries all sharing the same currency.
Even without being a member of the Union, it is affected by this new monetary situation. De facto, our
trade with Europe is already taking place in one currency only - the euro - because the parities of the
former  national  currencies  have  been  definitively  locked.  That  means  that  our  foreign  trade  is  less
diversified by currencies than earlier and that fluctuations of the SF/euro exchange rate have an even
stronger impact on the Swiss economy than the former SF/DM or SF/FF exchange rates. At the same
time,  a  common  monetary  policy  for  Europe  is  likely  to  lead  -  over  time  -  to  a  stronger
synchronization of business activity in the EMU member states. This, in turn, means that the impact of
the  European  business cycle  on the Swiss  economy  will  become  more  even  and  thus  also  stronger.
More than ever, Switzerland’s economic destiny will be linked to that of Europe.
Today, Switzerland benefits already from the technical simplification induced by the substitution  of
ten  different  currencies  by  a  single  one.  Monetary  unification  brings  advantages  to  internationally
oriented  firms  as  it  simplifies  their  foreign  currency  management  and  their  accounting  procedures.
From  the  year  2002  onward,  when the  euro  will  exist  in  the  form  of  cash,  the  single  currency  will
make  things  even  easier  for  a  broad  public,  not  only  for  the  Europeans,  but  also  for  every  Swiss
travelling  through  the  euro-zone.  At  that  time,  the  euro  will  probably  also  be  easily  accepted  for
payments in Swiss border regions and tourist areas.
As  final  advantage,  the  single  currency  greatly  enhances  market  transparency  and  stimulates
competition.  On  the  one  hand,  Swiss  importers  can  now  directly  compare  euro  denominated  offers
from different countries. On the other hand, exporters can less easily differentiate prices according to
the  market  destination  of  their  products.  In  the  long  run,  transparency  will  promote  efficiency  for
EU-members and non-members. The almost daily news about mergers and acquisitions in Europe is
an expression of the ongoing fight for a favorable position on the unified European market.
Extraordinary stability of the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate in the past ...
2.
After these remarks on the general consequences of the euro for Switzerland, let us now turn to the
more specific, but nonetheless central, question of the exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the
1
BIS Review 17/2000
euro.  As  already  mentioned,  the  exchange  rate  between  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  euro  is  of  crucial
importance to the Swiss economy. So far, the relation between the two currencies has been remarkably
stable. Since the introduction of the single currency, the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate has fluctuated
in an extremely narrow band of only 2%. Thus, exchange rate volatility has until now been even lower
than  the  8%  volatility  observable  between  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  Deutsche  mark  during  the  three
years preceding the monetary unification.
The extreme stability in the exchange rate has surprised many observers, including the Swiss National
Bank itself. It has led to the notion of “sister currencies”, the euro being the big sister and the Swiss
franc following her everywhere like a shadow. But is the Swiss franc really the euro’s little sister? Let
me discuss this question in detail.
If one examines the reasons for the extraordinary stability in the exchange rate, one quickly finds that
convergence  in  fundamentals  has  played  a  central  role.  Both  Europe and  Switzerland  have  suffered
from slow growth in the 1990s and from deflation fears in the aftermath of the international financial
crisis of 1998. Rising unemployment and weak economic activity led the ECB and the SNB to adopt
an  expansive  monetary  stance  and  to  cut  interest  rates.  Broad  similitude  in  business  cycle  and
monetary stance has created conditions leading to an almost fixed exchange rate between the euro and
the Swiss franc. At the same time, converging fundamentals explain why both currencies have been
equally weak against the US dollar: the American business cycle is well in advance of the European
and Swiss business cycles, requiring a different policy response from the Fed.
While  fundamentals  play  a  key  role  in  explaining  long  run  exchange  rate  developments,  political
factors  can  also  be  of  some  importance  in  the  short  run.  By  political  factors  I  mean,  for  example,
elections, government crises, political conflicts  or  new  legislation, but also  the  relation  between  the
government and the central bank, and the credibility of both. In 1999, these widely defined political
factors may have played some role for the relation between the euro and the US dollar. The conflict
between the former German finance minister Lafontaine and the European Central Bank, the European
undecidedness in the face of the Kosovo conflict, and the plans for a harmonization of taxes on interest
payments,  for  example,  may  have  contributed  to  the  weakness  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar.  In
addition, the not always clear communication  strategy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  concerning  its
views on the exchange rate of the euro may also have created some uncertainty.
However,  it  is  puzzling  to  see  that  the  relation  between  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  euro  has  not  been
disturbed by these factors. It may be that the markets perceived Switzerland as so strongly integrated
in Europe that they almost forgot that the Swiss franc is an independent currency. Or, they believed
that the Swiss National Bank, as declared in the early and uncertain days of the  introduction  of the
euro,  would  not  tolerate  a  sharp  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  Expectations  of  a  SNB  reaction
certainly played a role.
In my view, a further factor may explain the greater stability of the Swiss franc vis-à-vis the European
currencies. One cannot exclude that the emergence of a large market for the euro has had a structural
impact on the demand for Swiss francs. Today, the currency diversification of international portfolios
occurs between blocks (dollars, euros, yen and Sterling). Given its size and its traditional low volatility
vis-à-vis the DM, the market for Swiss franc denominated assets does not offer an attractive way to
counterbalance the risks born by large holdings of key currencies. Our currency is thus less demanded
as reserve currency and less involved in speculative capital movements. This is basically good news
for the Swiss economy.
... and what about the future?
3.
What conclusions can be drawn from the past? Will the Swiss franc remain stable vis-à-vis the euro, or
will we see a more independent development of our currency? Again, the answer to this question will
depend crucially  on  economic  fundamentals in  Switzerland  and  in  the  euro-zone.  In  both  areas, the
economy is now recovering from the recession, following a steady upward path. The expected growth
rates for this year amount to 2.2% for Switzerland and 2.9% for the euro-zone. The central question
BIS Review 17/2000
2
for the exchange market is to what extent the economic upturn could endanger price stability, and what
kind of central bank’s reaction can be expected.
Uncertainty about lasting convergence in European and Swiss fundamentals
3.1
While Europe is now growing faster, it still suffers from an unemployment rate of roughly 10%. At
first  sight,  one  might  think  that  this  big  labor  reservoir  would  allow  the  economy  to  grow  without
tensions on the labor market and without large wage adjustments. Inflation would remain subdued, and
there  would  be  no  need  for  an  all  too  restrictive  monetary  policy.  This,  however,  is  only  the  “first
sight”  scenario.  European  unemployment  is  largely  structural,  meaning  that  although  there  is  a
demand for labor on the part of the firms, this demand is not necessarily matched by the supply on the
labor  market.  Under these  circumstances,  the  labor  market  could  constitute  a  bottleneck  for  growth
and lead to inflationary pressure. To prevent inflation from rising, the European Central Bank would
have to further increase interest rates. Clearly, structural adjustments are of the essence in Europe. In
the  absence  of  flexibility,  the  unemployment  rate  cannot  be  lowered  significantly  and  doubts  exist
about the actual room of maneuver of the monetary authorities.
Expected growth for Switzerland, on the other hand, looks quite moderate by international standards.
Thus, one might think that there is little danger of inflation and that the Swiss National Bank should
further support the seemingly fragile economic upturn. A look  at the labor  market,  however, shows
another picture. Unemployment has fallen steadily since the summer of 1997 to a low  rate  of  2.3%
only. Its recent increase to 2.6% is due to seasonal factors. Moreover, there are already clear signs of a
shortage  on  the  labor  market.  Stronger  growth  could  thus  fuel  the  well-known  wage-price  spiral.
Under these circumstances, a further tightening of monetary policy is a realistic hypothesis.
To make things even more difficult, there is a high degree of uncertainty concerning the development
of labor productivity in both Europe and Switzerland. The rise in labor productivity is usually seen as
the main factor behind the spectacular performance of the US economy, characterized by high growth
and low inflation. Will productivity now also start rising in Switzerland and Europe? Where will it rise
more?  In  Switzerland,  where  the  labor  market  is  more  flexible  and  structural  reforms  are  more
advanced, or in Europe, where the large common market and the single currency are expected to break
up old structures?
We  have  good  reasons  to  believe  that  there  is  a  potential  for  non-inflationary  economic  growth  in
Switzerland.  Investment  has  been  strong  in  1998  and  in  the  first  part  of  1999,  deregulation  and
competition  have  made  spectacular  progress,  large-scale  adjustments  have  taken  place  in  various
economic sectors and more flexibility is now accepted in the labor market. Some adjustments in the
interest  rate  have  been  made  in  order  to  restore  a  more  neutral  monetary  stance.  In  one  word,  the
degree of competitiveness of our economy is stronger today than it was 5 or 10 years ago, production
capacities have not been fully exhausted and monetary conditions have been adjusted. Switzerland will
thus benefit from the recovery in Europe without major risk of inflationary pressures.
Indeed, the assessment of the future stability in the exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro
depends  crucially  on  what  will  happen  in  Switzerland  and  in  the  surrounding  countries.  If  the
convergence  in  fundamentals  goes  on,  the  exchange  rate  should  remain  relatively  stable;  otherwise
some adjustment will be needed. I am convinced, however, that the exchange market will not behave
irrationally. Following the pattern of the DM/SF relationship of the past, it will not depart substantially
from what fundamentals would suggest.
Political uncertainties
3.2
What about the political factors influencing the exchange rate? I would like to mention here two major
themes that could possibly affect the relation between the Swiss franc and the euro.
The  first  factor  is  the  uncertainty  about  Switzerland’s  future  policy  towards  Europe.  As  you  may
know, the Swiss people rejected Switzerland’s membership in the European Economic Area (EEA) in
December 1992. This vote was regarded as an anti-EU signal by the government, which has since then
shelved  its  plans  for  adhesion  to  the  EU.  As  an  alternative,  Switzerland  has  negotiated  Bilateral
3
BIS Review 17/2000
Agreements with the EU in order to gain free access to the EU internal market for goods and services.
The  agreements  need  to  pass  a  popular  vote  next  May.  The  prospects  for  an  adoption  of  the
Agreements are good. Sooner or later, however, the question of Switzerland’s accession to the EU will
be considered again. Should the Swiss people still favor a Switzerland outside of the EU, then room
for monetary independence will remain.
The second political factor is the uncertainty about the EU enlargement. There is a long list of Eastern
European  and  Mediterranean  countries  pushing  into  the  EU.  Of  course,  EU  enlargement  will  be  a
progressive step-by-step process. Nevertheless, it is uncertain today how an enlargement will change
the  EU’s  face in the  future.  How  will  these  countries  be  integrated?  How  will  the  decision-making
process inside the EU be affected? And finally, how will the EU enlargement be financed? All these
open questions constitute a potential risk factor for the euro.
Conclusions
4. 
Looking  back  at  the  first  14  months  of  the  euro  from  a  Swiss  perspective,  the  most  striking
observation is the  extraordinary  stability  of  the  Swiss  franc/euro  exchange  rate.  A  detailed  analysis
shows that this stability was due to a high degree of convergence in economic fundamentals and in the
monetary  reaction  of  the  two  central  banks.  Thus,  solid  economic  reasons  have  been  behind  this
stability and not some artificial strategy of currency pegging implemented in secret by the SNB. In the
future,  the  exchange  rate  should  evolve  depending  on  the  development  of  the  fundamentals  -  in
Switzerland and in the euro-zone - and on the answers to some important political questions. Exchange
rate stability, on the scale that has been experienced so far, is not guaranteed to last forever. However,
the risk of erratic movements seems limited because the presence of large currency blocks has lowered
the attractiveness of the Swiss franc as reserve currency.
Nevertheless, I would hesitate today to qualify the euro and the Swiss franc as “sister currencies”. If
you have a sister, she remains your sister for life and not just in case of common interests. We should
rather consider  these  two  currencies  as  travel  companions:  they  share  the  same  objective  -  a  sound
macroeconomic  development  -  and  follow  the  same  road  towards  price  stability.  It  is  up  to  their
relative fitness to see whether they will continue hand in hand.
BIS Review 17/2000
4
