Mr Mboweni: The role of the South African Reserve Bank in the economy
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Pretoria Council
for Businesswomen, Pretoria, held on 14 March 2000.
 The establishment of the Reserve Bank
1.
The South African Reserve Bank was established in 1921 as the central bank of South Africa in terms
of a special act of Parliament. The founding of the Reserve Bank was the direct result of disruptions
caused by the First World War and formed part of a more comprehensive set of measures meant to
deal with unsatisfactory monetary and financial conditions. At that time, the existence of central banks
was still not common, and the South African Reserve Bank was only the fourth central bank founded
outside Europe. The other three central banks were established in the United States of America, Japan
and Java.
The Reserve Bank was mainly set up because of the need to issue uniform banknotes and to prevent
the  over-issue  of  banknotes.  Before  the  Bank  was  established  an  assortment  of  banknotes  were  in
circulation in South Africa which were issued in terms of the laws of the various provinces. With the
formation  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  it  obtained  the  sole  right  to  issue  banknotes  in  South  Africa.  The
Bank’s first notes were issued to the public in April 1922. At the end of that year the banknotes in
circulation amounted to R20 million. At the end of February 2000 the notes and coin in circulation
totalled R27,4 billion.
The Reserve Bank’s size and operations were at first hampered by various statutory restrictions on its
lending and investing. Some expansions to the Bank’s powers to grant credit were brought about by
amendments to the Currency and Banking Act in 1923 and 1930. A more comprehensive revision of
the Bank’s powers was affected in 1944. Subsequently, many changes were also made to strengthen
the bank’s hand in carrying out its functions. These changes reflected a recognition of the Bank’s need
for greater freedom of action in its day-to-day operations and an awareness of the need for sufficient
policy instruments in conducting monetary policy.
acting as a bank to other banks;
the issuing of banknotes and coin;
acting as banker to the government;
Today, the Reserve Bank virtually performs the full range of functions and duties that are customarily
carried out by central banks. In addition, the Reserve Bank is actively involved in the marketing of
South Africa’s gold production. The main functions of the Reserve Bank are:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
collecting, processing and interpreting economic statistics and other information, and
providing facilities for the clearing and settlement of claims between banks;
acting as custodian of the country’s gold and other foreign reserves;
engaging in public debt management and open-market operations;
acting as “bank of rediscount” and “lender of last resort”;
formulating and implementing monetary policy.
1
BIS Review 24/2000
Legal framework of the Bank
2.
The existence, management, powers and functions of the Bank are currently governed by the Reserve
Bank Act No 90 of 1989, which came into operation on 1 August 1989. However, the Reserve Bank
has  also  been  identified  as  the  central  bank  of  South  Africa  in  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of
South Africa. As the Bank is a statutory institution, it is only allowed to perform functions expressly
or by implication assigned to or conferred upon it by these two legislative enactments.
Since its establishment, the Reserve Bank has always been privately owned. Today, the Bank has more
than 700 shareholders. The shares of the Bank are listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and no
individual shareholder is allowed to hold more than one-half per cent of the capital of the Bank. The
Bank may never pay a dividend of more than 10% per annum on the nominal value of its capital.
The Bank is managed by a Board of 14 Directors, seven of whom are elected by the shareholder’s to
represent them on the Board. Without holding any shares in the Bank, the Government has the right to
appoint the other seven Board members. The seven members appointed by the President includes the
Governor  and  three  Deputy  Governors,  who  are  full-time  executive  members,  plus  three  part-time
Directors.
The Governor and the Deputy Governors are appointed for five years, while all other directors serve
for periods of three years. All directors are eligible for reappointment or re-election after the expiration
of their terms of office.
The Reserve Bank Act provides further that of the seven directors elected by the shareholders, four
shall be persons who are or have been actively and primarily engaged in commerce or finance, one
shall be a person who is or has been engaged in agriculture and two shall be persons who are or have
been engaged in industrial pursuits. Members of Parliament, directors, officers or employees of banks
or  mutual  banks  and  persons  who  are  not  South  African  citizens  resident  in  the  country  are
disqualified from being appointed or elected as a director of the Bank.
The Board of the Reserve Bank has been given an important degree of autonomy for the execution of
its  duties.  In  terms  of  the  Constitution:  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  in  pursuit  of  its  primary
objective,  must  perform  its  functions independently  and  without  fear, favour  or  prejudice,  but  there
must  be  regular  consultation  between  the  Bank  and  the  Cabinet  member  responsible  for  national
financial matters”.
As  a  creation  of  government,  the  Reserve  Bank  is,  of  course,  accountable  to  Parliament  and  the
Government has an important say in the activities of the Bank. In terms of section 31 of the Reserve
Bank Act the Governor of the Bank must submit a report annually to the Minister of Finance relating
to the implementation of monetary policy. Moreover, in terms of section 32 of this Act the Bank must
on  a  monthly  basis  submit  a  statement  of  its  assets  and  liabilities  and  annually  its  annual  financial
statements to the Department of Finance. These reports are then tabled in Parliament by the Minister
of Finance.
The  Governor of the  Reserve  Bank  is also  summoned  to  appear  before the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Finance  from  time  to  time.  In  these  meetings  he  usually  explains  the  monetary  policy  stance  to
committee  members  and  answers  questions  on  the  Bank’s  views  on  financial  and  economic
developments.
Section 37 of the Reserve Bank Act provides further that if at any time the Minister of Finance is of
the opinion that the Bank has failed to comply with any provision of the Act or of a regulation made
thereunder, he may by notice in writing require the Board of the Bank to make good or remedy the
default within a specified time. If the Board fails to comply with such a notice, the Minister may apply
to the Supreme Court for an order compelling the Board to make good or remedy the default, and the
Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.
BIS Review 24/2000
2
Primary objective of the Bank
3.
In  all  these  endeavours,  the  primary  or  strategic  objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  achieve  and
maintain  stable  financial  conditions  in  the  country.  This  objective  is  spelled  out  in  both  the
Constitution of the Republic and in the South African Reserve Bank Act. In these acts it is recognised
that only by protecting the currency can balanced and sustainable economic growth be achieved. It is
believed in the Bank, and indeed in most countries of the world, that the potential growth rate of an
economy  and  the  optimum  creation  of  employment  opportunities  can  only  be  attained  under  stable
financial conditions. By fulfilling this primary objective, the Reserve Bank will make its contribution
to sustainable higher economic growth in South Africa.
The question may be asked what is meant by the term financial stability? In a broad sense financial
stability can be defined to include price stability as well as stable conditions in the financial sector as a
whole. Price stability is achieved when changes in the general price level do not materially affect the
economic decision-making  process.  Although  relative  price  movements  will  still  have  an  impact  on
production, consumption and investment, the rate of inflation or deflation is not an important factor in
the decisions taken by producers, consumers and the authorities under stable price conditions.
The stability of key institutions and markets in the financial system is achieved when there is a high
degree of confidence that the financial infrastructure of the economy is able to meet the requirements
of market participants. However, it is important to realise that financial stability does not exclude the
failure of individual banks or financial institutions. A financial institution can go bankrupt in  stable
financial conditions. It is only where systemic risks arise, i.e. where the financial  sector  as  a  whole
may be influenced by an incident, that the situation can be described as financially unstable.
The  two  elements  of  financial  stability,  i.e.  price  stability  and  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  are
closely  related.  Failure  to  maintain  one  of  these  elements  provides  a  very  uncertain  operating
environment for the other, with causality running in both directions. For example, high inflation can
lead to tighter monetary policy, higher interest rates, an increase in the non-performing loans of banks
and a fall in asset and collateral values, which can cause bank and other failures in the financial sector.
Conversely,  disruptions in  the  financial  system  will  make  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary
policy less effective and can materially affect changes in the general price level.
Monetary policy framework
4.
In its objective to establish and maintain financial stability it is therefore important that the Reserve
Bank encourages and supports the development of sound and well-managed banking institutions. This
is  done,  firstly,  by  monitoring  the  financial  risks  that  banks  undertake.  The  Bank  Supervision
Department is charged with the responsibility to ensure prudential soundness in the banking system.
Secondly, lender-of-last-resort assistance is provided to banks to safeguard the system from systemic
risks. This assistance is never provided automatically to any bank that encounters difficulties, but it is
only  applied  in  cases  where  a  bank  is  encountering  liquidity  shortages  and  where  its  failure  would
pose a serious threat to the financial system as a whole.
Financial  stability  also  requires  well-developed  and  efficient  functioning  financial  markets.  In  this
regard it is important to have sufficient banknotes and coin in circulation, so as not to hamper trade
and  financial  transactions.  Without  a  system  for  the  clearance  and  settlement  of  bank  claims,  the
payments for transactions would be encumbered. In addition, the Reserve Bank has a vested interest in
the development  and functioning  of  the  money,  capital  and  foreign  exchange  markets  if it  wants to
maintain financial stability.
In  order  to  achieve  price  stability,  the  Minister  of  Finance  announced  in  his  Budget  Speech  on
23 February  2000  that  the  government  has  decided  to  adopt  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy
framework  in  South  Africa.  This  means  that  the  authorities  are  now  targeting  the  rate  of  inflation
directly,  instead  of  setting  guidelines  for  intermediative  objectives  such  as  money  supply  and  bank
credit extension to bring inflation down to lower levels. The inflation target has been expressed as an
average annual rate of increase of between 3 and 6% in the consumer price index excluding the effect
of changes in mortgage rates for the year 2002.
3
BIS Review 24/2000
With the announcement of this new framework the inflation target becomes the overriding objective of
monetary  policy.  The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  now  to  hit  the  target.  Missing  the  target
consistently with wide margins will lead to lost prestige and credibility for the central bank. Such a
framework for monetary policy can only be successful if the public is certain that the central bank is
serious about containing inflation.
This new framework has been adopted in South Africa to remove any uncertainties about the monetary
policy  stance  that  is  adopted  by  the  authorities.  Inflation  targeting  makes  policy  transparent  in  the
sense that it makes the central bank’s intentions clear in a way that should improve the planning of the
private  sector.  Inflation  targeting  should  also  provide  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations,  lead  to
greater stability in interest rates if it brings about better coordination of policy measures and clearly
defines the accountability of the Reserve Bank.
In this new monetary policy framework the operational procedures of the Reserve Bank will basically
remain unchanged. The Bank will accordingly continue to influence the total monetary demand in the
economy  to  achieve  price  stability.  The  Reserve  Bank  controls  the  supply  of  money  through  its
operations in providing liquidity to the banking sector and by affecting the total demand for money
that emanates from the private and public sector. Its operational variable in this process is the level of
short-term  interest  rates.  The  level  of  interest  rates  is  determined  primarily  by  total  saving  in  the
economy, the inflow of capital, and by the demand for funds from government, businesses and private
individuals. The central bank affects the cost of short-term funds through the impact of its actions on
the repo rate, i.e. the interest rate at which it provides in the liquidity needs of the banks. In such a
framework there is no target for the exchange rate of the rand. The external value of the rand forms
part of the results obtained in the economy.
Decision-making process
5.
In  view  of  the  growing  complexity  of  functional  relationships  between  the  various  economic  and
financial  variables,  a  detailed  and  careful  analysis  has  to  be  made  of  the  underlying  economic
conditions. A large number of economic indicators are therefore monitored by the Bank to arrive at its
monetary policy stance, such as developments in price indices, the level of interest rates, the shape of
the yield curve, changes in nominal salaries and wages, nominal unit labour  costs, the  gap  between
potential  and  actual  domestic  output,  money  market  conditions,  the  overall  balance  of  payments
position, the net open position in foreign exchange and the public sector borrowing requirement.
To evaluate the results of such an analysis of the economy a Monetary Policy Committee was created
in the Reserve Bank. The Monetary Policy Committee consists of the Governor and Deputy Governors
as voting members and senior officials of the Bank as non-voting members. The first meeting of the
Monetary Policy Committee was already held in October 1999. At the meetings of this Committee an
evaluation  is  made  over  a  two-day  period  of  international  and  domestic  economic  conditions,  the
expected behaviour of the inflation rate and the current stance of monetary policy.
Although  the  governors  of  the  Bank  are  the  only  members  with  voting  rights  on  the  Committee,
consensus decisions are normally made. The final decision-making power on monetary policy matters
nevertheless is still vested in the Governor’s Committee, i.e. a subcommittee of the Board comprising
the Governor and three Deputy Governors.
After the completion of every meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee a statement is issued to the
public. This statement summarises the more important aspects that were discussed at the meeting and
the conclusions that were made. In this statement the monetary policy stance of the Reserve Bank is
also formulated. For example, in the last monetary policy statement of 2 March 2000 it was concluded
that after taking cognisance of the current economic circumstances and consistent with the  inflation
target set by the authorities, the Monetary Policy Committee is of the opinion that the current level of
the repo rate is appropriate. In accordance with the decision taken at the previous meeting, the Reserve
Bank will therefore continue to manage the banks’ daily liquidity requirement in a way that will result
in a repo rate at or around 11.75%”.
BIS Review 24/2000
4
Conclusion
6.
As already indicated, this decision was taken after lengthy deliberations and a detailed analysis of the
underlying economic conditions in the country by senior staff of the Reserve Bank. More in particular,
the  latest  decision  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  took  note  of  the  following  economic
developments:
• 
Favourable  global  growth  prospects  with  some  signs  of  an  acceleration  of  inflation  in
industrial countries and a concomitant rise in their interest rates.
      South  Arican  recovery  in  domestic  economic  activity  that  gathered  momentum  during  the
course of 1999. The growth from quarter to quarter in real gross domestic product increased
from 2% in the fourth quarter of 1998 to no less than 32% in the fourth quarter of 1999.
With  the  increase  in  economic  activity,  gross  domestic  expenditure  began  to  pick  up  and
increased at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 42% in the fourth quarter of 1999.
This high growth can be  ascribed  to a  rise  in consumption  expenditure, an  increase  in the
fixed investment of private organisations and a strong accumulation of inventories.
Conditions in the labour market remained depressed with further job losses of about 80 000
being recorded in the first nine months of 1999.
The current account of the balance of payments showed a deficit of 2% of gross domestic
product  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1999.  This  deficit  did  not  present  any  problems  to  the
domestic economy and was wiped out by a net inflow of capital of no less than R14 billion.
Moreover,  the  balance  of  payments  is  basically  very  healthy,  which  makes  it  difficult  to
understand why the external value of the rand recently came under some pressure.
Clear signs of increased inflationary pressures have become apparent in the South  African
economy. This has been reflected in a rise in the year-on-year rate of the production price
index from 5.7% in September 1999 to 8.2% in January 2000. This acceleration in inflation
was mainly due to increases in the prices of petrol and diesel, transport equipment and more
recently food products. The recent floods  experienced in the  country,  a  further increase in
international  oil  prices  and  the  more  rapid  rise  in  money  supply  growth  could  also  cause
rising inflation over the short term.
Over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  inflation  in  South  Africa  is  expected  to  subside  again
because  of  the  application  of  fiscal  and  monetary  discipline,  a  projected  low  growth  in
nominal  unit  labour  costs,  international  competition  and  the  excess  production  capacity  in
the economy.
All in all the economic conditions in South Africa are at  present  much  more  favourable  than  at  the
beginning  of  the  preceding  year.  With  the  further  improvement  in  the  production  structure  of  the
country envisaged in the President’s State of the Nation Address on 4 February 2000, the outlook for
the South African economy indeed looks very promising.
5
BIS Review 24/2000
