Mr Lim gives a policymaker’s perspective
on the role of macroeconomic modelling in public policy
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  The  Monetary
Authority of Singapore and Minister for Health and Second Minister for Finance, at the launch of The
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  new  macroeconometric  model  of  the  Singapore  economy,  the
Monetary Model of Singapore (MMS) on 2 February 2000.
 Introduction
It is my pleasure to be here today. This conference provides an excellent opportunity for networking
and the exchange of ideas between policymakers, private sector economists as well as academics.
Last July, at the Far Eastern Meeting of the Econometric Society in Singapore, I mentioned that the
Economics  Department  of  MAS  was  working  on  a  new  macroeconometric  model  of  the  Singapore
economy,  the  Monetary  Model  of  Singapore.  This  model  incorporates  the  latest  techniques  and
thinking in modelling. I am glad that the development work is completed and the model is now ready
to be used for policy work. The staff of the Economics Department will be presenting the details of the
model later this morning for review and discussion.
Post-Asian crisis: a time for reflection
The economic outlook for Asia has turned positive. Memories of the Asian financial crisis and of the
economic  recession  that  followed  have  already  started  to  fade.  The  crisis  Asian  economies  are
recovering - we see production, exports and consumption growth rebounding, some even surpassing
pre-crisis levels. GDP growth rates for most of these economies will likely turn positive in 1999. The
outlook for the year 2000 is similarly benign. Indeed, the concern for the Korean economy has even
turned into one of over-heating.
Asia’s  nascent  recovery  has  set  it  apart  from  other  emerging  economies.  Discerning  international
investors  are  placing  much  lower  risk  premiums  on  Asian  economies  compared  to  other  emerging
economies. For example, the difference between the yields on Latin American and Asian US dollar
bonds  has  risen  from  less  than  100  basis  points  in  August  1998  to  around  250  basis  points  in
November 1999.1
The Singapore economy too, has recovered strongly, rising together with the regional economies. GDP
grew by an estimated 5.6% last year, compared to 0.3% in 1998. This year, we expect the momentum
to be sustained, with GDP growth at around 4.5-6.5%. But we cannot be complacent. To ensure that
Singapore  continues  to  prosper,  we  need  to  remain  competitive,  regionally  and  globally.  Global
markets  have  become  much  more  integrated  and  global  competition  has  intensified.  We  need  to  be
part of this globalisation process and not close our doors to it. This is why we have been gradually
introducing more competition into previously protected sectors of the economy, such as the financial
sector and the telecommunications sector.
These  are  challenging  times  ahead  for  us.  But  as  economic  recovery  gathers  pace,  it  is  easy  for
euphoria to overtake  the  need  for  improvement  and  change.  It  could  also tempt  us to  scale  back  or
postpone  painful  restructuring  initiatives.  But  we  cannot  let  this  happen.  We  must  reflect  upon  the
1 BOE’s Financial Stability Conjecture and Outlook, November 1999.
1
BIS Review 9/2000
lessons of the crisis and use them creatively  to strengthen  the  economic  systems,  both domestically
and internationally.
This conference is timely. Macro modellers can use this opportunity to do some soul-searching. You
can  ask  yourselves  how  macroeconometric  modelling  can  facilitate  good  public  policy  in  this
post-Asian crisis era.
For the critics and the sceptics, the Asian crisis is evidence that macro modelling has failed badly. For
them, macro modelling is an old millstone in a new millennium. Perhaps resources should be freed up
for  more  productive  activities?  However,  the  indications  are  that  more  and  more  central  banks  are
embarking on projects to develop macro models of their economies.
I  take  a  sympathetic  view,  and  not  only  because  I  am  addressing  a  crowd  comprised  largely  of
economists and analysts. In my view, macro models can function as good navigational tools for the
policymaker. But I must qualify that not all models fit the bill.
How macro modelling can remain relevant to policymakers - five qualities
I  am  no  expert  in  the  field  and  my  comments  today  are  solely  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  public
policymaker.  I  believe  that  macro  models  must  exhibit  five  qualities  in  order  to  be  useful  to
policymakers.
First and foremost, macro models must be responsive to structural changes in the economy. Otherwise,
the  macro  models  will  have  little  or  no  value  for  the  policymakers  who  must  make  hard  decisions
based on the policy implications of the models.
Models today have in fact evolved to be quite different from those in the 1970s. Then, macro models
placed much emphasis on demand-driven outcomes for the economy. That was because governments
believed in the power of discretionary monetary and fiscal policies to promote high growth and low
inflation. However, the repeated failure of such macro models to identify critical turning points in the
1970s and 1980s caused many economists to question the old assumptions behind the models. It then
became clear that supply-side factors and the role of expectations also needed to be worked in. Thus,
today many macro models build in these factors. One example is how most models now work in the
impact of the economy’s potential output on inflation outcomes.
In  the  US,  modellers  are  faced  with  growing  evidence  of  an  emergent  “New  Economy”.  The
hypothesis is that high rates of growth can be sustained without triggering off inflationary pressures,
even  at  the  point  of  full  employment.  I  understand  that  staff  from  the  Federal  Reserve  constantly
update their estimates of key model parameters, such as the NAIRU2 as well as trend productivity to
reflect the features of this New Economy. These updated estimates have been used to help shape the
Fed’s forecasts of growth and inflation, thereby ensuring that the policymaking process is an informed
one.
The  second  quality  I  have  in  mind  refers  specifically  to  the  model’s  role  in  forecasting  and  policy
analysis.  A  model  must  have  a  good  track  record,  in  order  to  serve  as  a  reliable  guide  to  the
policymaker.  I  am  not  asking  for  spot-on  point  forecasts  or  estimates  but,  at  a  minimum,  a  macro
model  must  be  able  to  provide  policymakers  with  a  good  feel  for  the  directional  effects  of  various
policy options.
Thirdly,  the  workings  of  the  model  must  be  transparent.  Ideally,  the  structure  of  the  model  should
correspond to a flowchart of the linkages within the economy. Fed Governor Laurence Meyer has said
in a recent speech3 that model-based forecasting needs to “start with a paradigm and end with a story”.
2 Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment.
3 To the Stern Graduate School of Business, New York University: “Start with a Paradigm, End with a Story: The Value of
Model-Based Forecasting and Policy Analysis”.
BIS Review 9/2000
2
Ultimately,  when  policymakers  want  to  introduce  policy  changes,  they  want  to  know  through  what
channels the effect of this policy will flow and how agents will react to this policy. In other words,
policymakers  want  to  know  the  story  going  on  behind  each  policy  reaction  and  not  just  be  buried
under masses of model output.
Fourth, macro modelling should adopt a pluralistic approach. Policymakers are like consumers while
macro  modellers  are  the  producers.  As  the  well-known  econometrician  Clive  Granger4  said,  “it  is
worth  remembering  that  consumers  usually  prefer  having  a  choice.  It  is  rare  for  one  model  to  be
superior for all possible purposes: forecasting, policy making, conditional forecasts, testing hypotheses
or  investigating  the  effects  of  a  previous  policy  change,  for  example.  Different  users  will  have
different tastes, beliefs and needs and will prefer certain types of models.”
I understand a number of central banks, including the Bank of England, have followed this path. I am
sure that you will hear more of this later from the expert from the BOE himself. Such an approach is
of course hugely taxing on resources and here in Asia, we could perhaps look upon it as a desirable
goal to strive for.
Finally, I also encourage a pragmatic approach. Here, I am referring to the practice of supplementing
model  output  with  sectoral  analyses,  survey  data,  market  trends  as  well  as  value  judgements.
Modellers  need  to  be  aware  of  the  limitations  of  their  models.  The  complexities  of  the  economy
cannot  be  fully  captured  by  a  macroeconometric  model,  no  matter  how  comprehensive  its
specifications. In particular, macro models cannot quantify variables such as panic, greed or the herd
psychology of investors. As a result, even the predictions of the most sophisticated model have been
thrown off  by  unexpected  developments  in the environment.  This  was  clearly  evidenced  during  the
turmoil in international financial markets in August 1998, when the LTCM crisis unfolded.
Conclusion
The  new  Monetary  Model  of  Singapore  incorporates  many  of  the  new  features  and  innovations  in
macro  modelling.  In  time  to  come,  I  hope  that  it  will  be  further  fine-tuned  so  as  to  reflect  the  five
qualities that I have just spoken about. In this process, it might be useful to modellers in Singapore and
even  from  the  region  to  meet  more  regularly  to  exchange  ideas  and  learn  from  each  other’s
experiences.
In the post-Asian crisis era, one of the main concerns of regional policymakers is that of monitoring
vulnerabilities of the domestic economies to external shocks. There is a need for a formal and reliable
monitoring mechanism to help supplement overall surveillance efforts. Perhaps macro models could
be  employed  to  this  end.  If  workable,  this  might  just  be  the  function  that  renders  models  not  only
relevant but actually indispensable to policymakers.
I leave you with this thought and wish you all a day of fruitful deliberations.
4
“Empirical Modelling in Economics: Specification and Evaluation”, The 1998 Marshall Lectures.
3
BIS Review 9/2000
