Maurice O’Connell: The euro, the Irish economy
and banking supervision
Written submission by Mr Maurice O’Connell, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Irish
Parliamentary Joint Committee on European Affairs on 19 July 2000.
 The outlook for the world economy remains generally good. Europe has settled into a steady growth
pattern and real GDP growth of more than 3% is expected this year. Unemployment is falling steadily.
The US economy has continued to surpass expectations and there are now tentative signs of orderly
slowdown. Japan and the Far East generally appear to have shaken off the threat of financial collapse,
though recovery in Japan is still tentative. A policy of zero interest rates and high public expenditure
has  not  been  enough  to  stimulate  growth.  The  remarkable  performance  of  the  US  economy  has
generated euphoria about a so-called new economy that offers the prospect of a permanent reduction in
the  natural  rate  of  unemployment,  substantial  gains  in  productivity  growth  and  lessens  the  risks  of
inflation.  Whether  or  not  we  are  in  a  new  economy,  or  a  new  information  revolution,  it  would  be
unwise to  conclude  that  traditional  laws  of  economics  no  longer  apply.  There  are  new  factors,  but,
whether these are a temporary phenomenon or a profound change, only time will tell.
The world economy may appear fit and well but there is an imbalance that will require correction at
some point. I refer to the record deficit in the current account of the US balance of payments, which is
being financed by capital inflows from Europe and Japan. This may not continue indefinitely. Capital
will flow to wherever the strongest future return is perceived to be. The possibility of a sharp stock
market correction also deserves attention. Between end-1996 and end-1999 the Dow Jones index rose
by  78%,  while  the  Nasdaq  index,  which  accounts  for  about  one  third  of  total  stock  market
capitalisation  in  the  United  States  recorded  an  increase  of  more  than  200%.  In  Europe,  structural
weaknesses have continued to be a dead hand on the economy and reform is by its nature slow. In this
context, the current taxation proposals in Germany may prove to be a very significant development.
Very recently the OECD has issued warnings on the dangers of inflation both in the United States and
in Europe.
When I came before this Committee in February, I mentioned that the succession of economic crises
in  recent  years  had  prompted  the  authorities  to  review  comprehensively  the  whole  international
financial architecture. This review is ongoing and the Financial Stability Forum (a body set up by the
G7 to promote international financial stability) issued a report on offshore centres recently, as part of
its  mandate.  Earlier  this  year,  reflecting  the  new  emphasis  on  financial  stability,  the  International
Monetary Fund sent a team of experts to Ireland to investigate our arrangements for supervision of the
financial sector.
The euro
The  euro  has  been  continually  in  the  limelight,  largely  because  of  the  downward  trend  against  the
US dollar and other currencies. Since its introduction on 1 January 1999, the euro has depreciated by
almost 20% against the dollar. There has been a welcome improvement in recent months, reflecting
the improvement in the underlying economy. It has been a source of concern that, as a new currency
without an extended track record, the credibility of the euro might be damaged by undue weakness.
The  reasons  for  the  relatively  weak  euro  have  been  analysed  repeatedly.  Essentially,  it  reflects  the
robust performance of the US economy. The euro is undervalued; it should recover substantially as the
European economy improves and as familiarity with the currency increases. The current level of long-
term  bond  yields  confirms  market  expectations  of  continuing  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Large
swings  in  currency  external  values  are  by  no  means  a  new  phenomenon  in  the  world  order.  In  the
1
BIS Review 61/2000
mid-1980s  the  Deutsche  mark  was  considerably  weaker  against  the  dollar  than  the  euro  is  today.
Within two years, this position was reversed.
There has been some criticism from time to time of the management of the euro at international level.
This  criticism  has  pointed, in  particular,  towards  the  multiplicity  of  spokespersons  on  behalf  of  the
currency. Yes - there were too many opinions in the early days but this is now behind us. It has been
an extremely complex operation to bring 11 countries together into one monetary policy area. It is a
tribute to the professionalism of many that the transition has been achieved in such a straightforward
manner.  While  attention  may  have  focused  largely  on  the  external  value  of  the  euro,  the  primary
objective  of  monetary  policy  is  price  stability  within  the  euro  area  which  is  seen  as  essential  for
economic success, social justice and balance in society.
Although the euro has been weaker than expected since its launch, the prospects for the currency have
been  improving  steadily.  Where,  last  year,  the  weakness  against  the  US  dollar  largely  reflected  an
unexpected divergence in economic growth between the two areas, this differential has now narrowed
and is expected to continue to do so over the course of this year and next. On a broader scale, the euro
is  the  second  largest  currency  in  the  international  financial  system  and  the  euro  area  represents  an
internal market of almost 300 million people. With exports from the area accounting for almost 20%
of  world  exports  and  integration  of  financial  markets  progressing  further,  the  currency  has
considerable potential to appreciate.
The  European  Central  Bank  is  now  fully  operational.  At  the  political  level,  the  euro  11  (soon  to
become the euro 12) has gradually defined its role as a forum for economic policy coordination among
participating Member States. This includes a continuing dialogue with the Bank to ensure consistency
of policy. It is probably fair to say that the euro cannot be fully fledged and expect total acceptance
until banknotes and coin become available. Production is well under way to meet the target  date  of
1 January 2002 (known as E-day). People will then relate immediately to the euro as their currency.
There is great confidence that this will have a big influence in cementing the euro zone further.
The European Central Bank does not target an exchange rate for the euro. Large economic zones do
not  target  an  external  anchor.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  Bank  is  indifferent  to  the  level  of  the
currency. On the contrary, if at any stage the level of the euro were a threat to price stability, the Bank
would obviously respond. The Bank adopts a twin-pillar strategy in the conduct of its monetary policy.
These pillars are growth in money supply and inflation.
The Annual Report of the Central Bank of Ireland for 1999 reflects the extent to which EMU and the
euro impact on the functions of the Bank. There have been changes of radical dimensions. The Bank is
part  of  the  Eurosystem  and  it  no  longer  operates  an  independent  Irish  monetary  policy.  It  does  of
course  contribute  to  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area.  The  Irish  pound  is  no  longer  traded  on  the
foreign exchange market. The Eurosystem is decentralised so that operational activities are carried out
by  the  individual  national  central  banks.  In  short,  our  day-to-day  activities  are  more  complex  than
before. The Bank continues to manage reserves, to engage in open market operations, provide standing
facilities and to operate payments systems. It is constantly liaising with the European Central Bank in
Frankfurt on all aspects of our activities that relate to monetary policy.
Right  now,  Ireland’s  situation  within  the  euro  area  is  unique  because  of  our  exceptionally  buoyant
economic  conditions.  It  follows  that  the  monetary  policy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  is  not  best
suited  to  current  Irish  circumstances.  The  European  Central  Bank  cannot  address  our  situation  in
isolation.  The  Irish  economy  comprises  just  1%  of  the  euro  area  GDP  and  it  would  be  entirely
implausible to expect that the strategy for the whole euro area might be coloured by conditions that are
peculiar to us. In any event all members of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank are
obliged by law to adopt a euro area-wide perspective, rather than represent a region or a constituency.
This is the main reason why the European Central Bank does not publish minutes of meetings, in order
to avoid any semblance of national pressures.
The European Central Bank does not focus on individual countries. It does not differentiate between
big  and  small.  It  does  not  draw  distinctions  between  so-called  core  and  peripheral  countries.  This
language  is  not  used.  Monetary  policy  is  set  for  the  whole  euro  area  as  one  unit.  At  the  moment,
however,  economic  conditions  in  Ireland  differ  substantially  from  conditions  elsewhere.  We  have
BIS Review 61/2000
2
joined EMU, however, for the long haul - for the benefits of relatively low inflation, low interest rates
and the general security that membership of a large currency area provides.
Interest rate movements are obviously an important factor in determining the future course of the Irish
economy.  Internationally,  the  bias  in  interest  rates  is  upwards  as  the  world  economy  maintains  a
positive momentum. Nobody would rule out at this time the possibility of higher rates; for us, rates are
now determined by the policy of the European Central Bank by reference to economic conditions in
the euro area as a whole. The adoption of the euro involved a large and arbitrary reduction in  Irish
interest rates in 1998. This has to some extent been reversed and since November 1999, there has been
a cumulative increase of 1.75%. Higher rates would better suit Irish conditions as interest rates here
are  still  negative  in  real  terms  at  the  prevailing  rate  of  inflation.  This  invites  overinvestment.  As
mentioned  already,  policy  must  be  determined  however  by  reference  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.
Membership of the euro area will continue to require disciplines and benchmarks and provide stability
from  which  we  should  benefit  substantially  in  the  long  run.  This  is  one  good  reason  for  optimism
about the future of the Irish economy.
The Irish economy
The Irish economy continues to exceed best expectations. Before addressing difficulties and potential
problems, may I acknowledge achievements. We are in an economic position that most would envy
and  successive  administrations  deserve  credit  for  this.  The  problems  that  we  address  today  are
problems of success.
The Central Bank estimates growth this year will be 8½%. There is little evidence of a slowdown. This
level  of  growth  cannot  be  sustained.  The  signs  of  overheating  of  the  economy  are  already  evident.
Labour shortages, congestion and accelerating house prices are testament to this. There is a dilemma.
On the one hand, there is a large budget surplus and an obvious need for high investment in areas such
as  infrastructure.  On  the  other  hand,  an  expansionary  approach  to  the  budget  tends  to  generate
overheating, to increase the threat of inflation and ultimately undermine the competitiveness that has
got us where we are today. There is no simple nor definite answer. There is no alternative, however, to
restraint. This restraint must extend to incomes and to current expenditure generally. The pay terms
and tax reductions contained in the Programme for Prosperity and Fairness (PPF) should deliver real
income increases over the period of the agreement. It is important that the economy is not undermined
by wage drift.
The dilemma that I have outlined is not simply a matter of economics. It also involves political and
social choices, which are outside the remit of the Central Bank.
The  Central  Bank  estimate  of  average  inflation  for  this  year  on  a  CPI  basis  is  4¾%.  Last  year  the
average  was  1.6%.  Put  in  context,  this  means  that  Irish  inflation  will  be  substantially  beyond  the
average for the euro area this year. Nobody claims that inflation here must be at the same level as in
the euro area in general. It is reasonable to expect that inflation would be somewhat higher than the
average,  because  of  our  economic  growth  and  higher  productivity  growth.  The  gap,  however,  has
become too wide. Inflation is expected to go higher in the months ahead before it goes lower again. On
favourable assumptions, especially in relation to energy prices, the Central Bank forecasts an average
inflation rate of 3¾% in 2001. High and sustained services inflation could push this higher.
Perhaps the greatest threat at the moment is a wage-price spiral that could get out of hand. The danger
is  that  expectations  might  become  detached  from  reality  at  a  time  when  the  economy’s  scope  for
increased output is diminishing because of supply constraints.
It has been suggested that higher inflation may be a suitable route to a soft landing and that there may
be  no  need  to  worry  about  inflation.  This  proposition,  which  undoubtedly  has  superficial  appeal,
overlooks the dynamics of the inflationary spiral that could lead to a very sharp deterioration. It also
overlooks the difficulty of regaining competitiveness once it has been lost. It is not so long ago since
the  wage  price  spirals  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  resulted  in  high  unemployment  and  emigration.  In
addition,  this  trend  could  worsen  the  impact  of  an  external  shock  to  the  economy,  such  as  a  sharp
depreciation of sterling against the euro or a sharp fall in the US stock market.
3
BIS Review 61/2000
Private sector credit is now rising at a rate of 25% year-on-year. The overall stock of credit has been
rising to the point where it is now roughly at the European average. This growth reflects confidence in
the economy, strong growth and low interest rates. Residential and commercial property prices have
accelerated  at  an  alarming  rate.  Property  prices,  as  a  percentage  of  disposable  income,  are  now  at
historically high levels. In the context of the concern about housing costs, there have been calls for
restrictions  on  credit  growth.  There  is  no  authority  to  impose  restrictions  as  we  might  wish.  The
Central Bank contribution is to ensure that the lending institutions have made good provisions for the
rainy day. In the past year the Bank has put emphasis on stress testing and we have advised the banks
repeatedly to pay strict attention to risk management. We remain uneasy about the continuing upward
spiral  in  property  prices;  apart  from  other  considerations,  this  generates  an  inflation  mentality.  The
recent initiatives on housing taken by Government are to be welcomed.
I said earlier that the present rate of growth cannot be sustained. The Central Bank estimates that the
economy could, however, sustain a growth rate of the order of  4½-5%,  which  is  impressive  by  any
standard.  It  may  be  feasible  to  maintain  exceptional  growth  for  quite  some  time  ahead  through
importing  labour.  In  view  of  the  existing  congestion  levels  in  urban  centres  and  the  acceleration  in
accommodation  costs,  it  is  questionable  whether  our  infrastructure  can  cope  with  this.  Besides,  the
longer the surge in growth, the greater the downside risks. A slowdown is inevitable in time. This can
- and I expect that it will be - achieved in a smooth and orderly manner, provided there is wage and
price restraint. A smooth transition will require careful management; it may involve some erosion of
our  competitive  position  vis-à-vis  our  main  trading  partners  and  the  objective  must  be  to  minimise
this.
The  Irish  economy  is  one  of  the  most  open  economies  in  the  world.  Last  year,  total  trade - total
exports  and  imports  of  goods  and  services - amounted  to  around  160%  of  GDP  and  this  figure  is
expected  to  rise  this  year.  Expressed  as  a  percentage  of  GNP,  this  figure  would  be  even  higher.
Because  of this,  developments in  relation  to  competitiveness  are  particularly  important for  the  Irish
economy.
Supervision
May I now turn briefly to another aspect of the Central Bank’s activities, namely the supervision of
financial institutions. The number of financial entities that we supervise at present is of the order of
1,000.  This  includes  80  credit  institutions,  600  investment  intermediaries  and  260  entities  in  the
International  Financial  Services  Centre.  On  top  of  this,  we  police  about  2,000  funds  in  the  Centre.
There is legislation before the Oireachtas at the moment providing for the transfer of responsibility for
insurance intermediaries to the Bank. We are preparing for this transfer; I understand that the Bank
will assume responsibility for up to 6,000 such intermediaries.
In  Europe,  there  is  a  gathering  debate  about  the  role  of  the  Eurosystem  in  the  supervision  of  the
financial  system.  While  the  ESCB  has  a  general  involvement  in  supervision  under  the  Maastricht
Treaty, it does not have a day-to-day role. There is a potential for a more direct supervisory role under
the Treaty but this would require a Council of Ministers decision. There is now a recognised gap in the
system as there is nobody directly responsible for financial stability at euro area level. This debate is
only beginning and I would be engaging in speculation if I went further on this subject. We are likely
to see the emergence in due course of some European or euro area dimension to supervision.
The  Irish  financial  industry  continues  to  grow  successfully.  The  priority  for  the  Central  Bank  is  to
provide a regulatory service for this industry that matches the best international standards. I believe
that  we  are  doing  so.  I  believe  that,  in  general,  our  financial  industry  is  now  strongly  compliant.
Unacceptable  practices  of  earlier  years,  relating  to  taxation,  have  damaged  the  reputation  of  the
industry. There is now an awareness and an acceptance, at senior management and board levels, of the
need for greater emphasis on the proper conduct of affairs.
It is important to appreciate the contribution which this industry makes to the Irish economy. About
45,000 people are employed in financial services here. These services now account for about 7% of
BIS Review 61/2000
4
GDP. The contribution from the International Financial Services Centre alone to the Irish economy is
estimated in the region of £1 billion. These are big figures.
The financial services industry is going through a period of great change. This is due to a combination
of  factors,  notably  new  technology  and  cross-border  activity.  Technology  does  not  respect  national
boundaries  and  it  is  changing  the  whole  environment.  The  latest  phenomenon  is  internet  banking
which introduces new challenges for the regulator who must ensure that the interests of customers are
safeguarded.  Financial  institutions  are  concerned  that  there  be  clarity  from  a  legal  and  regulatory
perspective. The Central Bank has adopted a very positive approach towards the use of the internet as
a  medium  to  provide  services;  a  number  of  applications  for  licence  or  authorisation  are  being
considered. Our local industry  is  under threat  from  centralisation  within  the  European  Union  as the
financial markets become more integrated. Investors have a preference for larger markets with greater
liquidity.  Up  to  30  banks  from  the  European  Economic  Area  are  now  branching  into  Ireland.  We
cannot entirely dismiss the prospect that within a few years the Irish market could be dominated by
foreign  owned  banks.  Competition  is  growing  more  intense;  there  is  a  price  to  be  paid  and  this  is
perhaps reflected in the recent closures of local branches which can no longer be subsidised. The Irish
banks must be cost efficient in order to maintain their position.
This is the background against which the regulator must operate. A high level of professionalism is
demanded.  We  must  aspire  to  having  the  highest  standards  of  regulation.  We  must  keep  pace  with
international developments and much is happening internationally.
General
In conclusion, may I draw attention to some figures in the Annual Report and Accounts of the Central
Bank  for  1999.  The  Bank’s  profits  from  its  operations  during  1999  were   million.  Of  this,
 million is transferred to the Exchequer. At the end of last year, the Bank  reserves  were in the
region of   billion. The numbers employed last year totalled approximately 650 of whom about 140
worked on supervision. Full details of all our activities are given in the Annual Report; I recommend
this to the Committee.
5
BIS Review 61/2000
