Gordon Thiessen: Update on economic
and monetary developments in Canada
Opening  Statement  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the  Standing
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, on 6 April 2000.
 I very much appreciate the opportunity to appear regularly before your Committee. I would like to use
this particular occasion to update you on economic and monetary developments as well as to discuss
any issues that you may want to raise.
Let me first give you an overview of the developments in the past year. When I appeared before you
last April, there was still a high degree of uncertainty in the global economy related to the 1997-98
financial crisis in emerging markets and the associated fall in world commodity prices. And because of
these difficulties, the pace of economic activity in Canada had slowed. But by mid-1999, our economy
had regained its momentum, supported by buoyant US demand, a rebound in commodity prices, and a
pickup  in  domestic  spending.  Over  the  four  quarters  of  1999,  output  expanded  by  about  4¾%  and
425,000 new jobs were created, taking the national unemployment rate down to 6.8% by this February
- its lowest level in 23 years. At the same time, the underlying rate of inflation remained low.
Why has Canada rebounded so quickly from the external shocks of 1997-98? I believe it is because
Canada’s  economic  policy  foundation  is  stronger  today  than  it  has  been  in  several  decades.  This
foundation has two cornerstones. One is the improved fiscal positions of governments that have led to
a  declining  ratio  of  public  sector  debt  relative  to  the  size  of  our  economy.  The  second  is  an
environment of low and stable inflation that is expected to persist because it is anchored by the Bank
of Canada’s target for inflation control.
Since the early-1990s, Canadian monetary policy has been based on a commitment to explicit targets
for inflation control. This commitment has helped to moderate fears of a resurgence of inflation, has
assisted the Bank in taking timely action in response to changing economic and financial conditions,
and has improved our public accountability.
A crucial part of our monetary policy regime is our floating exchange rate. Without that, we could not
have  Canadian  inflation  targets.  A  good  measure  of  the  success  of  our  monetary  policy  framework
based on inflation targets and a flexible exchange rate is that Canadian interest rates have remained
lower than comparable US rates, apart from the period of turbulence in 1998. These lower rates reflect
Canada’s  lower  inflation  rate,  and  the  expectation  that  low  inflation  will  continue.  In  the  past,  a
depreciation of our currency has frequently fed fears of inflation and has led to interest rate increases.
The  difficulties  of the  past  couple of  years  also illustrate  the  value  of  a flexible exchange  rate  as  a
shock absorber. The downward movement of the Canadian dollar from mid-1997 to the end of 1998
was largely a response to the sharp decline in world prices of the primary commodities that Canada
exports.  Our  economy  had  to  adjust  to  this  reality;  the  exchange  rate  decline  facilitated  a  shift  in
activity  from  the  primary  sector  to  manufacturing  and  other  export  sectors.  It  also  provided  an
additional  incentive  for  these  sectors  to  take  advantage  of  a  strong  US  economy.  Because  of  these
adjustments,  the  Canadian  economy  continued  to  expand  during  1998  and  recorded  a  substantial
upswing in 1999.
When I last appeared before this Committee, Mr Chairman, there were a number of questions about
Canada’s rate of productivity growth and about the gap in productivity levels with the United States. I
am happy to report that there have been some positive developments over the past year. Not only have
we  had  better  productivity  gains  through  1999,  but purchases  of  machinery  and  equipment  climbed
18% during the course of the year. This continues the increase in investment in machinery, equipment
and technology that began in 1996 and that mirrors the increase in investment that began somewhat
earlier in the United States.
1
BIS Review 32/2000
While we are certainly heartened by the better productivity outlook in Canada, we are not sure how
large  these  gains  are  likely  to  be,  how  long  they  will  last,  or  by  how  much  they  will  eventually
enhance our economy’s production capacity. This uncertainty raises an important issue for monetary
policy, especially since, by some measures, the Canadian economy is currently operating at or above
full capacity.
On the one hand, our low-inflation environment and the Bank of Canada’s commitment to maintaining
it  give  us  more  room  than  we  have  had  for  some  time  to  explore  the  economy’s  full  potential.
However, because of the current strong momentum of the economy and the high levels of activity, the
Bank  must  be  careful  to  avoid  approaching  capacity  limits  too  rapidly.  We  do  not  want  to  trigger
bottlenecks and shortages that can put unnecessary pressure on inflation. Because of the time it takes
for  monetary  policy  to  have  its full impact  on the  economy,  we  can  best  achieve  and  maintain  full
potential if we approach capacity constraints gradually and carefully.
We had these considerations in mind when we increased the Bank Rate in November, February and
March.  These  increases  followed  similar  rate  hikes  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  The  US  actions
provided  additional  evidence  of  the  likely  further  spillover  of  US  demand  to  our  export  sector.
Altogether,  this  suggests  an  overall  demand  for  Canadian  output  that  is  stronger  than  previously
expected. Under these conditions, it has been essential for the Bank of Canada to be vigilant.
As I said before, our inflation performance, up to now, has been good - in fact, somewhat better than
we had expected. While the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI moved up to 2.7% in February
because of sharply higher energy prices, when one looks through those developments at the underlying
trend of inflation, our core CPI measure (which excludes food, energy, and the effect of changes in
indirect taxes) was at 1.6% in February. This is within the lower half of the 1 to 3% inflation-control
target range.
When it comes to the surge in energy prices, let me just say that the Bank of Canada will be watching
closely to ensure that the recent increase in energy prices does not show up in higher expectations of
inflation.  We expect that  the  recent  decline  in  world  energy  prices  will  persist,  bringing  the  rate  of
increase in the total CPI down, closer to the centre of our target range by late this year.
I cannot stress enough the importance that we at the Bank of Canada place on keeping the future trend
of inflation in Canada low and stable. This is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to
the continued expansion of the Canadian economy and to further productivity gains.
BIS Review 32/2000
2
