Mr McDonough comments on the implications
for the strong US growth for the world economy
Speech by Mr William J McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the
Japan Center for Economic Research, Tokyo, on 30 March 2000.
 Good  afternoon,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  speak  before  such  a
distinguished audience. My thanks to the Japan Center for Economic Research for extending such a
kind invitation.
This  afternoon  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  of  my  thoughts  on  the  US  and  the  world
economies as we move forward into the 21st century. To do so, it is helpful to step back and take a
somewhat  longer-term  view  of  how  the  stage  was  set  for  much  of  the  current  strong  economic
performance the US economy has enjoyed in recent years. In addition, I would like to comment on the
implications of the strong US growth for the world economy.
The United States is now experiencing the longest economic expansion in its history. This expansion,
which began in April 1991, not only has reached record length, but also has done so in a far stronger
manner than had been expected. Most notably, inflation has been subdued, notwithstanding the most
favorable labor markets that the United States has experienced in a generation, and the country’s fiscal
accounts are in surplus. There is no question that this expansion reflects some remarkable changes in
the  US  economy.  Before  turning  to  some  of  the  deeper  trends  that  may  help  account  for  the
remarkably good performance in the past several years, I think some key points are worth noting.
As  2000  gets  under  way,  the  US  economy  continues  to  enjoy  astonishing  job  growth.  Payroll
employment growth has been fluctuating around 250,000 jobs per month since early 1996. Although
job growth in February was considerably more modest, when figures for December and January are
included, it looks as though the trend of roughly 250,000 jobs per month is still in place.
The counterpart to strong job growth has been a steady decline in US unemployment rates. In January,
unemployment  in  the  United  States  fell  to  a  30-year  low  of  4%.  This  level  held  roughly  steady  in
February. What is particularly noteworthy is that the percentage of the population employed, at 65%,
is the highest it’s been in the postwar period.
Of  considerable  importance  is  the  fact  that  job  growth  in  the  last  few  years  has  been  increasingly
centered in the segments of the population in which unemployment has been most stubborn: the more
disadvantaged  parts  of  US  society,  including  the  inner  cities.  The  unemployment  rate  for
16-19 year-olds, for example, was about 20% in 1992. It is now about 13-14%. Similar trends hold for
decreases  in  minority  unemployment  rates.  In  addition,  recent  years  have  witnessed  sharp  gains  in
labor force participation rates for minorities.
Along with strong employment growth have come gains in personal income. Real disposable income
in the United States, for example, has risen roughly 4% a year over the past two years.
In addition, there has been considerable vigor in household demand. Indeed, the question is whether
household  demand  is  growing  too  quickly.  In  constant  dollar  terms,  consumer  spending  grew  more
than 5% in 1999, the fastest rate since the mid-1980s. Housing has also been surprisingly strong, due
to the best affordability conditions in a generation. In fact, the home ownership rate reached a record
67% in the second half of 1999.
A  number  of  commentators  have  expressed  concerns  that  the  United  States  cannot  sustain  these
current  measures  of  prosperity.  To  support  their  view,  they  point  to  the  declines  in  recent  years  in
personal saving rates.
1
BIS Review 29/2000
However, these declines in personal saving rates may be misleading in that they may be due in some
respects  to  technical  measurement  issues,  such  as  the  exclusion  of  realized  capital  gains  from  the
income and saving data. More relevant is  the  fact that  household  credit  quality  has  not  deteriorated
over  the  past  several  years.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  be  improving.  Delinquency  rates  on
mortgages and consumer installment debt have been falling, as have the number of new bankruptcies
reported.
Driving these positive trends, to be sure, has been strong growth in employment and income. At the
same time, I cannot suggest that the Phillips curve - which holds that there is a predictable trade-off
between  achieving  price  stability  and  employment  gains - is  dead.  Notably,  it  is  true  that  as  the
unemployment rate has come down, the pace of wage gains has increased. But what is different in the
current  environment  is  that  productivity  growth  has  increased  roughly  in  tandem  with  the  rate  of
compensation growth, thereby negating the inflationary impulses of these wage gains.
Thus, probably the most notable feature of the remarkable expansion in the US economy over this past
decade has been a rebound in the growth rate of productivity. Whereas the productivity growth rate
had  languished  at  the  1½%  level  throughout  most  of  the  1970s  and  1980s,  it rose steadily  over  the
decade of the 1990s, reaching an astonishing 5.7% annual growth rate in the second half of 1999. The
question  that  remains  unanswered - and  troublesome - is  whether  this  significant  improvement  in
productivity growth, which has made the US economy one of the most competitive in the world today,
is temporary or permanent.
What is less often taken into account is that the US productivity boom of the 1990s has taken place
against a background of very low inflation in the United States and rapidly decelerating inflation in
almost every region of the world. Through much of the 1990s, weak economic performance elsewhere
in the world has held down commodity price inflation and strengthened the dollar.
As a result of both productivity growth and the favorable world inflation environment, core consumer
price inflation (CPI) - excluding the  more  volatile food and  energy  sectors - has  been  running  about
2% recently, down from 3% in 1995. As measured by the personal consumption expenditures deflator
(PCE), core inflation is even more subdued, rising by only 1½% a year over the past few years.
As a central banker, however, I cannot help but register concerns about some recent developments. As
the expansion has progressed, signs of imbalance or strain have begun to appear in the US economy,
especially  in  relation  to  the  world  economy.  Commodity  prices,  for  example - and  not  just  oil
prices - have increased rapidly in recent months, as world growth has bounced back sharply in 1999.
For example, on a year-over-year basis, prices for crude materials, excluding food and energy, were up
15% as of February.
In addition, strong consumption growth in the United States has been fueled in part by an inexorable
decline in the personal saving rate. As I have noted, however, these declines in personal saving rates
may to some extent be due to technical measurement issues.
Moreover, the US current account deficit has also widened markedly over the past several years, with
corresponding  large  surpluses  in  Asia  and  Europe.  The  outlook  is  for  continued  worsening  in  the
deficit  that  had  already  reached  a  record  last  year,  at  about  4%  of  GDP.  History  tells  us  that  such
imbalances  can  persist  for  some  time,  but  increase  in  risk  as  they  widen.  History  also  tells  us  that
current  account  imbalances  eventually  require  macroeconomic  adjustment - adjustment  that  is
smoother and more orderly the earlier and more coordinated the policy response.
While I am not one to second-guess the markets, I also believe that we in the United States must ask
ourselves  whether  the  surge  in  the  stock  market  over  the  past  several  years  will  continue  to  be
accompanied by commensurate growth in output and earnings. To date, consumer spending increases
spurred  by  the  growth  in  the  stock  market  have  not  been  exceptional  compared  with  the  growth  in
wealth, but the growth in wealth has certainly been astonishing.
Let me turn now to some of the longer-term trends driving the US economy in recent years. It is these
trends that have led many to question whether the structure of the US economy has changed and to ask
whether, in fact, the United States is a “new economy” today.
BIS Review 29/2000
2
While  the  bottom  line  is  that  there  is  not  a  consensus  on  this  issue,  no  one  disagrees  that  the
performance of the US economy has changed dramatically in recent years. Annual real GDP growth
over the past four years is higher than it has been in decades, averaging 4% a year in comparison with
average annual GDP growth rates of roughly 3% in the 1970s and 1980s. Over the same period, core
CPI inflation has fallen from average annual rates of over 6% to 2%.
One important sign of underlying change is that the volatility of economic fluctuations has declined
since the mid-1980s, evidenced by the fact that there has been only one recession in the United States
in the past 17 years. Improved macroeconomic policy management and such positive supply factors as
generally  lower  commodity  prices  certainly  have  contributed  to  the  strong  performance  of  the  US
economy in recent years.
Also critical has been the emergence of new technologies, specifically the adoption of “just-in-time”
inventory systems, which we copied from Japan. Research at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
suggests  that  these  new  inventory  systems  have  helped  account  for  a  significant  reduction  in  the
magnitude of inventory swings and hence less volatile growth of the US economy. The spate of recent
announcements  of  new  resource  management  systems  by  auto  companies,  retailers,  and  others
suggests  that  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  the  potential  benefits  from  such  inventory  and  production
systems.
These  inventory  and  production  management  techniques  are  just  one  aspect  of  the  most  significant
factor  that  has  characterized  the  improved  performance  of  the  US  economy,  which  is  non-farm
business productivity growth. As I have noted, this had averaged about 1½% a year over the previous
20 years, but since 1995 has improved steadily. It has been the impressive growth in productivity that
has been the fundamental factor behind the stunning improvement in the output/inflation mix we have
been observing these past several years.
What accounts for this improvement in productivity, and is it sustainable? These questions are really at
the heart of the debate as to whether the United States is or is not a “new economy”. No one disagrees
that the surge in the production of computers and software has been integral to the recent upswing in
productivity. Where the  differences  in  view  enter is  over  the  deeper sources  of  productivity  growth
and  the  sustainability  of  the  productivity  improvements - that  is,  whether  they  are  temporary  or
permanent.
Those  suggesting  that  there  is  no  “new  economy”  argue  that  the  recent  improvement  in  US
productivity growth is easily explained: it is a combination of a normal cyclical reaction to a surge in
demand and a pickup in the growth of the capital stock, most notably high-technology equipment and
software. Once growth in demand settles down, this view holds, and investment in  high  technology
slows, productivity growth will moderate. Even proponents of this view recognize, however, that the
rapid  increase  in  productivity  and  output  growth  in  the  computer  industry  will  likely  increase  the
growth rate of the economy over the longer term.
By contrast, those supporting the idea of a “new economy” tell us that what we are witnessing in the
US  economy  is  the  fruition  of  some  longer-term  trends  in  information  technology,  deregulation,
globalization  and  labor  markets.  More  specifically,  proponents  of  a  “new  economy”  contend  that
advances in  computer  power  and  software - combined  with  deregulation  in  the  telecommunications,
transportation  and  financial  industries - have  produced  many  new  profitable  business  opportunities.
Using  advances  in  technology  and  tapping  into  highly  liquid  world  capital  markets,  many  new  and
existing firms have been able to exploit these opportunities quickly.
Furthermore,  the  proponents  of  a  “new  economy”  argue,  information  technology  has  produced
numerous  cost  savings  for  business  operations.  The  growing  role  of  the  internet  as  the  medium  to
exchange large volumes of information and conduct efficient transactions - among businesses as well
as  between  businesses  and  consumers - will  lead  to  a  further  acceleration  of  productivity  growth.
Thus, this view concludes, the increase in the output of the computer/software industry is both a cause
and an effect of these deeper trends.
We are just at the early stages of understanding the surge in productivity growth. But recent empirical
work is beginning to grapple with some of these issues. It appears that a significant part of the increase
3
BIS Review 29/2000
in productivity relates to increased quantities of capital per worker, primarily computers and software.
However, the largest part of the improvement in productivity growth has yet to be fully understood.
We  can  not  yet  resolve  the  “new  economy”  debate.  Nevertheless,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  longer
productivity  improvement  continues,  the  harder  it  becomes  to  view  this  improvement  merely  as  a
cyclical phenomenon. Certainly, it seems to me that the accompanying low levels of inflation, together
with  relatively  high  rates  of  resource  utilization,  suggest  that  something  more  than  normal  cyclical
forces is at work.
The  ability  to  develop  and  deploy  these  technological  advances  rests  on  underlying  changes  in  our
labor and financial markets, changes that have been occurring over the last two decades. With respect
to labor markets, two main changes have occurred.
First,  large  corporations  have  been  increasingly  willing  to  lay  off  workers  and  restructure  their
businesses during the expansion phase of the business cycle rather than waiting for a recession to do
so.  This  process  has  been  under  way  in  the  United  States  for  over  a  decade  and  it  has  not  been
accomplished  without  pain.  A  crucial  unanswered  question  in  the  current  environment  is  how  to
identify the point at which labor market tightness becomes sufficiently severe for workers to demand
more permanent pay increases.
Second, there appears to be a shift in the structure of compensation toward variable pay that includes,
but is not confined to, stock options. This shift away from wages and traditional benefits has allowed
for greater flexibility in labor costs and by this means has made it easier for new firms to add labor.
Employees  compensated  through  incentive  pay  take  on  some  of  the  risks  of  capital.  And  in  highly
competitive  goods  and  services  markets,  consumers’  benefits  show  up  in  the  form  of  lower  prices,
rather  than  entirely  in  higher  pay,  with  important,  not  yet  fully  understood,  implications  for  the
distribution of benefits in our economy.
Let us not forget the financial and corporate side of  this picture  as  well. There  is no  doubt that  the
banking system in the United States has been far stronger in the 1990s than it was in the previous two
decades.  At  the  same  time,  capital  markets  have  deepened  significantly.  Expanded  equity  markets
have served as important sources of finance for new businesses, while venture capital markets have
provided increased  access to  risk  capital.  By  some  measures,  new  financing  from  these  and  related
markets has tripled the flow of new equity capital to business in the last five years.
Also important has been the increased liquidity of financial assets. Today, asset portfolios of loans and
credit cards are easily transferable through securitization or outright sale.
As a result, the corporate sector, too, has witnessed significant change over this past decade, with the
formation of many new businesses and the transformation of many old ones. Many of the household
names  today  were formed  sometime  in the last  25 years,  while a  number  of  the  corporate  giants  of
25 years ago still in operation today have changed dramatically.  To remain  competitive,  many  have
had to shed some business lines that no longer fit their overall strategies and to invest in new lines.
They  also  have  had  to  pay  more  attention  to  evaluating  business  opportunities  by  using  more
sophisticated  risk/return  analysis  than  they  previously  did,  a  strategy  financial  firms  have  been
particularly aggressive in pursuing.
What lessons might other countries thus draw from the US experience and what are the implications of
the  strong  economic  performance  in  the  United  States  for  other  countries?  One  lesson  seems  clear.
With the advances in technology, all countries that move toward more open and transparent markets
stand to benefit from the universally available strides that have been made in information technology.
I want to emphasize that the processes I am speaking about do not call for just onetime efforts. Quite
the contrary. They demand ongoing attention and adaptation to new circumstances.
Second, it is not just that productivity growth is being driven by technological advances. It is also a
question of how these technological advances are applied. At the end of the day, I believe, the United
States  has  had  such  strong  economic  performance  because  of  the  high  degree  of  flexibility  and
adaptability that has been built into the US labor, product and financial markets over the past decade.
BIS Review 29/2000
4
These lessons seem to be gaining a following, as many countries across the globe have begun to record
substantial progress in liberalizing and deepening their capital markets, deregulating their state-owned
enterprises,  and  easing  existing  labor  market  rigidities.  In  so  doing,  these  countries  position  their
economies to capture the manifold benefits technological advances allow them to enjoy.
To be sure, these efforts are not necessarily being undertaken with equal commitment and intensity in
every country. Nor should they be. No country is like any other. We all recognize that countries differ
in their histories, traditions and ways of doing business. This is not a question of thinking that there is
only one correct model and that each country must adapt to that model.
What is at issue, however, and what is desirable is that all countries grow. What the US experience has
shown is that productivity gains driven by new technological advances, coupled with the flexibility to
shift resources  quickly  into  high-growth  areas and the  ability  to  apply  the technology  in  productive
ways, can help contribute significantly to this goal.
The United States has no wish to be an island of growth in a sluggish global economy. The costs to the
US of being strong when others are weak are very real. One has only to look at the weakness of the US
current account deficit in recent years to understand why it is in the interest of the United States for the
rest  of  the  world’s  economies  to  be  strong  and  competitive  with  us.  The  United  States  cannot
indefinitely be the engine of growth for the world economy - the importer of first and last resort - and
sustain  ever-mounting  current  account  deficits  without  running  the  very  real  risk  of  economic  and
financial difficulties that could well weigh on many of the world’s economies. No one wants that.
Moreover, I am firmly convinced that growth in an economy is what ultimately underpins a healthy
society. It is simply not possible to have a strong society with a permanent underclass. No society - not
our own nor any other - can hope to flourish if its youth are left unemployed and a large segment of its
population  remains  poorly  educated  and  inadequately  housed.  Nor  can  an  economy  grow  without  a
basic  infrastructure  that  enshrines  the  rule  of  law  and  the  accountability  of  the  government  to  its
people.
As I survey the world economy today, I am pleased that there seems to be broad-based recognition of
these fundamental precepts. World economic conditions are considerably more benign than they have
been in years as we begin the new millennium.
How do things look outside the United States? Let’s start with Japan. When we look at Japan’s growth
in the 1990s, we really see two patterns. One is the sluggish growth since 1992, the other is the steep
recession  in  1998.  The  1998  recession  stemmed  from  the  financial  crisis  in  a  number  of  other
countries  in  Asia,  leading  to  a  collapse  in  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment,  and
essentially a credit crunch as financial restructuring got under way. Japan today is in the difficult phase
of restructuring, with high unemployment as balance sheets are being cleaned up in the corporate and
banking  sectors.  Moreover,  business  investment  was  slow  up  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  1999  and
consumers have been restrained in their spending.
I  believe  that  changing  private  sector  expectations  and  reducing  microeconomic  constraints  on  the
economy  are  key  in  Japan  today.  Japan  historically  has  had  a  tremendous  ability  to  capitalize  on
technological innovation. While productivity growth has been choppy - the result of cyclicality in the
economy - there has been overall moderate growth. In the first half of 1999, in fact, GDP growth was
unexpectedly strong, but it fell back in the second half of the year, owing largely to weaker private
consumption.  In  2000,  most  forecasters  expect  a  renewal  in  growth,  supported  by  a  new  round  of
fiscal stimulus, announced in November, and a broad-based recovery in business fixed investment.
Developments in the euro area are very interesting. The bold and historic effort of 11 of the European
community countries coming together to unite their economies in a common currency and to form a
single market appears to be bearing fruit.
In the run-up to the introduction of the euro, many of the euro area countries struggled to bring down
their  fiscal  deficits  and  reduce  inflation  to  a  low  level.  These  efforts  were  preceded  throughout  the
1980s  and  1990s  by  measures  to  break  down  trade  barriers  and  harmonize  some  regulations  while
eliminating  others.  Not  surprisingly,  these  developments  have  coincided  with  both  strong  business
5
BIS Review 29/2000
fixed  investment  and  labor  productivity  growth  in  manufacturing.  Today,  we  see  the  euro  markets
starting to coalesce and expand.
Although  unemployment  has  been  stubborn,  the  key  challenge  expressed  by  many  Europeans  is  to
make labor markets more flexible, and indeed, some change is evident. This past year, unemployment
in the euro area finally seems to have started to trend down, falling to 9.6% in January, a seven-year
low and almost 1 percentage point below its level a year earlier.
Further, output growth has begun to revive from the falloff in 1998, and the outlook is for solid growth
in the 11 euro countries to continue into 2000. Core inflation throughout the euro area has also been
subdued, although with rising energy prices, it may edge up a bit. Producer prices for finished goods
show no signs of inflation pressure. Growth elsewhere in the industrial world - the United Kingdom
and  Canada - also  appears  to  be  strong,  with  no  signs  of  accelerating  inflation.  In  both  countries,
strong  private  consumption - and  in  Canada  an  unemployment  rate  that  is  the  lowest  since
1981 - continues to keep GDP growth on a reasonably steady path.
More  broadly,  there  is  active  debate  within  Europe  today  about  what  kinds  of  labor  and  financial
market  changes  will  accelerate  technological  change.  Countries  have  taken  different  approaches  in
addressing  these  issues.  The  diversity  of  experiences  among  the  European  countries  allows  each  to
assess the impact of the various approaches others have taken and to draw lessons from which it may
benefit.
Among the emerging market countries, those in Asia in particular have long been considered engines
of vitality and technological adaptation in the world economy, and this recognition had been reflected
in very high rates of GDP growth until the financial crises of 1997 and 1998. One problem those crises
revealed is that in many countries, economic resources, notably capital inflows, had been misallocated.
In the Asian countries, financial market and corporate sector reforms are widely viewed as necessary.
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  some  progress  has  been  made  on  financial  restructuring,  although  the
extent to which markets - as opposed to governments - have  been  the  main  shaper  of  change  differs
across  countries.  Other  reforms  appear  to  be  less  far  along,  and  the  greatest  risk  is  that  the  sharp
recovery  so  many  of  these  countries  have  enjoyed  will  reduce  the  impetus  to  undertake  and  follow
through on needed reforms.
When we turn to Latin America, we observe an example of how important internal labor market and
corporate  sector  reforms  are.  In  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  many  countries  in  this  region  made
enormous  strides  in  achieving  sounder  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  especially  in  bringing  down
inflation  and  strengthening  reliance  on  market  mechanisms.  However,  in  several  countries,  internal
reforms  were  incomplete,  with  banking  systems  left in  need  of  further  strengthening,  labor  markets
still remaining too rigid, and fiscal policies requiring more attention, starting with the need to ensure
that all public sector spending be brought under control.
This past year, many countries in Latin America - other than the major oil exporters - faced the further
shock of a worsening in their terms of trade, as commodity prices declined in the wake of the crises in
Asia and Russia. However, a number of countries in Latin America have begun to see a resurgence of
growth, following sharp falloffs in 1998.
As  we  look  ahead  to  the  next  decade,  I  am  convinced  that  many  of  the  developments  we  have
witnessed over this past decade have greatly widened the opportunities for strong growth in the years
ahead. Inflation in the global economy appears subdued, fiscal deficits have been widely reduced - and
we have gained a much better understanding of how solid, non-inflationary growth can be achieved.
The  economic  and  financial  crises  of  the  1990s,  while  having  very  adverse  macroeconomic
implications for the countries involved, nonetheless have reinforced the importance of sound monetary
and  fiscal  policies  for  all  countries  and  the  desirability  of  market  reforms.  In  addition,  these  crises
have  laid  the  foundation  for  renewed  attention  to  structural  reforms  for  the  banking  and  corporate
sectors as well as to the need for strengthened regulatory and supervisory measures.
The challenge going forward will be to execute the necessary strategies to realize these goals. When
economic times are reasonably favorable, as they are now, the risk is that complacency sets in and the
BIS Review 29/2000
6
steps  needed  to  address  the  more  deeply  rooted  structural  problems  are  harder  to  take.  Not  to  act,
however, would be to squander the lessons of the past decade and mortgage our futures. It is simply
not an acceptable option.
We face today probably the best macroeconomic environment in decades to put our economies on a
sound economic and financial footing to meet the surprises we will inevitably face in the new century.
The  opportunities  provided  by  rapid  technological  change  are  available  to  all  in  the  global
marketplace.  The  flexibility  and  adaptability  we  build  into  our  respective  economies  today  will
ultimately  determine  the  success  we  are  able  to  achieve  for  the  generations  that  follow  us.  The
challenge could not be more important.
7
BIS Review 29/2000
