Mr Welteke offers some thoughts on the
euro/yen/dollar: managing a tripolar world
Speech delivered by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Annual Meeting
2000 of the World Economic Forum in Davos on 28 January 2000.
 I
“Managing a tripolar world” - for a long time, this meant managing the exchange rates of the currency
triad at that time: the US dollar, the Japanese yen and the Deutsche Mark.
The question was always whether the prevailing exchange rates between these three currencies were
appropriate  and  how  their  movements  could  be  stabilised.  The  external  value  of  the  dollar  was
revalued extensively on the foreign exchange markets during the 1980s. After a long period of neglect
by the Americans this led to the Plaza (1985) and Louvre  (1987)  agreements  -  the  results  of  which
were  partly  positive  and  partly  problematic.  And  even  during  the  1990s  this  topic  has  come  up  in
debates time and again, as for example when the dollar was devalued in 1995.
Some  people  now  fear  that  the  establishment  of  the  new  “dollar/euro/yen”  triad  may  lead  to  a
retrogression in international cooperation. In any case, concerns are voiced sometimes that the ECB
could assume a position of benign neglect or even malign neglect as regards the external value of the
euro.
It is true that the ECB has to assign priority to internal stability in cases of conflict. However, this was
always the Bundesbank’s policy, too. So that is nothing new.
In  Europe,  however,  we  have  not  yet  achieved  American-style  independence.  Thus,  in  the  USA  “a
dollar is always simply a dollar”, while in Europe some people fear the possibility that “a euro is a
dollar” although this is very unlikely considering the substantial appreciation potential of the euro.
No such thing as neglect, as if to say “The exchange rate is irrelevant”, exists in European monetary
policy. That would be inconsistent with the strategy of the ECB. In this “two-pillar strategy”, with the
money stock forming one pillar and a multitude of inflation indicators forming the other, the exchange
rate is one of the factors being watched very closely by the ECB; it is an important aid in assessing the
outlook for prices. In this respect, there is no neglect. By the way: under the critical eyes of today’s
international  financial  markets,  no  central  bank  in  the  world  can  afford  to  neglect  exchange  rate
movements.
It  is,  however,  an  entirely  different  matter  to  go  beyond  today’s  problem-oriented  cooperation  in
international  bodies,  as  is  being  sought  in  proposals  to  establish  a  more  formalised  exchange  rate
regime based, for instance, on target zones.
These suggestions have remained dry runs, and I assume they will probably remain so in the future.
Under the present conditions of deregulated financial markets and free movement of capital, there are
only three ways such systems can work to begin with - either:
– 
There is  already  a  strong  convergence  of  the  real  economy  and  of  anti-inflationary  policy
between the partners, causing parities to naturally remain in existence “on their own”, so to
speak. This convergence has rarely existed within the triad over a relatively lengthy period of
time.  At  the  moment,  the  structural  differences  between  America,  Japan  and  continental
Europe are becoming more evident.
 Or,  the  countries  are  otherwise  willing  to  change  parities  quickly,  as  unobtrusively  as
possible  and  in  a forward-looking  manner.  However,  experience  has shown  that  such
systems tend to be “too little, too late”.
1
BIS Review 8/2000
 A third possibility is to subordinate other internal economic policy targets almost completely
to the exchange rate. But this probably only makes sense if carried out by a small country
with  strong  external  trade  links  and  if  it  is  desired  that  external  trade  links  exercise  a
disciplinary effect on policy.
However,  none  of  these  considerations  make  a  stronger  exchange  rate  management  in  the  tripolar
world realistic today.
II
Managing a tripolar world: there is still another facet to this topic.
It is also about the monetary policy of those countries which are not part of one of the three poles but
which have to define their relationship to these three poles somehow.
As regards the European countries, some of them are reassessing their positions towards the monetary
union  or  are  making  considerable  progress  in  the  convergence  process.  A  case  in  point  is  Greece,
which was recently able to carry out a realignment rather unobtrusively.
At the EU summit in Helsinki, important  preliminary  decisions  on the  enlargement  of  the  EU  were
taken. I assume that those countries will use the euro as a beacon to guide their monetary policy over
the  long  term.  Upon  accession  to  the  EU  they  will  automatically  become  “Member  States  with  a
derogation”,  the  Maastricht  Treaty’s  term  for  those  EU  countries  not  yet  participating  in  monetary
union.
The emerging economies, too, must define their position in the currency triad. How do they intend to
fix  their  exchange  rates?  Should  they  aim  for  floating  exchange  rates  or  for  fixed  but  adjustable
exchange rates? Or should they establish a currency board?
Some countries are even debating whether or not to abolish their currency entirely. This is a decision
that  requires  serious  consideration.  The  abandonment  of  a  sovereign  currency  would  deprive  the
national economic policy of the ability to take action in two fields: exchange rate policy and monetary
policy. The question as to which currency to orient one’s economy to is only of secondary importance
and is determined mainly by trade flows.
Many  emerging  economies  have  been  forced  to  learn  that  today,  monetary  issues  can  hardly  be
separated from topics such as the functioning of international financial markets or the soundness of the
national banking system. The financial crises in Asia, Latin America and Russia have shown that the
exchange rate policy has often been too rigid, as:
– 
– 
the apparent exchange rate guarantee towards the dollar all but invited residents to incur debt
in US dollars.
It prevented domestic monetary policy from curbing liquidity sufficiently; and
These experiences must be taken into consideration whenever emerging economies seek to peg their
currencies to one of the poles. Pegging a  currency  can  actually  help  to  improve  the  standing  of the
country on the international financial markets. It can also help to establish internal discipline. This can
enhance  credibility.  However,  such  pegs  have  their  limits  where,  during  periods  of  tranquillity,
disequilibria develop which cannot be adjusted appropriately.
A currency board has its limits, too. It can make a contraction of the domestic money stock - at least
temporarily  -  necessary  with  accordingly  high  interest  rates. To  see  this  through,  a  country  needs  a
sound financial sector, and its real economy must have sufficient flexibility.
III
Therefore, there is no one-size-fits-all method of managing a tripolar world.
The  euro,  the  dollar  and  the  yen  are  all  in  a  state  of  healthy  competition  with  one  another.  The
international  monetary  system  as  a  whole  can  only  profit  from  this  competition.  Three  conditions
serve to promote a healthy competition:
BIS Review 8/2000
2
  First,  a  lot  of  common  ground  is  necessary  regarding  the  anti-inflationary  stance  of  the
countries’ monetary policy;
Second,  further  sustainable  progress  in  consolidating  public  sector  budgets  is  needed
- especially in Europe;
Third, the currency areas have to rise to the economic challenges.
– 
The  USA  has  to  prove  that  its  large  external  debt  is  justified  by  its  growth,  innovative  power  and
efficiency.  In  Europe  it  is  important  to  enhance  competitiveness  and  to  reduce  unemployment  by
implementing structural reforms.
Japan  has  to  rebuild  confidence  in  its  financial  sector  and  has  to  create  the  conditions  for  a  self-
propelling upswing.
A  healthy  competition  does  not  mean  rejecting  greater  worldwide  cooperation  with  the  aim  of
preserving the ability of the international financial markets to function. On the contrary, this is useful
and desirable.
However,  exchange  rates  are  not  the  main  instrument.  Instead,  more  stable  exchange  rates  are  the
result  of  the  participating  countries  undergoing  sound  economic  growth  and  conducting  an  anti-
inflationary economic policy.
3
BIS Review 8/2000
