David Carse: The current state of banking reform in Hong Kong
Speech by Mr David Carse,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at the
luncheon of the Hong Kong Foreign Bank Representatives Association, held at the Hong Kong Club,
on 5 September 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I am pleased to have the opportunity to address this lunch gathering of the Hong Kong Foreign Bank
Representatives Association. As an international financial centre, it is the essence of Hong Kong that it
should be a host to foreign banks. And as the banking regulator in Hong Kong, it is important that the
HKMA  should  keep  in  close  touch  with  foreign  banks  through  events  such  as  today’s  lunch.  This
gives us a chance to explain aspects of our policies and how we see the current state of banking in
Hong  Kong.  It  also  gives  you  the  opportunity  to  provide  feedback  to  the  HKMA  on  any  issues  of
current concern to you. Hopefully, I will not have to address too many hostile questions.
The 1998 Banking Sector Consultancy Study
I have chose to speak to you today on the subject of “The current state of banking  reform  in  Hong
Kong”. This seems a good time to undertake this stocktaking. It is over a year since we embarked on
the  reform  programme  that  we  devised  in  response  to  the  Banking  Sector  Consultancy  Study
undertaken by KPMG and Barents in 1998. A number of the measures in the programme are directly
relevant to foreign banks and you may therefore be interested to hear about what we have done so far,
and what more we have in mind.
The current state of the banking sector
The  Consultancy  Study  was  conceived  just  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  Crisis  and  took  place
during it. The Hong Kong banking sector has now come through the crisis, and can be said to have
clearly demonstrated its resilience and underlying strength. It is true that the number of foreign banks
in Hong Kong has fallen sharply over the last two years. This reflects the fallout from the crisis that
has led to the demise of some banks and has required others to cut back on their overseas operations
and return to their home base. Hong Kong has certainly not been the only financial centre to witness
this retreat.
However, the important point is that the core of the Hong Kong banking system - represented by the
local banks and the large foreign players - has remained intact. Although bad debts rose sharply during
the crisis and a few banks lost money, the banks generally remained profitable and financially sound.
The  capital  ratios  of  the  local  banks  actually  rose  during  the  crisis  period.  No  banks  failed  and  no
depositors lost money. The Government was not called upon to provide financial support.
The results of the banks for the first half of this year show that their recovery from the crisis is well
underway. Profits rose sharply and bad debts were lower. This means that the clouds that have hung
over the banking system for the last two years have now lifted. But it would be wrong to conclude that
life for the banks will go on much the same way as it did before in the golden years before the crisis.
The competitive environment for the banks is becoming increasingly intense. Of course, you can argue
that  there  is  nothing  new  in  this.  The  banking  system  in  Hong  Kong  has  always  been  competitive,
which is one of the reasons it was able to cope with the Asian crisis. But competition in past years was
taking place in highly buoyant conditions and within defined limits, reflecting in part the influence of
the interest rate rules of the Hong Kong Association of Banks.
1
BIS Review 69/2000
The competitive environment
Now things are somewhat different. A number of major players in the market, including some foreign
banks, are competing even more intensely than they did before. Some of them have recently increased
their presence in Hong Kong or are planning to do so. In some cases, this presence may be in virtual
form as banks increasingly offer their services in whole or in part over the internet. This is part of a
worldwide  trend  towards  greater  competition.  But  it  is  happening  in  Hong  Kong  at  a  time  when
lending growth has still not recovered along with the economy. Domestic loans showed no increase in
the first seven months of this year. The result is that loan to deposit ratios have fallen to their lowest
levels for many years - around 53% for the local banks as a group.
The effect on loan margins has been quite dramatic. In particular, the margin on mortgage loans has
fallen from 1.25% over prime rate prior to the crisis to the current low of 2.25% below prime.
The current situation may to some extent be temporary. It is difficult to believe that loan demand will
not  pick  up  soon  given  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  Hong  Kong.  Sentiment  in  the  property
market is now looking better and this may start to feed through into increased appetite for mortgage
loans.  But  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  boom  conditions  of  the  1990s  will  return  for  the  foreseeable
future.
The  implication  of  this  is  that  the  banks  in  Hong  Kong  may  have  to  cope  in  the  future  with  an
environment of more restrained loan growth and finer margins. This means that they will need to find
alternative means to boost income. One option is to diversify into the sale of products like unit trusts,
pensions  and  life  insurance  that  offer  the  opportunity  to  earn  fee  income.  Another  is  to  focus  on
lending  to  sectors  such  as  the  SMEs  that  provide  higher  returns  at  the  expense  of  higher  risk.  A
common factor in such initiatives is the need to cope with greater complexity in business development
and risk management. Technology can help to deal with these issues, but this creates its own set of
problems. Banks need to be able to afford the necessary investment in technology and to develop or
obtain the expertise to utilise technology properly.
The objectives of our reform measures
The KPMG/Barents Consultancy Study broadly anticipated these trends. The policy prescription was
that we should not stand in the way of the forces of change, nor should we simply do nothing and see
what happens. Rather, it was concluded that we should try to manage the process of change through
careful reform. The underlying aim of our reform package therefore is to help to improve efficiency
and innovation in the banking sector through increased competition. Among other things, this might
provide incentives for the local banks to think harder about merger and acquisition.
If we had simply done nothing and left competitive barriers, like the interest rate rules, in place, this
might  have  sent  misleading  signals  to  the  local  banks,  and  prevented  them  from  reacting  quickly
enough to the changes taking place around them.
A further objective of our reforms was to increase the attractiveness of Hong Kong as an international
financial centre. Also, bearing in mind that increased competition can bring with it increased risk, we
were also conscious of the need to take steps to enhance the safety and stability of the banking system.
I am not in this speech going to summarise all our reform measures, which are due to be implemented
over the period to the end of 2001. Instead, I will describe what we have done so far, and the main
tasks that remain to be done.
The progress on competitive reforms
So far we have introduced three main changes that are intended to promote competition:
• 
In September 1999, the one-building condition that applied to foreign  banks  licensed  after
1978  was  relaxed  to  allow  such  banks  to  open  branches  in  a  maximum  of  three  separate
BIS Review 69/2000
2
  buildings.  At  the  same  time  we  eliminated  any  restriction  on  the  number  of  regional  and
back offices that foreign banks can maintain.
In December 1999, we announced that agreement had been reached with the various parties
involved  for  restricted  licence  banks  to  join  the  RTGS  interbank  payment  system.  The
detailed legal arrangements were finalised in May of this year and a formal invitation to join
the system was issued to those RLBs with a clear business need to do so.
Finally, at the beginning of July of this year, we embarked on the first phase of deregulation
of the remaining interest rate rules. This involved removal of the interest rate cap  on time
deposits  with  a  maturity  of  less  than  7  days.  Following  this,  all  time  deposits  are  now
completely deregulated.
What  has  been  the  reaction  to  these  changes?  The  answer  is  that  not  much  has  happened  so  far.
Despite the fears of some of the local banks that they would have to cope with a flood of new foreign
bank branches, no foreign banks have as yet taken the opportunity to establish additional branches. Of
course, many foreign banks are engaged in wholesale, corporate or private banking business in Hong
Kong  and  do  not  require  an  extensive  branch  network.  Moreover,  a  number  of  banks  are  still
recovering from the Asian crisis or are in the process of merging, and are not in an expansion mode at
present. As mentioned previously, however, there are some foreign banks that are enthusiastic about
building up their presence in Hong Kong. But perhaps for these, the organic route of establishing new
branches,  and  having  these  limited  to  three,  is  too  slow  and  restrictive.  Acquisition  of  an  existing
operation is likely to be more attractive for such banks.
We have already said that we will review the impact of the three building condition in the first quarter
of 2001. If it appears that it is serving little useful purpose - because there is not in any case a huge
demand  on  the  part  of  foreign  banks  for  additional  branches  -  we  may  simply  dispense  with  the
condition altogether.
Similarly, no RLB has yet applied to join the RTGS system. It is however early days for this, and we
are  aware  that  some  of  the  more  active  RLBs  are  considering  whether  to  apply.  They  will  need  to
weigh  the  costs  and  benefits  of  direct  membership  compared  with  the  existing  practice  of  using  a
settlement bank. The important point is that the RLBs are now in a position to make that choice based
on  their  own  business  needs.  If  the  RLBs  feel  that  there  are  any  remaining  impediments  to  their
joining the system we would be pleased to hear from them.
Interest rate deregulation
The first phase of interest deregulation also produced a muted response. This is not unexpected nor is
it unwelcome. We are trying to avoid “big bang” deregulation that might be disruptive. Some banks
have introduced new overnight deposit accounts, which pay interest above the savings account rate.
But so far we have not seen any large-scale migration from savings accounts to 24-hour call accounts.
This is perhaps not surprising given the ample liquidity in the banking system, which means that the
banks  have  a  reduced  incentive  to bid actively  for  fresh  deposits.  This  is  reflected  in  the  unusually
small  differential  between  the  interest  rate  on  savings  accounts  and  those  on  time  deposits.  For
example, the gap between the savings account rate and the one-month time deposit rate was only about
0.5%  at the  end  of  August.  This  reduces  the  incentive  for  depositors  to  forego  the  loss  of  liquidity
involved in switching into time deposits.
Of course, there could be a more significant impact in July 2001 when the process of deregulation is
due  to  be  completed  with  the  removal  of  the  interest  rate  cap  on  savings  accounts  and  of  the
prohibition  of  interest  on  current  accounts.  Based  on  self-assessments  that  we  asked  the  banks  to
prepare earlier this year, there is a general view that competition in the banking sector will intensify
after  the  final  phase  of  deregulation  and  that  there  could  be  quite  a  significant  impact  on  the  net
interest margin.
That  was  also  the  conclusion  of  the  KPMG/Barents  Consultancy  Study.  But  the  actual  impact  will
obviously depend on the conditions at the time. If the supply of deposits remains ample in a year’s
3
BIS Review 69/2000
time, banks will have less reason to bid aggressively for deposits. Despite this, many banks may use
deregulation as an opportunity to try to  gain  market  share  and to attract  new  customers  by  offering
new deposit products with an attractive interest rate. Innovation and competition of that kind is what
deregulation  is  intended  to  achieve.  It  should  also  encourage  more  efficiency  in  pricing  and  the
elimination  of  cross-subsidisation.  Expect  therefore  to  see  more  transaction  fees  and  charges  to
recover servicing costs, and use of differential pricing to encourage customers with low and volatile
balances to use less costly delivery channels such as the internet.
The need for fairness and transparency
Banks are at liberty to impose such fees and charges, but it is essential that they should be fair and
transparent in doing so. This is particularly the case if the banks are intending to get more involved in
consumer and wealth management business where it is important to retain the trust of the customer.
The banks cannot afford a bad image otherwise they may find their customers going elsewhere - for
example, to internet-based financial institutions.
As we have seen from some recent incidents, the banks in Hong Kong have been lagging behind in the
provision  of clear information  to  their  customers  about  the  cost  of  some  financial  products  such  as
credit card advances. Moreover, there has been recent controversy about the provisions in credit card
agreements  that  entitle  the  lenders  to  reclaim  from  debtors  the  full  legal  costs  and  expenses  of
recovering  overdue  debts.  In  a  recent  court  case,  the  judge  ruled  that  the  relevant  provisions  were
unconscionable and therefore could not be enforced.
We have written to authorised institutions to ask them to review their terms and conditions in the light
of the court’s ruling and to ensure that they are consistent with Hong Kong law. We have also initiated
a review of the Code of Banking Practice with a view to strengthening the provisions on such issues as
transparency in the provision of banking services and the proper and responsible use of debt collection
agents. These issues are already addressed in the Code to some extent, and perhaps if the spirit of the
Code had been  more  closely  adhered to, some  of  the  recent  bad  publicity  for  the  banks could  have
been avoided. However, it is evident that the Code needs to be made more specific in some areas, and
the issue of how to ensure compliance must also be addressed.
The Code of Banking Practice is not part of our reform measures, but I have digressed to talk about it
for  two  reasons.  First,  as  already  indicated,  it  becomes  all  the  more  important  in  a  deregulated
environment to ensure that there is a fair and balanced relationship between banks and their customers.
Second, the fact that we are going to have to devote resources to this issue for the rest of this  year
means  that  one  of  our  reform  measures,  namely  a  review  of  the  current  three  tier  system  of
authorisation, will be postponed from this year to next. This will also allow us to take into account the
results of our forthcoming review of deposit protection arrangements, which may have a bearing on
the  minimum  size  of  deposits  that  authorised  institutions  which  are  not  licensed  banks  should  be
allowed to take.
Safety and soundness of the banking system
Deposit protection is part of what might be called the safety net arrangements for the banking system.
As the name suggests the safety net is there to catch banks that are in trouble or, if not the banks, then
at  least  their  depositors.  This  is  part  of  the  other  aspect  of  our  reform  measures  that  are  aimed  at
promoting the safety and soundness of the banking system.
One aspect of this is already in place in the form of a policy statement issued by the HKMA in June of
last year on its role as Lender of Last Resort to authorised institutions.
The major safety and soundness issues however lie ahead. The first is whether we should introduce a
commercial credit reference agency in Hong Kong which would gather and collate information from
participating institutions about the indebtedness and credit record of their corporate borrowers. This
would enable lenders to obtain a more complete picture of the financial position of their customers,
and thus improve their credit assessment and perhaps make them willing to lend. That is the theory,
BIS Review 69/2000
4
which seems to be supported by both academic research and the experience of overseas countries. We
are currently nearing the end of a consultation period and will consider the way forward in the light of
the comments received.
As  this  consultation  ends,  we  are  about  to  embark  on  another  that  may  be  more  contentious.  I  am
referring to the possible enhancement of the deposit protection arrangements in Hong Kong. In their
Consultancy Study, KPMG/Barents identified this as an important issue as the banking sector becomes
more  competitive  and  the  level  of  risk  possibly  increases.  They  also  considered  that  the  current
arrangements, which give priority to small depositors, did not appear to  have  sufficiently  raised  the
crisis  of  confidence  threshold  to  avoid  bank  runs.  They  therefore  recommended  that  the  issue  of
deposit protection should be looked at again.
This we have done in the form of a new consultancy study by Arthur Andersen that was completed in
July of this year. This has looked at various options for deposit protection, including maintenance of
the status quo at one extreme and the introduction of an explicit scheme for deposit insurance at the
other.  Such  schemes  are  increasingly  being  introduced  around  the  world  and  are  advocated  by  a
number of international standard setting bodies. The drawbacks of deposit insurance are however well
known, including the risk of increased systemic instability due to moral hazard. The costs of such a
scheme would also need to be carefully considered.
This  is  a  controversial  issue  that  will  need  to  be  fully  debated.  Subject  to  views  of  Exco,  it  is  our
intention to undertake a consultation on the various options for deposit protection at the beginning of
October. If it is eventually decided to introduce one of these options, further consultation would then
be required on the detailed arrangements.
Risk-based supervision
Of course, the best thing would be for the safety net not to be actually used. In other words, we should
be  trying  to  prevent  banks  getting  into  difficulties  in  the  first  place.  This  requires  effective
management by the banks themselves as well as careful monitoring by the banking supervisors. The
first of these we have tried to address through our recent Guideline on the Corporate Governance of
Locally  Incorporated  Authorised  Institutions.  This  is  intended  to  encourage  high  standards  of
management in such institutions and thus help them to deal with the challenges ahead.
These challenges also require enhancements to our system of banking supervision. As recommended
by  KPMG/Barents,  we are  introducing  a  more  risk-based  approach.  This  aims  to  be  more  forward-
looking than the old style of supervision. It focuses more precisely on the various types of risk being
run by individual banks, the quantity of such risks and the quality of the system used to manage them.
If used properly, it should lead to a less intrusive and less burdensome supervisory approach towards
well-managed institutions.
We have been developing this approach over the last year and have applied it to a number of the local
banks. We intend to roll it out to cover foreign banks next year. It is important that the whole process
should  be  transparent  and  to  assist  in  this  we  intend  to  issue  a  framework  document  quite  shortly
which  will  outline  the  new  approach.  We  are  also  engaged  in  a  major  rewrite  of  our  supervisory
guidelines  to  make  them  more  user-friendly  and  to  put  them  into  a  common  format.  This  is  a
substantial project that will take about a year to complete. In the meantime, we shall be issuing new
and revised supervisory guidelines in the new format as they come off the production line.
Conclusions
To sum up, our reform package is not intended to be revolutionary. The Hong Kong banking system is
already  well-managed  and  competitive.  But  even  good  players  need  to  improve  their  game  as
conditions become tougher. The main responsibility for doing this in the Hong Kong banking context
will rest with the banks themselves. We in the HKMA are trying to do our bit by removing possible
barriers to change in a cautious manner, and by making sure that our supervisory approach remains
appropriate to the changing market environment.
5
BIS Review 69/2000
