Lars Nyberg: The infrastructure of emergency liquidity assistance
- what is required in today’s financial system?
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the CGFS regional meeting
in Tokyo, Bank of Japan, on 22 May 2000.
 Sweden experienced a severe banking crisis in the beginning of the 1990s. To manage the crisis, the
authorities  had  to  implement  measures  that  averted  a  complete  breakdown  of  the  financial  system
while attempting to limit the costs to taxpayers.  In  addition, it  was  imperative  for  the  authorities to
consider whether or not their actions would contribute to  future  moral  hazard  problems.  During  the
crisis, an effective division of labour developed between the authorities involved, namely the Ministry
of Finance, the Riksbank, the central bank, Finansinspektionen, the financial supervisory authority and
the  Bank  Support  Authority.  As  the  crisis  progressed,  the  Riksbank  provided  emergency  liquidity
assistance (ELA) twice, acting in its role as “lender of last resort”. The remarks in this note are largely
drawn  from  the  Riksbank’s  experiences  in  this  crisis,  and  how  these  experiences  can  be  used  to
assessing the role of ELA in a general crisis management infrastructure.
When  discussing  the  infrastructure  that  is  in  place  to  handle  financial  crises,  two  aspects  are  of
primary  importance.  First,  ELA  must  be  put  in  the  context  of  the  overall  methods  of  crisis
management that the authorities would employ should a financial crisis occur. ELA is not a measure
that can or should be used in every financial crisis. The way other crisis management procedures are
set up also affects the scope for ELA. This is covered in the first part of this note.
Second, the way ELA issues are organised within the central bank is also very important for whether it
is  an  effective  measure  and,  in  particular,  whether  it  will  reduce  or  increase  moral  hazard  in  the
financial sector. This is discussed in the second part of the note.
Before discussing these two aspects, the importance of speed in granting ELA must be emphasized, as
the speedy implementation of ELA is essential to its being effective in a crisis situation. ELA is the
only  measure  in  the  crisis  management  framework  that  normally  can  be  used  quickly.  It  should  be
seen  as  an  acute  measure  that  is  used  for  avoiding  a  sudden  disruption  of  the  large-value  payment
system, in particular when threats to the system emerge suddenly.
Incidents like the failure of Barings bank, LTCM and the Swedish currency and banking crisis show
that threats to the financial system may indeed emerge suddenly, and that authorities must react very
quickly  -  if  not  within  minutes,  at  least  within  hours.  The  growth  and  increasing  globalisation  of
financial  markets,  the  high  volatility  in  these  markets  and  the  increasing  complexity  of  financial
institutions,  are  all  examples  of  factors  that  increase  the  risk  for  sudden  crises  and  increase  the
probability that such crises will spread from one market to another.
ELA as part of general crisis management and resolution
1.
Should a financial crisis occur, there are a number of measures that may be used by authorities to limit
the consequences of the crisis. In addition to ELA, examples of these measures are financial support to
protect the solvency of institutions, brokering of private sector support to or acquisitions of troubled
institutions,  management  of  deposit  insurance  schemes  and  insolvency  procedures  for  financial
institutions. In general, these measures may be undertaken by different authorities. A consequence of
this  is  that  cooperation  between  authorities  is  an  important  element  of  crisis  management.  The
authorities  must  have  a  common  strategy  for  how  the  crisis  should  be  managed  in  order  to  avoid
excessive support to the financial sector. Excessive support may lead to undue costs to taxpayers and
to unsound incentives for the financial sector. In this context, it is important to emphasise that these
effects can arise from all kinds of official support. Thus, the authorities must limit the support that is
1
BIS Review 42/2000
offered.  Support  may  be  warranted  only  when  there is  a considerable risk  for  a systemic  crisis  that
may lead to a severe decline of real economic activity. Typically, real economic activity is affected by
a breakdown of payments systems or restrictive granting of credit, a credit crunch.
Traditionally, ELA provided by central banks has been seen as a measure to deal with pure liquidity
problems  in  banks  that essentially  are  solvent.  In  practice,  situations  where  pure  liquidity  problems
arise seem to be rare. In  most cases where banks face liquidity  problems,  there is  some  uncertainty
about the solvency of the institutions involved. Typically, it takes time to make an assessment of the
solvency  of  an  institution.  In  the  Swedish  banking  crisis,  it  took  many  months  to  fully  assess  the
financial situation of the troubled institutions. Not even the institutions themselves had a good picture
of how large their problems were. Recent developments in the financial system, such as consolidation,
the emergence of geographically dispersed financial conglomerates with activity in many product lines
and a greater complexity of financial products, make this task even harder. It is unlikely that central
banks or supervisory authorities will be able to make a valid assessment of the solvency of troubled
institutions quickly enough. As mentioned above, requests for liquidity support may arise very rapidly.
The conclusion of this is that it will in practice be very difficult to draw the dividing line between the
central  bank’s  responsibilities  and  those  of  other  authorities  by  distinguishing  between  institutions
with solvency problems and those with pure liquidity problems, at least during a sudden crisis.
Another conclusion is that it is crucial to establish rules for information sharing between authorities,
especially  between  the  financial  supervisory  authority  and  the  central  bank  in  advance  so  that  the
central bank can quickly make an assessment. It is also important that the central bank, even if it does
not have direct supervisory responsibilities, closely monitors general financial market developments,
including in the major institutions, to detect potential crisis situations that may call for ELA.
The traditional view that ELA should never be given to insolvent banks can also be discussed from
another  perspective.  A  prerequisite  for  all  kinds  of  support,  including  ELA,  should  be  that  there  is
considerable risk for a systemic crisis. Given that, it can be discussed whether it is worse to provide
ELA to an insolvent institution, or to refrain from an action that could avoid a systemic crisis. If there
is a risk of systemic crisis, it is normally determined that public support even to insolvent institutions
may be warranted, but this is normally given by the government through the fiscal budget, not by the
central  bank.  The  moral  hazard  aspects,  which  are  common  arguments  for  not  providing  ELA  to
insolvent  institutions,  will  be  no  different  if  the  central  bank  provides  support  or if  the  government
does.
The central bank may have a better capability than other authorities to provide financial support if the
need  arises  very  quickly.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  that  the  central  bank  has  the  instruments  for
lending available and it has resources in its balance sheet or the credibility to get resources if they are
needed  (for  example  in  foreign  currency).  It  also  has  an  established  capacity  to  judge  whether  a
systemic crisis may occur as a result of an institution’s financial problems. The Riksbank is able to
make  this  judgement  by  virtue  of  its  role  as  provider  of  the  central  payment  system  and  the
responsibilities attached to this, its presence in financial markets and its general knowledge of the state
of  the  economic  and  financial  system.  Other  authorities  typically  have  greater  obstacles  to  reacting
fast,  as  they  do  not in  most  cases have  instruments  or  resources  readily  available  for  these  sorts  of
operations. There may also be difficult political considerations that have to be taken. For example, a
minority  government  may  need  to  seek  support  from  other  parties  to  use  budgetary  resources,  a
support  that  may  be  hard  to  get  or  at  least  take  some  time.  However,  this  is  not  to  be  taken  as  an
argument for governments to use the central bank as a provider of support because it does not want to
use budgetary resources. The central bank should be independent and control its own resources.
The conclusion of this is that ELA operations should have the role in the general crisis management
infrastructure  of  dealing  with  quickly  emerging  problems.  Where  problems  arise  gradually,  other
measures available to supervisory authorities and governments are more likely to be used. ELA should
be seen as a means for handling acute problems, so that the authorities gain time to decide whether
other crisis management measures are needed, such as restructuring of troubled institutions. If private
sector support can be organised, such as in the case of LTCM, that is of course to be preferred.
BIS Review 42/2000
2
If the view is accepted that ELA should function as a “bridge” measure to prevent acute crises from
occurring, it is very important that the support is given in a way that minimises the credit risk for the
central bank, in order to avoid moral hazard effects. The central bank must have a well-considered exit
strategy for its lending operations. The most obvious way to  do  this is to  lend  against  collateral.  In
most cases where a need for support occurs, collateral that is normally accepted by the central bank
will probably not be available. The central bank may in these cases be required to accept lower quality
collateral.  It  should  in  these  cases  apply  a  larger  haircut  on  the  collateral  than  is  used  for  normal
collateral.  Another  part  of  a  proper  exit  strategy  is  that  financial  support  should  not  be  given  to
shareholders or other holders of risk capital.
Internal procedures for ELA
2.
In the previous section, two main points were suggested: (1) that ELA is a measure that predominantly
should be used for problems that arise without warning; and (2) that ELA should only be provided if
there is a risk that a systemic problem would occur if the central bank did not act. These two features
bring about requirements for the way central banks should organise the ELA function internally. The
possible need for speedy assistance necessitates that a central bank must have internal procedures for
managing requests for liquidity support and doing so very rapidly. To accomplish this, central banks
need to have a detailed crisis plan that can be put in place within very short notice. The crisis plan
should include the following types of information:
A division of responsibilities for analysis, information, decision-making, etc.
Staffing requirements for different tasks, with substitutes.
A  description  of  the  information  necessary  to  make  a  decision  about  whether  or  not  a
systemic crisis may occur.
Necessary information about systemically important individual banks.
A  plan  for  informing  and  coordinating  information  and  decisions  with  the  other  domestic
agencies involved in the crisis.
A plan for informing authorities in other countries about the situation.
A plan for communicating with the financial markets.
A plan for spreading information to the public and media (ex ante and ex post transparency).
Organisational structure
• 
• 
Analysis plan
• 
• 
Information strategy
• 
• 
• 
• 
Plan for implementing ELA
• 
A clear description of the routines which must be followed and the legal requirements which
must be met for ELA.
An inventory of the instruments available for implementing ELA.
Legal  procedures,  for  example  contracts,  for  lending  against  other  collateral  than  what  is  normally
eligible
• 
• 
Internal preparedness is important in order to be able to consider requests for ELA, as the timeframe
for reaction normally is very limited. It is important to note that preparation is crucial also if a central
bank  is  to  deny  a  request  for  ELA.  If  the  central  bank  has  no  organisation  for  analysing  systemic
consequences and the availability of measures, it is very likely that it will not dare not to lend.
Guidelines for acceptable collateral and appropriate haircuts.
3
BIS Review 42/2000
No  central  bank  wants  to  give  financial  institutions  and  markets  the  slightest  reason  to  depend  on
central bank support rather than their own efforts to avoid financial meltdown. Clearly, ELA is a last
resort  measure  that  central  banks  use  only  when  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  at  stake.  A
well-planned and clear LOLR function need not encourage moral hazard. On the contrary, a central
bank  with  clear  guidelines  and  a  solid  analysis  capability  is  in  the  best  position  to  pinpoint  those
situations in which ELA is necessary. In all other situations, clear guidelines help the central bank to
stand firm against the institutions’ demands for help and to force markets to solve financial problems
by themselves.
BIS Review 42/2000
4
