Willem F Duisenberg: The international role of the euro
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
2000 Spruce Meadows Round Table, held in Calgary, on 8 September 2000.
 Let me first thank the organisers of this conference for having invited me to share some thoughts with
you on the international role of the euro. The euro was successfully launched 20 months ago as the
single  currency  of  11  Member  States  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  -  known  as  the  “euro  area”.  On
1 January  1999  these  Member  States  transferred  their  monetary  sovereignty  to  a  new  supranational
institution, the European Central Bank (ECB). Since then, the Eurosystem - composed of the ECB and
the national central banks (NCBs) of the 11 countries that have adopted the euro - has been in charge
of the euro area single monetary policy and related functions, such as foreign reserve management and
operations and payment systems oversight.
The euro has brought about fundamental  changes  to the economic  and  financial environment in  the
euro  area  and  beyond.  By  lowering  transaction  costs  and  enhancing  price  transparency,  the  single
currency represents a major contribution to fostering competition and efficiency in goods and financial
markets across the euro area. As such, the introduction of the euro represents a quantum leap towards
completing a fully integrated Single Market in the EU and lays a solid basis for the improvement in
the living standards of European citizens. Besides these welfare-enhancing effects on the “domestic”
economy of the euro area, the new setting also has far-reaching consequences for the world economy
and the international community.
Let  me  shed  some  light  on the international  ramifications  of  Monetary  Union  by  highlighting  three
interrelated  aspects.  First,  the  use  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  in  the  global  financial
system; second, the growing role played by the Eurosystem in international policy cooperation; and,
third,  relevant  aspects  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro.  Before  dealing  with  these  points  in  turn,  I
should like to recall some key economic features of the euro area.
Key economic features of the euro area
Let  me  begin  by  putting  the  euro  area  into  an  international  perspective.  The  euro  area  represents  a
large  and  relatively  closed  economy.  Given  its  population  of  almost  300  million  people  and  its
significant weight in the global economy, the euro area is broadly comparable with the United States.
As regards its size and structure, the most striking fact is that the euro area economy has a share of
world  output  of  around  16%.  This  is  more  than  three  times  that  of  its  largest  national  component
(namely Germany, which accounts for 4.7%), significantly higher than that of Japan (which accounts
for about 8%), while being lower than that of the United States (which stands at 21%).
Being a large economy, the degree of trade openness of the euro area is much smaller than that of its
constituent countries, even though it is still higher than in the United States and Japan. Measured by
the average of exports and imports as a share of euro area output, the degree of openness is 16% in the
euro  area.  By  contrast,  prior  to  Monetary  Union,  the  average  export  ratio  of  all  Member  States
including intra-euro area trade stood at around 35% in 1997, ranging  from  20  to 60%.  At  the  same
time, the euro area remains more open than the United States and Japan, with ratios of 12% and 11%
respectively. Another factor highlighting the role of the euro area in world trade is its share in world
exports. With almost 20%, the euro area is the world’s largest exporter, compared with 15% and 9% in
the United States and Japan respectively.
As regards the structure of the euro area economy, the patterns of production are broadly similar to
those  of  the  United  States  and  Japan.  While  primary  production  is  rather  negligible  (around  2%  of
total  output),  the  bulk  lies  with  the  euro  area’s  services  sector,  accounting  for  almost  70%  of  total
production, which is roughly equal to that of the United States (72%) and higher than that of Japan
1
BIS Review 72/2000
(60%). The industrial sector accounts for around 30%, which is higher than in the United States but
somewhat lower than in Japan.
Finally, if you look at the structure of financial markets on both sides of the Atlantic, you may note the
difference  between  the  “bank-based”  system  of  finance  on  the  European  continent  and  the
“market-based”  system  in  the  United  States.  Although  there  seems  to  be  a  trend  away  from  banks
towards  non-bank  financing  in  the  euro  area,  reinforced  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  banks  still
play  a  dominant role in  providing  financial  services  in the  euro  area.  Domestic  credit as  a  share  of
domestic  output  accounts  for  130%  in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  80%  in  the  United  States.
Correspondingly, stock and debt markets are much smaller in the euro area than in the United States.
While the shares of euro area debt securities and stock market capitalisation relative to GDP remain
clearly below 100% (91% and 63% respectively), the figures for the United States are in both cases
well  above  150%  (155%  and  172%  respectively).  This  brings  me  to  the  use  of  the  euro  as  an
international currency in the global financial system.
The role of the euro as an international currency
Given  the  weight  of  the  euro  area  in  the  world  economy  and  the  legacy  of  the  former  national
currencies, which have been replaced by the euro, it is no surprise that the  euro  is the second  most
widely used currency behind the US dollar. A number of observers have argued that one of the main
motivations  behind  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  was  the  development  of  the  euro  as  a
major international currency. This perception, however, is incorrect for a number of reasons.
First,  the  “euro  project”  is  to  be  seen  as  a  further  logical  step  in  the  European  integration  process,
which started more than half a century ago, immediately after the Second World War. Its objectives
were not - and are still not - purely economic, as European integration aims not only at the creation of
a  prosperous  but  also  a  stable  and  peaceful  Europe.  For  a  large  part,  trade,  economic  and  financial
integration aimed at the removal of all barriers to free competition has been the engine of this process.
In this context, the euro is to be seen as a major contribution to the completion of the Single Market in
Europe. The primary objective of the ECB is to maintain price stability in the euro area.
Second,  the  international  use  of  the  euro  is,  first  and  foremost,  the  outcome  of  a  market-driven
process,  not  to  be  steered  by  central  banks  or  by  political  bodies.  The  ECB  has  adopted  a  neutral
stance on the internationalisation of the euro. The ECB intends neither to foster nor to hinder the use
of the euro. In the past, major countries have, at times, tended to promote the international use of their
currency,  primarily  with  a  view  to  potential  benefits  for their  national  financial sectors. There  have
also been cases in which major countries have resisted the internationalisation of their currency, owing
to  the  uncertainties  that  this  process  may  imply  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  However,  by
maintaining price stability, the ECB almost automatically fosters the attractiveness of the euro as an
international currency.
Third, the international use of a currency is a complex phenomenon that does not lend itself to ad hoc
promotion  measures.  A  currency  can  be  used  not  only  for  different  functions,  but  also  by  different
groups of economic agents. In this context, the use of the euro by private agents as an investment and
financing currency, as well as a payment and vehicle currency, plays a prominent role. Although the
euro  is  also  used  by  the  public  sector  as  a  nominal  peg  and  reserve  currency,  the  behaviour  of  the
private sector dominates the internationalisation of the euro. The amount of financial assets managed
by  the  private  sector is  many  times  larger than  official reserve  holdings.  In  addition,  private  agents
usually adjust their asset management strategies more rapidly than most public sector institutions. But
what are the factors behind the internationalisation of a currency?
In principle, two basic factors might eventually determine the international role of the euro - size and
risk. With regard to the size factor, a broad, deep and liquid euro area capital market may lead to a
greater use of the euro through lower transaction costs. This may, in turn, facilitate the development of
the  euro  as  a  vehicle  currency  for  trade  and  commodity  pricing.  Already  at  this  early  stage,  the
introduction of the euro has brought about fundamental structural changes in euro area capital markets.
Progress in the harmonisation of certain market standards, practices and conventions across the euro
BIS Review 72/2000
2
area  is  reflected  in  a  capital  market  that  is  characterised  by  increased  market  liquidity,  broader
maturity spectrum and wider range of financial products. In addition, following the introduction of the
euro, the euro area corporate bond market has grown significantly. The activity of private issuers has
become  more  important  than  that  of  sovereign  issuers,  traditionally  dominating  the  euro  area  bond
markets. Positive network externalities and economies of scale have provided incentives for firms to
issue  their  own  securities  instead  of  borrowing  from  banks.  However,  this  trend  away  from  banks
towards  markets  -  the  so-called  disintermediation  process  -  will  take  time.  The  development  of  a
broader spectrum of euro-denominated financial instruments will be a gradual process.
In addition to the size factor, the international use of a currency is determined by risk factors, since
investors may use the euro to hedge their risks through diversification across international currencies.
If  international  investors  and  issuers  consider  the  euro  to  be  a  stable  currency,  they  will  hold  euro
assets  to  minimise  risk  in  their  internationally  diversified  portfolios.  In  this  context,  I  should  make
clear that maintaining price stability not only makes a contribution to improving economic prospects
and raising living standards in the euro area, but it is also a major precondition for a currency to play
an international role. Only if investors outside the euro area are confident that their purchasing power
will be preserved over time, will they engage in euro-denominated financial activities. Therefore the
commitment  of  the  ECB  to  pursue  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  remains  a  key  factor  behind
market confidence in the euro as a stable currency. Besides price stability, the current and expected
growth performance of the euro area economy is an additional factor behind the attractiveness of the
euro.  Sustained  non-inflationary  growth  in the  euro  area  economy  would  have  beneficial  effects  on
market expectations and foster the international use of the euro.
As regards the private use of the euro, recent trends show that it has mainly been used as a financing
currency. With regard to international debt securities, the euro is more widely used than  the  former
national currencies of the euro area countries. The issuance of euro-denominated assets by residents
outside  the  euro  area  accounted  in  1999  for  almost  30%  of  total  issues  denominated  in  a  currency
different from that of the borrowers’ respective geographical residences. By comparison, the combined
share of all former national currencies of the euro area countries and the ECU amounted to only 18%
of total gross international issuance in 1998. The growing use of the euro was mainly mirrored in a
decline in the share of US dollar-denominated issues from 58% to 48% between 1998 and 1999. These
trends are even more striking if one focuses on the bonds and notes segment of the market. Accounting
for 33% of all announced international bonds and notes issues in 1999, compared with 37% for the US
dollar, the euro nearly matched the dollar in that year. In the second half of 1999 euro-denominated
bond issues even exceeded those in the US dollar.
As far as the euro’s share in overall official reserves is concerned, the euro also represents the second
most widely used currency behind the US dollar. According to the latest available data, at the end of
1999 the euro accounted for around 13% of the official foreign currency holdings of the world. Apart
from some technical corrections on account of the conversion of the Eurosystem’s reserves into euro,
which  led  to  a  slight  decline  in  the  euro’s  share  in  overall  reserves,  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
reallocation of foreign reserves at this stage. It should also be noted that more than 50 countries in the
world are currently using the euro as a nominal anchor.
International cooperation
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  institutional  side.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  brought  about  a  major
change to the institutional framework in which international cooperation takes place. In view of the
rapid process of globalisation and episodes of crises in a number of systemically important emerging
market  economies,  international  cooperation  should  play  a  role  in  strengthening  the  international
financial  architecture.  In  this  respect,  the  new  institutional  setting  in  Europe  is  to  be  taken  into
account.
By  reducing  the  number  of  key  players,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  will  simplify  the  international
policy  cooperation  process  between the  major economies.  In  particular, it should  make  this  process
more  efficient  by  facilitating  the  reciprocal  exchange  of  information  and  views,  as  well  as  the
formulation of common understandings on economic and financial issues at the global level. Each of
3
BIS Review 72/2000
the  main  partners  -  the  United  States,  the  euro  area  and  Japan  -  is  in  a  position  to  speak  for  a
comparatively  large  economic  area.  A  more  balanced  relationship  between  the  major  players  might
help to induce each of them to take on responsibility for contributing to a stable global environment.
In many ways, the ECB - which as a rule represents the Eurosystem externally - is already involved in
the work of international institutions and fora in the area of competencies of the Eurosystem. Formal
and informal agreements have already been reached with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD),  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements  (BIS),  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  and  the  several  groupings  of  ministers  and
central bank governors (G7, G10 and G20).
The  involvement  of  the  ECB  was  relatively  straightforward  for  groupings  created  after  the
introduction  of  the  euro,  such  as  the  FSF  or  G20.  In  the  case  of  pre-existing  international  fora  and
organisations, however, the arrangements to be made were more complicated. The introduction of the
euro  heightened  the  need  for  international  financial  institutions  -  such  as  the  IMF  and  the  OECD,
whose internal procedures are organised on the basis of the “one country, one currency” principle - to
accommodate in their bilateral and multilateral surveillance exercises the existence of regional entities.
In December 1998, for example, the IMF granted observer status to the ECB. Since February 1999 the
ECB observer at the IMF has been involved in all relevant work of the Fund on issues falling within
the competence of the ECB and of mutual interest to both institutions.
The  fact  that  the  ECB’s  overriding  objective  is  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  has  three  main
implications for its participation in international policy cooperation.
First, a reciprocal exchange of information and views is a substantial component of the Eurosystem’s
cooperation with the international organisations and fora. Regular consultation on external economic
developments enhances the ability of the ECB to analyse the  outlook  for  price  developments  in  the
euro area, which in turn provides useful input into the effective implementation of its monetary policy.
By  taking  into  account  possible  spillover  effects  from  third  countries’  policy  actions,  consultation
contributes  to  reducing  the  likelihood  of  misinterpreting  the  impact  of  foreign  developments  on
domestic  variables.  Given  its  voluntary  nature,  consultation  does  not  compel  the  ECB  to  adopt  a
monetary policy inconsistent with its objective of price stability.
Second, a reciprocal exchange of information and views is supplemented by international surveillance.
In this case, a third and independent party, such as the IMF or OECD, regularly monitors and assesses
the economic policies of its members. The ECB participates in  the  surveillance  process for policies
falling  within  its  competence  (e.g.  monetary  policy,  payment  systems  oversight).  This  means  that,
whenever monetary policy is under surveillance, the ECB is solely responsible for its interaction with
the IMF and OECD. Standards and codes recently adopted by the IMF and other relevant international
institutions  are  a  way  of  defining  best  policy  practices  and  enhancing  transparency  in  the  field  of
monetary and financial policy. In this respect, the ECB’s involvement in regular surveillance further
strengthens its accountability through being transparent.
Third,  in  the  area  of  macroeconomic  policies,  consultation  and  surveillance  are  the  only  forms  of
international cooperation that are relevant to the Eurosystem. Any form of ex ante policy coordination
of monetary with other macroeconomic policies would neither be advisable for the Eurosystem nor be
compatible with the ECB’s mandate and independence. Apart from the well-known recognition  and
decision  lags  in  policy-making,  attempts  to  coordinate  ex  ante  would  not  only  blur  the  specific
responsibilities  of  individual  policy-makers,  but  also  reduce  their  accountability.  In  determining  its
monetary policy stance, the ECB should and does take into account all relevant information. It cannot
let its policy solely be determined by the current and future course of other policies. This could easily
compromise the maintenance of price stability.
The  ECB’s  active  participation  in  the  ongoing  process  aimed  at  strengthening  the  international
financial architecture is to be seen against this background. The Eurosystem supports such a process
for two reasons: first, since the achievement of its primary objective of safeguarding price stability in
the euro area would be facilitated by a sounder and more resilient international financial system; and,
second, because the Eurosystem is expected to contribute to the smooth conduct of policies relating to
the stability of the financial system.
BIS Review 72/2000
4
Putting one’s own house in order must be at the basis of the stability of the “global village”. In this
context, I should like, if you would allow me, to draw attention to the fact that the introduction of the
euro  also  contributes  to  international  financial  and  economic  stability  in  a  more  subtle  way.  The
process towards EMU is not only concerned with irrevocably merging 11 national currencies. It also
means  building  up  a  sound  institutional  framework  based  on  monetary  stability  and  fiscal
sustainability.  The  EMU  process  provides  evidence  of  how  effective  properly  organised  policy  and
institutional cooperation can be in fostering economic stability in each individual country. In addition,
EMU shows that regional policy cooperation may go well beyond trade matters.
One should not be surprised by  the  number  of  countries  that regard  EMU  as a  relevant  example  of
regional  cooperation.  In  Europe,  EMU  represents  a  powerful  magnet  for  many  central  and  eastern
European countries. For these countries, accession to the EU will mark the completion of the transition
from the former centrally planned economies to fully-fledged market economies. The prospect of EU
membership is an incentive for transition efforts of accession countries and the ultimate adoption of
the euro is already taken into account in their monetary and exchange rate policy strategies. However,
the countries concerned will not adopt the euro by the date of their entry into the EU and the timing for
this step might be quite different from country to country. The path towards full euro area participation
implies  progress  towards  nominal  and  real  convergence.  Ultimately,  these  countries  are  required  to
observe the same convergence criteria with regard to public finance, long-term interest rates, exchange
rate stability and inflation as the current euro area countries. In the legal area, accession countries will
be required to provide their central banks with the same degree of independence as today in the euro
area.  In  the  technical  area,  preparations  will  require  long  lead  times,  and  the  ECB  has  already
established a dialogue with them, to assist when requested.
Outside the euro area, an ongoing debate on deepening regional integration beyond trade liberalisation
is  taking  place  among  Mercosur  countries.  The  relative  economic  conditions  of  these  countries
appeared  even  more  differentiated  than  those  of  European  countries  when  the  integration  process
started  more  than  fifty  years  ago.  However,  this  seems  to  reinforce  their  conviction  that  regional
cooperation  is  necessary  to  achieve  stable  and  non-inflationary  growth  and  to  overcome  latent
economic conflicts with their trading partners. As in the case of the regional process of integration in
Europe, it may well be that the final objective of the Mercosur regional agreement goes beyond that of
trade cooperation.
The international community should support regional  cooperation  efforts among  countries that  have
strong trade relationships and are willing to achieve progress in economic convergence. These efforts
have significant positive externalities and could contribute to greater effectiveness of multilateral and
bilateral surveillance.
The exchange rate of the euro
To complete the picture of the international role of the euro, let me finally refer to the exchange rate of
the euro vis-à-vis other major currencies, namely the US dollar and the Japanese yen. I should like to
take  the  opportunity  to  reaffirm  that  the  ECB  does  not  pursue  any  exchange  rate  target  in  its
stability-oriented monetary policy strategy. Our objective is to maintain stable prices in the euro area
and not a specific level of the euro’s exchange rate. According to our strategy, the exchange rate of the
euro is the outcome of current and expected economic policies pursued in the euro area, and economic
developments in both the euro area and abroad.
Conclusions
To  summarise,  the  new  institutional  monetary  setting  in  Europe  has  consequential  implications  for
international capital markets and international policy cooperation. The pace at which the role of the
euro as an international currency will develop is hard to predict. But what can be said is that the global
acceptance  of  the  euro  in  the  international  financial  markets  depends  first  and  foremost  on  market
confidence in the stability of the euro. In this context, the ECB’s monetary policy committed to the
pursuit  of  price  stability  provides  an  important  contribution.  In  the  same  vein,  by  participating  in
5
BIS Review 72/2000
international  policy  cooperation,  the  ECB  contributes  to  reducing  the  risks  of  negative  externalities
and to fostering the adoption of best policy practices at the international level. This is an  important
contribution of Europe to a more stable international financial system.
BIS Review 72/2000
6
