Eva Srejber: Price stability and growth in Sweden
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Skandinaviska
Enskilda Banken, in Malmö, on 4 September 2000.
 Sweden is now entering its third year with growth of over 3%. This year, GDP is expected to increase
by  over  4%  and  our  assessments indicate  continued  annual  growth  rates  averaging  over  3%  for  the
next two years. Despite the strength of the economy, inflation is low. Why doesn’t inflation rise more?
What balances do we have to strike as monetary policy decisionmakers? These are the issues that  I
want to give my view on in today’s speech.
Monetary policy strategy
I would like to start by drawing attention to what guides us when we make monetary policy decisions,
ie how we have formulated the monetary policy strategy.
The new Riksbank Act, that came into force on 1 January 1999, confirmed by law that the objective of
monetary policy is price stability. This objective was formulated in 1993 as an inflation target, where
CPI  is  to  total  2%  with  a  tolerance  interval  of  plus/minus  one  percentage  point.  One  reason  for
adopting CPI was because it is well-known and measures the prices consumers encounter for a large
part of their consumption. Two per cent was chosen, among other reasons, because it was considered
to  be  at  a  good  European  level  at  that  time.  When  the  new  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  took
office at the beginning of 1999, we found no reason to change the target formulation.
To make it possible to evaluate how we carry out our task, we endeavour to be as clear as possible
about the  grounds  on  which  monetary  policy  decisions  are  made.  Inflation  assessments  and  interest
rate decisions are explained in the Riksbank’s inflation reports.
The Riksbank has also stated a rule of conduct for what should normally lead to decisions on interest
rate rises, and the justifications for departures from this rule of conduct. Finally, the published minutes
of  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meetings  contain  an  account  of  how  we  voted  and  the
reasoning underlying the decisions.
Resource use is important for inflation
Since  the  interest  rate  affects  inflation  with  a  time  lag,  monetary  policy  decisions  are  based  on
forward-looking assessment of inflation.
Highly  simplified,  the  conceptual  framework,  used  by  the  Riksbank  in  the  appraisals  of  price
tendencies, can be described as follows: when there is unused capacity in the economy, price pressure
is low and inflation is under the target. When demand is sufficiently high to lead to output exceeding
the level that coincides with the long-term trend level of production, inflation instead tends to exceed
the  target.  Inflation  will  be  on  target  when  output  is  at  the  level  of  the  long-term  trend  level  of
production - the output gap is closed. This reasoning assumes that inflation expectations are close to
the target for monetary policy.
Inflation expectations are based therefore on forecasts for the development of the real demand, how
many unused resources there are in the economy initially, assessments of the productivity trend and
the long-term trend level of production.
However,  consumer  prices  can  be  affected  by  factors  that  are  not  related  to  resource  use  in  the
Swedish economy. Inflation measured by CPI is also affected, for instance, by changes in supply and
other factors that temporarily affect inflation. When CPI is affected by temporary factors of this kind
1
BIS Review 72/2000
that  are  unrelated  to  resource  use,  inflation  diverges,  in  the  simplified  model,  from  the  target  even
when the output gap is closed. UND1X is a measure that makes adjustments for some of these effects
although far from all of them.
The rule of conduct
The  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  has  decided  to  formulate  a  decision  rule  that  states  that  if
inflation, measured as the annual change in CPI, is expected to rise about the target of 2% during the
nearest one to two years, then the interest rate should normally be increased and vice versa. The choice
of time horizon is justified by our assessment that an interest  rate  change  has the  greatest  effect  on
price  developments  during  this  period.  However,  interest  rate  changes  also  affect  inflation  in  the
shorter  and  longer  term,  so  that  there  are  reasons  for  giving  some  consideration  to  the  inflation
forecast for the coming year and for the time beyond two years.
However,  a  monetary  policy  that  aims  in  all  situations  to  keep  inflation  at  2%  can  lead  to  large
fluctuations in output. If monetary policy was to counteract price increases in CPI which are deemed
to be temporary and not a consequence of excess demand, interest rates must be kept sufficiently high
to  hold  down  demand  in  the  economy.  Output  would  then  be  under  the  long-term  trend  level.
Correspondingly, with the target of achieving 2% inflation, monetary policy must stimulate demand
and  press  output  up  above  the  long-term  trend  level  if  inflation  was  held  down  by  factors  that
temporarily dampen prices.
There are therefore reasons for modifying the monetary policy rule of conduct to make it possible to
achieve balance between variations in inflation and in growth. Excessively large fluctuations in output
can entail high economic costs. Fundamentally, after all, the reason for monetary policy being given
the task of maintaining stable prices is that this is the way in which it is considered to make the best
contribution to creating the prerequisites for high, stable growth.
If  inflation  is  affected  by  temporary  factors  or  if  the  economy  is  affected  by  such  extensive
disturbances that it can be difficult to bring inflation back on target within one to two years, there may
therefore be reasons to bring inflation back to target more slowly than usually. However, we should
give reasons for doing this.
Scope for major differences, despite a common strategy
Even if there is agreement on the strategy for monetary policy, there is, of course, considerable scope
for differences in assessments of where the interest rate should be in each situation.
In  the  first  place,  the  Executive  Board  can  make  different  assessments  of  the  most  probable  price
tendency. As we know, economics is not an exact science and forecasts of prices and growth potential
always rest on many assessments of an enormous mass of information and correlations. Models can
never capture the complexity of the economy and how people’s economic decisions interact and must
therefore always be regarded as one of many aids in assessments.
The Riksbank uses a lot of different approaches and indicators to make assessments. The focus of the
Riksbank’s analysis has been until now on the real economy and how it affects price trends. In many
areas, we have come further than other central banks, while we have not come so far as regards the
analysis  of  different  financial  aggregates  and  their  linkage  with  inflation  and  real  demand.  An
endeavour has certainly been made to take into account information provided by the development of
the quantity of money and growth of credit. However, we have not for instance developed methods
that can give guidance as to the level of indebtedness and the quantity of money that is  compatible
with the long-term sustainable growth of the economy on the basis of the inflation target. While the
financial economy is in principle only a reflection of the real economy and vice versa, changes can
take place as to which component is in the driving seat. A well-developed analysis of both sides would
probably improve the basis for decision-making in monetary policy. Structural changes in the financial
markets  make  it  difficult  to  interpret  developments  and  to  find  stable  correlations  between,  for
instance, the quantity of money and inflation, although this is true for many parts of the economy. It
BIS Review 72/2000
2
applies, for instance, to methods for estimating such central variables as how many unused resources
there are in the economy and how great the potential growth can be. Different methods then produce
different results.
The ECB is an example of a central bank that builds up its analysis from the real side and from the
financial side - monetary policy rests on two pillars. There are partly historical reasons for monetary
policy strategy being conducted in this way. Their strategy is perhaps not the best way to take financial
trends into consideration. The risk with such a clear division is that the fact that it is actually about
mirror images is disregarded and that the consistency between the real and financial analysis is lost.
The advantage is that financial trends can clearly be taken into consideration when monetary policy
decisions are made.
In the second place, we can make different appraisals of the risk picture for the price trend during the
forecast period. As there is normally great uncertainty in the inflation assessment of the main scenario,
the Riksbank also produces risk scenarios; we also publish estimates of the probability distribution of
different inflation outcomes. The distribution around the probable outcome is taken into consideration
when decisions on the interest rate are taken.
In the third place, we can make different assessments as to how monetary policy is to be conducted to
strike a reasonable balance between fluctuations in growth and inflation. As I mentioned earlier, the
Executive Board has agreed that we can decide not to bring inflation back to target within one to two
years if CPI is affected by temporary factors or if the economy is affected by extensive disturbances.
Making assessments and evaluating when - within these frameworks - there are sufficient reasons for
avoiding output variations by extending the control horizon is far from self-evident, however.
To  maintain  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability,  it  is  important  therefore  to
justify such departures.
In the fourth place - and I am now starting to sound as if it is not at all possible to conduct monetary
policy with a demand for clarity - we do not know exactly the stimulation or tightening produced by a
particular  interest  rate.  This  depends  on  our,  like  everybody  else’s,  limited  knowledge  of  the
“transmission mechanism”. It is also due to it being difficult to exactly define at what real interest rate,
monetary  policy  has  a  neutral  effect  on  demand.  The  difficulty  is  increased  by  the  “neutral”  real
interest  rate  changing,  for  instance  when  the  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  changes.  On  the
basis of experience, simple rules of thumb and rough calculations, everyone can per se obtain an idea
of how monetary policy operates. However, this is another area that needs to be developed.
Altogether, this review shows that monetary policy decisions can never  be  made  mechanically  with
the aid of simple rules of thumb. In order to firm up the analysis and make it easier to describe the
basis  for  our  decisions,  it  is  notwithstanding  this  important  to  describe  and  keep  to  a  conceptual
framework, around which we construct  our  analysis.  As  we  gain increased  knowledge,  our  analysis
and conceptual framework are complemented or modified. In order not to lose clarity, we endeavour in
our  inflation  reports,  speeches  and  publications  to  describe  our  analytical  apparatus  and  its
development.
Challenges in the present situation
The  growth  prospects  for  the  Swedish  economy  have  improved  considerably  in  recent  years.  The
Riksbank has been successful in creating support for and making the inflation target credible, central
government  finances  have  improved  and  many  structural  reforms  have  been  carried  out,  although
much remains to be done.
However, although for the most part, it looks good, there is a risk that the Swedish economy is now
growing too rapidly due to over-optimistic assessments of growth prospects. This must in my view be
taken into consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. Excessively optimistic expectations of the
future  could  lead  to  financial  imbalances  with  excessive  indebtedness  building  up  in  the  Swedish
economy. High stock exchange prices and increasing property prices can intensify  this tendency.  In
3
BIS Review 72/2000
this situation, an expansive monetary policy, based on the same over-optimism, would contribute to
imbalances being built up.
However, an important issue for the Riksbank is whether such a scenario is possible without different
indicators for inflation signalling in time that overheating is on the way so that monetary policy has
time to react.  Experiences from  other  countries  show that  low  consumer  price  inflation  and  healthy
central government finances do not by themselves constitute a guarantee for future good development.
Although  one  should  always  be  cautious  about  drawing  conclusions  from  comparisons  between
countries, it has been seen, for instance, that with experiences from Japan at the end of the 1980s and
from  Korea  in  the  mid-1990s,  overheating  can  be  expressed  in  exaggerated  stock  exchange  and
property prices, high lending rates and low yield investments rather than in rising consumer prices.
I can conceive of at least two factors in the Swedish economy that lead to an increasing overheating
not being expressed in rising consumer prices and therefore risk leading the Riksbank and the general
public to draw the wrong conclusions about the state of the economy.
In the first place I believe that both wage and pricing behaviour are affected by inflation expectations
being low and stable. It takes time before an increased use of resources has an effect on price and pay
increases! In the same way as it takes time to adjust inflation expectations downwards, there is inertia
in shifting them upwards. This would mean that even if demand and production are higher than what is
sustainable in the long-term, that this is not marked in price development before the use of resources
has come under great strain.
 In  the  second  place  deregulations  and  increased  competition  can  lead  to  consumer  prices  being
dampened as a result of excess profits being forced down in previously sheltered industries. Initially,
increased competition will perhaps primarily lead to redistribution of real incomes. In the somewhat
longer  term,  productivity  will  also  be  improved.  However,  it  is  uncertain  how  quickly  and  to  what
extent potential growth will increase as a result of increased competition.
If  monetary  policy  assessments  are  based  on  an  overoptimistic  view  of  growth  prospects  and
developments  in  consumer  prices  do  not  give  any  signals  about  this,  this  can  lead  to  considerable
imbalances being built up.
Sooner  or  later,  however,  inflation  will  accelerate.  When  the  scope  for  reduced  profit  margins  as  a
result of deregulations and increased competition begins to be exhausted and demand pressure finally
begins  to  be  expressed  in  rising  prices,  there  is  a  risk  that  price  increases  will  be  large  and  come
quickly. Expectations of future growth prospects can then be abruptly interrupted. The consequences
can  be  that  demand  drops  if  companies  and  households  are  then  too  highly  indebted.  If  a  lot  of
companies  during  the  overheating  period,  have  based  their  investment  decisions  on  incorrect
expectations of the demand trend, the fall can be great.
The example shows a development where monetary policy by acting too late creates high variability in
both inflation and output. The effects need not be visible either until after the forecast horizon. The
economic  costs  of  waiting  too  long  to  change  the  direction  of  monetary  policy  can  be  high  if
imbalances have grown great and the fall in production is large.
The same course of events as in USA?
Although the prospects for the Swedish economy look very bright, we cannot therefore disregard the
risk of overoptimism. History has shown many times that an optimism that was well-founded to start
with  has  become  self-reinforcing  and  has  ended  up  by  creating  considerable  imbalances  in  the
economy. Developments in Japan in the 1980s and in Asia in the 1990s are clear examples of this.
The  exceptionally  long  upswing  in  the  USA  has  contributed  to  strengthening  expectations  of  faster
long-term  growth  in  Sweden  as  well.  It  is  therefore  important  to  understand  whether  an  American
level of growth is sustainable in the long-term and whether anything similar can take place in Sweden.
An  important  basis  for  the  favourable  development  in  the  USA  is  probably  the  focus  on  budget
consolidation and price stability that has guided economic policy there for a long time. We have had a
similar  development  in  these  areas  in  Sweden,  although  the  process  started  later  here.  At  the  same
BIS Review 72/2000
4
time,  there  are  similarities  with  regard  to  the  strong  penetration  of  information  technology  in  the
economy, although we are also later in this development. As in the USA, high asset prices and strong
optimism have stimulated demand and increased the level of indebtedness in the Swedish economy.
Although  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  write  off  the  risk  of  financial  imbalances  building  up  the  USA  -
imbalances that can have negative effects for the American economy - it now seems as if the American
economy  may  be  on  its  way  to  a  soft  landing.  However,  there  still  remain  the  global  financial
imbalances  that  have  been  built  up  over  many  years  with  very  high  saving  in  Japan  and  very  low
saving  and  high  indebtedness  in  the  USA.  We  have  still  not  seen  how  these  imbalances  are  to  be
resolved and the consequences this will have for the world economy.
Although there are some indications that the Swedish economy is experiencing a similar development
as the American, the structural differences cannot be disregarded, which probably create greater inertia
in  the  Swedish  economy  than  in  the  American.  One  such  area  is  the  labour  market.  Considerable
barriers to competition remain in the Swedish economy as well. Another difference is that the cyclical
upswing  we  are  now  experiencing  is  taking  place  at  the  same  time  as  an  increase  in  growth  and
resource use in the rest of the world. We cannot therefore benefit in the same way as the USA from
there being unused resources in the rest of the world.
Conclusions
The Riksbank makes the assessment now that GDP growth will be over 4% this year and average over
3%  during  the  next  two  years.  This  rise  is  taking  place  after  a  number  of  years  with  considerable
growth. Despite this, inflation is low and is expected to remain so for the whole forecast period. We
cannot with certainty determine the processes concealed behind the weak increase in prices. I drew the
conclusion during  the  spring  that  we had  probably  underestimated the output  gap,  ie  the  amount  of
unused resources available in the economy initially and this is probably an explanation for the price
increases being surprisingly low. Some productivity improvements and indications of shrinking profit
margins in the economy as a whole also indicate that deregulations and increasing competition play an
important role. I furthermore consider that the stabilisation-focused macropolicy and measures such as
the tax reform have moreover increased the potential growth in the Swedish economy.
The strong growth that the Riksbank - assuming an unchanged repo rate - calculates with, is slightly
too low in my view. At the same time, I have a somewhat less optimistic appraisal than the majority of
the  mode  of  functioning  of  the  labour  market  and  competition  in  a  number  of  markets  in  Sweden.
However,  my  assessment  is  that  the  low  inflationary  expectations  are  making  it  take  a  longer  time
before overheating tendencies are expressed in increasing consumer prices. This leads me to make the
assessment that prices will not start to rise until the end of the forecast period but that price increases
will then be stronger than the majority believes. My assessment is therefore that inflation at the end of
the forecast period, in my main scenario, will end up marginally over the forecast that was reported in
the last inflation report, which the Executive Board majority did not find reason to revise.
My  assessments  of  developments  during  the  next  two  years  differ  then  only  marginally  from  the
majority view. I am more concerned about the price tendency and the risks I see in developments after
the forecast horizon. The assessments of the use of resources and future production possibilities are
uncertain. Structural changes of the Swedish as well as the international markets make it particularly
difficult to draw conclusions about future growth prospects. There is a risk that we go to excess. High,
increasing indebtedness calculated as a  share  of  GDP  for  both  households and  companies  make  me
concerned for financial imbalances that can be on their way to being created, although our knowledge
of what can be assumed to be long-term sustainable development is small.
In  my  view,  there  is  a  risk  that  we  overestimate  potential  output  in  the  coming  years  and  that  we
therefore accept an excessively high level of demand in the economy. Low inflation expectations and
the effects of deregulations and increased competition can lead to the excessively strong demand not
producing  an  effect  on  CPI  until  a  late  stage,    but  primarily  in  other  parts  of  the  economy.  The
economic  consequences  that  can  ensue  from  an  incorrect  assessment  can  be  high.  Although  the
probability of a dramatic development is small, the high costs that can arise if this comes about must
in  my  view  be  taken  into  account  when  making  monetary  policy  decisions.  Caution  indicates  that
5
BIS Review 72/2000
monetary policy should at least be neutral in the present situation. I regard monetary policy as being
expansive at present. I therefore consider that the interest rate should be increased.
BIS Review 72/2000
6
