Jean-Claude Trichet: Report on the operations of the Banque de France
Introductory  letter  for  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Banque  de  France,  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,
Governor of the Banque de France, submitted to the President of the French Republic, the President of
the Senate and the President of the National Assembly.
 I am honoured to present you with the report on the operations of the  Banque  de  France,  monetary
policy  and  the  prospects  for  it,  as  required  by  law.  As  is  the  custom,  I  also  submit  herewith  the
Monetary Policy Council’s comments on the past year, which was marked by the introduction of the
euro and the implementation of the single monetary policy.
After  a  brief  slowdown  at  the  end  of  1998  and  the  start  of  1999,  French  economic  growth  became
firmer  from  the  second  quarter  of  1999  onwards.  The  expansion  became  more  broad-based,  which
points  to  robust  growth in  2000,  as  do  forecasts  and  business  surveys.  Foreign  trade,  which  had  an
adverse effect on activity in 1998, sustained GDP growth in 1999 thanks to the recovery in exports
that started in the spring. Furthermore, domestic demand remained strong. The particularly high level
of household confidence, the surge in job creation and the purchasing power generated by continuing
subdued inflation fostered firm consumption growth, which rose by 2.2% on average in 1999, while
corporate investment recorded sustained 7.6% growth. Overall, GDP increased by an average of 2.9%.
I would like to emphasise that the performance of the French economy was above the averages for the
euro  area  as  a  whole,  where  2.4%  growth  was  recorded,  and  the  large  countries  of  the  European
Union.
In parallel to this strong recovery in activity, the current account surplus remained high, with France
having the second largest in the world. In 1999, as in 1998, the good competitiveness of the productive
sector thus remained one of the main pillars supporting French economic growth.
The acceleration in economic growth during 1999 enabled the creation of 375,000 dependent jobs in
market services. The number of jobseekers fell by 11.4% and the unemployment rate decreased from
11.5% of the labour force in December 1998 to 10.6% at the end of 1999, the lowest level recorded
since 1992.
Inflation quickened somewhat, especially at the year-end, whilst remaining within limits compatible
with the objective of stability (namely less than 2%) assigned to monetary policy. According to the
Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP),  which  is  the  measure  of  inflation  adopted  for  the
countries of the European Union, the rise in prices in France reached a twelve-month rate of 1.4% in
December 1999, as against 0.3% a year earlier. This increase  can  mainly  be  explained  by  the sharp
20.6%  annual  rise  in  oil  product  prices.  Underlying  inflation,  which  measures  the  rise  in  prices,
excluding  products  with  highly-variable  prices  (notably  energy  and  fresh  produce)  and  also  public
utility charges, after stripping out the impact of tax measures, rose at a slower twelve-month rate of
0.7%.  France  was  thus  the  best  performer  of  the  euro  area  in  this  field,  along  with  Germany,  with
twelve-month HICP growth of 1.7% in December 1999.
Since the start of 1999, the Eurosystem - comprising the European Central Bank (ECB) and the eleven
national central banks of the countries having adopted the euro as their currency - has been responsible
for defining and implementing monetary policy.
In accordance with the Maastricht Treaty, the primary objective of the single monetary policy is price
stability. This is defined as a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area of below 2%. The
definition of this medium-term objective is the same as that adopted by the Monetary Policy Council
for French monetary policy when the Banque de France was granted independent status a little more
than six years ago.
1
BIS Review 55/2000
In order to achieve its main goal of price stability, the Governing Council of the ECB decided, as you
know, to refer to two groups of indicators, or “pillars”, for European monetary policy:
– 
the  first  pillar  is  a  prominent  role  for  money,  reflected  by  the  choice  of  a  quantitative
reference  value  for  growth  in  M3,  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  for  the  euro  area.  This
reference value has been set at 4.5%.
 This  concept  of  a  reference  value  implies  close  monitoring  of  monetary  developments,
without implying a commitment to mechanistically correct the deviations that may appear in
the short term. At its 2 December 1999 meeting, the Governing Council decided to keep the
same 4.5% reference value for 2000;
concerning the second pillar, the ECB Governing Council monitors developments in a broad
range of economic and financial indicators giving advanced warning of inflationary pressure.
This group of indicators mainly covers different price and cost indices, wages, the exchange
rate,  various  measures  of  real  economic  activity  and  surveys  of  business  leaders  and
consumers.
After observing monetary developments and changes in economic and financial indicators,
the Governing Council, which had cut the euro area’s main refinancing rate from 3% to 2.5%
on 8 April, put it back up to 3% on 4 November 1999. Monetary conditions thus changed in
connection with the assessment of inflationary risks.
The indications given by the two pillars became consistent with each other in the second half of the
year, pointing towards a steady rise in the risks to future price stability.
For  the  first  pillar,  the  twelve-month  rate  of  M3  growth  for  the  period  from  October  to  December
averaged 6.1%, which was 1.6 percentage points above the 4.5% reference value.
An  analysis  of  the  factors  behind  this  rapid  expansion  of  M3,  which  especially  concerned  its  most
liquid  components,  reveals  strong  growth  in  credit  to  the  private  sector.  From  the  start  of  1999,
lending to the private sector grew at an annual trend rate of about 10% in connection with the pick-up
in activity, but probably also the significant rise in the prices of property and financial assets, which
were  very  responsive  in  certain  sectors  and  economies  of  the  area,  as  well  as  the  rising  number  of
mergers and acquisitions, many of which reflected direct investment outside the euro area. In France,
twelve-month growth in total  domestic  debt  stood  at  8.1% in  December 1999,  compared  with  4.5%
in 1998.
Among the elements forming the second pillar, the exchange rate of the euro is an important monetary
policy indicator.
The depreciation of the euro seen in 1999 is a matter of concern because it causes production costs and
the general price level to rise. In addition, this depreciation of the European currency simultaneously
reflected and boosted the negative financial flows, in the form of both direct and portfolio investment,
that affected the entire euro area in 1999.
The French economy, like the euro area’s, is enjoying favourable monetary and financial conditions
and high competitiveness. These factors are facilitating a durable, non-inflationary upturn in activity.
However,  while  a  sound  monetary  policy  is  a  necessary  condition  for  economic  success,  it  is  not
sufficient in itself to guarantee growth and job creation.
Since its establishment more than six years ago, the French Monetary Policy Council has reiterated,
notably in the Banque de France’s Annual Report, the three other main prerequisites for growth and
durable job creation: a sound fiscal policy aimed at controlling public spending and reducing deficits
lastingly; ambitious structural reforms in the areas of education and training,  the labour  market  and
welfare and, lastly; the continuation and strengthening of a policy aimed at containing unit production
costs in the economy and improving corporate competitiveness.
These guidelines are equally valid for the entire euro area economy as for the French economy.
BIS Review 55/2000
2
With  regard  to  the  first  two  conditions,  and  without  forgetting  the  major  achievements  in  the  fight
against unemployment in recent years, the Banque de France is convinced  that  we  could  have  even
lower unemployment - as low as in the best-performing economies in Europe and the world - if the
level of public spending (which can be likened to the overheads of our economies) was lower and if
the labour market functioned in a way even more conducive to job creation. It should be recalled that
our  Monetary  Policy  Council  recommends,  as  an  essential  first  step,  that  our  public  spending  be
reduced to below 50% of GDP as quickly as possible (it came to 52.4% in 1999). Note also that the
Stability and Growth Pact recommends that public finances be “close to balance or in surplus” in the
current period. This is not yet the case in France. At the end of 2000, it probably will be in at least four
euro area member countries and in a total of at least seven European Union Member States.
Turning to the third condition, it is important to remember that the considerable improvement in the
cost competitiveness of the French economy in the 1980s and 1990s played a very large part in the
recent  success  of  our  economy,  a  fact  that  we  perhaps  tend  to  neglect  a  little  today.  If  the  French
economy has grown more quickly than the other main European economies between 1997 and 2000,
whilst recording the largest external surplus in Europe and the second largest in the world over the last
three years, it is to a large extent because, thanks to our low inflation, average unit wage costs in the
manufacturing sector have, since the start of 1987, increased significantly less in France than in the
euro area as a whole (some 16% less), as can be seen from the following graph:
Competitiveness of the French economy
Unit production costs in the manufacturing sector (unit wage costs)
Relative to Monetary Union Member States
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
Jan. 1986
Gains in competitiveness
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
Jan. 1988
Jan. 1990
Jan. 1992
Jan. 1994
Jan. 1996
Jan. 1998
Jan. 2000
 Nominal exchange rate: from the franc to the euro (base 100 in 1987).
 Indicator for the trend in unit production costs in the same monetary unit (base 100 in 1987).
 A fall in the indicator means lower costs and thus better competitiveness.
This remarkable trend in our production costs - made possible by long-run low inflation - is a major
achievement  of  the  cross-party  economic  and  monetary  strategy  pursued  by  the  French  government
and  central  bank  over  a  long  period.  It  is  important  for  France  and  the  euro  area  to  maintain  and
consolidate this strong cost-competitiveness position. Since the introduction of the single currency, it
is more important than ever that we very closely monitor the indicator for unit production costs as it
determines the competitiveness of the goods manufactured in our economy and therefore the current
level  of  employment.  This  indicator  also  determines  future  employment  because  it  dictates  the
attractiveness of an investment in our economy compared to elsewhere, particularly outside the euro
area.
Allow me to lastly make a general remark about our strategic approach to growth.
Under  the  notable  influence  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies,  a  change  is
underway in the overall attitude of Europeans in general and French people in particular concerning
the motors of economic growth and job creation. Persistent mass unemployment, the structural causes
3
BIS Review 55/2000
of  which  were  poorly  understood,  had  for  a  long  time  led  to  the  adoption  of  certain  Malthusian
attitudes:  wariness  towards  technical  progress  as  it  could  potentially  destroy  jobs,  the  avoidance  of
productivity-enhancing investments thought to contribute to higher unemployment and, lastly, efforts
to reduce the available work force with a view to sharing the same number of jobs between a smaller
number of people.
Having thus sought to limit technical progress, the available work force and the capital stock, it is not
surprising  that,  despite the  considerable progress  in  recent  years,  Europe  and  France  have  seen  that
their non-inflationary growth potential was still not as high as would have been desirable. In Europe
and in France, we are seeing a profound change in perspective and are moving away from Malthusian
attitudes.  The  Banque  de  France  and  the  entire  Eurosystem  can  be  counted  upon  to  support  this
change.
This is why the Monetary Policy Council continues to make the following recommendations: in the
interest  of  currency  and  price  stability  and  therefore  of  robust  growth,  sustainable  because  it  is
non-inflationary and effective in combating unemployment, it is now more than ever the time to:
– 
invest and ease the constraints on capital. Investment is essential in our economy, in which
the capacity utilisation rate currently stands at about 87% and 31% of firms are experiencing
production bottlenecks. An increase in the capital stock is necessary to achieve faster growth
today and to eliminate inflationary pressure;
  reduce the constraints on labour. In an economy, in which 42% of businesses are at present
indicating  that  they  are  encountering  serious  recruitment  difficulties,  especially  for  skilled
labour, it is necessary to not only step up training and education efforts, but also to accept the
extensive  use  of  overtime  in  all  sectors  where  there  is  a  labour  shortage.  Moreover,  the
increase in Europe’s employment ratio from 61% today to 70% in ten years time, decided
upon  at  the  European  Council  meeting  in  Lisbon  in  order  to  expand  the  labour  force,  is
particularly opportune and reveals a profound change in attitude;
actively  seek  productivity  improvements,  which  lie  at  the  very  heart  of  economic  growth.
Now is the time to embrace technical progress, the digital revolution, new information and
communication  technologies,  biotechnology  and  material  sciences.  In  a  French  and  a
European economy characterised up to now by lower productivity growth than in the United
States since 1995, this openness to technical progress and rapid productivity enhancement is
a  crucial  factor  if  we  are  to  achieve  our  ambitions  of  faster  growth  today,  durably  low
inflation and robust, sustainable growth.
BIS Review 55/2000
4
