European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statements
Introductory  statements  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and
Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President  of the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Press  Conference,  held in
Frankfurt, on 14 September 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meetings
of the General Council and the Governing Council of the ECB.
The Governing Council of the ECB today conducted its regular examination of recent monetary and
economic developments and their implications for the risks to future price stability in the euro area.
Subsequently, it decided to keep the interest rates on the Eurosystem’s monetary policy instruments
unchanged. Thus, the minimum bid rate in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem was left
at 4.50%, and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility were kept at
5.50% and 3.50%, respectively.
Allow me to give you an overview of the main elements of our assessment of the latest information on
monetary, financial market and other economic developments.
As regards the developments in the context of the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy  of  the
ECB, no new monetary data have become available since our decision taken on 31 August  2000  to
raise the main ECB interest rates. After having increased at a very strong pace in the first quarter of
2000, M3 growth has been showing some signs of moderation over recent months. This moderation
has  mainly  been a  consequence  of lower  growth in  the  most  liquid  components  of  M3,  which  bear
little or no remuneration, indicating that the monetary policy measures taken since November 1999 are
gradually feeding their way through. At the same time, the average of annual M3 growth rates for the
period from May to July 2000, at 5.5%, continued to deviate on the upside from the reference value of
4½%.  The  pronounced  expansion  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  up  to  July  also  suggested  that
households and firms continued to regard financing conditions in the euro area as favourable. In the
context  of  the  robust  expansion  of  economic  activity,  continued  ample  liquidity  conditions  would
constitute a risk to price stability.
Turning to the second pillar, real GDP growth in the euro area, according to first estimates published
by Eurostat today, reached 3¾% (on an annualised basis) in the first half of 2000. Currently available
forecasts  predict  that  growth  will  remain  above  3%  next  year.  The  strength  of  the  euro  area’s
economic expansion in the past few months is in line with these forecasts. In fact, recent indicators
suggest that, following the period of acceleration, the economic expansion may now have settled at a
high rate of growth. The overall level of confidence has remained at, or close to, record highs in recent
months. Moreover, employment continued to grow strongly in the first half of this year and the rate of
capacity  utilisation  has  risen  further.  Taken  together,  these  factors  should  underpin  the  growth  of
private consumption and investment, and thus that of domestic demand.
The  positive  outlook  for the  euro  area is also  supported  by  external  developments.  The  outlook  for
growth  of  the  world  economy,  and  thus  for  growth  of  euro  area  exports,  has  remained  favourable.
Forecasts of world growth have consistently been revised upwards over the past few months.
Expectations of a period of sustained economic growth in the euro area can also be found in euro area
bond  markets.  Overall,  longer-term  bond  yields  in  the  euro  area  have  shown  a  very  high  level  of
stability in the course of this year, with fluctuations being contained within a relatively narrow range.
The  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  was  2.4%  in
July 2000. Recent consumer price developments in the euro area have been very much influenced by
the strong rise in oil prices and the depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro.
1
BIS Review 74/2000
While monetary policy cannot address short-term developments in prices, it is imperative for monetary
policy that medium-term upward pressure on prices be contained. The risk that the current pressure on
the HICP might spill over onto costs and prices determined in the domestic economy must be taken
seriously. This holds true in particular in the context of the favourable prospects for economic growth.
The Governing Council reacted to this picture by raising the main ECB interest rates at its meeting on
31  August  2000.  This  step  followed  a  series  of  interest  rate  increases  implemented  since
November 1999.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  remain  alert  to  emerging  risks  to  price
stability.
It is a matter of fact that recent oil price increases have caused the terms of trade of the euro area to
deteriorate, and thus have also reduced real income. This loss of real income cannot be avoided for the
economy  as  a  whole.  Attempts  to  shift  the  burden  of  this  loss  within  the  economy  will  risk
endangering the continuation of a non-inflationary growth process.
For  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  it  will  be  particularly  important,  in  the  current  phase  of
strengthening economic growth, that wages continue, on average, to grow at rates compatible with the
objective of price stability. Any attempt for wages to catch up in reaction to recent oil price increases
would be highly detrimental to the current favourable growth prospects, since monetary policy would
need to react to the resulting upward pressure on prices.
Governments  also  have  to  play  a  role  in  order  not  to  convey  the  false  impression  that  the  costs
stemming from the increase in oil prices could be avoided by relaxing budgetary policies. This would
not  be  in  line  with  the  needs  of  establishing  budget  positions  in  balance  or  in  surplus  and  would
complicate the fostering of tax reforms conducive to a stronger growth potential of the euro area.
I should also like to reiterate that the prospects for a stronger potential for growth in the euro area will
depend very much on progress made in enhancing the flexibility of labour and goods markets in the
euro area. Although reform efforts in several countries have been heading in the right direction, there
is still much to be done when looking at the area as a whole.
Finally,  let  me  also say  a  few  words about  recent  exchange  rate  developments.  I  noted  earlier  that,
from a monetary policy point of view, these developments are a cause for concern as they add to the
upward pressure on consumer prices in the euro area.
These  concerns  are  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  does  not  appear
appropriate when looking at economic fundamentals. As you are aware, we have been expressing this
concern  for  some  time.  In  the  meantime,  we  have  witnessed  a  considerable  improvement  in  the
economic  growth  prospects  for  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  owing  to  measures  taken  by  the
Governing Council, the outlook for price stability in the medium term in the euro area has remained
intact. At present, inflation in the euro area is among the lowest in the world. The fact that the euro has
continued to depreciate over recent months is not in line with these strong economic fundamentals in
the euro area. Recent global exchange rate developments are also not in line with international balance
of payments positions. Our concerns on this issue remain serious and we shall monitor developments
closely.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to say a few words about other issues discussed by
the Governing Council.
First,  I  should  like  to  inform  you  that  the  Governing  Council  has  agreed  on  a  TARGET
reimbursement  scheme  for  the  benefit  of  TARGET  participants  in  the  event  of  malfunctioning  in
TARGET.  The  scheme  will  apply  whenever  the  same-day  processing  of  payment  orders  within
TARGET cannot be completed. The reimbursement scheme is intended to compensate participants for
certain  higher  costs  they  incur  in  having  recourse  to  the  standing  facilities  of  the  Eurosystem  as  a
result  of  a  malfunctioning.  In  order  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field,  the  scheme  also  applies  to
participants in euro real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  systems  of  non-participating  national  central
banks.  The  legal  framework  for  this  reimbursement  scheme  is  reflected  in  an  amended  “TARGET
Guideline” which, in line with the ECB’s policy of enhanced transparency, will be published in the
Official Journal of the European Communities and made available on the ECB’s website shortly.
BIS Review 74/2000
2
Second,  the  Governing  Council  addressed  issues  relating  to  cross-border  retail  payment  services,
which  are  of  particular  interest  for  euro  area  consumers.  You  may  recall  that  the  ECB  published  a
report on this subject a year ago, calling on the banking industry to improve the unsatisfactory service
level for cross-border credit transfers before January 2002. Today, on the basis of a Progress Report,
we have reviewed the advances of the banking industry against the objectives set by the Eurosystem
and we have identified the outstanding issues that need quickly to be addressed. A press release on this
topic  will  be  issued  later  on  today.  The  Progress  Report  will  be  available  on  the  ECB’s  website
shortly.
3
BIS Review 74/2000
