Bank of Japan’s March report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 10 March 2000.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s  economy  has  recently  started  to  improve.  The  economic  environment  surrounding  private
demand continues to improve, as seen in the increase in corporate profits. However, clear signs of a
self-sustained recovery in private demand have not been observed yet.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  housing  investment  and  public  investment  are  decreasing  moderately.
Recovery  in  private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  through  lack  of  notable  improvements  in
employment  and  income  conditions.  Meanwhile,  business  fixed  investment,  which  had  been  on  a
downward  trend,  seems  to  have  almost  leveled  off.  Net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)
continue to follow an upward trend due to an upturn in overseas economies.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production continues to rise, and an increase
in corporate profits is becoming distinct. In this situation, corporate sentiment continues to improve.
Regarding the employment condition, the decrease in the number of employees is slowing. However,
the improvements in corporate profits and sentiment have not stimulated business activities of many
firms, because  these firms  still strongly  feel  that they  have  excess capacity  and  employees  and  that
they should reduce their debts to restore financial soundness. In addition, efforts by firms to reduce
personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As for the outlook, public investment is likely to pick up reflecting the progress in the implementation
of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  1999.  This,  along  with  the  favorable  financial  environment
created  partly  by  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing,  is  expected  to  continue  underpinning  the  economy.
Moreover, the positive impact on domestic production of the recovery of overseas economies is likely
to  continue for some  time,  having  favorable  effects  on  corporate  profits  and  spending,  and  then  on
household income  and consumption.  By  contrast,  it  is  highly  probable that  housing  investment  will
continue  to  decline  moderately.  In  the  corporate  sector,  restructuring  is  gradually  improving
profitability  to  some  extent,  and  some  firms  in  high-growth  sectors  are  inclining  toward  increasing
capital  spending.  Many  firms,  however,  are  expected  to  maintain  a  cautious  stance  toward  fixed
investment based on their modest prospects for sales. It seems that the appreciation of the yen since
the  summer  of  1999  will  have  an  adverse  effect  on  corporate  profits  in  the  near  term.  In  these
circumstances, future economic developments still require careful monitoring in spite of the continued
improvements  in  the  environment  for  private  demand.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  to  promote
structural reform in order to facilitate a recovery in private demand.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising due to the increase in international commodity prices
such  as  crude  oil  prices,  along  with  the  recent  depreciation  of  the  yen.  Domestic  wholesale  prices,
notwithstanding  the  fall  in  prices  of  electric  machinery,  are  flat  mainly  due  to  the  rise  in  prices  of
petroleum  and  chemical  products  reflecting  an  increase  in  crude  oil  prices.  Meanwhile,  consumer
prices  are  somewhat  weak  due  to  a  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  reflecting  the  past
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 8 March 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 8 March as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 22/2000
appreciation of the yen. Corporate service prices are still falling slowly. As for the outlook, upward
pressure on prices is likely to arise from the gradual improvement in domestic supply-demand balance,
as  shown  in  the  decline  in  inventories,  and  from  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices.  On  the  other  hand,
downward  pressure  is  expected  from  the  long-term  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  due  to
technological  innovations  and  from  the  fall  in  prices  of  imported  products  reflecting  the  past
appreciation of the yen. On balance, overall prices are likely to remain unchanged for the time being.
However,  attention  should  still  be  paid  to  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  stemming  from  weak
demand, as clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not yet been observed and
wages continue to fall.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has generally stayed near zero, except for a temporary
rise reflecting concerns about the possible computer problems related to the leap year, and financial
institutions have been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount outstanding of
funds in the call money market increased slightly in late February, and decreased thereafter.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  have  generally  been  stable  at  an  extremely  low  level.  The  Japan
premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  were  generally  above  1.8%  in  February,  but  declined
somewhat from the beginning of March, and are recently ranging between 1.7% and 1.8%. The yield
spread between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds continues
narrowing,  primarily  that  between  private  bonds  with  relatively  low  credit  ratings  and  government
bonds.
Stock prices have been firm on the whole, and are currently moving around 20,000 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen weakened against the US dollar  for  most  part of  February.
However, the trend was reversed late in the month, and the yen is recently being traded in the range of
106-108 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base  has  eased  considerably.  Under  these  circumstances,  major  banks  are  becoming  more  active  in
extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition,  firms  continue  to  reduce  debts  as  part  of  their  balance-sheet  restructuring  measures.  As  a
result,  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  be  basically  stagnant,  and  thus  private
banks’ lending has remained sluggish. Issuance of corporate bonds and CP has been steady.
The growth in money stock (M2+CDs) continues to slow reflecting the above-mentioned situation.
In  this  financial  environment,  corporate  financing  conditions  are  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial  institutions  is  perceived  by  firms  as  becoming  less  severe.  It  continues  to  warrant  careful
monitoring  how  these  favorable  developments  in  the  corporate  financing  environment  will  affect
economic activities.
BIS Review 22/2000
2
