William J McDonough: The foundation of financial stability
Speech by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, before the 50th Anniversary Symposium of the Bank of Korea, held in Seoul, on
8 July 2000.
 It is a true honor to address you today on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Bank of Korea. I
regret that I am unable to join you personally in your celebration.
The past half-century has been one of tremendous challenges and outstanding achievements for Korea,
to which even a short list of developments testifies: national rebuilding after the devastations of the
Korean War, the economic miracle, democratization and the emergence of a modern, urbanized and
well-educated  population.  Indeed,  given  initial  conditions,  Korea  might  be  considered  the  biggest
success story of the last 50 years. This record reflects the long Korean history of resilience in the face
of external threat, the hard work and energy of the Korean people, and the adoption of new models in
response to environmental change.
The  Bank  of  Korea  has  played  a  key  role  in  Korea’s  economic  success.  In  the  early  stages  of
development, the Bank acted to facilitate the state-led growth model. The Bank’s role evolved as the
economy  became  more  market-driven  over  time,  and  the  amended  Bank  of  Korea  Act  further
enhanced the independence of the central bank and enshrined price stability as the primary objective of
monetary policy.
The economic crisis that began in 1997 represents the latest national challenge. True to historic form,
Korea has responded decisively and vigorously to that challenge, with the Bank of Korea playing a
critical role in the overall effort. A strong case can be made that, of all the countries affected by the
broader  crisis  in  the  emerging  markets,  Korea  has  gone  furthest  to  repair  the  damage  and  institute
underlying reforms to prevent future crises. That said, in Korea and elsewhere, the recovery is not yet
complete, and more remains to be done.
The depth, breadth and rapidity of economic and technological developments of the last several years
clearly  underscore  the  increasingly  international  nature  of  policy  challenges,  and  the  dramatic
transformation  of  the  international  financial  landscape.  The  intensified  integration  of  markets
- reflecting  the  globalization  of  capital,  production  and  labor - has  increased  the  risk  of  contagion,
making it virtually impossible for any  country  that  wants to  be  part  of  the  global  trading  system  to
insulate itself from external forces.
The crisis and the recognition that we have entered a new environment have set in motion a range of
efforts dedicated to building a new international financial architecture. My remarks today will focus on
what I believe can be done, from my perspective, to enhance domestic financial resiliency, within the
context  of  these  international  efforts,  and  particularly  on  two  essential  building  blocks:  a  strong
financial  system  and  a  sound  and  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  My  comments  reference  the
experience of East Asia, but reflect lessons that are more broadly applicable.
Overview of recent recovery
Given the depth of the problem a little more than two years ago, the Asian recovery on the whole is
remarkable, and has largely defied initial expectations that the crisis would cast a long shadow over
regional growth prospects. The regional recovery exhibits a solid “V” shaped trajectory supported by
strong performance in the external accounts, but with more recent improvement in domestic demand.
Banking  sectors - faced  with  unprecedented  crisis  two  years  ago - have  been  shored  up  through
substantial capital injections and problem asset carve-outs. Corporate sector conditions also appear to
have improved notably with the advent of recovery and debt restructuring efforts.
1
BIS Review 57/2000
At the same time, authorities  in a  number  of  Asian  countries  initiated a  wide  range  of  fundamental
enhancements  to  financial  system  infrastructure,  including  strengthening  prudential  regulation  and
supervision,  bolstering  bankruptcy  and  collateral  recovery  processes,  and  improving  disclosure
requirements.  With  the  full  implementation  of  these  measures,  standards  in  Asia  will  closely
approximate international norms.
Complacency
In light of these achievements, there is  much  to be  optimistic about.  But  we  must  all  guard against
complacency and reform fatigue, which represent a significant risk to sustained recovery.
Crises entail wrenching change and costly solutions that are difficult to bear over a long period. The
desire  for  a  return  to  “normalcy”  is  strong.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is  human  nature  to
overemphasize  positive  information,  tire  of  reform,  declare  victory  and  move  on.  These  impulses
might be expected to be particularly powerful against the backdrop of years of strong and unbroken
Asian economic growth.
It is no wonder therefore that governments the world over initially tend to underestimate the size of
problems, underfund solutions and postpone loss recognition. It also is not surprising that, given the
many obstacles involved, authorities may be tempted to prematurely mark a case closed, particularly
with the advent of economic recovery.
In the new international financial landscape, a government’s perceived ability to deliver on the policy
front is crucial, preferably based on coherent, comprehensive and achievable objectives. Confidence in
a government’s ability to deliver is nurtured both by actions and by communication. Complacency and
reform backsliding, however, create the dangerous potential for a shift in expectations.
Vulnerabilities
Indeed,  while  the  recovery  in  the  region  has  been  impressive,  vulnerabilities  remain,  both  at  the
micro- and macroeconomic levels.
On  a  microeconomic  level,  the  still  fragile  condition  of  regional  financial  and  corporate  sector
institutions remains a vulnerability, and a real threat to medium-term stability.
Notwithstanding  significant  official  rescue  efforts,  regional  financial  sectors  remain  burdened  by  a
high  level  of  problem  loans,  and  require  further  substantive  bolstering  of  capital  and  reserves.
Authorities,  by  and  large,  have  yet  to  articulate  a  program  for  reprivatizing  banks  and  liquidating
purchased  assets.  Improvements  in  the  financial  system  infrastructure  depend  critically  on
follow-through on these issues, a long-term process.
Corporate sectors similarly remain fragile: recent debt restructurings have involved a high degree of
debt rescheduling, and firms across the region remain burdened with significant amounts of debt. The
relatively limited restructuring of corporate operations to date across the region raises questions about
the medium-term sustainability of recent improvements in bank asset quality.
The  relative  lack  of  breadth  in  the  region’s  recovery  also  creates  vulnerabilities.  Asia’s  export
orientation has long been a key focal point of strength, to which the recent recovery attests. However,
too  great  a  dependence  on  export-driven  growth  brings  increased  vulnerability  to  external  shocks.
While current account surpluses have been substantial, this potential engine of growth could be slowed
over  the  medium  term  through  pressures  on  domestic  currencies  to  appreciate,  and  through  the
ongoing reversal of the dramatic import compression witnessed following the crisis.
The  recent  pickup  in  domestic  demand  is  a  positive  sign  of  more  balanced  growth - sustained  by
notable  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus - which  will  need  to  be  steadily  unwound  as  recoveries  take
firmer root. Regional central banks will be particularly tested as they seek to implement new monetary
policy anchors, in some cases with new-found independence.
BIS Review 57/2000
2
Unfinished business
Events  of  the  recent  past  have  amply  illustrated  that  weak  financial  systems  are  an  expensive  and
dangerous  vulnerability,  particularly  for  countries  that  rely  on  foreign  capital  to  help  support  their
investment and growth. Financial sector weakness was at the heart of the problems in Asia, a crucial
element  in  Argentina  and  Mexico  earlier  in  the  decade,  and  a  contributing  force  in  Russia.  Just  as
strong  financial  systems  act  as  stabilizers  when  a  domestic  economy  is  battered,  weak  financial
systems amplify the scope and reach of the problems, making bad situations worse.
While  important  progress  has  been  made  in  rehabilitating  Asia’s  financial  systems,  a  great  deal
remains  to  be  done  to  continue  the  strengthening  of  weakened  financial  and  corporate  sectors,  and
improve the region’s resistance to future problems.
I  am  well  aware  that  universal  policy  prescriptions  are  difficult  to  draw,  given  the  wide  range  of
experience and initial conditions. Indeed, individual countries in Asia have followed differing reform
strategies,  and  the  results  of  these  efforts  will  help  to  inform  the  ongoing  debate.  Nonetheless,
international experience with financial sector reform suggests a number of cautionary lessons. Let me
cite a few:
• 
Restructuring  and  reform  must  adequately  address  both  the  current  “stock”  of  problem
assets  as  well  as  the  potential  “flow”  of  new  problems  attributable  to  deficiencies  in  the
broader financial system infrastructure. Lack of adequate action on either front can lead to a
continuation  of  the  substantial  costs  of  weak  banking  sectors,  sometimes  well  beyond  the
immediate crisis itself.
         Clean-up  efforts  must  be  sufficient  to  the  task.  Half-done  measures  that  leave  financial
institutions  with  significant  levels  of  impaired  assets  at  best  postpone  the  reckoning  and
potentially create incentives for excessive risk-taking.
Fundamental  improvements  in  bank  corporate  governance  are  critical.  Just  as  risk
management  and  internal  control  processes  usually  need  to  be  thoroughly  overhauled  in
weak institutions, more often than not, so too does management.
Protracted forbearance to preserve the appearance of solvency is not a solution. While some
degree of forbearance may be unavoidable and even appropriate under the right conditions, it
is  at  best  a  temporary  measure.  It  is  critical  that  forbearance  does  not  become
institutionalized,  but is tied  directly  to  actions  by  both  bankers  and  supervisors  to  address
underlying problems.
Governments  are  not  good  long-term  asset  managers.  Prolonged  government  holding  of
impaired  assets  is  not  likely  to  enhance  their  value  nor  aid  in  the  restoration  of  market
liquidity.
Governments are not good commercial bankers. Delayed privatization of nationalized banks
always means higher future costs and usually inhibits fundamental reform.
Government-directed lending means future fiscal losses. Similarly, efforts to stimulate credit
growth by non-market forces in the context of a banking crisis at best buy additional time
and usually dig a deeper hole.
Foreign investment in domestic financial sectors can yield important benefits. Foreign direct
investment in the banking sector can provide much-needed capital resources, technology and
knowledge transfer, and a more diversified capital and funding base in the event  of  future
economic instability.
Financial sectors are only as healthy as their borrowers. Without corresponding corporate
sector restructuring, financial sector rescue efforts are likely to be necessary in the future.
Unbalanced  financial  systems  create  vulnerabilities.  Financial  systems  that  are  unduly
reliant on banks for financial intermediation are likely to be more vulnerable and slower to
3
BIS Review 57/2000
recover from the onset of weakness. Shallow capital markets limit lending alternatives and
delay the recovery of financing to the real sector.
The challenges can be daunting, but recent experience both within and beyond Asia confirms that a
dedicated  commitment  to  financial  reform  contributes  to  greater  crisis-resilience  and  longer-term
financial  stability.  While  financial  sector  rehabilitation  will  remain  a  key  priority  for  authorities  in
Asia, longer-term measures need to be put in place to deal adequately with the increasingly complex
and dynamic international financial marketplace of the 21st century. The threats to financial stability
are  many,  and  no  one  set  of  measures  can  be  expected  to  ensure  against  the  recurrence  of  future
problems. Financial intermediation is a constantly evolving activity, involving new risks, instruments
and control challenges. Financial institutions and policymakers alike need continually to upgrade their
processes to remain in command of these risks. To that end, it is imperative that new standards not be
developed to “fight the last war”, but be sufficiently robust to meet new challenges in a dynamic way.
effective market discipline; and
sound leadership at the firm as well as at the national level;
Stability ultimately can be served only by the collective interaction of the three pillars of:
• 
• 
• 
Sound corporate governance at the firm level is the first bulwark against financial system instability,
and begins with capable and experienced directors and management, a coherent strategy and business
plan, and clear lines of responsibility and accountability. The execution of overall objectives must be
supported  by  rigorous  internal  controls  and  effective  risk  management.  The  importance  of  a  strong
institutional credit culture cannot be stressed enough.
strong prudential regulation and supervision.
Strong  private  balance  sheets  contribute  to  a  strong  national  balance  sheet.  Recent  experience
underscores the importance of prudent management of liquidity risk. Clearly, reducing public sector
short-term borrowing is often an essential (and generally well-acknowledged) part of the solution. To
encourage  improved  private  sector  liquidity,  authorities  need  to  review  the  broader  policy  mix  and
identify and remove incentives that favor excessive short-term capital flows, as well as identify and
remove barriers to longer-term and/or equity capital flows.
The  second  line  of  defense  is  effective  market  discipline,  an  increasingly  important  ally  of
policymakers in a global marketplace. Of course, market discipline must be supported by substantial
disclosure,  sound  accounting  standards,  and  an  efficient  and  credible  legal  framework.  On  the  last
point, while some foreign investors have too frequently made allowances for “special” local practices
during periods of economic boom, only strong and proven attitudes towards law, taxation, disclosure
and the like provide the kinds of protections most long-term investors want and should insist upon.
While effective bank-level management and meaningful market discipline are crucial elements of an
overall strategy for promoting and preserving financial stability, neither can substitute for the critical
role played by official supervision. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which I chair, has
identified the necessary ingredients of sound supervision, and these principles must be applied to all
internationally active banks within a more dynamic, risk-based and process-oriented framework.
The role of a sound and stable macroeconomic environment
A  sound  and  stable  macroeconomic  environment  is  also  crucial  for  financial  stability,  and  more
generally  for  promoting  sustainable  growth.  The  converse - macroeconomic  overheating - raises  the
likelihood of an eventual crisis, first by promoting excessive, and eventually unsustainable, external
and internal borrowing. The next step inevitably is the correction to the real economy, interest rates
and/or  the  exchange  rate,  that  can  sharply  worsen  asset  quality  and  expose  the  accumulated
weaknesses in the financial system.
BIS Review 57/2000
4
Role of central banks in promoting stability and growth
A central bank’s most important role in achieving stable, long-term growth involves promoting price
stability.  Achieving  long-run  price  stability  is  a  difficult  and  continuous  challenge,  as  it  requires
constant efforts first to detect and then to correct the building up of internal and external imbalances.
Moreover, because of time lags in policy effectiveness, authorities often have to take action based only
on  partial  evidence,  well  before  adverse  symptoms  are  fully  evident.  The  principal  reward  for
forward-looking policy is that changes in policy, and associated stresses they engender, are generally
smaller and more easily assimilated by markets. The effectiveness of monetary policy naturally brings
us to the question of monetary and exchange rate regimes.
A great deal has been said in various forums about the choice of monetary and exchange rate regimes.
I believe it is crucial that there be consistency between a country’s choice of currency regime and its
other policies. There is no “right” regime that applies to all cases and all points in time. Experience has
shown  that  no  currency  arrangement  can  compensate  indefinitely  for  imperfections  elsewhere  in  an
economy, such as weaknesses in financial supervision, an excessively loose fiscal stance or inflexible
wages and prices. Furthermore, no exchange rate regime can offer full insulation from cross-market
spillovers,  particularly  where  the  free  movement  of  capital  is  allowed.  Nevertheless,  certain  policy
combinations  can  make  things  far  more  dangerous.  Fixed,  but  adjustable,  regimes  look  to  be
particularly fraught with perils when combined with shortcomings elsewhere, not the least of which
are the severe after-effects that always seem to follow their forced abandonment.
Official reserves  can,  at  times,  play  a  helpful role  in  the  equilibrating  process  under  either  fixed  or
managed  floating  rates,  but  considerable  caution  is  needed  here.  Clearly,  large-scale  sterilized
intervention  has  a  poor  track  record  as  a  crisis  avoidance  tool.  To  be  sure,  history  is  replete  with
examples of how quickly a once comfortable reserve cushion can dissipate when countries attempt to
buy stability rather than earn it by adjusting policy. Nonetheless, markets often seem to take comfort
when authorities are perceived to step in with “judicious” market smoothing. Here again, credibility is
key in assuring market participants that the central bank’s focus is on preventing disorderly markets
rather than on trying to manipulate market prices.
As you are aware, much of the emerging world has moved toward floating rates in recent years. For
those  countries  that  have  made  the  change  in  East  Asia,  it  would  appear  that  the  new
monetary/exchange  regimes,  despite  their  very  difficult  starts  under  the  most  inauspicious  of
circumstances, now appear to be serving countries well. Inflation is in the very low single-digit range
in all of the newly floating economies, and in many instances the successful effort to bolster monetary
credibility has been reflected in short-term interest rates that have declined to historically low levels.
Moreover, authorities have gained new degrees of freedom to manage their economies and to respond
to changing internal and external circumstances.
But  if  the  promised  benefits  of  monetary  discretion  are  to  be  fully  realized  going  forward,  markets
need to understand the objectives and the framework by which the monetary authorities will decide
future policy actions.
In this regard, I would note that some countries have looked to inflation targeting as a framework to
accomplish  that  end.  And  indeed,  inflation  targeting  would  seem  to  have  much  to  recommend  it,
provided that it is approached not as a panacea, but rather as a pragmatic organizing framework for
policy. In other words, policy frameworks such as inflation targeting can be useful where they signal a
disposition  towards  continuous  and  predictable  communication,  and  a  forward-looking,  informative
policy approach. But as I said, inflation targeting per se is not a sure-fire solution - for example, the
costs of disinflation do not appear to be lower in inflation-targeting countries - nor is it a prerequisite
for effective communication and ultimately effective policy.
Role of fiscal policy
Clearly, crisis prevention through promoting stable and sustainable conditions in the macro economy
is  not  solely  the  province  of  central  banks.  Sound  fiscal  policies  are  needed  to  complement  the
effectiveness  of  even  the  soundest  monetary  policies.  Chronically  loose  fiscal  policy  is  a  persistent
5
BIS Review 57/2000
threat to  macroeconomic  stability  through  the  build-up  of internal  and/or  external  debts  that  can  be
devastating.
For  the  countries  of  East  Asia,  the  public  sector’s  generally  low  initial  indebtedness  provided
important  latitude  for  dealing  with  the  recent  crises.  Governments  had  room  to  stimulate  aggregate
demand recovery through fiscal ease; moreover, extensions of public guarantees and capital helped to
contain the banking crises.
However, while initially strong fiscal positions may have provided a sort of “spare tire”, as with any
spare tire, it is risky to ride on it for too long, in part because it may be needed to deal with the next
nail  in  the  road.  Public  debt  has  already  risen  markedly  in  a  number  of  countries,  and  contingent
liabilities often remain significant, raising some concern about potential future debt growth.
Thus, some governments now face the challenge of moving to retighten fiscal policy while preserving
growth  and  stability  and,  over  the  longer  term,  gradually  restoring  their  previously  strong  net  debt
positions. These considerations further underscore the importance of quickly completing the process
of banking sector rehabilitation and of attracting new sources of capital. Such decisive action would
allow  the  banking  sector  to  again  be  an  engine  of  growth,  capable  of  offsetting  the  eventual
withdrawal of fiscal stimulus.
Improved transparency can help
Achievement of the goals of corporate and financial restructuring, and of macroeconomic stability, are
fostered by improved transparency. When authorities clearly explain the objectives or concerns that lie
behind their  policies,  they  greatly  increase the likelihood  that  markets  will  move  in  a  direction  that
supports, and even favorably anticipates, the authorities’ goals. Under the auspices of the IMF useful
standards  have  been  promulgated  for  transparency  with  regard  to  macroeconomic  data,  including
international reserves, and for fiscal and financial policies.
As part of the improved disclosure of policies and intentions, timely and comprehensive dissemination
of the public sector’s balance sheet and income statement clearly is necessary if market turbulence is
to be reduced. Such disclosure helps identify pressures or problems that might otherwise be allowed to
fester. For example, more timely, continuous and comprehensive release of data on foreign exchange
reserves  may  encourage  earlier  and  appropriate  policy  action  in  the  face  of  large-scale  speculative
pressures.
Transparency is most effective when it is an established element in a clearly articulated, goal-oriented
process.  Sensitivity  to  the  changing  needs  of  the  marketplace  for  information - both  statistical  and
qualitative - can be developed only through an ongoing dialogue with market participants. Experience
suggests  that  in  today’s  24-hour  trading  environment  with  instantaneous  access  to  information
everywhere, authorities are well-advised to speed up their disclosure and explanation of their actions
and intentions.
Conclusion
In closing, the recovery in Asia, and particularly Korea, is remarkable indeed, and owes much to the
energy and hard work of its people, enlightened political leadership, and the substantial and focused
efforts of policymakers to implement sound macroeconomic and financial policy. But the recovery is
not  yet  complete  and  much  remains  to  be  done.  Moreover,  the  rapidity  and  severity  of  the
developments of the last several years, indicative of the transformation of the international financial
landscape, underscore the importance to crisis prevention of ongoing vigilance and robust institutional
structures, and the awareness that we can never let our guard down.
While the crisis did substantial damage, it has not fundamentally affected Asia’s prodigious economic
strengths.  But  if  Asia  is  to  realize  its  potential, it is critical that  authorities  attend  to  the  unfinished
business  that  remains  while  continuing  to  put  in  place  longer-term  measures  to  promote  financial
resilience  and  sustainable  growth.  Asia  is  at  an  important  crossroads  and  there  is  now  a  unique
BIS Review 57/2000
6
opportunity  to  consolidate  recent  reforms  and  implement  lasting  change  that  will  pay  dividends  for
years to come.
Korea’s  history,  both  longer-term  and  more  recent,  gives  me  every  confidence  that  your  country,
assisted ably by the Bank of Korea, will rise to these challenges with skill and vigor, ensuring that the
next 50 years will be even more successful than the last.
Thank you for your kind invitation and attention. Supported by the miracles of modern technology, I
would be happy to take any questions you may have.
7
BIS Review 57/2000
