Mr Noyer summarises the main features of the Eurosystem’s monetary
policy strategy and discusses the short past and the long future of the euro
Speech by  Mr  Christian  Noyer, Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on the  occasion  of  a
conference organised by “le Club des Affaires de Berlin e.V.”, Berlin, on 23 February 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a pleasure and an honour for me to speak here at the Club des Affaires de Berlin today. Since the
foundation  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  more  than  50  years  ago,  Berlin  has  attracted
prominent  speakers  from  all  over  the  world  praising  this  city  as  a  symbol  for  the  achievements  of
Western-type  market  economies.  With  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  wall  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro,
integration  in  Europe  has  gained  a  new  quality  both  from  an  economic  and  a  political  perspective.
German  unification  has  raised  expectations  of  a  wider  unification  in  Europe  in  the  sense  of  further
integration. As Romano Prodi, the President of the European Commission recently declared before the
European Parliament: “The opened Brandenburg Gate stands as a powerful symbol of our continent’s
future.”
The birth of the euro as the single currency for eleven Member States of the EU was an important step.
Although this was only one year ago, the euro can be seen as a symbol for European achievements.
The single currency offers a great opportunity to achieve and maintain price stability in Europe and to
create the conditions needed for sustained economic growth. For the euro to become a “success story”
as the single currency for around 300 million people, the confidence of the population in the stability
of  the  new  currency  and  in  the  single  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  plays  a  crucial  role.  The
establishment  of  a  “stability  culture”  throughout  the  euro  area  will  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the
euro. The foundations of this stability culture are to be found in a broad consensus among Europeans
that the maintenance of price stability is of utmost importance. A stability culture also facilitates the
achievement of other objectives, such as high employment.
The introduction of the euro marked the culmination of a long period of successful preparatory work,
the magnitude of which can hardly be overestimated. As a result of these efforts, the introduction of
the euro took place in an environment of price stability that only a few observers would have predicted
some years ago. In its short history, the Eurosystem has started to build up credibility and to gain a
sound reputation in financial markets for its stability-oriented monetary policy. In the course of 1999,
inflation  for  the  euro  area  remained  at  a  rate  consistent  with  price  stability  of  around  1%.  The
Eurosystem  is  determined  to  conduct  the  appropriate  policy  in  order  to  ensure  that  price  stability
remains in place.
Let me also mention that, as expected, the transition of the euro area financial markets to the year 2000
went smoothly. This reflects the careful preparation of the banking and financial community and the
comprehensive and flexible operational framework of the Eurosystem.
The establishment of Monetary Union marks an outstanding historical achievement. In my remarks I
should  like  to  summarise  the  main  features  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  and  the
experience gained with the euro in this first year. By subsequently addressing forthcoming challenges,
I should then like to span the bridge towards the future.
A clear and transparent monetary policy strategy
Let  me  describe  our  first  experience  with  the  monetary  policy  strategy  in  the  euro  area.  The
Eurosystem has chosen a clear and transparent monetary policy strategy with a quantitative definition
of  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  The  chosen  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  is
forward-looking  and  medium-term  oriented.  The  Eurosystem  has  a  policy  framework  which  truly
1
BIS Review 16/2000
reflects the complexity of the economy. It is sufficiently flexible to allow for appropriate responses to
specific shocks. It also allows account to be taken of the possibility of regime shifts that could impact
on the stability of important economic relationships in the course of time.
Let me briefly recall the main elements of the Eurosystem’s strategy. A clear definition for the primary
objective  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  contributes  to  stabilising  market  expectations.
Price stability is defined as an annual increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%.  The  Eurosystem  aims  to  maintain  price  stability  in  line  with  this
definition over the medium term. In order to achieve its overriding objective, the Governing Council
has adopted a two-pillar approach.
The first pillar assigns a prominent role to money. By announcing a reference value for the growth
rate  of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate,  the  strategy  takes  into  account  that  inflation  is  a  monetary
phenomenon in the medium term. The reference value exploits the leading indicator properties of the
broad aggregate M3, which according to most empirical studies is the most useful guidepost for future
price developments in the euro area. The first reference value was set in late 1998 at an annual growth
rate  for  M3  of  4½%.  Following  a  review  of  the  reference  value  in  December  1999,  the  Governing
Council  decided  to  leave  the  reference  value  unchanged  on  the  grounds  that  the  underlying
assumptions are still valid. Under normal circumstances, significant and sustained deviations of actual
monetary  developments  from  this  value  would  signal  future  risks  to  price  stability.  However,  the
reference value is not an annual target. Rather, it is based on medium-term assumptions and serves as
a guide for developments over the medium term. Moreover, the ECB is not committed to ensuring that
M3 grows in line with the reference value at a particular point in time.
The  second  pillar of the  monetary  policy  strategy  is  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for
price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This  assessment
encompasses  a  wide  range  of  financial  market  and  other  economic  indicators,  including  forecasts
produced both within and outside the Eurosystem. Within the second pillar, cyclical developments and
wages are important indicators for future price developments. In addition, the exchange rate is one of
the  important  determinants  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  If  exchange  rate  developments  pose  a
threat  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  this  threat  will  be  taken  into  account  together  with  the
information on price developments revealed by all other indicators.
Monetary policy does not react mechanically to developments in a single indicator or forecast. Instead,
based on the signals provided by both pillars of the strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB sets
the monetary policy instruments of the Eurosystem at the level which best serves the achievement of
its primary objective.
Watchers  of  the  ECB  have  criticised  our  communication  policy  for  a  lack  of  transparency.  Central
banks are used to this kind of criticism. More recently this criticism has also been extended to other
central banks which follow a strategy of (direct) inflation targeting. However, we should be clear that
revealing every aspect of an ongoing discussion is not an objective in itself. Instead, communication
should be an element that reinforces the efficiency of monetary policy by making it comprehensible
and  facilitating  its  acceptance  by  economic  agents.  It  is  therefore  important  to  judge  carefully  the
contribution which the various elements of communication can make to the fulfilment of the primary
objective of monetary policy.
information  which 
Such considerations apply for example to the issue whether the ECB should publish forecasts for euro
area  variables.  Forecasts  represent 
important  for  monetary  policy
decision-making.  However,  publishing  forecasts  as  a  central  bank  is  different  from  publishing
forecasts as an outside institution. It is the objective of the ECB to maintain price stability. Since the
objective  of  the  ECB  is  to  achieve  this  over  the  medium  term,  any  forecast,  which  is  for  example
based on constant interest rates, does not take into account that monetary policy takes action in time to
ensure price stability. In other words, while forecasts may inform interest rate decisions, there should,
in  principle,  never  be  any  doubt  that  after  the  ECB’s  decision  the  outlook  for  price  developments
should be in line with price stability. In this context, it would then be problematic to send signals into
the  public  debate,  which  could  influence  inflation  expectations.  Furthermore,  in  the  construction  of
is 
BIS Review 16/2000
2
forecasts,  behavioural,  institutional  and  structural  uncertainties  should  not  be  overlooked.  Large
uncertainties can make forecasting price and other developments in the euro area inevitably difficult.
Forecasts have therefore to be interpreted with great caution and an assessment has to be supplemented
by an evaluation of risks and uncertainties underlying the forecast. Therefore, publishing just a single
number for the inflation outlook would clearly be misleading. Instead, a careful interpretation of the
results  is  required  in  order  to  exploit  the  signals  for  monetary  policy  purposes.  Before  the  ECB
publishes  any  forecasts,  it  is  crucial  that  we  explain  carefully  the  uncertainties  surrounding  it,  the
assumptions  being  made  and  to  what  extent  then  forecasts  actually  play  a  role  in  our  decision.
Otherwise,  publishing  forecasts  might  finally  increase  uncertainty  and  even  complicate  the
maintenance of price stability.
Let  me  point  out  that  the  ECB  has  set  high  standards  in  terms  of  openness,  transparency  and
accountability.  As  part  of  its  communication  policy,  the  ECB  provides  the  public  and  other  policy
makers  regularly  with  timely  and  detailed  information  on  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of
monetary,  financial  and  economic  conditions 
the  euro  area.  This  assessment  reveals
forward-looking  information  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  as  well  as  the  risks  to  price
stability.  A  statement  of  the  President  is  released  immediately  after  the  first  Governing  Council
meeting each month. This has the advantage of presenting the Council’s assessment of the economic
situation almost instantaneously after the meeting. Each month the ECB publishes a bulletin providing
additional background information to explain its current assessment of monetary, financial and other
economic developments in more detail. Once a year, the ECB releases an annual report on its activities
to the European Community institutions.
in 
Gaining first experience
The  monetary  policy  strategy  has  passed  its  first  tests  successfully.  In  addition  to  the  described
elements of the strategy, consistency and transparency of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy decisions
were a crucial aspect. This can be best illustrated by discussing the most important factors influencing
the interest rate changes decided so far by the Eurosystem.
In  the  first  few  months  of  last  year,  signs  emerged  that  the  extent  of  the  slowdown  of  economic
activity  in  the  euro  area  might  be  stronger  than  had  been  anticipated.  At  that  point  in  time  price
pressures  continued  to  be  weak.  In  this  environment  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  the  negative
effects  stemming  from  the  crises  in  Asia  and  Russia  on  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro  area
represented  a  downward  risk  to  future  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  was  also
reflected  in  the  downward  revisions  to  the  inflation  forecasts  of  international  organisations  at  that
time.
A monetary policy reaction to these downward risks to price stability was, however, complicated by
the fact that at that time some indicators appeared to point in the opposite direction. In particular, the
three-month average of annual growth rates of M3 was slightly above the reference value. Consumer
confidence  remained  comparatively  strong  despite  the  economic  slowdown.  Furthermore,  oil  prices
had been rising since mid-February and the euro had depreciated in effective terms. These two factors
were also able to exert upward pressures on prices in the short term.
However,  there  were  several  indications  that  M3  was  temporarily  being  distorted  upwards  in  early
1999 as a result of the changeover to Stage Three of EMU. Thus, in early 1999, it did not appear that
M3 growth revealed upside risks to price stability. Moreover, since most of what could be assessed by
then  was  a  normalisation  and  correction  of  excessive  developments  in  late  1998,  the  Governing
Council did not regard it as appropriate to overemphasise relatively volatile movements in oil prices
and exchange rates in the first few months of 1999.
All in all, while in early April the first pillar of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem was not judged
as pointing to upward risks to price stability, the second pillar of the strategy was signalling significant
downward risks to price stability. This assessment made it necessary for the Governing Council to take
action.  With  a  view  to  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term,  the
3
BIS Review 16/2000
Governing Council of the ECB thus decided at the beginning of April 1999 to reduce the interest rates
on the main refinancing operations by 50 basis points to 2.5%.
At around the beginning of the summer, it appeared that the downward risks to price stability receded.
Over  the  summer,  the  three-month  average  of  the  annual  rate  of  M3  growth  increased  further  and
progressively approached a rate of 6%. Overnight deposits and credit to the private sector continued to
expand  rapidly.  A  protracted  monetary  expansion  was  thus  evident.  At  the  same  time,  the  external
environment  strengthened  as  the  Asian  economies  stabilised  and  then  started  to  recover,  while
concerns  for  financial  crises  in  other  emerging  markets  receded.  In  this  environment,  economic
activity in the euro area progressively recovered. In addition, the effective exchange rate of the euro
weakened further and oil prices continued to rise. These two factors were gradually feeding through to
consumer prices. Therefore, information contained in both pillars provided evidence that the balance
of  risks  to  future  price  stability  had  been  progressively  moving  upward  since  the  beginning  of  the
summer. The downside risks which were present at the time of the cut in ECB interest rates in April no
longer prevailed. On 4 November the Governing Council decided to raise the interest rates on the main
refinancing operations by 50 basis points to 3%.
The increase in interest rates at that point in time was aimed at helping to counter the upward pressure
on future prices and  at contributing  to  keeping  inflation expectations safely  below  2%. The interest
rate decision was taken in a timely manner so as to avoid the need for stronger measures later. This is
consistent  with  the  focus  on  maintaining  price  stability  and  would  thus  contribute  to  sustaining
non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area over the medium term.
In  late  1999  and  by  2000  risks  to  price  stability  moved  again  to  the  upside.  Both  pillars  were
indicating increased risks to price stability. Considering the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy,
monetary  and  credit  growth  continued  to  signal  generous  liquidity  conditions.  Monetary  expansion
remained high as evidenced by the latest three-month average of annual M3 growth of 6.1% for the
period covering October to December 1999. The expansion of credit to the private sector continued to
be strong with rates around 10%. These developments were indicative of a continuation of a generous
liquidity situation.
As for the second pillar of the monetary policy strategy, the oil price and exchange rate movements
observed in late 1999 and January 2000 have added to upward pressure on prices in the euro area. In
fact, price and cost increases were larger and more protracted than foreseen earlier and hence indicated
renewed  upward  risks  for  price  stability.  The  latest  price  developments  for  the  euro  area  were
reflecting this pattern, given a pick-up in the HICP inflation rate to 1.7% for December 1999. Adding
to these risks was the  fact  that the international  environment  has  been  showing  continuous  signs  of
improvement  and  the  prospects  of  a  cyclical  upswing  in  the  euro  area  have  improved.  Indeed,
significant improvements in the economic outlook were confirmed by estimates of real GDP growth
for the third  quarter  of 1999 from  Eurostat  and by  available  confidence indicators  that  pointed to  a
continued solid output growth in the fourth quarter of 1999. Against this background the Governing
Council decided to raise ECB interest rates by 25 basis points in February 2000.
The explanations of the decisions to change ECB interest rates in 1999 and in February 2000 show
that  we  do  not  react  mechanistically  to  individual  indicators.  Instead,  we  always  interpret  the
movements and signals in all of the indicators evident in both pillars in conjunction with each other.
As outlined and given that we are living in a complex world, this is a more reasonable approach than
relying on a simple indicator. Timely and appropriate monetary policy adjustments should ensure that
the risks to price stability are kept under control.
The Governing Council’s determination to counter threats of inflation should assure wage negotiators
that the prospects for price stability remain favourable. In fact, it will be important to ensure that wage
settlements themselves do not constitute a threat to price stability in the medium term.
The international role of the euro
Let me turn to the implications the introduction of the euro had for the international capital markets.
The  euro  has  become  the  currency  of  an  economic  area  which  roughly  equals  the  United  States  in
BIS Review 16/2000
4
terms of economic size and external trade, and which has the world’s second largest capital market.
Owing  to  the  fact  that  a  number  of  the  currencies  replaced  by  the  euro  had  played  an  important
international role in the past, the euro inherited this role. After the US dollar, the euro is the second
most widely used currency in the world. In parallel with growing investors’ confidence and as more
EU Member States join the euro area, in particular following an EU enlargement, the international role
of the euro will receive further stimulus.
Let me  emphasise that  the  Eurosystem  does  not  actively  promote  the  international  role  of  the  euro.
Instead a neutral stance has been adopted leaving the determination of the international role to market
forces.  Maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  helps  to  gain  credibility  and  the  confidence  of
European citizens in the stability of the euro. This will also contribute to the increased use of the euro
outside the euro area.
The  international  interest  in  the  euro  is  indeed  evident,  for  example,  from  international  new  bond
issues. According to information from the Bank for International Settlements, in the first three quarters
of 1999, euro-denominated gross international issues of money market instruments, bonds and notes
accounted  for  38%  of  total  issues,  which  is  only  slightly  less  than  the  share  for  the  US  dollar.  By
comparison,  in  the  first  nine  months  of  1998  the  combined  share  of  the  former  euro  area  national
currencies and the ECU was only 24% of total gross issuance. Although this strong increase can be
partly  explained  by  the  postponement  of  issues  from  1998  to  1999,  the  issues  in  euro  have  been
growing  continuously  in  the  course  of  1999  not  least  owing  to  positive  expectations  regarding  the
future development of the euro area financial markets.
Towards a long future of the euro
Let me now try to look ahead towards the challenges which the ECB and the Eurosystem will have to
address in the coming years. The experience with the short past of the euro justifies expectations that
we will gradually see further advances towards a broadening of economic and monetary integration in
the future. With the establishment of the Eurosystem, solid foundations for a stable currency were laid.
Moreover, the principle of central bank independence is anchored in the Treaty.
Let me emphasise that Monetary Union in Europe has a different quality from the German currency
union in 1990. German unification led to the introduction of the Deutsche Mark in eastern Germany
based on a fixed conversion rate. Monetary Union in Germany was thus achieved at the same time as
the  political  union.  However,  in  Europe  the  establishment  of  Monetary  Union  has  preceded  the
creation  of  a  wider  political  area.  This  made  it  necessary  to  introduce  additional  features  in  the
framework of EMU so as to enhance the coordination between monetary and economic policies. For
example  the  establishment  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  facilitates  the  coordination  of  fiscal
policies  among  Member  States  on  the  basis of  a fiscal rule.  Sound  fiscal  policies  also  facilitate  the
ECB’s task to maintain price stability in the euro area. In this context, the Stability and Growth Pact is
a crucial element. Its aim is to encourage the pursuit of disciplined and sustainable fiscal policies by
both the participating EU Member States and prospective members.
Safeguarding  sound  government  finances  is  conducive  to  achieving  sustainable  growth  and
employment creation. The consolidation of public finances, which has made considerable progress in
the past few years, has to be continued and, where necessary, strengthened.
There are  important  conditions to  be  met  in  order  to  achieve  sustainable  non-inflationary  economic
growth in the euro area. In particular, decisive measures to address the structural problems in Europe
are  needed,  for  example  in  the  area  of  labour  markets.  Even,  if  we  see  some  progress  in  reducing
unemployment in the euro area over recent months, this problem is still pressing. There is no doubt
that  it  needs  to  be  tackled  by  policies  enhancing  the  flexibility  of  the  euro  area  labour  and  goods
markets.
In the coming years, the success of EMU demands that the division of policy responsibilities between
monetary and government authorities, as set out in the Maastricht Treaty, is followed. This allows the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy to focus on its primary objective. At the same time economic policies
can be directed more efficiently towards structural problems prevailing in the Member States. Such a
5
BIS Review 16/2000
sharing  of  tasks  is  both  transparent  and  conducive  to  accountability.  It  enhances  the  credibility  of
monetary and economic policies in Europe.
The  focus  on  price  stability  does  not  allow  the  conditioning  of  monetary  policy  actions  upon  the
prospective results of fiscal and structural measures. Similarly, monetary policy cannot be conditional
on  future  wage  developments  promised  by  the  social  partners.  In  both  cases  the  outcome  is  quite
uncertain.  The  public  could  falsely  interpret  such  a  form  of  policy  coordination  as  the  attempt  to
negotiate  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  with  other  policymakers.  This  might  hinder  the
Eurosystem’s  prompt  response  to  shocks  that  threaten  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  The
Eurosystem  should  always  take  into  account  all  available  information,  not  just  the  information  on
other intended policy actions.
In the future, we will also see the accession of a number of new Member States to the European Union
and  eventually  to  the  euro  area.  It  is  clear  that  the  envisaged  extension  of  the  EU  to  include  new
members  and,  ultimately,  the  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  represent  important  challenges  both  for
Member  States  and  for  the  Eurosystem.  Any  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  is  subject  to  the  strict
application of the convergence criteria, and not automatic. I should like to recall that the Maastricht
Treaty provides for a clear and transparent procedure, which lays down the conditions for EU Member
States  wishing  to  join  the  euro  area.  This  should  ensure  that  Member  States  provide  evidence  of
sufficient economic convergence with the euro area before adopting the euro.
In this context it is useful to explain the rationale behind the convergence criteria. Their main purpose
is to ensure that only those Member States which have economic conditions that are conducive to the
maintenance  of  price  stability  shall  be  participants.  This  is  important  for  the  credibility  and
sustainability of  EMU.  It  makes  the  case  for  a strict  application  of  the  criteria.  As  the  convergence
criteria  constitute  a  coherent  and  integrated  package,  they  must  be  all  satisfied  at  the  same  time.
Current data represent the basis for an assessment. An application shall be carried out in a consistent,
transparent  and  simple  manner.  This  implies  that  a  convergence  assessment  shall  also  take  into
account the experience gained in the run-up to Stage Three.
Compliance with the convergence criteria on a sustained basis is essential. This can be best explained
for the example of fiscal policies. Looking back, many accession countries have accumulated high or
very high levels of public sector debt. This was often the result of economic shocks, distributional or
intergenerational  problems  as  well  as  regional  divergences.  An  unduly  high  stock  of  debt  typically
steers  debt-service  payments  for  both  current  and  future  budgets  until  debt  levels  are  substantially
reduced.
Exchange rate stability is also a measure of overall convergence, given that exchange rate movements
typically reflect, in addition to market expectations, relative movements of economic variables. In this
regard, participation in ERM II fosters convergence for prospective euro area members.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  in  other  countries  will  require  more  than  only  compliance  with  the
convergence criteria. In particular, further preparatory work in various areas is required. For example,
new  members  have  to  ensure  that  the  harmonised  framework  in  which  the  single  monetary  policy
operates is fully in place prior to their participation in the euro area. Statistics need further adaptation
so as to comply with the Eurosystem’s reporting requirements. Some changes in national legislation
are needed to formally lay the foundations for the introduction of the euro. Finally, all procedures that
involve the Eurosystem and the prospective member country will have to pass a number of real-time
tests in order to demonstrate that the infrastructure is operational.
Conclusions
In  summary,  looking  at  the  current  evidence  on  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  the  first  year  of
operation of the ECB has been successful. The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem has proved
to be a valuable tool both in supporting monetary policy decisions and in explaining these decisions to
the general public in a transparent manner. The ECB does its utmost to maintain price stability in the
euro area in a forward-looking manner and with a medium-term orientation. The Governing Council
of the ECB vigilantly monitors the signals provided by the two pillars of the ECB’s strategy. Stable
BIS Review 16/2000
6
prices are the best contribution monetary policy can make to sustained economic growth in the euro
area.  Maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  will  contribute  to  the  credibility  of  the  single
monetary policy and to the stability of the single currency. It will pave the way for the long future of
the euro.
7
BIS Review 16/2000
