Mr Bäckström reports on the significance of risk management
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Risk  Management  Forum,
organised by Ernst & Young, in Stockholm on 3 February 2000.
 First a word of thanks for the  invitation to attend this  forum  and  discuss  future risk  management.  I
shall be talking about the socioeconomic aspects of financial risks and what the authorities are doing
in this field.
Why is the financial sector so important?
What makes the authorities so concerned about the financial sector? Why don’t they focus to the same
extent on, say, the forest industries, car manufacturing or even on other service industries? The reason,
of course, is that the financial sector - banks in particular - performs such special and central functions
in a modern economy.
It is not the case that parliaments, governments, supervisors and central banks around the world are
particularly concerned about individual banks. What matters is the part that financial institutions play
in  sophisticated  modern  systems  for  credit  and  payments.  Virtually  every  economic  transaction
involves a payment service of some kind; it can take the form of banknotes, payments on account or
the  provision  of  credit.  It  follows  that  if  the  facilities  for  payments  by  households  and  firms  are
seriously  disrupted,  the  consequences  for  the  real  economy  may  be  disastrous.  So  disturbances  in
credit  and  payment  systems  can  be  costly  for  society  and  the  costs  are  not  primarily  the  direct
consequences that measures of support will have for government finances. The essential consideration
instead is the costs that a collapse of credit and payment systems may entail indirectly in the form of
decreased  production  and  higher  unemployment.  When  payments  and  the  supply  of  credit  do  not
function efficiently, the rest of the economy also suffers. That is the main reason why governments are
more concerned about the bank sector than they are about other service industries.
To appreciate what happens when credit and payment systems are disrupted, one can just take a look
at  what  happened  as  a  result  of  the  financial  crises  that  occurred  around  the  world  in  the  last  two
decades. There are, unfortunately, numerous examples that can serve as illustrations. The International
Monetary Fund has estimated that since 1980, serious problems in the bank sector have arisen in three
out  of  four  of  its  180  or  so  members.  This  has  been  case  in  the  industrialised  world,  where  one
example is Sweden in the early-1990s, as well as in emerging markets.
Bank capital bases relatively small
There is a variety of factors that could be cited as possible causes of these disturbances. They include
shortcomings  in  economic  policy,  inadequate  supervision  and,  in  many  instances,  poor  risk
management by the players themselves. But the roots of the problem go deeper than this.
The  basic  issue  is  the  financial  system’s  vulnerability  to  unforeseen  events.  Take,  for  example,  the
bank sector’s solvency, measured as the ratio of equity capital to the balance sheet total. This amounts
to only a few per cent, whereas the level in non-financial firms is 20, 30 or even 40%. So a simple way
of solving the bank sector’s vulnerability would be to raise the capital base to what is customary in
other companies. Banks would then be in a better position to cope with unexpected disturbances in the
financial markets.
Maintaining a large reserve of equity capital for unexpected events is, however, costly and someone
would have to pay for this. The solution would therefore lead to expensive credit and low interest on
1
BIS Review 9/2000
deposits. Projects that are not exceptionally profitable would not obtain finance and the level of saving
in the economy would be low. With little investment and low saving, growth would ultimately falter
and prosperity would suffer. From this it will be readily understood that unduly tight capital adequacy
requirements for the bank sector can be very costly for the entire economy.
So if the whole economy would be liable to suffer because the banking system opts for or is coerced
into holding a sizeable capital reserve, one can say that this is not a viable remedy for ensuring the
financial system’s stability. But how, then, are financial crises to be prevented?
After  the  global  crisis  in  the  1930s,  the  path  that  was  chosen  up  to  around  the  1970s  (its  duration
varied from country to country) was regulation. Credit and exchange controls  were  reintroduced.  In
Sweden, the credit system had been liberalised in the middle of the 19th century but after the 1930s it
was  regulated  once  more.  The  risk  of  serious  financial  crises  was  countered  by  controlling  the
domestic credit supply in detail and more or less prohibiting cross-border capital movements that were
not  directly  connected  with  trade  in  goods  and  services.  But  these  controls  also  had  the  effect  of
hampering  the  financial  system’s  development.  If  the  costs  of  this  period  of  regulation  could  be
identified and estimated, we would probably find that they were considerable.
What this amounts to is that high capital requirements for banks are costly, not just for the banks but
for the entire economy, and the same applies to controls on credit and foreign exchange.
As this was recognised by more and more countries, national policies in this field were realigned in the
course of the 1970s and 1980s. Controls were abolished and domestic capital markets were opened up
for cross-border capital flows.
But  in  many  instances  the  financial  system  was  unprepared  for  a  freer  environment.  The  era  of
regulation had lulled many banks into a false sense of security. Moreover, supervision concentrated on
the wrong issues and was by no means appropriate. Neither did economic policy observe the discipline
that a deregulated financial system requires. And the gold standard, which had functioned as a highly
disciplined  system  for  monetary  policy,  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  New,  costly  problems  were
encountered, as is clear from the numerous bank crises that occurred around the world in the 1980s
and 1990s.
It is in the light of these experiences that we are now engaged in erecting, step by step, a new financial
architecture that  will  work  in  a  world  where  capital  adequacy  requirements  for  banks  are  relatively
limited at the same time as the financial system is rather free and open.
Increased importance of risk management
One function of a bank’s capital base is to act as a buffer for absorbing various types of disruption and
risk.  The  greater  the  difficulty  a  bank  has  in  identifying  the  numerous  types  of  risk  involved  in
financial activities, the larger its capital base needs to be. Otherwise, a sudden increase in  risk  may
quickly render the bank insolvent. By the same token, the lower the stipulated capital requirement for
financial operations, the more important it is to have efficient systems for risk management.
The capital base in banking has, in fact, been strengthened to some extent in the past decade. When
minimum  capital  adequacy  standards  for  banks  were  specified  in  the  Basel  regulations  in  the
late-1980s,  they  were  met  by  protests  from  banks  in  Sweden  as  well  as  elsewhere.  One  of  the
criticisms  was  that  the  regulations  would  be  costly.  Today,  all  the  Swedish  banks  have  voluntarily
strengthened  their  capital  bases  by  more  than  the  Basel  regulations  require.  Banks  in  many  other
countries have done the same.
At the same time, the concept of bank sector solvency has been increasingly undermined. Many risks
are  not  on  the  balance  sheet.  It  is  therefore  more  relevant  to  consider  the  ratio  between  total  risk
exposure and the capital base.
With the expansion and growing complexity of financial market operations, it has become increasingly
important that banks are capable of managing the risks in their business. The financial turbulence in
recent years has underscored this and banks are also more determined to have such a capability. The
BIS Review 9/2000
2
capacity to understand, monitor and control internal risks is thus featuring more and more prominently
in the organisation of financial enterprises.
A major aspect of this work has been the development of more advanced methods for the quantitative
measurement  of  risks.  As  one  might  expect,  most  progress  has  been  made  in  the  measurement  of
market risk; the extensive trading in financial instruments provides a good supply  of  price  statistics
and this is a considerable help when it comes to estimating market risks.
Much work is now being done in many places to construct models for a better management of credit
risks, which are still by far the largest risk category for banks. The difficulties here, however, are far
greater than in the case of market risks. The estimation of key parameters for models is obstructed by a
lack of statistics. And even if individual default probabilities can be estimated reasonably accurately, it
is still rather difficult to combine them into portfolio assessments, partly because not enough is known
about  the  interaction  between  variables.  The  models  therefore  tend  to  rest  on  a  large  number  of
simplified assumptions based on subjective judgements.
Still, sector players are displaying a strong determination and creativity in their efforts to surmount the
obstacles. The rapid progress in this field was evident from the discussions last June in Stockholm at
the  conference  on  credit  risk  modelling  that  was  arranged jointly  by  the  Riksbank  and  the  Swedish
Financial Supervisory Authority.
Recently, moreover, some advances have been made in the estimation of operational risks (the risk of
losses arising from technical problems or inadequate internal controls). Previously, operational risks
had attracted less attention than, for example, credit and market risks. It is changes in the nature of
banking operations that have brought them more to the fore. The significance of operational risks for
an individual institution is evident, not least, from the case of Barings Bank.
The development of quantitative risk measurement is  an  interesting  and important  matter  and  many
speakers today  will no  doubt  be  talking  about these  methods’ technical aspects.  I  therefore  want  to
draw attention to the need for a holistic approach; instead of relying solely on statistical models, it is
necessary to combine them with sound judgement and common sense.
It must be borne in mind that models are no more than a highly simplified and limited image of the
real world. While their simplicity does make them very useful in the work of identifying risks, it is
also  perhaps  their  chief  disadvantage.  Models  fail  to  catch  a  great  deal  of  what  is  happening  in  a
dynamic and complex environment.
Events in the autumn of 1998 and the problems at that time in connection with the American hedge
fund LTCM are a telling example of the limitations of risk models, or perhaps rather of errors in the
ways they are used.
Firstly, there was the evident difficulty in separating the management of market risks from credit risks.
As  a  result  of  major  shifts  in  market  prices,  the  credit  risks,  which  had  seemed  to  be  negligible
initially, suddenly became considerable.
Loans are often provided against collateral in the form of securities; the securities are not pledged for
their full value, which leaves a margin for unforeseen events. This buffer, however, is often relatively
small. Additional collateral, it is said, can always be called for if market prices make this necessary.
Alternatively, the existing collateral can be realised.
There has been a tendency to disregard both the potential credit risk in arrangements of this type and
the possible refinancing and liquidity risks. What happened with LTCM in the autumn of 1998 showed
that market value can deteriorate so rapidly that there is not enough time for calling in and receiving
additional  collateral.  Neither  could  the  securities  be  sold  without  further  ado  in  order  to  realise  the
existing collateral. Under these circumstances, the market risk was transformed into credit risk. In the
case of LTCM, the banks had made a proper credit  assessment  and  scrutiny  of  their  counterparties.
The  end  result,  as  we  know,  was  that  the  banks  were  obliged  to  take  over  the  fund  and  contribute
additional capital.
Secondly,  we  were  reminded  that  Value-at-Risk  and  similar  assessments  must  be  used  prudently.
Looking back, it can be said that too much faith was put in estimates that had been made while the sun
3
BIS Review 9/2000
was  shining  and  which  proved  less  watertight  when  it  suddenly  started  to  rain.  The  parameters  on
which  risk  calculations  are  based  -  standard  deviations  and  correlations,  for  example  -  are  usually
estimated on the market’s historical performance together with some simple assumption - for instance
a normal distribution - about the underlying pattern of probabilities. Shocks of the kind that occurred
in the autumn of 1998 pulverise the conditions behind such calculations and make Value-at-Risk less
meaningful as an indicator of the risks that actually apply.
As with any innovative activity, there is an element of trial and error here that we must aim to tackle
by developing new methods at the same time as we try to learn from mistakes.
The  hard-earned  lesson  for  the  authorities  as  well  as  for  market  players  -  not  least  the  executive
managements  of  financial  institutions  -  has  been  that,  to  make  them  functional,  statistical
measurements require additional techniques.
An important component for risk assessment is provided by analysing sensitivity, using what are often
referred to  as  stress  tests. This involves  assessing  the  consequences  that  a  more  dramatic  course  of
events  would  have  for  a  particular  exposure.  Instead  of  considering  the  scenarios  that  are  most
probable, these tests refer to the worst possible cases. The information is very valuable for those who
ultimately have to decide about the risks that are to be taken.
The work of the authorities
Developments in the financial system obviously affect the work of the authorities that are responsible
for the system’s stability. This applies to rules as well as supervision.
Financial legislation and regulation need to be sufficiently flexible to accommodate the rapid pace of
developments in the financial sector. It tends to take considerably longer to amend rules than it does to
create  new  financial  products.  But  there  has  to  be  a  foundation  of  minimum  requirements  for  such
matters as capital bases and risk management.
In  addition,  the  authorities  must  be  increasingly  involved  in  ensuring  that  institutions  themselves
possess  a  basic  competence  in  and  understanding  of  the  risks  that  have  to  be  managed,  as  well  as
adequate systems for their management, rather than issuing detailed risk management instructions.
In  other  words,  it  has  become  more  important  to  inspect  systems,  defined  in  a  wide  sense,  than  to
scrutinise  particular  commitments  or  market  risks.  Some  supervision,  moreover,  can  be  carried  out
with the market’s assistance. By this I mean that authorities can prescribe as well as encourage a more
open presentation of the institutions’ risks and profitability in different operations. Such a transparency
accentuates the banks’ demands on each other as well as what customers require of their banks.
These developments do, of course, call for new forms of competence and resources for the authorities.
The transition from an administrative organisation to one that inspects sophisticated risk management
systems in a wide sense is something of a cultural revolution. That is what central banks and financial
supervisors  around  the  world  are  working  on  intensively  at  present.  Some  have  come  a  good  way,
others have more to do.
Basic minimum standards for solvency and risk management, more active supervision with a stronger
focus  on  risk,  and  increased  transparency  are  also  the  foundations  of  proposals  that  have  been
presented both by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and by the  Swedish  Committee  on
Bank Legislation.
In this context I want to draw attention in particular to the international work that the Director General
of  the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  Claes  Norgren,  is  doing  as  chairman  of  the  Basel
Committee’s Capital Task Force, as a part of the cooperation in the Bank for International Settlements,
and in the Banking Advisory Committee of the European Commission.
Claes Norgren will be talking later on about the proposals for new rules. I should like to acknowledge
that the task of achieving such a far-reaching reform of the international capital adequacy standards is
by no means easy. Quite apart from the exceptional technical complexity of the substantive issues, it is
not always evident how the political and cultural differences that nevertheless exist can be reconciled.
BIS Review 9/2000
4
I know that Claes Norgren’s international efforts have been most valuable and appreciated around the
world. Permit me to conclude by congratulating the Director General of Sweden’s supervisory body
on his successful work.
5
BIS Review 9/2000
