William J McDonough: Update on the major initiative
to revise the 1988 Capital Accord
Speech by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, before the 4th Annual Supervision Conference of the British Bankers Association,
held in London, on 19 June 2000.
 I am pleased to be with you to provide an update on the major initiative to revise the  1988  Capital
Accord.  Last  June  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  I  have  the  privilege  of
chairing, released a Consultative Paper proposing a new capital adequacy framework. My comments
today  will  focus  on  the  industry’s  response  to  the  proposal  and  the  areas  that  will  require  the
Committee’s  attention  going  forward.  Given  the  progress  already  achieved,  it  is  my  belief  that  the
Committee will be prepared to release a second Consultative Paper early next year.
I  will  also  briefly  discuss  three  essential  aspects  of  the  safe  and  sound  operation  of  any  banking
organization - good corporate governance, rigorous internal controls and effective risk management. I
will  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  critical  role  of  banks’  board  of  directors  and  senior
management.
Current Accord
The primary tool of capital regulation currently is the set of minimum ratios that were devised in 1988
by  the  Basel  Committee.  The  1988  Capital  Accord  has  truly  become  a  global  standard  for  banks
worldwide. Its adoption by over 100 countries has helped to strengthen the safety and soundness of the
international banking system and has contributed to the achievement of competitive equality.
However, the financial world has changed dramatically over the past dozen years, to the point that the
Accord’s  efficacy  has  eroded  considerably.  Its  broad  brush  approach  to  differentiating  credit  risk
encouraged  banks  to  undertake  regulatory  arbitrage  transactions.  Furthermore,  as  banks  have
developed  innovative  techniques  for  managing  and  mitigating  risk,  credit  risk  now  exists  in  more
complicated, less conventional forms than is recognized by  the  1988  Accord, thus  rendering  capital
ratios, as presently calculated, less useful to banking supervisors.
Today’s  marketplace  also  provides  an  imperative  for  revising  the  1988  Accord.  The  rapid  pace  of
technological change places information that was once largely the domain of analysts and institutional
investors into the hands of millions of individual investors and consumers. Market participants, armed
with timely and meaningful information, reward sound risk management practices and penalize those
banks  that  are  found  deficient  in  this  area.  A  bank’s  regulatory  capital  position  can  be  a  strong
indicator  of  how it supports  its risk,  and  if  markets  are  to impose  an  optimal  level  of  discipline  on
banks, we must ensure that regulatory capital measures reflect risk as precisely as possible. I believe
that  reform  of  the  Basel  Accord  is  thus  clearly  in  the  markets’  best  interests.  As  the  Committee
continues to develop a more risk-sensitive capital adequacy framework,  we  cannot  lose  sight  of the
need to keep the Accord up to date.
Progress in revising the Accord
Let  me  take  a  few  moments  to  tell  you  how  our  work  on  the  Basel  Accord  is  progressing.  The
Committee  began  a  fundamental  review  of  the  Accord  in  1998.  The  release  last  June  of  the
Consultative  Paper  reflected  our  vision  for  a  new  capital  adequacy  framework  and  we  asked  for
comments from the broad marketplace.
1
BIS Review 51/2000
We knew that our first Consultative Paper would not be a perfect framework for all banks. That is why
we  have  been  so  keen  to  obtain  feedback  from  a  wide  variety  of  sources  including  financial
institutions, central banks and supervisors, representatives from non-G10 countries and other market
participants. The formal comment period on the Consultative Paper ended on 31 March. We are very
pleased and  encouraged  by  the  response,  and  are  now  in  the  process  of  considering  more  than  200
comments received.
The commentators have sent us a strong message that they endorse our overall goal of developing a
capital  framework  comprised  of  three  pillars  -  minimum  capital  standards,  supervisory  review  and
market  discipline  -  that  is  more  risk  reflective  and  appropriate  to  banks  of  varying  levels  of
sophistication.
Internal ratings-based approach
Based on our evaluation of the comments received, I can tell you that we are more committed than
ever to an internal ratings-based approach. Many in the industry noted that a capital regime based on
banks’ internal ratings, which reflect a wide range of information about  borrowers,  can  prove  to  be
quite sensitive to the level of risk in a bank’s portfolio.
Our analysis indicates  that  a  wider  range  of institutions  could  be  eligible  to  use the  internal  ratings
approach, than the narrower set of large and sophisticated institutions, as implied in the Consultative
Paper  issued  in  June.  We  now  envision  extending  the  applicability  of  the  internal  ratings  method
approach  to  banks  of  varying  sizes,  including  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  provided  such
ratings  systems  are  accompanied  by  strong  internal  controls,  supervisory  oversight  and  ample
disclosure.
With this in mind, the Committee is working  on  how  to link  banks’  internal  ratings  to  a  regulatory
capital scheme. We are seeking to develop flexible approaches, since all banks wishing to use internal
ratings may not yet be able to generate the full amount of information necessary to tie their ratings to
capital  requirements.  Thus,  for  at  least  some  banks,  we  are  considering  the  possibility  that  some
information would be supplied by the supervisor, although the core elements would be generated by a
bank’s internal ratings scheme. There would be a parallel track for the more sophisticated institutions,
which would rely  fully  on  internal  information.  In  practice, the two  approaches  are  part  of  a single
evolutionary  framework,  in  which  banks  can  rely  increasingly  on  internal  processes  for  regulatory
capital allocation as their risk measurement and management practices improve.
As a first key step in developing these approaches, the Basel Committee gathered information about
banks’ internal ratings systems. Our findings indicate that there is presently no single standard for the
design  and  operation  of  such  a  system.  Thus,  I  see  the  importance  of  establishing  appropriate
guidelines for the use of internal ratings systems. These guidelines should ensure that internal ratings
appropriately reflect the credit risk in each category of exposure. Additionally, it is important that we
develop  robust  disclosure  guidelines  for  internal  ratings  information  to  ensure  that  capital
requirements are comparable across banks and countries.
Standardized approach
A revised standardized approach is still very important to us at the Basel Committee, as some banks
may  not  have  the  internal  resources  to  implement  an  internal  ratings-based  approach,  and  some
supervisors  have  indicated  that  implementation  of  this  approach  would  create  resource  strains  for
them. Further, we want to ensure that those banks that look to the Accord as the common standard -
many of which are located in emerging market countries - can subscribe to the revised framework.
In  order  to  improve  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  standardized  approach  without  becoming  overly
complex, the Committee has proposed the use of external credit assessments, such as credit ratings.
Many  comments  noted  drawbacks  to  this  approach,  but  those  that  have  seriously  considered  the
trade-off between simplicity and risk sensitivity generally have agreed with the Committee’s decision
to make use of external credit assessments. This is particularly true for sovereign credits where there is
BIS Review 50/2000
2
widespread  support  for  finding  an  alternative  to  the  current  OECD/non-OECD  distinction.  In  other
words, OECD membership would no longer be relied on for setting regulatory capital for sovereign or
bank claims.
Notwithstanding  this  support,  many  commentators  have  offered  modifications  to  the  Committee’s
proposed  standardized  framework,  which  several  observers  have  suggested  does  not  go  far  enough
toward risk differentiation. The Committee has taken this concern to heart, and is actively evaluating
whether it would be feasible to incorporate additional risk weights into the standardized approach, and,
if so, how this should be done.
As we work toward greater risk differentiation among claims that are rated, we will continue to give
extensive  thought  to  the  treatment  of  unrated  claims,  given  that  the  penetration  of  external  ratings
remains low in most countries. It is difficult to avoid creating incentives to remain unrated while at the
same  time  retaining  continuity  with  the  existing  Accord’s  treatment  for  these  credits.  Further  work
would  be  needed  to  develop  a  standard  for  unrated  claims  that  would  be  more  risk-reflective  but,
unfortunately, few commentators offered significant suggestions in this regard.
Procyclicality
The Committee has considered what some observers have noted is the potential for introducing greater
cyclicality  in  a  more risk-sensitive  capital framework.  That is, the  capital  requirements  for  loans  to
troubled borrowers will tend to increase at just the point when such trouble is becoming apparent.
This is an important point, and one that must be given serious consideration. It is my view that the
global  financial  system  needs  to  move  toward  addressing  potential  credit  problems  preemptively  -
before these problems have time to grow from minor disturbances to major disruptions. A more risk-
sensitive  capital framework  should  help  ensure  that  banks  hold  appropriate  capital  behind  high-risk
credits  in  the  first  place,  and  thus  reduce  the  tendency  for  accentuating  the  need  for  capital  after
problems arise with such loans.
Credit risk mitigation techniques
Greater recognition of the benefits of risk mitigation techniques - such as collateral, guarantees, credit
derivatives and netting - also is at the forefront of the Committee’s work in revising the Accord.
In January of last year, the Committee held consultations with over 50 banks and industry associations
within the G10 on their methods for mitigating credit risk. We are now evaluating how to incorporate
the risk-reducing benefits of the best of these practices, while at the same time addressing potential
risks that remain from their use.
As we finalize our proposals for making capital charges reflective of risk mitigation techniques, we are
striving to find the right balance between recognizing a material reduction of risk with a structure that
is  applicable  beyond  internationally-active  banks  to  both  domestic  and  non-G10  banks.  While  we
recognize that the treatment of credit risk mitigation techniques might differ in some respects between
the  standardized  and  the  internal  ratings-based  approaches,  we  want  to  ensure  a  high  degree  of
consistency between the two.
Interest rate and other risks
The  Committee  recognizes  that  in  refining  the  measurement  of  credit  risk,  we  should  also  take  the
opportunity to explore the potential coverage of other important risks, such as interest rate risk in the
banking book and operational risk.
For  interest  rate  risk,  we  are  pursuing  a  methodology  that  would  require  a  capital  charge  only  for
so-called  “outlier”  banks  whose  interest  rate  risk  is  significantly  above  average.  The  envisioned
framework for determining “outlier” banks for interest rate risk is similar to the general framework for
credit  risk  -  the  most  sophisticated  banks  would  use  internal  measurement  systems  for  assigning
3
BIS Review 51/2000
capital,  while  banks  without  sufficiently  robust  internal  systems  would  use  a  simple  standardized
approach. The Committee is still working out a number of issues on this topic, including the definition
of  an “outlier”  bank  and  supervisory  assumptions  that  would  need  to  be  built  into  the  standardized
approach.
The Committee, through its Risk Management Group, also is engaged in the development of a capital
requirement for other risks, in particular operational risk. Over the past year, it has met with numerous
banks  and  industry  associations  including  the  British  Bankers’  Association.  These  meetings  have
allowed us to better understand the range of practices currently in use. Over the next year, the Risk
Management Group will work with the industry to develop an evolutionary framework comprised of
approaches  of  varying  sophistication,  ranging  from  a  simple  to  an  internal-based  method.  We  are
particularly interested in creating the right incentives through a set of robust criteria that will enable
banks,  subject  to  supervisory  approval,  to  employ  increasingly  sophisticated  approaches  for  setting
capital requirements for other risks.
Second and third pillars
Let  me  also  briefly  touch  upon  the  two  other  pillars  of  the  revised  capital  adequacy  framework  -
supervisory review and market discipline. These topics are certainly familiar and important ones to all
of you.
Supervisory  review  of  capital  is  a  critical  complement  to  minimum  capital  requirements.  The
Consultative  Paper  proposes  that  supervisors  should  ensure  that  each  bank  has  sound  internal
processes in place to assess the adequacy of its capital, based on a thorough evaluation of its risks. I
want to stress that this proposed approach in no way intends to replace the judgement and expertise of
bank management, or to shift responsibility for capital adequacy to supervisors. On the contrary, it is
well  understood  that  bank  managers  have  the  most  complete  understanding  of  the  risks  their
institutions face, and it is they and the bank’s board of directors who have primary responsibility for
managing those risks.
The task for supervisors in this framework is to evaluate how well banks are assessing their capital
needs  relative  to  their  risks,  including  whether  banks  are  appropriately  addressing  the  relationship
between  different  types  of  risks.  Most  importantly,  in  proposing  this  second  pillar  the  Committee
intends  to  foster  a  more  active  dialogue  between  banks  and  their  supervisors,  such  that  when
deficiencies  develop,  prompt  and  decisive  action  can  be  taken  to  restore  capital.  The  Committee
currently is in the final stages of preparing a paper on how the supervisory review of capital can be
implemented effectively.
The  third  pillar  of  the  new  capital  adequacy  framework,  market  discipline,  will  serve  to  reinforce
capital regulation and other supervisory efforts to promote safety and soundness in banks and financial
systems. The Committee, in January of this year, issued a paper on bank disclosures, covering banks’
capital  structures,  risk  exposures  and  capital  adequacy.  Currently,  our  Transparency  Group  is
considering  whether  it  is  possible  to  establish  a  set  of  core  disclosures  that  would  bolster  market
discipline. This  will involve  drawing  upon  our  existing  disclosure  recommendations,  and  reviewing
the  extent  to  which  disclosure  in  new  areas  -  the  internal  ratings-based  method,  external  ratings  or
internal assessment of other risks - might be appropriate.
I hope that this overview has given you a sense of the key points the Committee has learned from the
consultative  process,  and  where  we  are  headed.  In  the  near-term,  we  are  completing  our  work  and
expect  over  the  next  few  months  to  make  progress  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  greater  risk
differentiation in the standardized approach and the development of supervisory standards for internal
ratings.
As we continue to fine-tune the new capital adequacy framework, we also are striving to avoid getting
bogged down in secondary issues that could slow down the overall process. As I have often remarked,
the  perfect  cannot  be  the  enemy  of  the  good.  It  is  imperative  that  we  stay  on  track  in  our  goal  to
release  a  new  capital  adequacy  framework  by  early  next  year,  with  a  comment  period  and  industry
implementation to follow shortly thereafter.
BIS Review 50/2000
4
Corporate governance
My remarks thus far have focused on the need for a more risk-reflective capital framework. Clearly, a
strong capital position is crucial to the sound operation of any banking organization. It allows banks’
board of directors and senior management to focus on strategic objectives and growth opportunities,
supports the business  activities  of  the  organization,  and provides  the  financial strength  necessary  to
sustain the occasional losses that are inevitable in a business of taking calculated risks.
In this latter sense, capital represents the last line of defense against potential loss-creating problems.
But, I want to briefly address the first line of defense - effective bank management, which increasingly
is  an  important  element  of  today’s  supervisory  framework  as  banks’  activities  and  their  associated
risks become ever more complex.
There  are  several  aspects  to  effective  bank  management.  The  importance  of  good  corporate
governance  cannot  be  overemphasized.  Broadly  speaking,  corporate  governance  refers  to  the
organizational  infrastructure  necessary  to  achieve  a  workable  corporate  strategy,  to  effectively
implement that strategy, and to continually evaluate its risks and benefits to the organization. These
basic infrastructural elements include:
    independent and competent outside directors;
capable and experienced management;
a coherent corporate strategy and business plan; and,
clear lines of responsibility and accountability.
There are  three  key  points that  are  closely  related  to  good  corporate  governance  and  critical to  any
banking institution. The first is a rigorous internal control apparatus, which is essential to the sound
and successful execution of banks’ strategic objectives. Second, each banking institution must have in
place the technical systems and management processes necessary to identify the risks associated with
its activities. Third, an effective risk management and control structure must be accompanied by the
institutional  management  culture  required  to  ensure  that  policies  and  procedures  are  translated  into
practice, with buy-in at all staff levels.
Primary  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  bank  has  in  place  good  corporate  governance,  rigorous
internal  controls  and  effective  risk  management  lies  with  the  board  of  directors  and  senior
management. The task of the board of directors is to oversee the development of the overall strategy of
the organization and the decisions made by senior management in pursuit of that strategy. The role of
senior management, in turn, is to  assure  that day-to-day  decisions  made  within  the  organization  are
consistent  with  the  policies  and  long-term  objectives  of  the  board.  With  regard  to  the  board  of
directors,  I  recognize  that it can be  difficult  to  elect  members  with  the  necessary  skills  and  time  to
devote to overseeing the bank. While this can be a major challenge, it is obviously important that we
get it right for the overall well-being of the bank.
Conclusion
In  closing,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  effective  supervision  of  modern  banking  organizations  will
necessarily entail a closer and more cooperative partnership between industry participants and official
supervisors. The industry’s participation in the formulation of a more risk-sensitive capital adequacy
framework is a good example of this kind of constructive interaction. Indeed, the three pillars of the
proposed  framework  -  minimum  standards,  supervisory  review  of  banks’  capital  assessment
methodologies, and market discipline - reflect the understanding that regulatory requirements alone are
no longer sufficient to address the growing complexity of banks’ activities and the associated risks.
Consistent with this notion is the need for effective corporate governance, which plays an increasingly
important role in a rapidly evolving banking environment.
It is clear to me, as a former commercial banker and now as a supervisor, that only if the industry and
supervisors work together, each meeting our responsibilities and reinforcing the other, will we be able
to successfully manage and supervise a modern financial system. While perspectives may differ from
5
BIS Review 51/2000
time to time, our objective is the same - to maintain a strong and vibrant financial system over the long
term.
BIS Review 50/2000
6
