Masaru Hayami: Financial system stability and future agenda - 
need to strengthen the capital base
Speech  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Fiftieth  Anniversary
Symposium of the Institute for Financial Affairs, Tokyo, on 14 July 2000.
 I  am  pleased  to  be  invited  to  this  Symposium  celebrating  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Institute  for
Financial Affairs.
Before I begin, allow me to explain one rule regarding monetary policy meetings under the new Bank
of  Japan  Law,  which  became  effective  in  April  1998.  The  rule  dictates  that  the  Governor,  Deputy
Governors and Members of the Policy Board should not, in principle, make remarks about monetary
policy and operations immediately before or after monetary policy meetings. This is intended to avoid
any unnecessary speculation or confusion which might be generated by such remarks. We call this the
“blackout rule”. Since there is a monetary policy meeting next Monday, today happens to fall into the
period  when  this  blackout  rule  applies.  Therefore,  I  will  not  talk  about  any  matters  relating  to
monetary policy and will refrain from answering any questions on the subject. I would appreciate your
kind understanding on this.
Since  I  began  my  career  as  a  central  banker  a  long  time  ago,  I  have  received  a  lot  of  intellectual
stimulus from reading the publications of the Institute as well as participating in the study groups and
conferences  organized  by  it.  And  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Institute  for
publishing the book on the balance of payments which my colleagues in the then Foreign Department
wrote and I edited some 20 years ago in 1977.
On the occasion of the Institute’s 50th anniversary, when we look back at the past 50 years of Japan’s
economy, we really have experienced a diversity of situations. Around the time of the Korean War, I
was  in  Osaka  and  witnessed  the  reconstruction  of  the  textile  industry  and  the  economic  boom
supported  by  the  special  procurements  occasioned  by  that  war.  Other  events  in  the  past  50  years
include  the  reconstruction  period  following  the  chaos  just  after  World  War  Two,  the  high  growth
period,  the  oil  shocks,  the  Plaza  Agreement  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen,  the  emergence  and
bursting of the bubble, and the current prolonged recession.
When talking about Japan’s economy, some call the past 10 years the “lost decade”, and during this
period average annual growth was a meager 1%. Against this background, financial institutions have
been gradually changing their management strategy while bearing the heavy burden of the past legacy.
Though Japan’s financial system has faced an extremely difficult situation for the past several years, it
appears  that  overall  stability  has  finally  been  restored  thanks  to  various  measures.  For  example,  in
overseas markets, the difficulty that Japanese banks faced in raising funds around the beginning of last
year  and  the  Japan  premium,  which  was  the  extra  cost  that  they  had  to  pay,  have  largely  subsided
against  such  background  as  the  injection  of  public  funds  into  major  banks  in  March  1999.  At
international meetings like the G10 central bank governors meeting at the BIS, which in fact I attended
a  few  days  ago,  we  have  seldom  heard  any  concern  or  criticism  about  financial  system  stability  in
Japan.  In  addition,  the  ratings  of  Japanese  banks,  mainly  those  that  have  announced  merger  and
consolidation plans, have begun to be upgraded.
And yet, it is true that there exist a number  of  agendas that  we  have  to tackle to further  strengthen
financial stability, as evidenced by the recent collapse of Sogo Department Store. Today, I would like
to  talk  about  the  need  to  strengthen  the  capital  base,  one  of  the  most  important  agendas  over  the
medium to long term.
Among many issues regarding the capital base, the first is the capital structure of Japanese banks. The
risk-based  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  internationally  active  Japanese  banks  was  11.8%  at  the  end  of
1
BIS Review 59/2000
March 2000, out of which Tier 1 capital was 6.6%. In the case of US money center banks, the capital
adequacy ratio was 13%, and Tier 1 capital 8 to 9%. It should be noted that in the United States, there
has  been  no injection  of public funds  and deferred  tax  assets  corresponding  only  to  income  for  the
following year are included in Tier 1 capital. If we calculate the Tier 1 capital of internationally active
Japanese  banks  according  to  the  US  standard,  it  would  decline  from  6.6%  to  the  4%  level.  Indeed,
there is clearly a big difference in the capital structure between major Japanese banks and US money
center  banks.  In  other  words,  there  exists  a  difference,  significantly  larger  than  what  is  observed,
between Japan and the United States in terms of the strength of banks’ capital position.
Under  such  circumstances,  Japanese  banks  need  to  strengthen  capital  base  by  increasing  its  key
element.  Furthermore,  from  the  viewpoint  of  achieving  multiple  targets  including  not  only  the
strengthening of capital base but also a reduction in capital cost and an increase in return on equity,
banks  should  work  toward  the  redemption  of  high-cost  capital  and  an  increase  in  internal  reserves
through higher profits.
The second issue is how to measure various  risks  such  as credit,  market  and  operational  risk  by  an
advanced  method  and  to  align  capital  charges  closely  with  these  underlying  risks.  The  Basel
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  chaired  by  Mr  William  McDonough,  President  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, is undertaking reform of the 1988 Basel Capital Accord. In June 1999, a
consultative paper proposing a new capital framework was released and public comment was sought
until  March  2000.  Currently,  the  Capital  Accord  is  being  reformed  by  incorporating  the  comments
received from the public, with the reforms being put into effect two years from now.
The  following  points  deserve  particular  attention.  First,  the  new  Capital  Accord  will  incorporate
market  and  operational  risks,  which  are  not  taken  into  account  in  the  current  Capital  Accord,  in
banking accounts. Second, it will measure credit risk more precisely and impose capital charges more
appropriately.
For the past few years, banks have increasingly faced more complex and sophisticated types of risks.
To satisfactorily deal with these risks as well as to win amid the severe competition that is to come, it
is  necessary  that  risks  should  be  measured  in  an  accurate  way  and  appropriate  capital  charges  set
accordingly.
The  third  issue  for  financial  system  stability  in  Japan  is  how  to  deal  with  intensified  competition
triggered by the entry of foreign capital and non-financial firms into the banking industry.
One of the major topics in the financial community in recent years is that foreign capital and domestic
non-financial  firms,  which  have  detected  business  opportunities  in  Japan’s  banking  industry,  have
become active in purchasing failed banks and establishing internet banks. Some of these banks have
announced  their  intention  to  focus  on  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  which  had  been
profitable.
There are also active moves to establish new types of banks which did not exist traditionally. One firm
is  considering  providing  payment  services  by  installing  automated  teller  machines  in  a  myriad  of
convenience stores. Another one is aiming at offering various banking services efficiently through the
internet to satisfy the diverse needs of customers.
The management environment surrounding banks has significantly changed. Competition has further
intensified.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  recent  strategy  of  many  banks,  whether  establishing
holding companies, forming a megabank by merger or focusing on local communities, has emphasized
consumer banking and customer targeting, focusing, for example, on small and medium-sized firms.
In consumer banking and customer targeting, competition is already intense among Japanese banks of
all  sizes,  foreign  banks  and  non-financial  firms.  To  win  the  race,  it  is  essential  to  have  a  detailed
database regarding individuals and firms as well as to maintain a large network to reduce operational
costs.  For  this,  we  need  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  progress  of  information  technology,  which
requires enormous investment. In this regard, whether or not one has sufficient capital to be able to
finance such investment is the key to success.
BIS Review 59/2000
2
Banks that plan mega-mergers emphasize business areas such as investment banking, project finance,
global cash management and networking in Asia as their primary strategies. In these business areas,
major  banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  have  already  constructed  a  fairly  solid  business
foundation.  Particularly  in  such  business  areas  as  global  cash  management  and  global  custody,
Japanese banks need huge investment and technology to compete with banks in the United States and
Europe.  The  key  to  success  in  these  business  areas  is  investment  in  information  technology  and
sufficient capital.
As  I  just described, strengthening  the capital  base and  pursuing  the efficient  use  of  capital  seems  a
typical case of “easier said than done”. Nevertheless, when we look back at the recovery of US banks
from  the  banking  crisis  in  the  early  1990s,  we  observe  the  following  virtuous  circle.  First,  banks’
profitability  improved  thanks  to  restructuring.  Then,  their  ratings  were  upgraded,  which  led  to  a
reduction  in  capital  cost  and  fund-raising  costs.  Such  cost  reductions  contributed  to  higher
profitability. Using increased profits, banks  amortized  high-cost  capital  by,  for  example,  purchasing
back preferred stock. Higher profits increased internal reserves, return on equity rose and ratings were
further upgraded. These processes continued.
Efficient use of capital means that we need to select targeted business areas and concentrate resources
on these selected areas. This reminds me of the fact that Mr John Reed, Chairman of Citicorp, decided
to abolish its investment banking section. In the mid-1990s, return on equity in the investment banking
section  was  as  high  as  13%.  Nevertheless,  Citicorp  pursued  its  chosen  strategy  by  abolishing  the
investment  banking  section  and  transferring  all  human  and  physical resources in it to the  consumer
banking  section.  There  were  various  criticisms  about  Citicorp’s  decision,  but  it  turned  out  to  be
successful.  This  episode  shows  that  it  is  ultimately  the  decision  of  top  management  to  achieve  the
strengthening of capital base and efficient use of capital.
There  are  five  months  remaining  before  we  enter  the  21st  century.  We  strongly  hope  that  in  the
coming century Japanese financial institutions will be internationally competitive and provide the best
financial services on a global basis thanks to the efforts of all those concerned in the management of
financial institutions.
We at the Bank of Japan will continue to make utmost efforts to maintain financial system stability by
utilizing the experience and the lessons learned in the past 50 years, and to preserve independence and
transparency, two fundamental concepts underpinning the new Bank of Japan Law.
3
BIS Review 59/2000
