Eva Srejber: The role of monetary policy for growth in Sweden
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
FöreningsSparbanken’s Economics Day, held in Vellinge, on 6 June 2000.
the
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here  at  FöreningsSparbanken’s
Economics Day. In my speech today, I shall try to look beyond the day-to-day monetary policy where
the focus on interest rate points and minor differences in assessments of the consumer price index at
times entails a risk of a lack of perspective. It can therefore sometimes be justified to remind oneself
and others of the role that economic policy can and should play. For me as a decision-maker at the
Riksbank, this applies in particular of course to the role of monetary policy and the importance of the
stability  of  the  payment  system.  I  would  also  like  to  recall  the  successes  achieved  in  the  Swedish
economy  during  the  past  decade,  where  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  have  both  made  important
contributions.  The  challenge  now  is  to  reinforce  what  has  been  achieved  and  at  the  same  time  be
strong enough to carry out  the  changes  that remain.  It  is  also important  to  continually  evaluate  and
discuss the design of economic policy as new experiences are obtained. This requires openness, which
has been a lodestar for the Riksbank in recent years.
To create understanding and support for the goal of price stability, it has been necessary to explain the
conceptual  framework  that  guides  monetary  policy  decisions  in  a  simple,  pedagogic  way.  This  has
perhaps resulted in our creating an exaggerated idea that monetary policy decisions are arrived at with
the  aid  of  very  simple  rules.  A  simple  conceptual  framework  is  a  support  in  a  complicated  reality.
However, factors that cannot be captured in a simple rule for decision-making need to be taken into
account. Since the effects of monetary policy extend over a number of years, every decision must rest
on assessments of probability and individual valuations of the risks that are associated with alternative
developments in the macroeconomy in future. In conclusion, I draw attention to some of these risks in
the development of the Swedish economy in the present situation.
The three pillars of economic policy
A well-balanced economic policy contributes to creating good prerequisites for  stable,  high  growth,
which is generally regarded as an important component of the welfare concept. For this, it is required
that  all  components  of  economic  policy  play  their  roles  well.  This  applies  to  fiscal,  structural  and
monetary policy. Good conditions for growth are created when uncertainty about future income and
expenditure  is  minimised.  If  at  the  same  time  resources  are  used  where  they  make  the  greatest
contribution  to  welfare,  there  are  prerequisites  for  good  development.  Economic  policy  should  be
designed so as to minimise uncertainty and so that the regulatory framework and tax system do not
distort the allocation of resources in the economy.
If fiscal policy is carried out so that the central government debt is stabilised at a reasonable long-term
level,  certainty  is  established  in  the  design  of  the  transfer  systems  and  coming  tax  burdens  and
investment and consumption decisions are facilitated. Structural policy also has an important role with
regard to creating good conditions for growth. Structural policy is such a broad concept that I can only
point to some important components. The tax and transfer systems, for instance, should be designed so
that they do not create motives for citizens to act in a way that is harmful to long-term  growth and
welfare. The task of the educational system is to provide access to relevant, high-quality education and
that of labour market policy to ensure that demand and supply of labour power match.
1
BIS Review 48/2000
The tasks of the Riksbank
A monetary policy aiming at price stability reduces uncertainty about future real incomes. Agreements
on  future  payments  and  assessments  of  future  income  are  thereby  facilitated.  Demands  for
compensation  for  risk  are  reduced  which,  among  other  things,  stimulates  real  investments.  Price
stability also improves the ability of the price system to spread information about how resources are to
be distributed to areas where they most benefit citizens. In a market economy, it is the task of the price
system to communicate information about household preferences and, for instance, to provide signals
as to where productivity is to be best developed.
Besides  the  task  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  the  Riksbank  is  also  responsible  for  the  country’s
payment system. It is a prerequisite for the functioning of a modern economy that payments can be
carried  out  in  a  safe,  efficient  way.  In  order  for  payment  systems  to  function,  it  is  important  that
financial stability is maintained, which, for instance, means that bank crises shall be avoided. There
are  close  connections  between  the  responsibility  of  the  central  bank  for  price  stability  and  its
responsibility  for  financial  stability.  In  order  for  the  instrumental  rate  to  have  the  desired  effect  on
interest rate formation, it is, for instance, important that the payment system functions efficiently and
securely,  since  monetary  policy  instruments  operate  via  the  payment  systems.  Price  stability  can
further be threatened by financial imbalances and by financial instability. At the same time a monetary
policy  focused  on  price  stability  per  se  probably  reduces  the  risk  for  financial  instability.  It  is  not
meaningful to draw a sharp boundary between what is regarded as the central bank’s monetary policy
tasks and what is included in the responsibility for a secure, efficient payment system. I confine myself
here  to  stressing  that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  both  required  to  create  good  growth
conditions in an economy. And the central bank plays an important role in achieving both these goals.
On  1 January  1999,  a new  Riksbank  Act came  into force.  It  states  that the  goal  for  the  Riksbank’s
activity  is  to  maintain  stable  prices.  The  Riksbank  shall  also  be  responsible  for  a  secure,  efficient
payment system. In the preparatory legal material on the Act, it is also further stated that the Riksbank,
without setting aside the price stability target, shall also support the objectives of  general economic
policy with a view to achieving sustainable growth and high employment.
The  price  stability  goal  has  then  been  confirmed  by  law.  The  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  is
responsible for making the price stability goal operational and designing the framework for monetary
policy. Among other things, this means that the Executive Board decides on how the  price stability
goal is to be defined and over what period price stability is to be maintained.
The  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  has  decided  that  price  stability  shall  be  defined  as  an  annual
increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  of  2%  with  a  tolerance  interval  of  plus/minus  one  percentage
point. If the consumer price index is affected by factors that are considered to only have a temporary
effect on CPI, the Executive Board has agreed that we shall be able to disregard this. The reason is that
monetary policy otherwise risks leading to unnecessary fluctuations in employment and production.
A lot has been achieved although some things remain to be done
Economic  policy  has  been  very  successful  in  many  areas  during  recent  years.  When  central
government  debt  increased  dramatically  during  the  first  half  of  the  1990s,  when,  at  the  same  time,
unemployment  increased  to  a  very  high  level  and  large  fluctuations  in  long  interest  rates  and  the
exchange rate indicated great uncertainty in inflation prospects in the mid-1990s, there were probably
not many who could imagine that we would so quickly have such a positive development as we are at
present experiencing. Central government finances have improved markedly and we are now one of
the  best  in  the  EU  with  regard  to  the  size  of  central  government  debt  and  the  central  government
budget balance.
For some time now, growth has been strong and we expect unemployment to fall towards 4% during
the coming year. And despite this, inflation expectations remains at a stable level close to the target.
We can therefore note that the Riksbank has been very successful in creating support and credibility
around  the  price  stability  target.  Without  such  a  responsible  fiscal  policy,  it  would  not  have  been
possible  to  reduce  inflation  expectations  in  the  way  that  has  happened,  however.  The  prohibition
BIS Review 48/2000
2
against financing the budget deficit at the central bank was a step in that direction. The rule that the
Government and Riksdag adopted and which means that fiscal policy is to strive towards a surplus of
an average of 2% over a business cycle furthermore supports the price stability target and creates good
conditions for growth. The expenditure ceiling for central government finances that sets limits for how
much public activity can expand has the same effect.
Many structural reforms that  have  improved  the  conditions  for  growth in the longer term  have  also
been  carried  out  during  the  past  decades.  The  financial  markets  are  wholly  deregulated  and  the  tax
system is reformed so that it produces fewer distortions than before. During the 1990s, a process has
been  initiated  which  has  strengthened  competition  in  many  areas.  Transport,  communication  and
energy have been deregulated. At the same time, EU membership and continued internationalisation
have exposed the business sector to increased competition.
However, there is still a great potential for deregulation. This applies, for instance, to many parts of
service production where moreover growth prospects look favourable. A study recently carried out by
the Competition Authority confirms that competition has improved during the 1990s, but also points to
considerable  competition  deficiencies  in  many  industries.  Besides  many  industries  in  the  service
sector, this also applies, among others, to the construction industry where regulatory frameworks and
building norms contribute to excluding competitors from other countries. The study is a follow-up of a
study carried out in 1991. Its conclusion was that lack of competition and concomitant high prices was
a feature of a number of the industries investigated.
Exaggerated expectations about the growth path can create macroeconomic imbalance
Even though the growth prospects for the Swedish economy now appear very bright, it is too early to
write  off  the  risk  of  old  problems  in  our  economy  again  making  their  presence  felt.  There  is,  for
instance,  a  risk  for  overheating  when  households  and  businesses  now  seem  to  make  decisions  on
consumption and investments based on expectations of strong future real income increases as a result
of  higher  productivity  growth.  This  can  lead  to  financial  imbalances  and  exaggerated  indebtedness
heightened  by  high  share  prices  and  increasing  property  prices.  Earlier  periods  with  strong  credit
expansion  and  high  demand  in  Swedish  economy  have  been  followed  by  rising  inflation.  Low
inflation expectations and price-dampening effects from deregulations can now for a time hold back
the  inflationary  pressure  that  builds  up  when  resource  use  in  the  economy  increases.  Low  inflation
combined with high growth can per se strengthen the concept that earlier patterns have been broken
away from in the long term and we have entered a period with long-term higher growth. If demand
increases  so  much  that  resources  are  put  under  pressure,  however,  inflation  will  sooner  or  later
accelerate. There is a risk that prices  then  will  increase  very  quickly  and  that inflation  expectations
will  also  increase.  To  get  inflation  in  line  with  the  target  in  that  situation,  it  may  be  necessary  to
conduct a stringent monetary policy for a longer period. If expectations of future growth prospects at
the same time are interrupted, a need for consolidation can arise in the household and business sector,
which  will  strongly  dampen  growth.  The  consequences  of  altogether  too  strong  growth  now  could
therefore  be  instability  in  inflation  and  production  later.  If  the  financial  imbalances  have  become
altogether  too  great,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  consequences  will  not  be  limited  to  great  variations  in
growth and inflation but will even lead to lower overall production.
The same course of development as in the USA?
As  we  have  said,  it  is  incontestable  that  the  Swedish  economy  has  functioned  better  than  before.
However,  there  is  a  risk  that  we  will  overshoot.  The  exceptionally  long  upswing  in  the  USA  has
contributed  to  strengthening  expectations  on  faster  long-term  growth  in  Sweden  as  well.  There  are
certain developmental features in the Swedish economy that are reminiscent of the American economy
which could indicate that. An important basis for the favourable development in the USA is probably
the approach to budget consolidation and price stability that has guided economic policy there for a
long  time.  And  in  those  areas  we  have  had  a  similar  development  in  Sweden  although  the  process
started later here. At the same time, the strong penetration of information technology in the American
3
BIS Review 48/2000
economy is considered to be a factor that has contributed to the productivity improvements recorded in
the USA. As regards information technology, we are well to the fore, although it is first recently that
statistics indicate some increase in productivity growth. Expectations for a continued strong increase
in productivity in the USA have also been a basis for the strong rise on the American stock exchange.
The high share prices and the positive expectations have stimulated demand and the debt ratio in the
private sector has increased. It is not possible to write off the risk of financial imbalances being built
up in the USA, which risks having negative effects on the macroeconomy. However, many analysts
consider that the long-term growth rate has in fact increased in the American economy and that the
expectations that have served as the basis for investments and increased indebtedness will therefore be
realised.
Even  if  there  are  some  indications  that  point  to  the  Swedish  economy  undergoing  a  similar
development to the American, the structural differences cannot be disregarded, which probably create
greater  inertia  in the  Swedish  economy  than  in  the  USA. The labour  market  is  one such  area.  As  I
mentioned earlier, considerable barriers to competition also remain in the Swedish economy. Another
difference is that the cyclical upswing we are now experiencing is taking place at the same  time  as
growth is increasing in the surrounding world and resource use is increasing. The American upswing
could benefit from a surrounding world with a lot of free resources and low price pressure and with
few competing investment alternatives for international investors.
Should monetary policy counteract financial imbalances?
How  shall  monetary  policy  be  designed  if  there  is  a  risk  for  exaggerated  indebtedness  and
overheating?
A decision-making rule the Riksbank sometimes uses to motivate its monetary policy decisions can in
simple terms be described as follows: when inflation exceeds the target in a one-to-two year horizon,
then the interest rate is increased. Interest rate increases reduce the  demand  for  goods and  services,
which in turn reduces inflationary pressure. In our simple conceptual framework, inflationary pressure
is  then  assumed  to  vary  with  the  use  of  resources  in  the  economy.  When  there  is  free  capacity,
inflationary pressure is low in the absence of so-called shocks. When demand is so high that it exceeds
the level that is compatible with the long-term production path, inflation tends instead to exceed the
target. The line of reasoning is based on inflationary expectations being established close to the target
for monetary policy. Price increases when demand is strong may for instance depend on bottlenecks
being created in some part of the production chain. As the company in this situation, cannot improve
its profits by increasing its volume of sales, profit margins are increased by price increases. Shortage
of  labour  also  increases  the  risk  for  excessively  high  wage  increases.  The  result  will  be  higher
inflation.
If we strictly apply such a simple rule for decision-making, we shall then disregard the risk of building
up  of  financial  imbalances  and  overheating  as  long  as  inflation  is  not  deemed  to  exceed  the  target
during the forecast period.
In the most recently published inflation assessments, it was assumed that the price stability target was
not  threatened  during  the  forecast  period  despite  the  growth  of  demand  being  so  strong  that  use  of
capacity  was  under  strain  at  the  end  of  the  period.  The  majority  view  of  the  Executive  Board  was
therefore  that  there  was  no  reason  to  increase  the  repo  rate.  This  assessment  was  based  on  free
resources  in  the  initial  situation,  good  productivity  growth,  low  price  increases  on  certain  recently
deregulated areas, low import prices and finally low inflation expectations. It is not per se strange that
GDP can increase as much as 3-4% for a couple of years without inflation sharply accelerating, if the
use of resources is low initially.
If the pattern from previous cyclical upswings was to be repeated, price pressure should now increase.
However,  it  has  proven  difficult  to  identify  any  exact  and  very  stable  correlation.  As  I  mentioned
earlier  great  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  Swedish  economy.  While  there  are  still  considerable
deficiencies in competition in many areas, it is nevertheless not probable that inflation will accelerate
strongly in the next few years. An important reason for this is that the price stability target has now
BIS Review 48/2000
4
obtained such strong support that inflation expectations are not increasing despite a cyclical upswing
that is stronger than for a very long time. I have, however, for the reasons I mentioned earlier in my
speech, been somewhat more pessimistic than the majority of the Executive Board as regards inflation
assessments at the forecast horizon. Fluctuations of consumer prices a few tenths of a percent up and
down around the target in an economy with a strongly accepted price stability regime are per se less
important than the mode of functioning of the economy.
I  am  more  concerned  about  what  can  happen  with  inflation  and  growth  after  the  forecast  period  if
demand increases at the rate we have anticipated. The simple rule that says that monetary policy shall
only  react  if  the  target  for  inflation  is  not  met  during  the  forecast  period  is  a  good  help  when
conducting  monetary  policy.  However,  it  is  not  reasonable to  mechanically  apply  this  rule  in  every
situation. The consequences that the economic development can have for macroeconomic stability and
inflation beyond the forecast horizon must also be weighed in. The risk for financial imbalances now
being built up when indebtedness is increasing and of inflationary pressure accumulating at the same
time  must  in  my  view  therefore  be  taken  into  account  in  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  A
development  that  I  described  earlier  can be the  consequence  if  the  expansion of  demand  and  credit
continue to increase at a high rate. The quantity of money and lending, especially to households, are
for instance increasing at present at a rate which is probably not sustainable in the long term.
The  advantages  of  simple  rules  for  decision-making  are  that  they  are  easy  to  explain  which  can  be
especially  important  when  establishing  credibility  for  a  low-inflation  regime.  With  simple  rules  for
action, it becomes clear what has guided monetary policy decisions. However, as I have shown, this
does  not  necessarily  result  in  optimal  policy  in  every  situation  in  the  sense  that  macroeconomic
stability and longer-term price stability are achieved. The difficulties in assessing when demand and
the increase in lending are too strong are certainly considerable although this applies by and large to
all the assessments we have to make.
5
BIS Review 48/2000
