Mr Hayami: Globalization and regional cooperation in Asia
Speech given by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at  the  Asian  Pacific  Bankers
Club, in Tokyo, on 17 March 2000.
 It is a great honor to be invited today and given an opportunity to address distinguished members of
the  Asian  Pacific  Bankers  Club.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  Club  for  providing  a
valuable forum for fostering mutual understanding among representatives of major banks in East Asia
and the Pacific region. More than two years have passed since the outset of the currency crisis in Asia,
and  we  can  now  say  that  we  have  clearly  witnessed  a  recovery.  Thus,  at  this  juncture,  I  believe  it
useful to examine what kind of regional cooperation is desirable in Asia from a long-term perspective.
Positive and negative sides of globalization
Let  me  first  consider  globalization.  The  essence  of  globalization  is  the  integration  of  markets
worldwide  and  the  deepening  of  various  interdependent  relations.  As  we  all  know,  the  speed  of
globalization has been accelerating, especially in financial markets. This is clearly evidenced by the
significant increase in foreign exchange transactions and international bond issues over the span of the
past ten years. You will all agree that the rapid progress of information and communication technology
has played a decisive role as the driving force behind globalization.
But,  we  should  not  forget  the  dynamic  mechanism  whereby  globalization  creates  pressures  for  the
harmonization  of  such  systems  as  accounting,  taxation  and  corporate  governance  across  borders,
which,  in  turn,  leads  to  further  globalization.  As  is  commonly  said,  “globalization  begets
globalization”.  Thus,  the  move  toward  globalization  is  an  inevitable  reality,  and  not  likely  to  be
reversed.
Bearing in mind such a reality, we need to examine the problems related to globalization and how we
should respond to them. Globalization has  brought  about a  variety  of  changes.  One  obvious  benefit
from a long-term viewpoint is that active cross-border capital flows will realize the efficient allocation
of world resources.
At  the  same  time,  precisely  because  of  enhanced  efficiency,  there  is  a  greater  risk  that  the  rapid
increase in international capital flows will induce an unexpected adverse impact, as was the case when
financial crisis contagion following the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis in 1997 spread to Russia
and Latin America.
Given  the  fact  of  life  that  globalization  is  not  reversible,  what  we  need  to  do  is  to  minimize  the
negative side of globalization. In fact, since the financial crisis in Asia, various measures have been
effected  to  prevent  international  contagion  stemming  from  financial  crises  and  to  improve  the
international  financial  system.  These  measures  include  the  improvement  of  disclosure  to  achieve
enhanced  market  discipline,  the  establishment  of  a  domestic  financial  system  which  is  robust  and
resilient to external shocks, closer international cooperation in terms of financial supervision, and the
review and strengthening of IMF functions.
Progress of regional cooperation
Amid globalization, it is worth noting that we have also witnessed a clear trend toward regionalism or
regional  cooperation  in  various  parts  of  the  world.  These  movements  toward  promoting  regional
cooperation  have  taken  due  account  of  trade  and  financial  relations.  For  example,  in  Europe,  the
introduction of the euro and the expansion of the EU. In the Americas, the expansion of NAFTA and
1
BIS Review 26/2000
dollarization which is being considered by some Latin American countries. In Asia, we have begun to
observe some moves toward closer cooperation as I will describe later.
Can we reconcile these two contrasting trends, the progress of economic and financial globalization on
the one hand, and the strengthening of regional cooperation on the other? One possible interpretation
of this difficult question is that the driving force behind globalization has also made the interaction of
economic and financial activities closer in regions which have a lot in common. For example, the rapid
progress of information and communication technology can be regarded as one of the major factors
supporting the integration of financial markets in the euro zone.
Therefore, globalization and regional cooperation can proceed simultaneously. Furthermore, regional
cooperation, if managed properly, will promote globalization. For example, if there are problems for
which it  will  take  a long  time  to  form  a  global  consensus, it  may  be  possible  to  reach  a  consensus
relatively quickly among specific regions. This is a case where regional cooperation lowers barriers to
globalization in countries within the regions concerned.
Furthermore, if there is a common platform for discussion or a framework for solving problems in a
region which consists of countries with similar economic conditions and policy orientation, we may be
able to reduce the cost of global negotiations in the event of international policy conflicts or shocks. In
such  a case,  regional  cooperation  may  supplement  a  global  cooperative  framework.  It  may  sound  a
little  ironic,  but  regional  cooperation  has  become  all  the  more  significant  and  important  when
globalization progresses rapidly. The global economy of the twenty-first century will most likely be a
multi-layered global network of various forms of regional cooperation.
Regional cooperation in Asia
Now, I would turn to regional cooperation in Asia. Needless to say, Asia is extremely diverse in terms
of culture, politics, and religion. Such diversity entails difficulties in promoting regional cooperation.
In fact, the speed of regional cooperation in Asia has been slow compared to other regions. However,
it is also true that the extent of interdependence has become more widespread and deep as witnessed
by the progress of the horizontal division of labor and increased capital flows in East Asia. In addition,
since the bitter experience of the currency crisis in 1997 has made us recognize the risk of spillover
and contagion, I  believe  that  momentum  for  actively  promoting  regional cooperation  as a  device  to
support globalization has steadily increased.
In  promoting  regional  cooperation,  let  me  offer  you  three  important  points  in  the  economic  and
financial area. First is the strengthening of mutual surveillance. It is a major premise for any regional
cooperation that the  countries  concerned  share  a  common  recognition  with  respect  to  the  economic
and  financial  conditions  of  individual  countries  in  the  region,  their  interdependence,  and  the  risks
inherent in the regional economy.
Second, countries in the region should share a common  view  of  the  future  direction  of  the  regional
economy and also concrete policy response based on such recognition. Bearing in mind the lessons we
learned from the currency crises, we should improve the functioning of financial markets and foreign
exchange  regimes,  and  also  strengthen  domestic  financial  systems  and  financial  supervisory
frameworks. In order to make an appropriate policy response, not only coordination among countries
in the region but also competition among them are very much needed.
Third is participation in global efforts toward the stability of the international financial system, which
is often termed the “New International Financial Architecture” problem. It seems to me increasingly
important to send a coherent message from Asia to such international fora as the Financial Stability
Forum,  the  Group  of  Twenty  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors,  and  the  International
Monetary and Financial Committee.
Having  said  all this,  we  should  never  forget  the  importance  of  maintaining  the  basic  philosophy  of
“open regionalism” as a major underlying premise to contribute to the stability and development of the
world economy. Central banks also play a very important role in promoting regional cooperation. As
symbolized  by  the  rapid  expansion  of  derivative  transactions,  we  now  live  in  a  world  where
BIS Review 26/2000
2
international  capital  flows  have  become  extremely  complex  and  the  speed  at  which  a  shock  is
transmitted across borders has accelerated.
In such a world, it is not possible for the central bank of any one country to ensure integrity of the
international financial system. This can be easily understood if we recall such problems as the liquidity
risk involved in foreign exchange and the Herstatt risk in cross-border settlements. To discharge the
responsibility of conducting appropriate monetary policy and maintaining financial system stability as
well  as  to  prevent  international  systemic  risk  from  emerging,  mutual  cooperation  and  coordination
have become increasingly essential among central banks in the region.
In this context, a forum called EMEAP, composed of central banks in the East Asia and Pacific region,
was  established  in  1991.  In  this  forum,  member  central  banks  have  been  exchanging  views  and
information regarding economic, financial market, and foreign exchange market developments. They
have also been studying  ways  to  make  improvements  in  such  areas  as  financial  markets,  settlement
systems, and bank supervisory methods.
Conclusion
In closing, let me briefly touch upon Japan’s role in Asia. Given the size of its economic presence and
close relations with countries in the Asian region, Japan should make an appropriate contribution to
regional  development.  To  this  end,  first  of  all,  Japan  itself  must  aggressively  implement  structural
reform to realize robust economic fundamentals.
At the same time, Japan should promote further opening and improvement of its domestic markets to
contribute  to  the  efficient  and  fair  allocation  of  world  resources.  Particularly  in  financial  markets,
various  measures  for  improvement  have  been  effected.  For  example,  in  the  benchmark  government
bond  market,  the  maturity  of  bonds  has  been  diversified  and  the  withholding  tax  on  non-residents
lifted.
We  should  continue  such  efforts  to  make  domestic  markets  more  attractive  for  overseas  investors.
Through such efforts, I believe and sincerely  hope that  countries  both  within  and outside  the  Asian
region  will  come  to  have  greater  confidence  in  Japan,  which,  in  turn,  will  contribute  to  closer  and
stronger cooperation in Asia.
3
BIS Review 26/2000
