Mr Brash gives an address
on the building blocks of economic growth
Speech  given  by  Dr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Canterbury
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, in Christchurch on 28 January 2000.
Introduction and retrospective
Over the past few years, as this speech has become an established part of my diary, I have used the
occasion  to  address  various  issues  of  the  day,  such  as  developments  with  the  exchange  rate,  the
balance of payments and the Reserve Bank’s inflation target.
Since this is my first public speech of the new millennium, the temptation is to step back much further
than usual and attempt to place current economic and monetary policy matters into the context of the
past thousand years.
Instead I want to speak on a subject that is of rather more immediate interest, economic growth. What
drives it, what will help us do better, and where does monetary policy fit into the scheme of things? To
get ahead of myself for just a minute, there won’t be too much about monetary policy. Good monetary
policy is important, but even the best monetary policy in the world will not of itself generate growth.
But as topical as growth is, history matters when we think about growth. So let me indulge just briefly
in  a  piece  of  millennium  contextualising.  In  an  excellent  survey  a  few  weeks  ago,  The  Economist
magazine1 reviewed humanity’s experience of economic growth over the past 1000 years. That survey
observed that the steady rise in living standards that we in the Western world now take for granted is,
in fact, a fairly recent phenomenon. Had I lived at the turn of the last millennium, for example, my life
would almost certainly have been – in the famous words of Thomas Hobbes - “poor, nasty, brutish and
short”. My lifestyle would have been essentially unchanged from that of my ancient grandparents and
great grandparents. Prior to about the middle of the 18th century, economic growth was so slow that it
was often imperceptible within the span of a lifetime.
The staggering growth of the last two or three centuries has supported a huge increase in population.
And, in the West, ours is the first age in which affluence has been enjoyed by more than just a tiny
fraction of the population. Even the less well-off can have access to things that were scarcely dreamed
of by even the wealthiest at the beginning of the twentieth century – things like an electric washing
machine, a television, a stereo, a computer, vaccination against disease, contact lenses, air travel and
so on.
So what happened to launch us into an age in which rising living standards and increasing wealth have
become  the  norm  rather  than  the  exception?  To  understand  that  is  to  give  ourselves  a  much  better
chance of understanding the way ahead.
Knowledge helped: the fruits of formal scientific endeavours, and of the applied curiosity of so many
remarkable men and women. But, as The Economist essay notes, much of the knowledge that proved
so  important  in  sparking  the  extraordinary  growth  in  Britain,  and  subsequently  elsewhere,  was  not
new. Some of the key technologies were available in Rome and China hundreds of years earlier. So
knowledge  alone  was  not  sufficient.  It  did  not  give  rise  to  sustained  economic  growth  in  China.
Indeed, in many cases the technologies that proved so valuable in Western Europe centuries later had,
by then, been completely lost to the Chinese.
So  if  knowledge  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  promote  growth,  what  are  the  other  factors  or  attributes
required?
1
25-31 December 1999 issue.
1
BIS Review 8/2000
There is no simple formula. Indeed, that is one of the things that make economics so interesting. As
we look to history to identify the successful economies, and then try to analyse what made them so, we
find ourselves wading into the uncertain fields of social values, politics and institutions. We have to
grapple with such things as property rights, law and order, the ability to contract into the future with
confidence, culture and values, an openness to innovation, social cohesion, public infrastructure, fair
and efficient taxes, and sound money.
Before anyone objects, let me volunteer immediately that that list is neither comprehensive nor ranked
in order of importance. But whatever the full story, we quickly find two themes emerging: sustained
growth  and  prosperity  required  an  openness  to  change,  and  both  vigorous  markets  and  good
government had important roles to play. In short, markets and governments needed each other.
What about the future?
Well, all that is interesting history, but what does it mean for 21st century New Zealand?
Clearly,  New  Zealanders  want  rising  standards  of  living.  Rising  living  standards  have  a  number  of
dimensions – each of us places value on a variety of different things, some traded in the market-place,
others not. But there is a widely-shared consensus that strong economic growth is a key foundation on
which broadly-based increases in living standards can be built.
Equally  clearly,  there  is  a  degree  of  public  dissatisfaction  with  both  the  pace  and  the  nature  of  the
economic growth achieved in recent decades. And the facts are quite stark. Our standard of living has
improved over the years. But the improvements in New Zealand have not matched those enjoyed by
Australians or others in Europe and North America.
Does that slide in relative living standards mean that the reforms of the past 15 years were misdirected
or  wrong?  Again,  my  view  is  clear. The reforms  were necessary,  they  were  generally  well-directed
and,  on  the  whole,  they  were  well-executed.  They  helped  deliver  us  both  increased  actual  growth
during the 1990s – we’ve broadly kept pace with the world in the 1990s – and they’ve increased our
potential for growth in the years ahead. But the challenge now is to sustain the growth, and begin to
close the gap between average incomes in New Zealand and incomes in other developed countries.
We did very well for a long time because there weren’t many of us, and climate meant we were very
efficient  producers  of  agricultural  products  that  were  prized  by  rapidly  growing  urban  populations
abroad. But as Denmark can’t today prosper on fine bacon, or Italy on the very best olive oil, so the
best Canterbury lamb and good Akaroa wine won’t be enough to keep us at the leading edge of the
nations of the world. The pressures we have been responding to in the last 20 years are largely beyond
the  control  of  any  government  –  a  continuation  of  a  two-centuries-long  slide  in  the  real  price  of
commodities  and  basic  manufactures,  falling  transportation  and  information  costs,  and  new
technologies  that  increasingly  both  require  and  reward  skills.  Add  to  that  a  legacy  of  change
postponed.
As I travel the country talking with groups like this, it is very clear that New Zealanders are anxious
about the way forward and are groping for answers about what will restore our relative position in the
world. And there seems to me to be no good reason why New Zealanders should not aspire to living
standards within, say, the top 10 of OECD nations. We were there in the 1950s, and indeed probably
for  much  of  the  early  part  of  the  twentieth  century  as  well.  We  now  stand  at  about  20th,  near  the
bottom of the OECD league, with average incomes 20 per cent adrift of even middle-ranking countries
like Australia, Sweden, and Ireland.
We are capable of reversing the trend but there are few certainties, no quick fixes, and no guarantees.
Governments cannot simply push a button labelled “high growth”, and no one will gift growth to us.
Some  things  we  know  work;  others  we  suspect  might.  But  in  other  areas,  we  simply  have  no  idea
whether we are hurting or helping (or neither) the cause of growth.
Often it seems that the pre-conditions for growth are laid down across decades, perhaps centuries. If
so,  they  are  hard  to  lose,  but  also  hard  to  gain.  In  many  respects,  government  policies  and  private
sector practices are very different in, say, the United States and Germany – and yet both are wealthy,
BIS Review 8/2000
2
growing, economies. And no matter what the policy regime, the countries of West Africa, for example,
are likely to be desperately poor for decades to come. Probably a few things matter a lot, and a lot of
things matter a little. Unfortunately, it is often easiest to do something about things that won’t do very
much to boost long-term prospects.
Some  things  we  simply  can’t  change.  Geography  matters,  and  drawing  a  circle  centred  on
Christchurch  with  a  radius  of  2100  kilometres  will  always  encompass  only  a  few  million  New
Zealanders and a lot of seagulls. Similar circles centred on Dublin, Helsinki, or Singapore encompass
hundreds of millions of people. That harsh fact makes it all the more important that we get right what
we can influence.
What  else  matters?  First,  and  to  go  back  to  the  history  I  started  with,  we  can  say  confidently  that
knowledge  matters.  That  has  rarely  been  more  obvious  than  over  the  past  few  years  in  the  United
States.  As  we  speak,  the  US  economy  is  on  the  verge  of  breaking  all  previous  records  for
uninterrupted growth – by next month, a record 107 months. During the 1990s, many think that the
sustainable medium-term  growth rate of the US economy has risen from  around  2.5  per cent  in  the
early  1990s,  to  around  3  or  even  3.5  per  cent  today.  In  large  part,  that  increase  reflects  the
extraordinary  developments  in  information  technology  in  recent  decades  that  are  now  coming  to
fruition. Record-high share prices year after year do raise questions about how much is sustainable,
but the change in the underlying technology is real and will not be lost – it is transforming the US, and
indeed the entire developed world.
So knowledge matters, and it will matter increasingly. We need people with ideas and innovations, and
entrepreneurs to  help  convert  those  innovations  into  successful  businesses.  But  we  also  need  social
attitudes that encourage both ideas and enterprise, and financial markets that support and sustain that
enterprise.
New Zealand will lift itself back to the top tier of OECD economies only with firms and workers that
are equipped with the skills and energy to participate fully in a knowledge-based economy. And not
simply to participate, but to be at the leading edge of developing and applying new technologies, and
finding markets for them.
A number of firms here in Christchurch – including Aoraki Corporation, run by our own director, Sir
Gilbert Simpson – are already a part of that drive, but we still have a considerable way to go. This is
certainly  not  a  technology-averse  society.  We  lead  the  world  in  the  take-up  of  new  banking
technologies (such as EFT-POS); leading-edge New Zealand technology played a big part in winning
– and, we all hope, retaining – the America’s Cup. And yet it is sobering to turn from the impressive
anecdotes to the hard data, where we find that New Zealand’s ratio of exports of high-tech products to
our imports of such products is among the very lowest in the developed world – ahead only of OECD
laggards Greece and Turkey.
There has been considerable debate in recent years about the role that government support for research
and development can, or should, play in helping foster this sort of orientation in our firms. In its recent
briefing papers, the Ministry of Research, Science, and Technology has highlighted that New Zealand
stands out as providing less support than most other countries.  I  am  no  expert  in  this field, and the
potential costs and benefits of such policies need to be weighed carefully. There can be considerable
costs to getting policy wrong. But that cuts two ways: there are costs in adopting measures that later
prove to be lemons, but there are also costs in not adopting initiatives that should in fact be pursued.
New Zealand’s history is, of course, littered with examples of the former sort. I suspect we should be
wary of dogmatism about things that are likely to be of secondary importance, especially when we still
know relatively little about the longer-term impact of the general tax and spending policies that affect
incentives throughout the economy and society.
Turning from firms to their workers, there are signs that the quality of the labour force is improving.
The number of students enrolled in tertiary education has increased markedly throughout the 1990s,
and whereas only 5.5 per cent of the adult population had a university degree in 1986, by 1996 that
number had risen to 8.5 per cent. The performance of the education sector remains critical to the future
of New Zealanders. But schools and universities can’t do it alone. They can only work with the raw
3
BIS Review 8/2000
material  they  are  given  –  children  who  are  already  shaped  by  the  attitudes  and  practices  of  their
parents, peers and communities.
Many  young  New  Zealanders  are  still  leaving  school  less  well-educated  than  their  international
counterparts. And a disproportionate number of Maori and Pacific Islanders are leaving school without
qualifications and, as a result, are working in low-skilled jobs. Over the coming decades, this group
will form an increasingly large part of the working age population. Raising Maori and Pacific Islander
educational  performance  provides  a  significant  opportunity  for  improving  New  Zealand’s  growth
prospects. And the threat to social cohesion – and, hence, to the capacity of the country to adapt and
grow – is equally real if, as a nation, we fail on this count.
A key aspect of any successful growth strategy will be openness to international trade and a thorough-
going integration into the global economy. When so much about growth is uncertain, this is one area
in  which  economists  find  relatively  little  to  dispute,  particularly  for  a  small  country  such  as  New
Zealand.  Studies  show  a  clear  link  between  the  openness  of  an  economy  –  openness,  that  is,  to
international trade, investment, and ideas – and economic growth. Openness enables us to specialise,
to  find  global  and  not just  local  markets  (and  rewards)  for  innovative  products,  and  it  provides  the
constant  discipline  and  challenge  of  the  fresh  ideas,  perspectives  and  products  the  wider  world  is
making available.
For much of the last half century New Zealand was not an open economy. Indeed, although we now
have quite an open economy, we opened up only relatively recently. And that is reflected in our ratio
of  trade  to  GDP,  which  –  contrary  to  much  popular  mythology  –  is  much  lower  than  would  be
expected for a country our size. The length of time an economy has been open also matters. Attitudes
and values, skills and markets, can only rarely be transformed overnight, no matter what happens to
the direct financial incentives firms and individuals face. By its nature, culture, whether business or
otherwise, changes relatively slowly.
In  a  sense,  none  of this  should  be  a surprise to  a  New  Zealand  audience.  From  the  early  European
sealers and whalers, to those exchanging flax for muskets, through our agricultural age, to the dawn of
the 21 st century  today,  so  much  of  our  economic  activity  has depended  on  two-way  foreign  trade.
Even for the small settler communities at the end of the earth 150 years ago, it never made sense to
attempt  to  self-sufficiently  meet  all  their  own  material  needs.  Self-sufficiency  makes  so  much  less
sense  today,  if  we  value  prosperity  and  opportunity  at  all.  With  all  due  respect  to  the  Christchurch
technology sector, and I have a great deal of respect for it, think of the inefficiency and waste involved
if we’d had to develop and maintain our own Microsoft, meeting only New Zealand needs, our own
Boeing, our own Vodafone. And equally, the prospects for our own innovators – Tait Electronics or
Aoraki Corporation, say – would have been bleak had they been limited to New Zealand sales alone.
As a nation, we turned inwards in the late 1930s, taking the protectionist route to development. The
advocates of that change were unquestionably well-motivated. They too recognised that in the long-
run  agriculture  was  unlikely  to  sustain  first-world  living  standards  and  strong  growth.  But  equally
clearly it was a wrong turning that delayed our adjustment, our shift to a high-tech globally-integrated
economy, by several decades. We pay the price for that now, in at least two ways. First, our economy
and people are less able to take advantage of the opportunities that beckon this decade than we might
have been if we’d avoided the by-ways of protection. But, second, we face the very real human and
social costs of adjusting away from the industry structures which the protective policies of the 1930s
onwards bequeathed us.
There are no easy answers to the practical questions of just how fast we should move away from that
protectionist route. Much of the work has already been done, even though the current government and
its  predecessor  have  answered  slightly  differently  the  questions  about  the  protective  barriers  that
remain. Trade matters – it is simply vital to our future – but I believe there is also a strong recognition
of  the  need  to  bring  people  along.  Speaking  only  a  couple  of  weeks  ago  of  the  changes  new
technology  is  bringing  about  in  the  US,  Alan  Greenspan  –  himself  an  enthusiastic  advocate  of  the
market economy – noted:
But as we seek to manage what is now this increasingly palpable historic change in
the  way  businesses  and  workers  create  value,  our  nation  needs  to  address  the
BIS Review 8/2000
4
associated dislocations that emerge, especially among workers who see the security
of  their  jobs  and  their  lives  threatened.  Societies  cannot  thrive  when  significant
segments perceive its functioning as unjust.2
If  an  innovative  and  competitive  private  sector  is  important,  so  too  is  an  innovative  and  efficient
public sector. In my many years of observing political processes, I find it difficult to recall a period
when the calls for increased public spending were more intense – health, education, superannuation,
defence, conservation, R & D and industry support can all present strong cases as to why more public
spending in those areas is desirable. Yet we know that our public spending is now not particularly low
by the standards of other countries – and health, education, and welfare spending (as a share of GDP)
is higher today than it was 15 years ago. We know also that much of our workforce is mobile, and that
tax rates are one – though of course only one – part of the equation that skilled young New Zealanders
face  as  they  make  their  judgements  about  whether  to  stay  or  go.  Likewise  our  companies  are
increasingly mobile. They don’t have to be based in New Zealand, especially as they grow and find
bigger and easier markets elsewhere. Our public infrastructure, business environment and tax regime
will increasingly figure in the decisions about where companies choose to reside.
I  am  not  here  arguing  that  small  government  is  necessarily  better  government.  The  evidence  of
successful  economies  internationally  is  quite  mixed  on  that  front.  Across  quite  a  range,  the  size  of
government seems to matter less than does the quality of government policy. But it seems axiomatic
that,  when  government  represents  the  biggest  single  sector  of  the  economy,  its  own  efficiency  and
effectiveness will be an important influence on overall economic performance.
This  takes  me  to  another  important  component  in  successful  growth  strategies  –  macroeconomic
stability. By that I mean the overall balance of government taxes and spending – the fiscal balance –
and the thrust of monetary policy.
The  goal  of  fiscal  policy  in  recent  years  has  been  to  maintain  surpluses  and  reduce  public  sector
indebtedness. Progress on that front has been impressive. A string of fiscal  surpluses  since  1993/94
and  a  sharply-reduced  government  debt  to  GDP  ratio  may  seem  of  little  relevance  in  the  face  of
pressing  social  needs.  But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  improved  fiscal  performance  has
contributed  to  improving  overall  economic  performance  in  New  Zealand.  And  of  course  improving
economic  performance  –  and  in particular faster  growth  –  also  makes  us  able  to  more  readily  fund
additional public spending over the medium-term.
In principle and other things being equal, an improvement in the fiscal position tends in the short term
to  ease  the  pressures  on  monetary  policy,  and  hence  on  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate.  The
opposite is also true. But these are transitional effects only.
Perhaps more important are the medium-term effects. First, the much-reduced public debt achieved in
recent years provides the government with greater breathing space to cope with adverse shocks to our
economy in future – and, of course, adverse shocks will happen again. The lower debt levels will also
help the government cope with the marked increase in the pension burden after 2010 as the post-war
“baby-boomers” move into retirement years, without major increases in tax rates.
Secondly, and more directly relevant to our growth prospects for the next decade or two, the lower the
level  of  public  debt,  the  lower  our  interest  rates  are  likely  to  be  on  average  over  the  course  of  the
business  cycle.  In  fact,  of  course,  our  long-term  real  interest  rates  have  been  –  and  remain  –
consistently  higher  than  those  of  countries  such  as  the  US,  Australia,  and  the  UK,  despite  the
improved fiscal position. We have paid – and continue to pay – a premium price for access to world
capital markets. That acts as a drag on our growth prospects – projects that would otherwise be done
simply don’t get done because the cost of capital is too high. So what is going on here?
We  pay  that  premium  price  for  capital  because  we  save  insufficient  ourselves.  Part  of  the  price  of
growth is deferring gratification – and as a nation we don’t rate terribly well on that score. In fact, we
2
“Technology and the economy”, remarks to the Economic Club of New York, 13 January 2000.
5
BIS Review 8/2000
now have one of the lowest savings rates (as a share of income) in the developed world, and that is
reflected in the disconcertingly large current account deficit and our huge dependence on external debt
and equity capital. By running operating surpluses, the government has reduced its call on the pool of
domestic  savings,  and  so  helped  to  avoid  putting  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  But  the
government cannot sensibly offset without limit the low savings of the private sector.
The other part of macroeconomic stability is my own territory, monetary policy. Next week marks a
decade since the Reserve Bank was formally made independent, and since 1988 we’ve been required
to target, and deliver, price stability. The Reserve Bank’s mandate is to ensure that CPI inflation stays
within the 0 to 3 per cent range set by agreement with the Government. Price stability isn’t the most
important objective a society can aspire to – far from it. The real objectives lie elsewhere – growth,
employment,  equity,  justice  and so  forth.  But  monetary  policy  is targeted  on  price  stability  for  two
reasons: first, because inflation is damaging, even at quite low levels, and secondly, because over time
monetary policy cannot durably affect anything other than inflation. By maintaining long-term price
stability  –  and  in  particular  by  building  public  confidence  that  price  stability  will  be  a  permanent
feature  of  our  economy  –  we  ensure  that  monetary  policy  doesn’t  act  as  a  drag  on  our  growth
prospects.
Let  me  dwell  just  briefly  on  some  of  the  shorter-term  connections  between  monetary  policy  and
growth, including some that achieved a certain prominence with the new  Policy  Targets  Agreement
signed by Dr Michael Cullen and me on 16 December last year.
Monetary policy responds to forecasts of emerging inflation pressures looking one to two years ahead
(and  not  to  the  most  recent  actual  CPI).  The  trigger  here  is  not  growth  itself.  Economic  growth  is
good, and we certainly do not, as some have suggested, live in fear of it. What prompts an increase in
the OCR is when growth in demand looks like getting out of line with growth in the capacity of the
economy to supply goods and services. When that looks like happening, there is a risk that inflation
will pick up, and in those circumstances an increase in the OCR, to lean against the growth in demand,
is in order. Can I stress that the economy’s capacity is determined by the whole variety of things I’ve
talked about today, and hardly at all by anything under the control of the Reserve Bank. As I said right
at the start, the best monetary policy in the world will not, of itself, generate growth.
Over the last few years, as inflation expectations have settled down, and markets and the public have
come to believe that price stability will endure, monetary policy has been able to think a little more
about medium-term prospects and outcomes. The extent of the change shouldn’t be overstated – we’ve
always recognised that monetary policy works only with a lag – but we’ve been able to be a little more
relaxed  about  short-term  “wobbles”  in  the  inflation  rate,  such  as  those  caused  by  moves  in  the
exchange rate. We do this because we recognise that to react too much to short-term  movements in
inflation could induce unnecessary variability in economic activity and output.
In a sense, that is just what the new provision in the Policy Targets Agreement recognises. We didn’t
seek the change, and yet its addition helpfully, and more formally, reminds us that there are,  in  the
short-term, sometimes trade-offs. If that is so, then we need to think seriously about the implications
for the short-term variability of output, interest and exchange rates when deciding on the OCR needed
to ensure that medium-term price stability is maintained. In some circumstances, accepting a bit more
short-term variability in inflation may mean a bit less variability in interest and exchange rates, and
vice versa. I say may, because it isn’t the case in all circumstances. In many situations, the best way to
minimise  fluctuations in  inflation, output, interest  rates,  and  the  exchange  rate  will  be  to  adjust  the
OCR firmly and promptly to guard against imbalances emerging in the economy.
None  of  this  –  in  fact,  nothing  –  will  alter  the  fact  that  a  growing  and  prosperous  New  Zealand
economy will always live in an uncertain world subject to shocks and surprises. Monetary policy can
assist  in  responding  to  shocks  –  moving  to  stimulatory  mode  as  Asia  struck,  moving  back  towards
neutral now, heading for restraining mode as and when growth begins to put strain on capacity and
threatens to reignite inflationary pressures. But we won’t – indeed can’t – remove the economic cycle,
or the bulk of the big cycles in interest and exchange rates.
In all this, I hope I don’t appear defensive when I remind you – as I must often remind myself – that in
a world of huge uncertainty a very considerable element of art is involved in reaching monetary policy
BIS Review 8/2000
6
decisions. That means it will often only be with the benefit of very considerable hindsight that the final
verdict can be delivered on whether or not the best decisions were made at the time.
Conclusion
Improving our economic growth performance is a big part of what the public look to governments and
their officials to provide. But while sustained strong growth inevitably involves governments, there are
severe limitations on what governments alone can do. Firms, individuals and markets generate growth.
And yet firms and individuals are affected in so many ways by what governments do that without a
cohesive  society  and  good  government  it  is  almost  impossible  to  have  sustained  and  broadly-based
economic growth. Much has been done in New Zealand in recent decades as governments, firms and
individuals have begun to awaken to the implications of the world economy for New Zealand’s future
economic prospects.
Change takes time, and recent economic performance suggests New Zealand will probably not close
the gap that has developed between our incomes and those of our fellow OECD countries in the near
future. There are no guarantees, and nothing can be taken for granted, but there are a number of causes
for greater optimism in the longer term. New Zealanders are increasingly better educated, firms and
workers are more experienced in managing the  open economy,  macroeconomic  credibility  has  been
established; and over time, exposure to the competitive pressures and opportunities of an increasingly
high-tech  world  should  help  transform  the  nature  of  New  Zealand  business.  Monetary  policy  will
continue to do what it can, providing a stable backdrop against which firms and households can plan
for a better New Zealand in the new millennium.
7
BIS Review 8/2000
