Mr Heikensten examines different aspects
of the new economy and its implications for monetary policy
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy  Governor  of the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to The  Riksdag’s
Standing Committee on Finance, Stockholm, on 24 February 2000.
 The new economy, our topic today, is a concept that people are using frequently without always taking
the trouble to explain what they mean by it. As interpretations differ somewhat, the discussion is liable
to be a little confused.
According  to  the  definition  most  people  seem  to  have  in  mind,  the  new  economy  is  a  result  of  a
favourable shift in trend productivity that has raised the potential growth rate. This shift is attributed in
turn to the development and spread of information technology (IT). Another common explanation for
the higher productivity growth is the stronger competition that has resulted from deregulations and an
increasingly integrated global economy. Moreover, in that much of the discussion of the new economy
originated  in  the  United  States  in  the  light  of  the  good  economic  performance  there  in  the  1990s,
emphasis has been placed on the importance of a good macroeconomic environment.
My starting point today is the US economy. My primary aim is not to present a comprehensive picture
of  developments  there  but  rather  to  highlight  the  issues  that  these  developments  have  raised  and
initiated the debate on the new economy. While my discussion will centre on the advances in IT, for
the US economy there have been other beneficial factors. Then I shall look in a more principled way at
what  the  new  economy  may  imply  for  monetary  policy.  In  this  context  I  shall  mainly  consider  the
consequences  in  terms  of  higher  productivity  growth,  but  I  shall  also  be  touching  on  the  new
economy’s impact on demand, which has attracted less attention in the public debate.
This will be followed by a look at Sweden and the conditions for a new economy and the inflation
process. What is the situation here as regards, for example, the use of IT and competition? Has the new
economy led to changes in the inflation process? Finally, I shall be saying something about what the
Riksbank has to consider in the context of the new economy’s existence or non-existence.
My  review  today  obviously  will  not  result  in  definite  answers  either  way.  The  questions  are  too
complex  for  that.  Economists  are  finding  it  difficult  in  general  to  arrive  at  sound  explanations  for
technical development and growth. The discussion about the new economy is therefore welcome on
that account. It can inspire studies of the driving forces behind the technical progress we are aware is
so important for our prosperity but about which we unfortunately do not know enough.
Starting point: experience in the United States
1.
The  American  discussion  about  the  new  economy  was  instigated  by  a  generally  good  economic
performance  that  combined  high  growth  and  employment  with  low  inflation.  A  variety  of  factors
contributed to this achievement. They include a successful stabilisation policy, whereby inflation was
reined in even though capacity utilisation has been high, as well as an efficient labour market, where
unemployment has been lower than for several decades without leading to higher inflation. A number
of  occasional  factors  also  contributed:  the  dollar  has  been  strong  when  this  was  needed  to  restrain
inflationary  impulses;  a  reduction  of  employers’  health  insurance  contributions  has  helped  to  hold
wage costs down; and so on.
Some years ago, the general opinion among economists was that these cyclical factors, together with
an efficient labour market, sufficed to explain much of the good performance. Recently, however, this
view has been modified. The strong productivity growth, which is unusual so far into a demand-driven
upswing, has raised the question of the extent to which the advances in IT may have played a part as
well.
1
BIS Review 18/2000
Compared  with  earlier  decades,  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States,  as  in  most  other
industrialised  countries,  was  weak  from  1970  up  to  the  mid-1990s.  Yet  this  was  a  period  when
computers with a steadily growing capacity were being introduced on a wide front. As Robert Solow,
the Nobel laureate, observed in 1987, “You can see computers everywhere except in the productivity
statistics”.
In the closing years of the century, however, productivity growth in the United States showed clear
signs of climbing back to the levels in the 1950s and 1960s. A closer look at the figures reveals that
the improvement has been most marked in manufacturing and particularly rapid in industries  where
computers are used most intensively.
The upward shift in US productivity growth was preceded by an investment boom that gave pride of
place to investment in IT-related capital. Since the 1980s, American investment in computer capacity
has doubled in nominal terms; in relation to the dramatic price fall for computer capacity, the level has
risen by a factor of more than twelve.
To what extent, then, has the improvement in productivity come from IT? What are the mechanisms?
Computers  have  clearly  helped  to  make  production  processes  more  efficient  and  automated,  just  as
new  techniques  have  led  to  the  creation  of  many  new  goods  and  services,  from  compact  discs  to
tele-medication.
But  in  order  to  understand  the  broader  implications  for  the  workings  of  the  economy,  one  should
perhaps heed Alan Greenspan, head of the US Federal Reserve, and single out the word “information”.
When information flows more efficiently, there will be a better matching of supply and demand both
internally and between firms, as well as less tied-up capital for coping with contingencies. In that firms
can use IT to enhance “just-in-time” routines, they can cut the levels of stocks and working capital.
Better information also paves the way for smaller production units and less bureaucratic structures.
All these processes are now being further reinforced by the rapidly growing flow of information on the
Internet.  Access  to  the  Internet  as  a  national  and  global  market  place  lowers  the  barriers  to  market
participation.  Opportunities  are  provided  not  only  for  economies  of  scale  both  nationally  and
internationally but also for the diversification, even individualisation, of goods and services. Market
forecasts by international IT consultants predict that retail Internet commerce will grow from twenty to
thirty billion dollars this year to several hundred billion dollars. And even this is dwarfed by prospects
for  business-to-business  commerce,  which involves  asking  for tenders  on the  Internet and  matching
the potential suppliers for increased efficiency. In an optimistic forecast from the American investment
bank Goldman Sachs, this form of Internet commerce is predicted to expand to more than a thousand
billion dollars by 2003 and to contribute a quarter of a percentage point to annual GDP growth in the
coming decade.
The fact that clear signs of improved productivity did not appear until almost a decade after Solow’s
observation  can  be  attributed  to  computers  and  IT  being  what  is  commonly  referred  to  as  general
purpose  technology,  in  the  sense  that  they  interact  with  and  modify  many  other  processes  and
techniques. The economic impact of such innovations is liable to take a long time.
Parallels have been drawn with another innovation with far-reaching consequences, namely electricity.
Although electricity began to be used in the late nineteenth century, its impact on productivity did not
show  up  in  earnest  until  the  1920s.  One  important  reason  is  considered  to  be  that  various  types  of
structural adjustments, in business as well as in society in general, were needed before the benefits of
electricity  could  be  reaped  efficiently.  At  factory  level,  for  example,  more  flexible  production
processes  enhanced  productivity  when,  instead  of  running  much  of  the  workshop  in  a  cumbersome
manner from a single large electric motor, smaller power units were developed for single machines.
Thus, since it takes time to work out and implement various types of organisational changes that are
most appropriate for the new techniques, there is liable to be a considerable time lag before general
purpose innovations have an impact. This time lag unfortunately also makes it difficult to single out
the factors that underlie technical advances and growth.
What has happened in the United States in recent years also illustrates another consequence of the new
economy. Besides the strong trends for productivity, capital formation and employment, which have
BIS Review 18/2000
2
resulted  in  a  more  positive  appraisal  of  potential  growth,  share  prices  have  risen  dramatically  and
saving has fallen to low levels. A major question at present is how stable this situation will be.
Summing up, then, there are a good many signs that IT may have contributed to a more favourable
productivity  trend  in  the  United  States,  particularly  in  recent  years.  But  there  have  also  been  many
other  changes,  such  as  increased  competition  and  the  emergence  of  deep  and  efficient  markets  for
venture capital. For this and other reasons, the contribution from IT cannot be distinguished from other
factors.
Implications for monetary policy
2.
The  implications  that  the  new  economy  might  be  expected  to  have  for  monetary  policy  can  be
illustrated  with  the  aid  of  a  simplified  notion  of  how  the  economy  functions.  In  the  long  term,  a
country’s  productive  capacity  is  usually  assumed  to  follow  a  comparatively  stable trend. This  trend
rate of growth is determined by demographic factors, for example, together with, above all, the pace at
which  technical  advances  are  made  and  incorporated  in  the  production  process.  Thus,  the  fact  that
Sweden’s GDP per capita is now appreciably higher than in, say, the 1950s and even more so than a
century ago is mainly explained both by our ability to develop new technologies and new modes of
production and by the new technology that we have been able to import from elsewhere and introduce
here.
Monetary policy’s primary contribution is perceived today as being to ensure that the macroeconomic
environment, mainly as regards inflation, is stable and predictable. A stable value of  money  and  an
efficient payment system are important preconditions for an efficient modern market economy.
Monetary policy affects aggregate demand via interest rate adjustments. Policy is normally aimed at
steering  demand  so  that  the  economy  remains  as  close  as  possible  to  its  long-term  growth  trend,
thereby avoiding unnecessary cyclical fluctuations. This also helps to keep the level of inflation stable.
However,  it  is  not  only  cyclical  fluctuations  around  trend  growth  that  influence  inflation.  Another
important  factor  in  the  longer  run  is  inflation  expectations.  If  households  and  firms  count  on  the
Riksbank fulfilling its function, the inflation target can serve as a benchmark for their decisions about
prices and wages.
So  what  effects  might  the  new  economy  have  in  this  simplified  world?  It  could  result  in  a  more
favourable path for productivity and thus a stronger expansion of potential output - a steeper path for
trend  growth  -  at  least  for  a  time.  Demand  could  then  rise  more  rapidly  without  exceeding  the
long-term capacity ceiling and generating inflationary pressure.
It  is  conceivable,  moreover,  that  the  new  economy  can  lower  price  pressure  in  the  economy  even
without an appreciable positive effect on productivity as usually measured. It is possible, for example,
that Internet commerce and generally stronger international competition could tend to restrain inflation
by making it more difficult for firms to raise prices. That could lead to a reduction of inflation that
does not have to do with the level of demand in relation to trend growth.
It  may  be  worth  noting  that  strong  competition  as  such  does  not  necessarily  imply  lower  inflation.
There are many indications, on the other hand, that downward price pressure can be generated during
the transition from lower to higher competition. As such a process probably takes a considerable time,
the mounting competition’s impact on inflation will also be protracted.
Another  consequence of the  new  economy  -  perhaps the least controversial  -  is  the  direct  effect  on
inflation from the steep price fall for IT-related products, which are not a negligible item in the CPI
basket. The falling prices are explained in turn by the very strong productivity growth and high rate of
innovations in this product area. The result may be what is commonly known as a positive price shock,
which  in  many  respects  resembles  the  effects  of  a  marked  price  fall  for  some  other  specific  CPI
component.
So far I have discussed the monetary policy implications solely in terms of a notional new economy’s
consequences for supply. New techniques and strong productivity growth leave their mark on profit
3
BIS Review 18/2000
expectations and capital formation, for example, and thereby add to the forces that are raising potential
growth. With rising  share  prices, however, increased  household  wealth  adds  to  demand. This  raises
questions  to  do  with  dynamic  aspects.  One risk  is  that demand  grows  faster  than  supply  despite  an
improvement in potential output. That could lead to stronger price pressure and accordingly motivate a
tighter monetary stance in the traditional way. Another risk is that investment activity becomes unduly
optimistic  and  leads  to  financial  imbalances.  This  problem  is  more  difficult  to  handle  in  monetary
policy’s normal  analytical  framework,  where  undesirable  changes  in  price  pressure  are  parried  with
the interest rate.
To sum up, to the extent that the new economy is a reality, its supply-side effects can be expected to
make price tendencies somewhat more subdued than otherwise. If the effects are not transitory, they
could pave the way for a less tight monetary policy. At the same time, demand is normally affected as
well and there is a risk of this getting out of step with the stronger growth.
Conditions in Sweden
3.
One approach to the question of whether the new economy could also show up in Sweden involves
looking at conditions in Sweden for some of the factors that are generally considered to have played
an  important  role  in  the  United  States:  the  IT  revolution,  increased  competition  and  the
macroeconomic environment.
3.1
One question is how Sweden compares with the United States in terms of the technologies
that are considered to drive the process. Although there is a lack of fully comparable statistics, it is
hardly  controversial  to  say  that  IT  use  in  Sweden  is  high  -  higher  than  in  many  other  countries  in
Europe  and  possibly  much  the  same  as  in  the  United  States.  The  per-capita  level  of  Internet
subscriptions is one of the highest in the world, on a par with the United States, and so is the number
of PCs per capita. In certain respects Sweden is even ahead of the United States. In per-capita terms,
mobile phones are used more in Sweden than in the United States and most other European countries.
Sweden  also  tops  the  United  States  in  the  domain  of  mobile  Internet,  as  witness  both  Microsoft’s
decision to locate the development of such systems here and the first WAP phones in Swedish shops.
Internet use in Sweden is also well in line with the United States. Market surveys by IT consultants
admittedly indicate that in relation to total retailing, Internet shopping for goods is somewhat higher in
the  United  States  but  Sweden  is  ahead  of  many  other  countries  in  Europe.  Most  of  the  portals  and
e-commerce sites are also American. But a considerably higher proportion of Swedish banking is done
on  the  Internet  and  Sweden  has  been  an  early  starter  with  models  for  Internet  business-to-business
transactions.
We also know that in the latter part of the 1990s, IT-related sectors, including the successful telecom
industry,  accounted  for  almost  a  tenth  of  manufacturing  output  in  Sweden.  Figures  from  the
Association of Swedish Engineering Industries show a remarkable increase during the decade, from a
share of just over 2% in 1993 to more than 12% in 1999. According to the same source, one fifth of
Sweden’s GDP growth from 1995 to 1998 came from the IT and telecom sector. Comparing statistics
can be difficult but a similar indicator - from the Department of Commerce - of the IT and telecom
sector’s  share  of  GDP  growth  in  the  United  States  shows  that  in  the  same  period  this  sector  made
approximately the same contribution there.
3.2
this respect there are some notable differences in Sweden.
Another important aspect in America has been efficient markets and strong competition. In
External competition in markets for goods has also tended to grow in Sweden. Since the mid-1980s
the  traditionally  high  GDP  share  for  imports  has  almost  doubled.  Domestic  competition  has  also
increased,  for  instance  in  markets 
that  have  recently  been  deregulated  -  electricity  and
telecommunications, of which the latter is particularly strategic for IT.
Even so, price levels in Sweden are still high in many areas - higher than in most other EU countries
as well as compared with the United States. Differences in taxation clearly play a part but so does a
lack  of  competition.  This  in  turn  may  have  to  do  with  the  degree  to  which  markets  for  goods  are
BIS Review 18/2000
4
regulated. In the OECD index of product market regulation, Sweden is admittedly lower than many
other EU countries but appreciably higher than the United States.
A  breakthrough  for  the  new  economy  is  also  dependent  on  the  situation  in  factor  markets.  The
Swedish risk capital market has undergone major improvements and relative to GDP is now the third
largest in Europe, after the United Kingdom and Ireland. And whereas in 1983 it was only a quarter of
the relative size of the risk capital market in the United States, by 1998 it had already become half as
large. A notable feature in recent years is the greatly increased input of foreign capital. But the US risk
capital market is, of course, considerably more developed and in Sweden the supply of risk capital is
associated with specific problems, for instance as regards taxation, that ought to be looked into.
The labour market is naturally a major factor, too. Besides being suitably competent, labour must be
prepared to transfer rapidly  to  the  sectors  and jobs that  arise  as the  new  economy  takes  hold.  Even
with a good level of education in general and a rising number of university graduates, the supply of
people with spearhead competence poses problems both because the output is too small and to some
extent  because  qualified  persons  move  elsewhere.  One  explanation  is  the  lower  return  on  tertiary
education in Sweden compared with, for example, the United States. Compared with their American
colleagues,  moreover,  relatively  fewer  graduates  in  Sweden  start  new  businesses  and  exploit  new
commercial  ideas.  Neither  does  wage  formation  in  Sweden  function  so  well  in  general  that  the
available job vacancies are filled without friction; in the United States this has played a central part in
maintaining high growth and rising employment without strong upward pressure on wages.
3.3
Finally, as regards macroeconomic policy, the Swedish and American economies now have a
good deal in common in that in both cases inflation is low. But it is only about five years ago that the
sustainability of the Swedish economy was rather uncertain.
To sum up, it can perhaps be said that the conditions whereby the new economy might also catch on in
Sweden are good in certain respects. Two examples are the level of IT use and the macroeconomic
environment.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  asked  why  what  appears  to  constitute  a  new  universal
technology has not had a greater impact. This probably has to do with the workings of factor markets.
The inflation process to date in Sweden
4.
So there are arguments both for and against the notion that the new economy can gain a hold, or is
possibly already on its way, in Sweden as well. Now I should like to move on and look at whether the
inflation process in Sweden has changed appreciably. Here I shall be using the simplified concept of
how the economy functions that I outlined earlier.
It  should  be  noted  in  this  context  that  in  the  past  decade  a  great  deal  has  happened  in  Sweden’s
economy.  Inflation  and  the  general  workings  of  the  economy  have  presumably  been  favourably
affected  by  such  structural  changes  as  the  establishment  of  a  low-inflation  regime,  tax  cuts,
adjustments  of  many  transfer  systems,  market  deregulations  and  Sweden’s  membership  of  the
European Community. So any signs that can be discerned in the statistics are probably mainly the fruit
of more traditional structural adjustments rather than evidence of the new economy.
One of the more pronounced differences with earlier periods is that Sweden has broken the pattern of
high inflation, recurrent cost crises and devaluations that characterised the 1970s and 1980s. Surveys
and  other  information  indicate  that  for  some  time  now,  households  and  firms  have  adapted  their
inflation  expectations  to  the  Riksbank’s  target.  In  that  it  influences  the  behaviour  of  those  who  set
prices  and  wages,  this  in  itself  assists  our  endeavours  to  keep  inflation  down.  Estimates  by  the
Riksbank suggest, moreover, that the long-term component of inflation decreased appreciably in the
1990s, in which case there is a more permanent restraining force that is not directly dependent on how
the real economy is functioning. But as I mentioned earlier, there are good grounds for supposing that
a low, stable path for inflation can generate positive indirect effects on the real economy. There are
also certain signs that the cyclical fluctuations in inflation - and not just its average level - have been
smoothed in recent years.
5
BIS Review 18/2000
Thus,  there  are  some  indications  that  the  present  cyclical  upswing  will  not  generate  the  same
acceleration of inflation as its predecessors. But as output in the Swedish economy has been below the
sustainable trend ever since the beginning of the 1990s - so that what we have experienced, strictly
speaking, is a long period of low activity - it is difficult to tell whether the behaviour of inflation over
a complete cycle has in fact changed.
Another  indication  that  the  workings  of  the  economy  may  have  taken  a  turn  for  the  better  is  the
Riksbank’s upward revision of potential output in the light of, for example, good productivity growth
and very moderate inflationary tendencies even when GDP growth has been comparatively high. At
the same time, methods have now been developed that probably enable us to get a little closer to the
mark than before. The current output gap estimates, which represent the difference between actual and
potential GDP, suggest that total production will rise above the  potential  level  in the coming  years.
There is nothing dramatic about this, however. In the longer run one would expect the economy to be
above its potential level about as much as it is below.
As regards potential growth, the Riksbank, like most other observers, now counts on a rate somewhere
between 2 and 2.5%. One approach to estimating this rate is based on the trends for labour supply and
productivity.  The  latest  assessments  from  the  Medium  Term  Survey,  based  on  such  factors  as
demographic changes and labour force participation, put the annual increase in the labour force up to
2008 at 0.5%. Labour productivity, according to the available statistics, has risen faster in the 1990s
than it did in the 1970s and 1980s; whereas the annual increase in the period 1974-93, for example,
averaged approximately 1.4%, since 1994 the rate has averaged about 1.9%. In the really long term,
the  recent  level  is  more  normal  than  the  relatively  low  figures  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  This
accordingly means that the potential annual growth rate could be between 2 and 2.5%.
A  feature  of  the  picture  in  the  United  States  that  I  touched  on  earlier  is  the  combination  of  high
productivity  growth  and  an  investment  boom.  One  factor  behind  the  investment  activity  appears  to
have been the high profit expectations associated with the new technology. The massive investment
has paved the way in turn for good productivity growth in that it has introduced new technology and
led to a higher capital input per employee.
No  corresponding  pattern is  discernible in  Sweden.  It  was  mainly  in  connection  with  rapidly  rising
capacity utilisation in 1992-94 that industrial productivity improved. Productivity  growth  since  then
has  been  more  normal.  Manufacturing  investment  has  risen  but  not  as  markedly  as  in  the  United
States.
It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  compared  with  the  United  States,  resource  utilisation  in
Sweden was considerably lower in the 1990s. This can explain a part of the upswing for productivity,
particularly  in 1992-94,  at  the  same  time  as  it  implies  a  weaker  propensity  to  invest,  either  to  save
labour  or  to  expand  capacity  in  response  to  growing  demand.  Against  this  background  it  will  be
interesting to see how the Swedish economy performs when resource utilisation is high again.
Briefly, then, it looks as though the inflation process in Sweden has been modified in recent years. The
economy  appears  to  be  less  inflation  prone  than  before.  Indications  of  somewhat  higher  potential
growth  may  also  be  discernible.  The  new  economy,  with  IT  as  a  central  component,  may  have
contributed but there is still no definite evidence of this.
Monetary policy considerations
5.
In  order  to  dispel  any  misunderstandings,  I  should  like  to  point  out  that  -  contrary  to  what  is
sometimes implied in the public debate - the Riksbank does not dismiss all talk of the new economy
and  its  possible  implications,  in  the  first  place  for  monetary  policy.  After  all,  the  existence  or
otherwise  of  the  new  economy  is  a  matter  that  does  not  differ  in  principle  from  the  forecasting
problems we have to deal with all the time. As I mentioned earlier, extensive structural changes have
occurred time and again, not least in the past decade. So even without the new economy hypotheses, it
is  difficult  to  form  an  exact  picture  of  either  the  path  for  trend  growth  or  the  extent  to  which  the
general workings of the economy have changed.
BIS Review 18/2000
6
Assessments of this type are accordingly very uncertain. This is evident not least from the revisions
we have been obliged to make, as I mentioned earlier. It should be underscored, however, that output
gap estimates, for example, are not the sole foundation for either our current or our earlier inflation
assessments.  We  work  simultaneously  with  several  different  models  of  inflation,  some  of  which
require absolutely no knowledge of, for instance, the output gap or potential growth. Even models that
use  comparatively  insignificant  assumptions  from  economic  theory  can  have  satisfactory  predictive
power. We also use disaggregated data on price and wage tendencies, shortages and so on. In the light
of all this information we then try to complete the puzzle of future inflation.
Another  matter  to  emphasise  in  this  context  is  that  even  when  outcome  figures  for  inflation  are
available,  it  is  not  always  possible  to  separate  the  contributory  factors.  When  forecasting  future
inflation, we normally start from a notion of the size of the output gap, the level of potential growth
and so on. If it then turns  out  that inflation  has  been  lower than  we  calculated even  though  growth
followed the expected path, it may seem natural to attribute this to a better trade-off between inflation
and growth. But the proper explanation may well prove to be something else, for instance that there
was more unutilised capacity than the forecast assumed or that we underestimated potential growth.
The impression that earlier relationships have changed does not necessarily mean that we are in the
throes of a new economy; we may simply have gained better insights into how the earlier, essential
relationships work.
While it is true that the contributions to the monetary policy decision-making process that have been
made by economic expertise and econometrics can scarcely be overestimated, the fact remains that to
some extent monetary policy is still a matter of trial and error. It is some consolation in this context
that we have a continuous supply of new information. If our policy happens to be unduly restrictive,
for instance, this will show up in weaker inflation and vice versa. The direction of policy can then be
adjusted.  This  is  relevant  not  least  with  respect  to  the  new  economy.  It  seems  unlikely  that  the
mechanisms  I  talked  about  earlier  would  cause  economic  relationships  to  change  overnight.
Presumably it would be more a matter of gradual changes that we can incorporate in the foundation for
decisions.
Then it is naturally the case that our decisions invariably involve taking some degree of unavoidable
chance as the risks associated with alternative strategies are weighed in the balance. The economy’s
cyclical position  is  important  here.  It  is  generally  agreed  at  present  that economic  prospects for the
coming years are unusually bright. Most forecasters count on stable growth of between at least 3 and
4% this year and next, followed it seems by the continuation of a favourable trend. In this situation,
when  resource  utilisation  is  rising  rapidly,  a  transition  from  low  to  more  normal  interest  rates  can
hardly  constitute  a  sizeable  threat  to  activity.  That  was  how  the  Federal  Reserve  reasoned,  for
example, in a similar situation in 1994. Matters are different when interest rates are at a more normal
level and growth is closer to what can be regarded as a sustainable rate. The balance of risks is then
different and there is more cause to proceed with caution.
As we all know, it is up to a central bank to represent continuity and stability - what might be called a
somewhat conservative stand. Establishing low inflation in Sweden has been a laborious process and
the fund of confidence that has been accumulated should not be squandered. At the same time, it is
difficult to dismiss the feeling that the rather revolutionary developments we are seeing, above all in
connection with information technology, will leave visible traces in the workings of the economy. It
therefore  seems  advisable  to  leave  the  door  to  the  new  economy  ajar.  An  apt  description  of  the
Riksbank’s  attitude  to  the  new  economy  would  accordingly  be:  optimistically  tentative  but  not
dismissive.
7
BIS Review 18/2000
