David Carse: Environmental issues and their implications for financial
institutions in Hong Kong
Keynote Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the Conference on Environmental Risk Management for Hong Kong Financial Institutions, held in
Hong Kong on 29 November 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  deliver  the  keynote  speech  for  this  conference  on  Environmental  Risk
Management for Hong Kong Financial Institutions.
I congratulate the various organisers for putting together the conference, which I understand is the first
of its kind to be held in Hong Kong. If so, it is long overdue. Environmental issues have come very
much  to  the  forefront  of  public  awareness  in  Hong  Kong  in  recent  years,  and  cleaning  up  the
environment has become one of the Government’s main preoccupations. There are all sorts of good
reasons for wishing to do this, in terms of improving the quality of life and the long-term health and
well-being  of  the  people  of  Hong  Kong.  But  there  is  also  a  growing  recognition  on  the  part  of
business,  both  here  and  elsewhere,  that  economic  growth  is  inextricably  linked  with  a  healthy
environment. At this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos, business leaders voted global climate
change the most pressing issue facing the world’s business community. It is all the more disappointing
therefore that last week’s UN summit conference in The Hague on climate change should have ended
in failure.
At first sight it might appear that banks and other financial institutions, as service companies, have less
responsibility  for  environmental  protection  than  other  companies,  notably  those  whose  industrial
processes have a direct impact on the environment. However, this would be to ignore the central role
in  the  economy  that  banks  have  as  financial  intermediaries.  While  they  may  not  be  polluters
themselves, they will probably have a banking relationship with some companies that are polluters or
could be in the future.
This  creates  a  number  of  risks  for  the  banks,  and  raises  the  question  of  how  these  risks  should  be
identified, measured, monitored and controlled. This is primarily a matter for banks’ management to
deal  with,  and  I  hope  that  today’s  conference  will  help  them  to  do  so.  But  it  is  also  an  issue  for
banking regulators, particularly with the increased focus on risk-based supervision. In the case of the
HKMA, this is a process whereby we try to assess the extent to which banks are exposed to various
types of risk and the quality of the systems used for managing these risks. For this purpose, we have
identified  eight  different  types  of  risk:  credit,  market,  interest  rate,  liquidity,  operational,  legal,
reputation and strategic.
Environmental risk straddles a number of these risks. In particular, it is a subset of credit, legal and
reputation risk:
• 
Credit risk can arise indirectly where banks are lending to customers whose businesses are
adversely  affected  by  the  costs  of  cleaning  up  pollution  or  by  changes  in  environmental
regulations. For example, the costs of meeting new requirements on emission levels may be
sufficient to put some companies out of business. Banks may also find themselves directly
affected if they find that the value of property that they have taken as collateral is impaired
by contamination.
 Legal  risk  can  take  a  number  of  different  forms.  Most  obviously,  banks  like  other
companies  are  at  risk  if  they  themselves  do  not  comply  with  relevant  environmental
legislation. But more specifically, they are at risk of direct lender liability for clean-up costs
or claims for damages if they have actually taken possession of contaminated or pollution-
1
BIS Review 108/2000
causing  property  as  a  result  of  realising  security.  There  is  also  the  even  more  worrying
prospect that in some jurisdictions the mere act of lending to  a company  or  project  which
causes environmental problems may lead to the lender incurring some liability for clean-up
costs. Banks may protest, with some justification, that they should not be forced into the role
of “environmental police”, but this may carry little weight in some courts.
Reputation risk may arise even in the absence of lender liability, particularly if banks are
seen as  associated  with large-scale  projects that  are  viewed  as socially  or  environmentally
damaging, such as dam projects. The growth of globalised protest movements and the use of
the  internet  to  disseminate  information  have  greatly  increased  the  risk  that  individual
companies will be the subject of concerted campaigns of public criticism.
 These  are  the  risks,  but  it  would  also  be  wrong  to  ignore  the  opportunities  that  environmental
protection can provide for banks and other financial institutions. Most obviously, the costs of cleaning
up pollution and the need to invest in environmentally friendly technology imply the need for finance,
either from the banks or the capital markets. Just to take one small example in the Hong Kong context,
the Government’s initiative to persuade diesel taxi owners to switch to LPG taxis creates the chance
for the banks to finance the purchase of the new vehicles. Banks also need to bear in mind that while
there will be losers from the drive to cut pollution, there will also be winners in the shape of those
companies which can exploit the new technologies to curb emissions.
Another  by-product  from  efforts  to  combat  climate  change  will  be  the  growth  of  emissions  trading
between  companies.  Such  trading  allows  companies  that  can  reduce  their  carbon  emissions  below
allotted  targets  to  sell  their  surplus  credits  to  those  companies  that  cannot  reach  their  targets.
Admittedly,  the  immediate  future  of  emissions  trading  is  in  some  doubt  following  the  Hague
conference,  but  it  still  has  the  potential  to  become  a  major  commodity  market.  If  so,  there  will
inevitably be a role for financial institutions to broker deals between buyers and sellers of emission
credits, and perhaps to take positions themselves.
Finally,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  can  profit  from  the  growing  public  awareness  of
environmental issues by offering “green” investment products.
How  do  banks  in  Hong  Kong  measure  up  in  terms  of  environmental  issues?  As  an  international
financial centre, Hong Kong provides a base for a number of multinational banks that have developed
detailed environmental policies and procedures. In the case of local and regional banks, I would say
that environmental issues are less highly articulated. This is why I welcome this conference and the
involvement in it of the Hong Kong Association of Banks.
It is not my purpose in this speech to anticipate the more detailed advice that subsequent speakers are
going to offer. But I would like to offer a few general recommendations that banks should take into
account in dealing with environmental issues.
First, banks should keep themselves informed about international and regional initiatives on the
environment, particularly those that directly concern financial institutions.
In this connection, I would draw the attention of those institutions that are not already aware of it to
the work of the United Nations Environment Programme (“UNEP”). This is the main UN institution
that deals with environmental questions. As part of its work, it has established a Financial Institutions
Initiative  on  the  Environment  which  is  a  partnership  between  UNEP  and  leading  banking  and
insurance  companies  to  promote  sustainable  development  and  environmentally  sound  business
practices. The basic role of the Initiative is to promote the integration of environmental considerations
into all aspects of the financial sector’s operations and services.
One of the products of the Initiative is a “Statement by Financial Institutions on the Environment and
Sustainable Development” (which is appended to this speech). The Statement includes a commitment
by  financial  institutions  to  contribute  towards  sustainable  development,  to  adopt  a  precautionary
approach to  environmental  management  and  to  foster  public  awareness and  communication  of  their
environmental policies. Over 160 institutions have signed up to the statement, but none I regret from
Hong Kong, except those which have done so by virtue of being part of international banking groups. I
would therefore urge banks in Hong Kong to consider becoming signatories to the Statement, and to
BIS Review 108/2000
2
familiarise themselves with the work of the Initiative more generally. You will find that the various
components of the work of the Initiative, including annual roundtable meetings, provide much useful
practical guidance to financial institutions on how to tackle environmental issues.
Secondly, in line with the UNEP Statement referred to above, banks should consider producing
a formal environmental policy statement and making this publicly available.
Such a statement should represent an acknowledgement by the bank that it must take environmental
implications into account in its business operations, decisions and processes. This should include its
own use of energy and resources and how it interacts with customers. However, on its own, a policy
runs  the  risk  of  becoming  a  “motherhood”  statement.  Policies  should  therefore  be  backed  up  by
management  structures  and  systems,  specific  objectives,  action  plans  and  monitoring  procedures  to
ensure that concrete results are achieved. Banks should also issue regular environmental reports that
inform the outside world of their progress in meeting their environmental objectives. This is one area
where  the  public  sector  has  taken  the  lead  in  Hong  Kong.  Following  the  Chief  Executive’s  1998
Policy Address all Government bureaux and departments (including the HKMA) are now required to
publish annual reports on their environmental policies and actions.
Thirdly, banks should where appropriate build environmental risk assessments into their credit
decisions.
This  follows  from  my  earlier  comments  about  environment  and  credit  risk.  Of  course,  detailed
environmental risk assessment will not be appropriate in all cases. At its most general, environmental
considerations are simply part of the process of “know your customer” - in other words, being aware
of the nature of his business and industrial operations, and being alive to the possibility that that there
may  be  an  environmental  angle.  In  particular  cases,  however,  more  detailed  assessment  and
quantification of the environmental risks will be required. This will be the case, for example, where
land  is  being  taken  as  security  or  where  the  borrower  is  involved  in  a  high-risk  industry  such  as
chemicals.  Obviously,  the  larger  the  bank’s  exposure,  the  more  important  the  environmental  risk
assessment becomes.  Taken to  the  extreme,  where the  bank  is involved  in the financing  of  a large-
scale project such as the construction of a power plant, a full environmental impact assessment should
be obtained from a professional and independent expert.
One  point  that  is  particularly  relevant  to  banks  that  finance  companies  or  projects  in  countries  like
China is that the rules of the environmental game can change very quickly. The authorities in China
are getting serious about cutting emissions and pollution, as the requirement by the Beijing Municipal
Government on the Shougang Steel Group to cut back its output has shown. The problem in China is
that  regulations  are  not  always  strictly  enforced.  But  this  can  change  overnight,  resulting  in  major
compliance problems for the companies concerned and increased risk for the banks that have lent to
them. Hong Kong banks which lend into China would therefore be well advised to keep this in mind.
Finally, banks should pay close regard to their own “corporate ecology”.
Banks  can  contribute  to  environmental  protection  by  the  way  in  which  they  manage  their  use  of
resources in their own operations. In this way banks can be responsible corporate citizens while at the
same time reducing business costs. The type of measures that can be adopted include saving on energy
consumption,  recycling  of  paper,  waste  management,  purchasing  environmentally  friendly  products
and use of video conferencing to cut down on unnecessary travel. Use of office automation such as
email  can  also  help  to  reduce  the  consumption  of  paper,  provided  of  course  that  staff  can  be
encouraged  not  to  print  out  the  messages.  The  important  aspect  of  this,  as  with  other  areas  of
environmental  management,  is  to  try  to  set  measurable  objectives  for  green  initiatives,  to  assign
management  responsibility  for  monitoring  performance  and  to  offer  staff  guidance  and  training  on
how  to  achieve  the  desired  results.  As  noted  earlier,  the  progress  should  be  communicated  to  the
outside world in the bank’s environmental report.
I would like to close by expressing my appreciation for being allowed the opportunity to speak to you
today on this important topic. Doing the research for my speech has certainly helped to raise my own
awareness  of  the  importance  of  environmental  issues  in  general  and  the  implications  of  these  for
financial  institutions  in  particular.  I  hope  that  you  will  find  this  conference  to  be  useful  and
3
BIS Review 108/2000
informative, and that you will pick up lessons and advice on environmental issues that you can take
back with you to build into your business operations and decisions. The need to do this is the keynote
of my speech and the main theme of this conference.
BIS Review 108/2000
4
5
BIS Review 108/2000
BIS Review 108/2000
6
