Eva Srejber: New economy - or blend of new and old?
Speech by Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting arranged by
WM-Data ub Tylösand on 23 October 2000.
 Major technological changes have occurred before. Then as now, many people talked about a new age
that would involve better communications, new economic relations and a very promising future. It is
therefore important to keep a level head amidst the technological enthusiasm over future opportunities.
The fact that I am today emphasising the risks more than the advantages, is not because I consider the
risks  to  be  more  important  than  the  advantages,  but  because  the  risks  appear  to  have  been  largely
forgotten in the general debate on the economy. Let us make a sober analysis of what is happening,
and maybe we can avoid repeating the mistakes made during previous technological leaps. Moreover,
I  will  touch  on  the  uncertainty  and  lack  of  information  regarding  the  structural  changes  currently
taking place in the economy. In conclusion, I will also indicate to what extent these phenomena have
already affected and can be expected to affect monetary policy.
It has happened before
A nation’s economy is constantly subject to changes that lead to reappraisals or to the development of
old economic relations and theories. This is nothing new. Examples of this include the introduction of
the steam engine and the telegraph at the beginning of the 19th century, the building of the railways
somewhat  later  and  the  internal-combustion  engine  and  electric  motor  in  the  20th  century.  These
changes  usually  follow  a  similar  pattern  of  growth  and  structural  transformation.  The  transitional
phase  initially  involves  a  period  of  crisis,  which  is  expressed  in  company  closures  and  rising
unemployment. After this, productivity and growth increase. Some industries expand rapidly and are
met  by  expectations  of  large  profits.  The  demand  for  labour  is  unevenly  distributed  and  matching
problems arise. Wage differentials increase. In many ways the “new” economy can be regarded as one
in a row of structural changes taking place in society. It is thus more appropriate, in many respects, to
talk of a blend of new and old, rather than a new economy.
In comparison with the steam engine, the railways and electricity,  today’s  IT  developments  may  be
perceived  as  marginal.  But,  while  there  is  considerable  exaggeration  in  the  discussion  of  the
importance  of  IT,  I  would  still  say  that  today’s  change  process  could  be  compared  to  these  events.
Computers  and  the  Internet  allow  us  to  gather  information  easily,  cheaply  and  rapidly,  as  well  as
facilitating contacts between buyers and sellers at almost all levels. IT affects a number of areas, such
as financing, stock management and procurement. This often involves a dramatic reduction in costs. In
addition,  improved  information  flows  make  it  easier  to  move  production  outside  of  the  company’s
premises, to “outsource” activities that are not part of the core activities and to decentralise. The most
important effects of IT probably occur in terms of company structure, working life and the everyday
life of the individual.
The price is crucial
One  way  of  evaluating  the  strength  of  IT  is  to  compare  it  with  earlier  technological  changes.  The
telegraph is an interesting example, both with regard to parallels and differences. The introduction of
the telegraph led, just like IT, to a strong increase in the flow of information in the economies of the
time. A message that had previously taken perhaps a month to arrive, could now be transmitted in a
matter of minutes. Today, with the aid of the Internet, this type of message can be transmitted in a few
seconds. This further time gain is relatively marginal, but the significance of the Internet is not.
1
BIS Review 93/2000
The difference lies in the cost. Telegraphy was expensive, which is why its spread was limited. The
people of the nineteenth century had to visit a telegraph office or employ a telegraph boy and pay a
considerable amount of money if they wanted to send a telegram. In today’s money value it cost them
approximately SEK 2,000 to send a long distance message of 20 words, while the corresponding cost
today is around 10 öre for 20 pages. In other words, the variable cost is negligible today and the fixed
cost  is  reasonable.  Today,  therefore,  we  can  find  powerful  computers  and  the  Internet  at  most
workplaces  and in  many  homes.  The  costs  are  so low  that  many  have  the  financial  scope  to  utilise
computers and the Internet, at least in industrial nations. This spread also means that the time and cost
involved  in  the  telegraph  boy’s  running  around  is  eliminated.  In  other  words,  it  is  this  spread  that
means  that  today’s  IT  most  probably  has  much  greater  significance  than  telegraphy  had  a  hundred
years ago.
Speculation and technology
So  far  during  the  ongoing  technological  revolution,  we  have  seen  both  a  powerful  rise  and  a
considerable decline in the value at the stock exchange. If we compare this with earlier periods when
major technological changes had a breakthrough or became more widely used, we can conclude that
the  sequence  of  events  has  varied  greatly.  We  have  had  several  periods  of  extensive  speculation  in
connection with breakthroughs for new technologies that have resulted in financial  and real  shocks.
We  have  also  had  periods  when  these  changes  have  occurred  more  gradually,  without  any  major
shocks.
One  example  of  the  former  is  the  speculation  during  the  early  1920s  that  resulted  in  an  economic
decline. A further example is the international shock we had following the wave of speculation in the
then  ‘new  economy  share’  -  the  railways  -  in  the  1870s.  This  led  to  a  very  weak  international
development over a period of almost 20 years. We saw a much calmer development in Sweden in the
1950s  and  1960s  when  electrification  became  widespread.  This  contributed  to  a  rapid  technical
transformation, which largely followed a calm course, although it involved a very extensive migration
and in its later stages involved entire industries being wiped out. However, this was a period that was
in many respects quite different from our current day and different from the period at the turn of the
previous century. Sweden had the advantage of having remained neutral in the Second World War and
we  were  able  to  benefit  from  a  relatively  stable  demand  from  the  countries  building  up  their
economies  from  the  ruins.  We  had  capital  market  regulations  and  the  international  scene  was
dominated by the Cold War, which led to a clear bipolar world. The USA dominated our part of the
world and  provided  support for clear international financial  structures, partly  based  on  the  need  for
solidarity.
What has happened so far in Sweden?
To return to today’s situation, we can conclude that the Swedish economy is doing better than it has
for a long time. Price stability has been established. Production and employment have increased at a
rapid  rate  and  would  appear  to  continue  to  do  so.  Looking  at  the  past  six  years,  the  economy  has
grown by an average of 3% per year and at the moment we appear to be in an annual rate of between 3
and 4%. Unemployment has fallen and is continuing to fall to levels that few believed possible only a
few years ago. Productivity in Sweden has developed strongly. Between 1974 and 1993, for instance,
labour productivity increased by no more than 1.5% a year on average, while the corresponding figure
from 1994 onwards lies at  around  2%. This appears  to  be  due  to companies succeeding  in  utilising
existing labour and equipment more efficiently.
What we know and what we believe
This is at any rate the picture presented by Statistics Sweden. Now, we perhaps should not take it as a
matter of course. Reality is not always so easy to capture in quantitative terms. One particular problem
related to information technology is that it probably affects service production just as much as purely
BIS Review 93/2000
2
industrial  production.  Service  production  is  something  of  a  black  sheep  in  the  economic  statistics.
There are often tremendous  difficulties  in  distinguishing  quality  changes from  price  changes  in  this
field, which leads to the  statistics  being  less reliable.  Although  a  lot  of  effort  has  been  put  into the
work  on  calculating  GDP  and  other  measures  of  economic  developments  in  Sweden,  we  should  be
aware  of  the  uncertainty  inherent  in  these  estimates.  This  is  also  an  important  reason  why  a
commission of enquiry was recently appointed to look into economic statistics in Sweden.
For the moment, however, we have to work on the basis of the published statistics and our experience,
which  tells  us  that  good  macroeconomic  data  should  not  provide  a  basis  for  complacency.  The
importance of humility is emphasised by the recent experiences several  countries  have  had  in  Asia.
For  instance,  the  experience  of  Japan  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  and  Korea  in  the  mid-1990s,  when
traditional  macroeconomic  measures,  such  as  consumer  price  inflation  and  public  finances  long
indicated a favourable development. What was not so evident were the imbalances built up through
stock exchange and property valuations and through low-yield investments.
What is the reason behind the positive developments?
Is the positive development in Sweden due to computers and the Internet? It is of course possible that
information technology has made a contribution, but is it a central part of the explanation? The new
information  technology  is  not  very  good  at  explaining  what  has  happened  so  far  in  the  Swedish
economy.  The  path  of  inflation  is  not  determined  by  technological  or  organisational  developments.
There have been periods of technological development with rising, falling and constant price levels. In
Sweden, the shift in monetary and fiscal policy towards macroeconomic stability is an important part
of the explanation for the improved economic developments. Moreover, we have moved away from a
tax system that severely restrained the economy (Stig Malm called it perverse), to a system that is less
restrictive. We have moved away from an economy marked by detailed regulations, devaluation cycles
and national perspectives, to an economy with well-developed credit markets, deregulation and greater
international openness. The total of all these changes should contribute, with some time lag, to what
has now happened, that is, that growth and productivity are developing more strongly.
My point is thus that we should not overestimate the significance of information technology on what
has happened so far in the Swedish economy. The fact that things are now going well is probably more
due  to  stability  policies,  structural  reforms  and  international  influences  and  less  due  to  new
technology. There are some people who claim that the vigorous Swedish IT sectors is a sign that no
further structural reforms are needed in Sweden. Things are fine as they are. This is a rather dubious
conclusion. The Swedish IT miracle is largely the result of three deregulation processes in Sweden.
The  deregulation  of  the  domestic  credit  market,  the  abolition  of  foreign  exchange  controls  and  the
deregulation of the telecom sector. This opened the way for the growth of the Swedish IT sector. Risk
capital flowed in to new companies from Sweden and abroad. This is not a new economy - it happens
every time that strictly regulated markets are opened up to competition. To be fair, however, it should
be  mentioned  that  there  is  a  two-way  relation  between  the  new  technology  and  the  deregulation
processes.  The  new  technology  made  state-regulated  monopolies  less  expedient  and  led  to  greater
difficulty  in  upholding  the  regulations  on  the  financial  markets.  At  the  same  time,  the  deregulation
processes were an important condition for the rapid success of the new technology. It is  also  worth
reminding  ourselves  that  the  IT  sector  stands  outside  of  the  traditional  Swedish  labour  market
regulations.
The effects may take some time
The  effects  we  have  seen  so  far  are  probably  the  result  of  better  economic  policy  and  technology
introduced  earlier,  such  as  computers,  networks  and  mobile  communications.  However,  the  large
productivity gains experienced in times of major technological transformation usually due not come
until the transformation has reached a stage of maturity, whereby a general spread has been achieved
through the new technology being used by at least half of all households and companies. With regard
to the Internet, available figures indicate that Sweden has only recently passed this stage. Achieving
3
BIS Review 93/2000
the maturity stage with its large gains in productivity also requires that companies find organisational
forms that utilise the opportunities provided by the technology. Tougher international competition may
bring about this type of adaptation relatively quickly, but for me it is still not evident that Sweden is at
a stage where the new technology has major macroeconomic effects.
Further changes
The majority of the effects of information technology may thus lie ahead of us. An important question
here is how well equipped the Swedish society is to take advantage of this type of development and to
deal with the problems that arise from accelerated structural transformation. In order to reap the full
benefits of the growth made possible by technology, we will probably need further deregulation and
changes to institutional rules.
Those aspects which have so far dominated the discussion are higher labour productivity as a result of
the  new  technology  and  the  attendant  effects  of  this,  in  the  form  of  sharper  competition,  which  is
expected  to  result  in  further  improvements  in  productivity  and  in  restrained  price  development.  If
these  hopes  were  fulfilled,  it  would  be  a  very  positive  development.  A  more  rapid  productivity
development in a society is a crucial factor for creating a high standard of living. If we had had the
same productivity development during the period 1974 to 1993 as during the past 5 years, our income
level could have been approximately 10% higher.
Expressed in a different way, the general discussion so far has been dominated by the possibility that
the  supply  in the  economy  has  increased.  But,  if  households  raise  their  expectations  with  regard  to
their lifetime incomes, consumption may in the short term be adjusted upwards more than domestic
production  allows.  With  regard  to  deregulation,  the  analyses  are  similar.  They  lead  to  a  downward
shift in  price  levels  via increased  competition.  But  here  it is  a  question  of  nonrecurring  effects  and
should not be interpreted as lasting lower inflation. In such a scenario, the net result in the short term
will not necessary be falling inflation - it could just as well be rising inflation. This is one of the risks
in this context.
Another risk that has not been discussed much yet refers to a longer-term perspective. Changes create
both winners and losers. Lower purchase prices for a business owner or for us consumers may involve
a lost profit margin for other companies. An increase in productivity may involve redundancies and
that  companies  which  are  unable  to  keep  up  with  developments  are  wiped  out.  The  structural
transformation thus  contains  not  only  possibilities, but  also  social  maladjustment  that  must  be  dealt
with by the labour market, the capital markets, the education system, etc.
What does this mean for monetary policy?
I intend to discuss four areas that have figured in debates on monetary policy and the ‘new and old’
economy: the effects on interest rates, the effects on purchasing power, the economic relations and the
Riksbank’s intellectual framework.
It would not have been possible for interest rates to lie at the current levels if price stability had not
lowered the risk premium that lenders require for the uncertainty factor. In addition, the reduction in
public  borrowing  and  declining  indebtedness  has  led  to  real  interest  rates  being  pulled  down.  But
would  this  still  apply  if  we  had a  higher  growth in  productivity  in  the  future?  One  effect  of  higher
growth  and  increasing  investment  could  be  rising  real  interest  rates.  In  a  partial  analysis,  where
everything  else  remains  unchanged  within  the  economy,  this  is  a  correct  conclusion.  However,
everything  else  is  not  the  same.  The  real  interest  rate  is  determined  internationally  to  a  significant
degree  and  is  affected  by  several  factors,  including  individual  people’s  evaluation  of  consumption
today, compared with consumption later and the degree of their aversion to uncertainty. It is only if we
assume  that  consumption  today  is  valued  as  highly  as  consumption  tomorrow  and  disregard  the
uncertainty, that the growth rate can be used as an approximation of what the neutral real interest rate
should be. We are now seeing, at the same time as the higher growth, several other changes that affect
the real interest rate, such as an ageing population. It is difficult to draw a clear conclusion on the total
BIS Review 93/2000
4
effect of all these changes on the real interest rate. This is one of the areas in which the Riksbank is
working on improving its knowledge.
Another discussion held in the trail of the new technology, deregulation and increasing competition is
how the effects of the relative price changes on general price developments should be dealt with. The
basic idea is that the Swedish price level is so high in relation to other countries that it needs to be
adjusted  downwards,  so  that  Swedish  citizens’  purchasing  power  will  increase.  This  is  the  same  as
saying that the real exchange rate is undervalued, i.e. we can buy too few imported goods for what we
export. This could be corrected by strengthening the krona through a stronger nominal exchange rate
or by price increases on goods subject to competition being kept lower than those in other countries.
It  is  sometimes  claimed  in  the  economic  debate  that  non-recurring  effects  of  deregulation  and
increased competition could be utilised by the Riksbank altering its price stability target from 2% to a
lower figure. However, this would involve temporary effects influencing the target formulation, which
would  erase  the  stability  in  the  target  formulation  that  has  an  intrinsic  value.  It  is  still  possible  to
strengthen  purchasing  power  with  an  unchanged  operational  target  formulation  by  a  nominal
appreciation of the krona.
It  has  sometimes  been  claimed  that  the  “new  economy”  could  lead  to  completely  new  economic
relations. I see no reasons for such a change. It is more likely that technological developments lead to
reality approaching the simplified assumptions that form the basis of many economic models, such as
a large measure of competition and low transaction costs. Thus, most of the models the Riksbank uses
today  would function  equally  well or  better  if  structural changes  were to  occur  more  rapidly  in  the
future.
Nor do I see any reasons why the Riksbank’s intellectual framework on monetary policy would need
to  be  fundamentally  changed  if  we  were  to  have  a  period  of  strong  growth  in  productivity.  On  the
other hand, it would make greater demands of our analysis, in order to understand the various steps in
an ongoing process of change,  whether  we  put  the  label of ‘new’  or ‘new  and  old’  on  parts  of this
process.
5
BIS Review 93/2000
