Klaus Liebscher: The integration of financial markets in the euro area
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, at the CEMS Graduate
Conference  2000  “The  Post  Merger  Syndrome - Effects  on  Relevant  Markets,  Industry  Sectors  and
Competitors”, held in Vienna, on 13 October 2000 (slightly abridged).
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Financial markets are essential. They perform a very important role in the implementation of monetary
policy decisions into the economy. Well-functioning and efficient financial markets are crucial to the
achievement of a smooth and homogeneous transmission of monetary policy impulses. The continued
integration and deepening of financial markets is therefore also a significant issue for policymakers,
and particularly for central bankers.
Over  the  past  few  years  financial  markets  have  become  more  and  more  global,  as  technological
progress and stepped-up competition have supported the accelerating move towards greater integration
of financial markets. The creation of EMU an the single currency were undoubtedly another important
milestone spurring many European countries to promote this drive for integration.
 Where do we stand in the integration process 21 months after the successful introduction of the euro?
The  euro  has  brought  fundamental  changes  to  the  economic  and  financial  environment  of  the  euro
area. Acting as a catalyst, the single currency made a major contribution to competition and efficiency
in financial markets across the euro area.
The removal of exchange rate risk has both lowered transaction costs and enhanced price transparency.
Moreover, there is no doubt that the introduction of the euro has facilitated the establishment of more
cross-border links between financial institutions and has fostered the internationalization of business
on the financial markets further. In addition, we can see a well-functioning money and capital market
supported by a sophisticated cross-border payment system.
 Let me now focus on the degree of development of the euro area’s key financial markets:
The implementation of monetary policy in the euro area has proved highly efficient. The Eurosystem
has  successfully  introduced  a  market-oriented,  modern  and  flexible  operational  framework.  The
money market has clearly benefited from this in its refinancing operations. Short-term interest rates
have totally converged and the money market within the euro area has become fully integrated. As a
result, we have an efficient and liquid euro money market, and banks benefit from the conformity of
market conditions.
The euro money market has widely used daily reference indices for interest rates, notably EONIA for
overnight transactions and EURIBOR for transactions with longer maturities. These euro area indices
were  swiftly  accepted  on the  market  and  form  a  common  basis  for  pricing.  Market  participants  are
now able to manage their day-to-day funds in an efficient manner, incurring relatively low costs.
The rapid integration of the euro area’s money market was also supported by the developments in the
payment systems infrastructure, above all the establishment of the TARGET system operated by the
ESCB,  which  links  the  national  real-time  gross  settlement  systems  with  the  ECB’s  Payment
Mechanism. The smooth functioning of the settlement of cross-border payments allows banks to trade
safely  throughout  the  euro  area.  Therefore  the  money  market  has  gained  a  clear  cross-border
orientation,  and  some  large  banks  have  started  to  act  as  “money  center”  banks,  based  on  a  euro
area-wide scope of activity.
1
BIS Review 89/2000
The broadening of the market and the increasing share of cross-border transactions have had a positive
impact  on  the  provision  of  liquidity:  the  wider  euro  area  money  market  can  now  absorb  liquidity
shortages more easily than before, as banks can borrow more readily from foreign institutions.
…
The  creation  of  the  euro  has  also  accelerated  the  development  and  integration  of  Europe’s  capital
markets. Following the  introduction  of  the  euro,  which  was accompanied  by  the  redenomination  of
government bonds into euro in order to quickly reach a “critical mass” of euro-denominated paper, the
integration  of  the  European  capital  markets  moved  up  a  gear  in  1999.  Last  year  euro-denominated
bond issues played a far larger role than the predecessor currencies of the euro had done in their day.
Moreover, recent data on bond issues denominated in euro clearly indicate that the euro was rapidly
gaining in importance as an international transaction currency. Euro-denominated assets accounted
for more than 30% of the volume of new issues during 1999, which is comparable to the market share
of bonds denominated in US dollars, which declined from 58% to 48% between 1998 and 1999. If we
take  into  account  bond  and  note  issues,  this  trend  is  even  more  distinct,  underlining  the  euro’s
competitiveness vis-à-vis the US dollar: of all publicly announced international bond and note issues
in 1999 33% were denominated in euro and 37% in US dollars.
Thus, the euro, together with the US dollar, has become the most widely used currency. This basically
reflects  the  outcome  of  a  market-driven  process,  as  the  ECB  has  adopted  a  neutral  stance  on  the
internationalization  of  the  euro.  But  by  maintaining  price  stability,  the  ECB  almost  automatically
fosters  the  attractiveness  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency.  The  commitment  of  the  ECB  to
primarily pursue price stability remains a key factor behind market confidence in the euro as a stable
currency.
 Two factors are likely to determine the international role of the euro. First, the size factor: a broad,
deep and liquid euro area capital market with lower transaction costs facilitates the development of the
euro as a vehicle currency for trade and commodity pricing and may eventually lead to greater use of
the euro in the future.
Second, the risk factor: if international investors and issuers consider the euro to be a stable currency,
they will hold euro assets to minimize risk in their internationally diversified portfolios.
There  has  been  a  considerable  increase  in  private  issuance  activity  in  the  euro  area.  The  European
corporate bond market posted significant gains in 1999, although it should be taken into account that
temporary or exceptional factors may have been partly responsible for this. However, this trend has
continued  in  2000.  The  rising  number  of  companies  with  relatively  low  ratings  shows  that  it  has
become easier for firms to tap the capital market. Indeed, the integration and deepening of the capital
markets are particularly beneficial to smaller companies in need of venture capital.
The newly created euro-denominated bond market is better able to absorb very large issues than the
individual bond markets of the euro’s predecessor currencies. Indeed, the average size of new bond
issues increased considerably in 1999, reflecting the investors’ growing preference for deep and liquid
instruments.  In  line  with  the  trend  towards  higher  average  issuing  volumes,  Austria  also  recorded
re-openings of government bonds aimed at boosting liquidity.
EMU has contributed positively to this development, and the single currency has been facilitating the
standardization of debt instruments and  has  been  driving  a  continued reduction in  transaction  costs.
Progress in the harmonization of market standards, practices and conventions across the euro area is
reflected in the  increased  market  liquidity,  the  broader  maturity  spectrum  and  the  development  and
spread of new financial products.
…
Let me now turn to the stock market where we have observed an increase in new listings: in the course
of  1999  close  to  900  companies  were  newly  listed  on  stock  exchanges  in  the  euro  area,  which
represented  an  increase  of  some  40%  compared  with  1998.  The  growth  rates  in  the  “new  market”
BIS Review 89/2000
2
segments seem to reflect the enhanced attractiveness of going public in the euro area. Furthermore, the
development of a range of euro area-wide stock market indices is an obvious indicator of the progress
already made in the integration of euro area stock markets.
The euro area capital market is larger and more open than any of the domestic markets and provides
investors with more varied opportunities for investment, but it is not yet fully integrated. There are still
some barriers: for example different traditions and local market practices, national regulations and tax
regimes.  One  major  obstacle  to  the  efficient  functioning  of  financial  markets  is  also  the  prevailing
segmentation of financial markets in Europe.
So, while the introduction of the single currency was a major step towards integration, the high degree
of  segmentation  in  Europe’s  securities  markets  remains  one  of  the  primary  reasons  for  structural
weaknesses.  Allow  me  to  illustrate  this  by  providing  an  example:  there  are  currently  more  than
20 different securities settlement systems in the euro area operating on different trading and clearing
platforms.  In  other  words,  the  euro  area  lacks  a  sufficiently  integrated  system  for  the  clearing  and
settlement of securities and for managing collateral at the cross-border level. But market pressure is
growing and the securities settlement systems are faced with increasing demands for consolidation.
 The euro, in tandem with technological progress and continuing globalization, has put more pressure
on  European  exchanges  to  strive  for  structural  improvements.  We  should  also  be  aware  that  the
process of consolidation of stock exchanges is taking place within the context  of the  integration of
capital markets in the euro area. This allows exchanges to benefit from increased economies of scope
and scale they may obtain by using new information and telecommunication technologies. Since the
introduction  of  the  euro  several  initiatives  have  been  launched  by  stock  exchanges  with  a  view  to
forming alliances or merging activities. The recent flurry of excitement about the future of the London
Stock  Exchange  gives  an  indication  of  just  how  important  the  push  to  consolidate  Europe’s  stock
exchanges has become.
The increase in M&A activity is a sign of the competition between business and financial locations
due  to  changing  market  conditions  and  the  increasing  competitive  pressures  to  which  the  different
financial intermediaries are exposed.
Further  efforts  must  be  undertaken  to  remove  the  remaining  segmentation  and  harmonize  market
architectures,  accounting  rules  and  tax  treatment.  Several  initiatives  are  already  under  way  and
progress  is  being  made  on  the  harmonization  of  market  practices;  here,  eg  the  “Financial  Market
Action Plan” of the European Commission comes to mind, and national governments and European
market organizations have been working towards these goals. An important recent initiative was the
decision  of  the  ECOFIN-Council  to  establish  a  Committee  of  Wise  Men  in  order  to  identify  the
obstacles which stand in the way of a single market in securities and consider how they might best be
removed.
 Let me finally briefly address the Austrian financial market as well, which forms an integral part of the
euro area.
Notable  improvements  in  the  structures  and  procedures  of  Austria’s  financial  markets  have  been
undertaken in the last couple of years in order to improve Austria’s competitive position. The Wiener
Börse  (VSE),  acting  as  a  regional  exchange  with  a  strong  domestic  base,  has  taken  a  series  of
measures to brace itself for the stiffer competition faced by European securities exchanges in terms of
costs, the range of services offered and changing industry practices.
The November 1999 linking of Vienna’s cash market to the German Xetra electronic trading platform,
which was developed by the Deutsche Börse, benefited the enterprises listed on the Vienna exchange
by  assuring  them  Europe-wide  exposure,  greater  liquidity  as  well  as  attractiveness  thanks  to  the
increased  number  of  market  participants.  In  addition,  trading  hours  were  extended  and  preparations
were  made  for  the  establishment  of  a  new  exchange  for  Central  and  Eastern  European  securities,  a
joint  project  of  the  Deutsche  Börse  and  the  Wiener  Börse  (VSE).  This  New  Europe  Exchange
3
BIS Review 89/2000
(NEWEX), which will be a specialized exchange for Central and Eastern Europe located in Vienna,
will take up its activities on 3 November and will build on Austria’s expertise in and ties with Eastern
Europe. NEWEX is set to become the central trading and financial platform for companies from the
region  and  for  international  market  participants.  A  key  feature  offered  by  NEWEX  is  the  high-tech
trading  platform  Xetra  that  bundles  liquidity  and  enables  remote  access  to  trading  for  market
participants.
As  part  of  the  budgetary  consolidation  currently  under  way,  the  Austrian  government  plans  several
privatization measures. These activities will likely give a further boost to the Vienna stock exchange.
Moreover, the government recently presented a package of measures to increase the attractiveness of
Austria’s  capital  market,  eg  by  abolishing  the  stock  exchange  turnover  tax  or  by  fine-tuning
regulations  with  regard  to  international  best  practices  standards.  All  in  all,  I  have  great  trust  in  the
Vienna Stock Exchange and its necessity even for a smaller regional financial market.
 Let me conclude by saying that 21 months is a very brief period in the life of a new currency. But in
my view, EMU and the euro are already today a success.
The  euro  holds  a  strong  position  in  the  financial  world.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the
development of a sound institutional framework based on monetary stability and fiscal sustainability
have contributed to international and economic stability.
The  single  monetary  policy,  based  upon  efficient  instruments  and  payment  and  security  settlement
systems, has been conducted in a credible manner and has successfully maintained price stability for
about 300 million people.
The overall economic outlook for the euro area is quite favourable with good chances for a sustainable
and non-inflationary growth and more employment. Compared with other parts of the world, inflation
rates are relatively low, budgets increasingly consolidated and structural reforms under way. Financial
markets within the euro area are in full process of dynamic restructuring - we can already observe a
highly liquid and fully integrated money market and deeper and more efficient capital markets.
Therefore  I  am  fully  convinced  that  after  its  successful  launch,  the  euro  has  all  the  potential  for  a
strong, competitive and well-accepted currency in international financial markets.
BIS Review 89/2000
4
