Edgar Meister: Challenges for regulators in Europe
Speech by  Mr  Edgar  Meister, Member  of the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Joint
Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the  challenges  for
economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I.
Developments  in  the  financial  system,  and  the  associated  issues  relating  to  systemic  risks,  are  of
essential importance to both central banks and banking supervisors. For that reason, in particular, in
eight of the eleven countries of the Eurosystem the central bank is either responsible for conducting
banking supervision or plays an important role in it. A stable financial system and especially a stable
banking system are preconditions to implementing monetary policy in the European System of Central
Banks  (ESCB)  and  are  an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  any  economy  to  function.  In  some  cases,
central  banks  provide  emergency  assistance  to  help  otherwise  solvent  credit  institutions  resolve
liquidity crises. Moreover, the central banks are involved in the clearing and settlement of payments
and, due to the considerable systemic risks in that area, exercise an oversight function. This results in
synergies which can be harnessed for prudential supervisory purposes.
Today,  banking  supervisory  issues  are  addressed,  and  prudential  supervisory  regulations  refined,
primarily  at  the  European  and  international  levels.  The  most  important  innovations  in  prudential
supervision are discussed and drafted in international committees.
Europeanisation and globalisation;
The challenges to supervisors in the ever-changing European banking market are very multi-layered.
Let me address just a very few aspects which I think are of exceeding importance. For years we have
been witnessing a trend characterised by:
• 
• 
• 
This trend is exceptionally complex and has gathered pace over the last two years. Also, I would like
to discuss the implications for the structure and operating procedure of banking supervisors.
computerisation of banking business.
consolidation; and
II.
Ladies and gentlemen, the so-called “European Passport” for financial services has undoubtedly given
a decisive boost to the integration of European financial markets.
For  some  years,  there  has  been  a  pronounced  and  accelerating  trend  towards  consolidation  in  the
European financial system. The integration of the markets is thus taking place at a higher level, as it
were. There are two sides to this process: the geographical aspect, and the question as to what business
activities are being caught up in the wave of concentration.
In the analysis, one notices that so  far,  mergers  and  takeovers  in  the  European banking  sector have
been taking place mostly on national markets. By contrast, cross-border mergers have been fewer in
number, but have been more in the public eye due to the size and stature of the institutions involved.
For  example:  in  the  Benelux  region,  the  takeover  of  the  Belgian  Banque  Bruxelles  Lambert  by  the
Dutch bank ING; in Scandinavia, the merger of the Finnish Merita Bank, Norway’s Nordbanken and
Denmark’s  Unidanmark  to  form  Nordic  Baltic  Holding;  and  the  recently  announced  merger  of
Germany’s HypoVereinsbank and Bank Austria. One notable example of a merger beyond Europe’s
borders is that of Deutsche Bank with Bankers Trust.
1
BIS Review 81/2000
What  are  the  most  important  reasons  why  mergers  have  so  far  remained  mostly  within  national
markets?
• 
Mergers  are  more  easily  accomplished  when  they  take  place  in  familiar  cultural
surroundings, where the language and the legal framework - particularly the tax framework -
are the same.
  In some cases, national mergers are a stepping-stone towards cross-border expansion.
Up until now the home markets of the larger countries, in particular, have afforded sufficient
opportunities for mergers and diversification, thus eliminating the urgent need to look across
national borders.
Differences in corporate cultures, which tend to cause friction, become more prominent in
cross-border  mergers,  especially  where  financial  institutions  of  countries  with  different
banking systems are involved.
However,  accentuated  by  the introduction  of  the  euro,  we  may  expect  the  number  of pan-European
mergers to go up. The primary aim is the desire of many companies to open up new markets and to
strengthen  their  own  European  and  global  competitiveness;  they  consider  size  to  be  an  important
competitive factor.
It is difficult to come to a final assessment of these M&A activities since most of the effects will only
surface in the medium term. Mergers of small institutions, in particular, contribute to a consolidation
of the banking system,  with  positive  stabilisation  effects.  By  contrast,  mergers  and  alliances  among
big banks may create structures which might be difficult to manage. The problem is magnified in the
case  of  cross-border  mergers.  Extremely  large  banks  and  financial  conglomerates  spread  out  over
relatively  numerous  countries  present  major  challenges  for  supervisors.  These  structures  require
increased supervision.
It is hardly possible to reliably forecast today what the impact of mergers will be on financial market
structures.  A  stronger  focus  on  financial  conglomerates  is  just  as  conceivable  as  a  concentration
towards core operations with marginal areas being spun off. Both trends can be observed, though the
contours of the resulting structures are not yet clearly visible.
This will naturally affect the future of universal banks. Will they remain competitive or will they be
pushed aside by specialised banks expressly aiming to make full use of comparative advantages? As I
see  it,  the  universal  bank  has  a  future.  This  future,  though,  may  involve  a  stronger  focus  on  core
competencies  both  to  utilise  comparative  advantages  and  to  benefit  from  the  advantages  of  risk
diversification.  Cross-subsidisation  of  less-profitable  branches  of  business  by  profitable  areas,  as
universal banks had a reputation for doing in the past, will probably become less and less viable given
the competitive waters in which these institutions are now swimming.
Ladies and gentlemen, an additional element of structural change in the banking market - in fact, often
their  driving  force  -  is  enormous  technological  progress.  Especially  electronic  banking,  including
electronic  brokerage,  is  creating  a  brand-new  virtual  platform  for  competition.  With  the  Internet,  a
distribution channel with low overhead costs has been created, which gives not only large banks but
also  small  and  new  banks  much  greater  opportunities  than  in  the  past  to  successfully  jockey  for
position.
To win customers, banks no longer need a high-cost network  of  branches. The “bricks  and  mortar”
banks of the past are facing competition from banks that serve their customers for the most part - and
in  some  cases  exclusively  -  as  “virtual  service  providers”.  This  will  surely  not  render  the  credit
institutions’ network of branches obsolete; however, pressure to downsize and to close insufficiently
profitable  branches,  which  already  exists  in  many  countries,  will  intensify.  The  implications  of  the
new opportunities are far-reaching. But in addition to the economic opportunities they afford, the new
technologies and specifically the Internet also, of course, harbour risks.
In addition to strategic business risks, security aspects also play a key role. Supervisors are thus paying
great attention to those developments and are confronted with special challenges in this area.
BIS Review 81/2000
2
After all, the new media make it possible to offer financial services from anywhere, which means that
potential  customers,  competitors  and  also  supervisors  cannot  always  tell  where  the  provider  legally
domiciled is and whether or not the enterprise has already obtained a license.
Adding to these are changes in market conditions. For example, the new media considerably enhance
the transparency of services and terms of business and thus have a major impact on demand.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  what  is  the  effect  of  all  these  developments  on  competition?  Technological
advances, increased transparency and new providers will tend to heighten the competitive nature of the
market, which in Europe is being reflected, for instance, in the continuing fall in interest-rate margins.
However,  the  process  of  consolidation  may  lead  to  a  degree  of  concentration  which  impairs
competition,  although  up  to  a  certain  threshold  competition  is  tending  to  increase.  The  situation  is
different throughout Europe. In Germany, at any rate, the five largest banks account for only 17% of
the volume of domestic business. In individual business segments, too, it cannot be said that individual
institutions have a position that impairs competition. By contrast, the degree of concentration in other
European countries is much higher, reaching 60 to 80% in some cases.
Ladies and gentlemen, supervisors naturally need to figure out how to react to these changes. This also
involves coming up with an adequate prudential supervisory structure for Europe.
III.
harmonised regulations with mutual recognition;
national responsibility for prudential supervision; and
Europe’s current banking supervisory structure rests on three pillars:
• 
• 
• 
Banking supervision in Europe has always evolved to keep pace with developments and changes in the
financial  sector  and,  in  parallel  to  the  market,  has  in  a  sense  followed  its  own  internationalisation
strategy.
cooperation and coordination.
To  start  with,  the  harmonised  banking  supervisory  regulations  characterised  by  mutual  recognition
within the framework of the European principle of home-country control are a key factor. In that area,
significant overall progress has been made towards a single European market for financial services.
However, the intensive cooperation among supervisory institutions in the practical implementation of
supervision  is  also  of  special  importance.  That  is  to  say,  we  need  a  convergence  of  prudential
supervisory practices. This is not only to give market players a “level playing field” at that level, as
well, but also to take account of cross-border activities and to keep the administrative costs generated
by different supervisory regimes low. To this end, home and host country supervisory authorities are
stepping up bilateral cooperation by means of a series of memoranda of understanding.
This bilateral cooperation is joined at the European level by well-functioning multilateral cooperation
agencies.  The  “oldest”  group  is  the  Groupe  de  Contact,  which  focuses  on  questions  regarding  the
implementation of prudential supervisory regulations and practices. The task of the Banking Advisory
Committee  of  the  EU  Commission  is  to  discuss  and  observe  regulatory  plans  and  supplementary
guidelines and to deal with issues of interpretation. The ESCB’s Banking Supervision Committee was
formed to enable multilateral cooperation between central banks and banking supervisors, with stress
being placed on the analysis of systemic stability. The Round Table of Regulators in Brussels, where
the  chairpersons  of  the  various  sectoral  agencies  (banking  supervisors,  securities  supervisors  and
insurance supervisors) are represented, deals with cross-sectoral supervisory issues.
With  this  framework  of  regulations,  agreements  and  agencies,  the  current  supervisory  system  can
boast quite a successful record in the area of financial stability. The most recent crises on international
financial  markets,  for  example,  have  been  overcome  by  the  European  banking  sector  without  any
problems.
3
BIS Review 81/2000
At any event, according to the findings of the recently-presented “Report on Financial Security” of a
high-ranking working group commissioned by the Ecofin council (also known as the “Henk Brouwer
Report”),  the  institutional  framework  of  EU  banking  supervision  is  sufficient,  yet  cooperation  in
practical prudential supervision needs further improvement.
Ladies and gentlemen, the functionality of today’s European supervisory model has thus, in principle,
been recognised by this working group. However, critics say occasionally that with banking operations
becoming increasingly globalised, national responsibility for banking supervision could pose problems
in spite of harmonisation at the European level.
Thus,  despite  all  efforts,  there  are  still  prudential  supervisory  areas  where  rules  have  not  yet  been
harmonised, such as liquidity regulations.
The  European  regulatory  framework  for  prudential  supervision  rests  on  the  setting  of  minimum
standards.  This  leaves  room  for  individual  nations  to  implement  and  apply  these  standards  in
conformity  with  their  special  situations.  However,  particularly  this  variety  of  supervisory  practices
may  have  an  impact  on  competition.  The  aforementioned  continued  harmonisation  of  supervisory
practices is therefore of high priority and is being undertaken with vigour.
Critics  have  also  indicated  certain  competencies  as  being  a  weakness  of  the  system.  Thus,  foreign
subsidiaries  of  institutions  are  subject  both  to  consolidated  solvency  supervision  by  the  parent
country’s home authority and to individual supervision by the competent authority in the host country.
Legally dependent foreign branches, by contrast, are supervised in terms of their solvency solely by
the supervisory authority at the domicile of the headquarters but, in terms of their liquidity, also by the
supervisory  authority  in  their  host  country.  This  requires  additional  time  and  effort  for  submitting
reports.  Relief  could  be  given  particularly  by  the  already-envisaged  transition  from  host-country  to
home-country  liquidity  supervision.  Further  harmonisation  requires  that  a  European  Commission
Directive be adopted.
Finally, the European supervisory  system,  which is  still  based  on national legislation, is not always
able to react with the necessary speed to new developments in the financial markets. However, this is
not  a  supervisory  problem  as  such  but  rather  the  consequence  of  the  existing  European  legislative
process, which should be accelerated wherever possible.
IV.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  do  think  it  has  become  clear  that  the  question  of  an  adequate  supervisory
structure  for  Europe  is  an  extremely  complex  subject.  Against  this  background,  some  banks  and
observers  have  called  for  a  central  supervisory  authority  in  Europe  as  a  sort  of  panacea.  However,
controversy reigns as to whether, and if so, to what extent supervision should be carried out  by  the
European Central Bank or a separate European supervisory institution.
I tend to take a dim view of these proposals; in my opinion, they do not represent a real solution to the
problem and would be less than optimal in view of the financial market structures. The establishment
of a central supervisory authority does not automatically lead to a harmonisation of supervisory rules.
Conversely, the rules can also be harmonised without a central institution being founded.
I feel that a lot of thought should still be given to further developing the European supervisory system;
for the key measure of a supervisory model is its ability to effectively support the objective of system
stability and to function efficiently. Moreover, it must also be politically viable.
We have already noted that there is still a rather wide range of different banking systems and financial
market structures in existence in the EU. Thus, the underlying question is: should a supervisory system
determine the market or should prudential supervision follow market structures instead? I tend to lean
towards the latter. Of course, it is necessary to define a regulatory policy framework for the financial
sector, too, since precisely this sector is of particular importance to the macroeconomy. However, a
very large dose of sensitivity for the situation is needed in order to keep regulatory guidelines, either
material or institutional in nature, from causing structural changes in the banking sector which do not
yield any additional economic benefit.
BIS Review 81/2000
4
And  here  is  another  question:  is  the  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe  already  at  such  an
advanced stage that this warrants institutional reforms of banking supervision in response? I think not.
Whereas in the meantime the European interbank money market has already reached a high level of
integration, some segments  of the  market  for  banking  and  financial  services  still lack  the  necessary
depth, efficiency and completeness. For instance, retail banking has largely remained a national matter
due to continuing differences in tax structures, legal regulation and cultural backgrounds among EU
countries.
Adding to that, there is the following question: would the EU member states currently be willing to
give up more national sovereignty above and beyond monetary policy, say, by transferring prudential
supervisory powers to a supra-national institution? A central supervisory authority would have to be
equipped with sovereign regulatory and intervention powers. Would  governments  and the  public  be
prepared to accept a bank in their country being shut down by a supra-national supervisory authority,
thus placing claims on taxpayers at the national level, by means of a potentially necessary bailout? In
an insolvency crisis, a European authority would be deciding how national tax revenue is used.
Another  question  that  affects  practical  supervisory  activity  is  this:  does  centralising  supervision
provide more systemic stability? As mentioned earlier, the focus of most banks’ business  is  still  on
their home markets. And there, they are subject to their respective national supervisors, which can rely
on  especially  profound  knowledge  of  their  country’s  legal  framework  and  banking  system.  Cross-
border issues are even today already being addressed in the various multilateral coordination bodies.
The  Europe-wide  diversification  of  business  activity  must  naturally  remain  under  continued
observation so that, if necessary, the supervisory system can be adapted accordingly.
The  way  I  see  it,  the  aim  is  not  a  centralised  authority  but  rather  an  improved  coordination  of
supervisory  rules  and  practices.  I  am  confident  that  the  present  supervisory  system  in  Europe  is
capable  of  pressing  forward  with the  necessary  harmonisation  of  different  supervisory  methods  and
regulatory framework conditions in a dynamic manner. To be sure, there are still harmonisation gaps
which remain to be closed. However, a centralised supervisory authority would be confronted with the
same problem of having to take account of special national features in its regulatory framework owing
to  the  still-heterogeneous  banking  systems  in  Europe.  Therefore,  the  optimum  minimum  level  of
harmonisation  needs  to  be  defined.  For  the  time  being,  at  least,  it  seems  questionable,  in  my  view,
whether a complete streamlining of all rules is necessary,  particularly  owing  to the  implications for
competition and in light of the variety of banking systems.
V.
Ladies and gentlemen, what conclusions may we draw? As the analysis has shown, there are no simple
one-size-fits-all  solutions  for  an  adequate  supervisory  model  for  Europe.  I  feel  that  the  present
supervisory structure is functionally viable. Naturally, it must constantly rise to new challenges  and
come up with suitable answers.
A gradual refinement of the tried and tested system seems more suitable than a “big bang” in the form
of a new, overarching supervisory authority in Europe. Don’t get me wrong - I don’t fail to recognise
the  need  for  a  rapid  harmonisation  of  supervisory  rules  and  practices  in  order  to  make  the  system
leaner, to reduce the administrative time and effort on the part of banks, and to keep the playing field
level in future as well.
Yet I feel it is necessary to go one step further at the European level. The existing coordination bodies
have done good work. These forums should be strengthened instead of taking what is, in my opinion,
the  too-large  and  currently  not  viable  step  of  creating  new  institutions.  Strengthening  these  forums
would  give  an  added  boost  to  the  process  of  harmonisation.  In  the  interests  of  financial  market
stability at the European level, it is necessary to put together systemic developments in the individual
countries to form a whole. With the Banking Supervision Committee, or BSC, we already have a body
that could cover that aspect. This committee can function as an “observatory of systemic risk” and as a
coordination body for cross-border banking supervisory and crisis management issues.
5
BIS Review 81/2000
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  convinced  that  with  such  an  evolutionary  and  flexible  approach  which
does  not  create  a  precedent  for  any  financial  market  trends  and  which  will  later  open  up  different
institutional opportunities, challenges to supervisors can be met successfully in future, too.
BIS Review 81/2000
6
