Yutaka Yamaguchi: Challenges raised by recent changes in the financial system
Remarks  by  Mr  Yutaka  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Joint
Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the  challenges  for
economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 It is indeed an honor to be invited today to address such distinguished guests at this conference.
The duty of a central bank is to contribute to sound and sustainable economic growth through price
stability,  though  the  legal  description  of  its  objectives  may  differ  from  country  to  country.
Furthermore, a central bank has a substantial responsibility in maintaining financial system stability as
a whole, regardless of whether or not it has supervisory authority over individual financial institutions.
Thus, a central bank is unique in that it conducts its business while always paying close attention to
the interfacing of the macro-economy and the financial system. Bearing these in mind, I will discuss
some challenges which recent changes in the financial system raise.
Let me begin with the background and characteristics of changes in the financial system.
First  of  all,  I  should  confirm  the  profound  impact  of  innovations  in  information  technology  on  the
financial system. These innovations and the development of concurrent financial technology such as
derivatives  and  securitization,  which  enable  the  unbundling  and  repackaging  of  risks,  have  greatly
expanded the range of tradable risks. As a result, market transactions have become deeper and more
liquid,  fairer  and  more  competitive  prices  have  been  realized,  and  transaction  costs  have  declined
substantially.  This  has  led  to  the  significant  expansion  of  cross-border  capital  flows  and  financial
transactions. And, with intensifying competition and interdependence, financial and capital markets in
various countries have become similar “in certain respects”.
The reason I said “in certain respects” is because middle and retail banking, which meets the financial
needs of individuals as well as small- and medium-sized firms, continues to be supported by financial
intermediaries indigenous to each country. Of course, in the future, such localized banking might be
affected by globalization as the advance of telecommunications technology, particularly the Internet,
further erodes regional barriers, even for the household sector. Right now, however, it is difficult to
envisage  globalization,  which  has  been  progressing  in  wholesale  banking,  to  also  be  observed  in
middle and retail banking in the immediate future. Thus, a phenomenon, which can be labeled “home
bias” in middle and retail banking, is likely to coexist with the globalization of wholesale banking.
As  globalization  has  progressed  in  wholesale  banking,  the  institutional  distinction  among  banks,
securities  companies,  and  insurance  companies  has  become  increasingly  blurred.  This  is  largely
attributable  to  the  fact  that  technological  innovation  has  promoted  the  unbundling  and  flexible
repackaging of such financial functions as settlement, financial intermediation, and risk allocation. At
present,  major  financial  institutions  in  many  countries  are  gearing  for  the  expansion  of  size  and
business area by way of consolidation. Such moves should be understood not only as the pursuit of
economies of scale and scope by providing a variety of financial services in a comprehensive manner,
but  also as  a process  searching  for  a  new  combination  of  financial  functions  tailored  for  individual
needs. With these moves gaining momentum, regulations based on the current fixed combination of
financial  functions  have  become  increasingly  outmoded  when  compared  with  reality.  Under  such
circumstances, even in the United States and Japan where the financial systems used to be based on
the strict separation of business areas, financial system reform which grants mutual entry of business
areas among different types of financial institutions, has been implemented.
These changes in the financial service industry will exert various influences on the financial system. In
this  regard,  let  me  mention  the  enhanced  role  of  capital  base  as  an  important  example.  Under  a
financial  supervisory  paradigm  that  aimed  at  ensuring  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  by
regulating  their  activities,  capital  base  only  played  a  limited  role.  However,  as  the  effectiveness  of
1
BIS Review 82/2000
such  a  regulation-oriented  paradigm  has  greatly  diminished,  capital  base  has  come  to  play  an
important role as a buffer against risks, and an accurate risk control method, which dictates as a core
principle  capital  base  being  in  line  with  risk  profile,  has  become  an  established  practice  among
advanced  financial  institutions.  Bearing  this  practice  in  mind,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision has been drafting a new  guideline  on  capital  requirements that  redefines the  amount  of
capital  base  corresponding  to  various  risks.  It  will  be  interesting  to  see  how  the  total  amount  of
required capital for financial institutions  will  change  as  a  result  of  the  new  guideline.  For  example,
when many countries are said to be overbanked, it seems to indicate that capital and other resources
are  excessively  allocated  to  the  financial  service  industry,  particularly  the  banking  sector.  With  the
new guideline that more accurately calculates the required capital corresponding to the risk profile of
banks, will a similar conclusion hold? And, if examined from the viewpoint of economic capital, will
there be any change in the conclusion? If the economy is considered overbanked even according to the
new  guideline,  we  will  see  the  reallocation  of  resources,  including  capital,  both  in  and  out  of  the
financial system. Through what kind of process will such reallocation of resources be realized? This
question  could  have  considerable  bearing  not  only  on  the  financial  system  per  se  but  also  on  the
conduct of monetary policy.
As such, the fact that financial transactions are conducted globally and financial markets have become
significantly  deeper  and  more liquid  should  work  to  enhance  financial  system  efficiency  as  well  as
stability by making it possible to absorb various external shocks through market functions.
However, even in the 1990s, we repeatedly observed financial crises that went far beyond the collapse
of individual financial institutions and affected entire financial systems, such as the asset bubbles in
Japan and the Nordic countries, the currency crises in Asian countries and Russia, and the failure of
the  Long  Term  Capital  Management.  The  increased  frequency  of  crises  along  with  changes  in
financial  systems  seem  to  suggest  that  while  financial  system  efficiency  has  been  considerably
enhanced,  vulnerability  has  also  increased.  Why  should  this  be?  Granted  that  the  adoption  of  fixed
exchange  rate  regimes  and  the  impetuous  liberalization  of  capital  flows  on  the  part  of  emerging
economies were behind the recent turbulence, it is possible to conclude that technological innovation
and globalization might have had a tendency to amplify such crises.
financial 
transactions,  and  occasioned 
Indeed,  financial  globalization,  ignited  by  innovations  in  information  technology,  has  dramatically
increased  cross-border 
intensified  competition  and
interdependence  among  financial  markets  in  various  countries.  However,  exactly  because  of  such
strengthened interdependence, stress will not only affect the country in which it emerges initially, for
example, Thailand in the case of the Asian crisis, but also be transmitted immediately to markets in
other  countries.  In  the  transmission  process,  stress  will  not  only  be  transmitted  to  those  countries
perceived to have similar economic structures, but also could significantly affect markets, which are
not directly related to the stress, through the global adjustment of highly leveraged positions. Indeed,
during  the  Asian  crisis,  “flight  to  quality”  and  liquidity  evaporation  took  place,  foreign  exchange
stability  which  enables  smooth  market  transactions  extending  over  many  countries  was  lost,  and
markets segmented. Thus, once a financial crisis occurs, the depth and liquidity of globalized financial
transactions that should absorb the shock immediately disappear, and the wholesale banking  market
becomes segmented by each country just as in the case of middle and retail banking.
In addition, where there are prospects for profit opportunities, in order to obtain maximum benefits,
sophisticated financial techniques backed by financial innovation have to be highly leveraged. While it
is true that such high leverage contributes to improving efficiency as long as forecasts turn out to be
accurate and the financial system is smoothly operating, once an unexpected shock hits the market and
profit opportunities are lost, a sudden reversal of prices could occur through position rebalancing and
leverage rewinding. In such a situation, the very activity of individual financial institutions based on
sophisticated  risk  management  techniques  aggravates  market  price  instability.  For  example,  market
wisdom created the use of collateral in OTC derivative transactions as a self-defense measure to deal
with  counterparty  risk.  At  the  same  time,  as  experienced  during  the  Russian  crisis,  such  collateral
potentially has the negative aspect of triggering a vicious circle in times of stress where a decline in
collateral  value  could,  by  converting  counterparty  risk  to  spread  risk,  induce  margin  calls  and  the
unwinding  of  positions,  thus  leading  to  further  declines  in  collateral  value.  Of  course,  from  the
BIS Review 82/2000
2
managerial viewpoint, each market participant would naturally try to contain risk and losses within a
certain limit. However, in a stress situation, this kind of individual activity could change prices in a
non-linear and discontinuous manner and cause the evaporation of market liquidity at a macro level.
Thus,  we  may  be  able  to  conclude  that  the  depth  and  ample  liquidity  of  markets  created  by
technological innovation and  globalization in  normal  times  could  be  immediately  lost  in  times  of  a
financial  crisis  accompanied  by  enormous  stress,  and  there  is  an  inherent  risk  that  it  would  further
amplify the crisis.
Let me now discuss the financial crisis caused by the asset bubble that Japan experienced in the 1990s
in relation to financial innovation. A bubble in the form of rapidly rising asset prices is a phenomenon
that  has  repeatedly  been  observed  in  history.  In  a  period  of  euphoria,  asset  prices  become  inflated
along with the credit expansion of financial institutions. And, in the subsequent period of adjustment, a
decline in asset prices impairs the balance sheets of financial institutions and has a substantial adverse
impact on the economy as the credit provision function of such financial institutions weakens. With
the benefit of hindsight, such a process is nothing new.
Having  said  this,  however,  in  Japan  we  cannot  deny  the  possibility  that  because  the  regulatory
framework in the late 1980s did not keep up with rapid changes in the financial system, the activities
of financial institutions became more risky than otherwise, thereby amplifying the extent of problems.
Technological innovation in the capital market made the services offered by banks less attractive, and
pressure from abroad for financial deregulation intensified. As a result, banks became strongly aware
of  the  decline  in  their  franchise  value,  which  gave  them  a  strong  incentive  to  pursue  risk-taking
activities  to  maintain  and  improve  their  earnings.  Furthermore,  deregulation  of  the  traditional
segmentation  of  business  areas  and  banking  organization  proceeded  only  gradually,  thus  making  it
difficult for banks to develop businesses that might open up new opportunities for profits. The result
was  excessive  risk  taking  in  lending  which  was  their  traditional  business.  Furthermore,  financial
institutions can temporarily prevent a fundamental deterioration in profitability from surfacing through
aggressive lending. This kind of behavior and a rapid rise in asset prices during the emergence of the
bubble that accelerated credit expansion, worked together to amplify the excess in the business cycle.
During the bursting of the bubble in the 1990s, Japanese banks simultaneously faced two problems:
the  non-performing  asset  problem  and  a further  rise  in  pressure  stemming  from  global  competition.
The interaction of these two problems further delayed improvements in financial system functions, and
was  a  significant  factor  behind  the  stagnation  of  Japan’s  economy  in  the  following  years.  Major
Japanese  banks  found  it  difficult  to  make  sufficient  high-tech  related  investments  due  to  capital
constraints,  and  had  to  divest  themselves  of  profitable  overseas  subsidiaries.  This  had  a  significant
adverse impact on the competitiveness of investment banking, which has tended to yield the highest
returns,  and  perhaps  further  delayed  reconstruction  of  the  medium-term  profitability  of  banks.
Furthermore,  economic  globalization  promoted  the  convergence  of  factor  prices,  including  property
prices,  and  made  reconstruction  of  the  financial  system  more  difficult  by  amplifying  pressure
stemming from asset deflation.
What lessons can the central bank learn from recent changes in the financial system and the experience
of financial crises?
First of all, innovations in information technology and globalization are ongoing phenomena and will
likely continue to change each country’s economy as well as its financial system at a rapid pace. For a
central  bank,  this  leads  to  increased  uncertainty  in  the  environment  surrounding  the  conduct  of
monetary policy.
A case in point is the argument that I made earlier on “overbanked” market. Such an argument is often
made regarding the financial system in countries like Japan and Germany. If this argument is correct,
it is envisaged that these countries would witness the rapid reduction of both deposits and loans, and
the increase  in  such  instruments  as  MMFs.  In  Japan,  we  hear  conflicting  views  on  the  issue:  while
some advocate the need to expeditiously solve overbanking, others criticize the slow growth of money
supply, which of course is the balance sheet of banks.
3
BIS Review 82/2000
Some  may  say  that the increased  uncertainty  for  a central  bank  stemming  from  such  factors  as,  for
example, overbanking would not pose qualitatively different problems compared with the introduction
of  new  financial  instruments  like  NOWs  and  MMFs  in  the  past.  However,  I  think  technological
innovation has the potential power to more profoundly alter the financial and economic structure over
the medium- to long-run.
For example, e-commerce, which develops as it interacts with innovation in financial techniques, has
been rapidly expanding at an exponential double-digit annual rate in Japan and the United States, and
may  fundamentally  change  the  price  formation  of  goods  and  services.  The  spread  of  e-commerce
could put downward pressure  on prices  due to the  decline  in distribution  costs,  dramatically  reduce
menu costs because, for example, price tags can easily be changed, and lead to price destruction as
prices can be set differently from customer to customer. In fact, we see examples in such merchandise
as CDs (compact discs) and books where e-commerce transactions are 10 to 20% cheaper than those in
traditional commercial  transactions,  and  merchandise  sold  with  a  unit  price  change  of  one  dollar  in
traditional commerce is now sold with a unit price change of one cent in e-commerce.
A decline in the price level and the rapid progress of price differentiation vis-à-vis customers would
make it more difficult for the central bank to set a targeted inflation rate and substantially impair the
reliability  of  price  indices.  Since  economic  theory  teaches  us  that  price  rigidity  is  a  big  factor
supporting  the  short-term  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  lower  menu  costs  might  have  a  large
impact on the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The spread of e-commerce is only one aspect of the various influences of technological innovation,
and as such innovation proceeds there will be many other new aspects to contend with. The intrinsic
difficulty  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  lies  in  our  limited  knowledge  of  economic
prospects and mechanisms, and innovation in information technology  and  advances  in  globalization
may further aggravate such difficulty.
Under such circumstances, we should not suppress, by regulation, the development of technology and
innovation  in  the  market.  Rather,  we  should  strive  to  provide  a  supportive  market  infrastructure,
including regulation and supervision, market practices, disclosure, and accounting methods, in a broad
context  and  to  make  it  more  robust.  The  systematic  improvement  of  market  infrastructure  will
contribute to reducing the risk of financial crises, which is the most serious uncertainty. In fact, to this
end,  vigorous  and  systematic  efforts  have  been  made  in the  international  community,  resulting  in  a
plethora  of  fora,  reports  and  proposals.  It  is  indeed  an  encouraging  development  that  many
international  committees  are  striving  to  discover  and  improve  weaknesses  inherent  in  the  global
financial system, and experts of the Financial Stability Forum have been double-checking such efforts.
We  must  thus  ensure  that  the  results  obtained  from  these  precious  efforts  are  implemented  by  the
authorities of each country and market participants, and in this context I agree to the point made by
many that appropriate incentives are needed.
Of the various efforts to improve market infrastructure, let me mention the study called the “Fisher II”
project, being undertaken by the Multi-disciplinary Working Group on Enhanced Disclosure, chaired
by Mr Peter Fisher of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. This developed from the study by the
central bank group at the BIS, and it is currently examining ways to improve disclosure necessary for
evaluating  counterparty  risk  in  collaboration  with  the  supervisory  authorities  of  banks,  securities
companies, and insurance companies, as well as with the support of major market participants. This
study  is  important,  not  only  because  cooperation  between  the  private  financial  sector  and  the
supervisory authorities in charge of the financial service industry overall is realized, but also because it
may  reveal  the  new  boundary  of disclosure  needed for  such  public  goods  as  market  stability  in  the
context  of  recent  crises.  Moreover,  we  need  to  check  whether  or  not  market  pressure,  which  is
regarded as a main incentive, would result in establishing advanced disclosure as a market practice. At
present,  it  is  only  a  hypothesis  that  more  advanced  disclosure  would  lead  to  more  appropriate  risk
management by market participants, let alone to further enhancing financial system stability through
the  better  grasp  of  macro  risk  profile.  In  this  regard,  one  lesson  we  have  learned  from  the  bubble
period  in Japan is  that  although  individual  financial  institutions  conducted  risk  management,  which
eventually turned out to be insufficient, enormous concentration of risk could arise at a macro level.
BIS Review 82/2000
4
Hence, we may need some other way to grasp the size and profile of risk at a macro level. Still, the
study of how financial institution disclosure should be pursued has the possibility of linking financial
system stability at a macro level to the incentives of individual market participants, and I believe it is
worthwhile to explore such a possibility to the maximum extent.
The next issue is how the central bank and the authorities should respond to increased uncertainty that
cannot  be  directly  controlled.  Recently,  many  countries  have  experienced  the  fluctuation  of  asset
prices, which is one example of uncertainty. Here, one issue is the difficulty of identifying whether
such fluctuation reflects the arrival of a new era or the emergence of a bubble, and also how monetary
policy should be conducted under such circumstances. Allow me to elucidate a little on these issues,
which I think important, though they are not directly related to the problem of changes in the financial
system.
A key question for a central bank is whether excessive swings in economic activity can be avoided
only  if  price  stability  is  maintained  by  appropriate  monetary  policy.  While  this  question  requires
careful examination, by looking at the experience in Japan, my preliminary answer is, to my regret,
“No”. In fact, Japan’s bubble emerged in the midst of favorable macroeconomic performance where
high growth and price stability had co-existed for several years. The yen’s appreciation resulting from
the outlook for higher growth potential coupled with contained inflationary expectations brought about
notable price stability during the period when asset prices rose rapidly, which made it difficult for the
Bank of Japan to preemptively raise interest rates citing the future risk of inflation. During periods of
euphoria  when  overheating  of  the  economy  is  not  reflected  in  price  forecasts,  and  the  central  bank
tolerates  continued  monetary  easing  despite  uneasiness  that  leads  to  a  delay  in  taking  preemptive
measures, the result will almost inevitably be an excess in asset prices and economic activity.
In this regard, ironic as it may sound, favorable macroeconomic performance and price stability seem
to be necessary conditions for the emergence of an asset price bubble. This seeming paradox poses a
serious challenge to the central bank. If favorable economic performance and price stability that could
be perceived as the arrival of a new era in fact turns out to be just euphoria, high asset prices will not
last  long,  and  the  subsequent  correction  of  asset  prices  will  have  a  serious  adverse  impact  on  both
financial  and  macroeconomic  aspects  of  the  economy.  Such  concern,  however,  is  not  convincing
enough to persuade those who believe in the arrival of a new era to restrain ambitious investments. In
many  cases,  the  arrival  of  a  new  era  and  euphoria  are  both  triggered  by  such  changes  in  the
environment as technological innovation, and it is never an easy task for anybody to judge whether the
change witnessed in the middle of euphoria is simply more euphoria or if a new era is being ushered
in.
Technological  innovation  significantly  raises  such  uncertainty.  Generally  speaking,  in  a  situation
where  uncertainty  surrounding  the  economy  increases,  prevailing  thinking  is  that  the  central  bank
should conduct monetary policy more carefully and cautiously. At the same time, not a few criticize
that such a gradualist approach to monetary policy might well end up in “too little, too late”. Some
even  argue  that  monetary  policy  should  be  decided  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  “minimax  theorem”,
which aims at minimizing damage in the worst scenario. According to this theorem, the central bank
should  first  compare  two  policy  options,  for  example,  to  erroneously  tighten  monetary  conditions
despite  the  arrival  of  the  new  economy  and  thus  deprive  the  economy  of  an  opportunity  to  raise
growth potential on the one hand, or to misunderstand a bubble as part of the transition process to the
new economy and continue monetary easing on the other hand. And it should conduct monetary policy
by judging which one of these two policy options is likely to result in a less worse scenario. I suspect
many central banks will perhaps be required to make such a comparison in the conduct of monetary
policy.
Today,  I  have  discussed  some  problems  resulting  from  changes  in  the  financial  system  that  central
banks face and how they should respond. Despite the various efforts I have outlined, the probability of
a financial crisis occurring can never be reduced completely to zero. With this in mind, a central bank
should enhance its crisis management ability. In this context, it is necessary to conduct risk monitoring
and  analysis  while  paying  close  attention  to  the  increasingly  globalized  financial  system,  and  to
strengthen a cooperative framework among central banks to deal with risks once they materialize. Of
5
BIS Review 82/2000
the various efforts made toward this end, the BIS Committee on Global and Financial Systems that I
have the honor of chairing, has been  actively  working,  as its primary  mission, to  discover  potential
market vulnerability at an early stage and to propose remedial measures, often in collaboration with
the  BIS  sister  committees.  For  example,  based  on  the  analyses  of  the  recent  international  financial
crises,  we  have  put  forward  suggestions  for  a  method  of  disclosing  foreign  exchange  reserves,  a
market design for enhancing liquidity, and a way to improve statistics with regard to international fund
flows.
At the outset, I said: “A central bank is unique in that it conducts its business while  always  paying
attention to the interfacing of the macro-economy and the financial system.” I think what is required of
a central bank is to conduct appropriate monetary policy while giving due consideration to this unique
feature,  and at the same  time  to  contribute  to  developing  a  market  design  in  a  broad  context  while
strengthening close cooperation and dialogue with other public authorities as well as private financial
institutions.
BIS Review 82/2000
6
