Jamie B Stewart, Jr: Developments in the US payment and settlement system and
the Federal Reserve’s interest in the securities settlement system
Remarks  by  Jamie  B.  Stewart,  Jr,  First  Vice-President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, before the Securities Industry Association T+1 Foundation Conference
held in New York on 24 October 2000.
 Good  afternoon,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  am  pleased  to  join  you  at  the  SIA’s  T+1  Foundation
Conference.  This  conference  provides  an  excellent  opportunity  to  review  plans  that  have  been
announced for converting to a T+1 settlement cycle for securities transactions. Implementation of T+1
would represent a significant change in the payment and settlement environment.
Before commenting on this arrangement, however, I would like to stand back for a few moments and
focus  on  some  of  the  plans  under  way  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  payment  and  settlement
system  in  the  United  States.  In  addition,  I  would  also  like  to  discuss  briefly  the  Federal  Reserve’s
interest in the securities settlement system.
There can be no doubt that a sound and effective payment and settlement system is critical to ongoing
confidence  in  the  US  financial  markets  and  to  the  continued  health  and  competitiveness  of  the  US
financial sector. In an environment of rapid technological change and rising trading volumes such as
we face today, it is essential to make certain that the integrity of the payment and settlement system
remains  intact.  To  this  end,  a  number  of  initiatives  are  currently  in  progress  to  help  ensure  the
continued efficiency of the payment and settlement system in the United States.
Let  me  be  a  bit  more  specific  about some  of  the  planned  improvements  to  the  infrastructure  of  the
financial system  that  we  expect  to  be  implemented in  a  very  short time. The  first  is  the  CLS  Bank
project,  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  Bank,  which  has  been  under  discussion  since  1995.  The
owners of the CLS Bank are in  the  process  of  building  the  Bank’s systems  and  getting  supervisory
approval to begin operations in the fall of next year.
The purpose of the CLS Bank is to create a privately owned and operated facility for payment-versus-
payment  settlement  of  foreign  exchange  transactions.  Today,  many  foreign  exchange  transactions
carry principal risk - that is, the risk that only one of the two legs of the transaction will be executed.
This risk exists because of differences in the operating hours of large-value payment systems around
the  globe.  However,  when  transactions  are  settled  through  the  CLS  Bank,  the  two  legs  of  the
transaction will be executed simultaneously with finality, thereby eliminating principal risk from the
transaction.
A  second initiative  under  way  to improve  the  payment  and  settlement  infrastructure  has  to  do  with
CHIPS,  the  Clearing  House  Interbank  Payments  System.  The  New  York  Clearing  House,  which
operates  CHIPS,  is  planning  to  introduce  fundamental  changes  to  its  processes  for  large-value
interbank payments that will bring about intraday finality. What happens now is that participants in
CHIPS  submit  payment  instructions  throughout  the  day.  But  actual  settlement,  performed  on  a  net
basis, is deferred and becomes final only at the end of the processing day.
In the new arrangement, which the New York Clearing House has announced it will put into operation
in  January,  CHIPS  participants  will  continue  to  submit  payment  instructions  throughout  the  day.
However,  through  the  use  of  a  bilateral  and  multilateral  matching  algorithm,  the  vast  majority  of
payments will be settled and become final over the course of the day. By ensuring that final payment
is  made  promptly,  the  new  procedure  will  reduce  settlement  and  operational  risks  and  enable
participants to manage their risks more effectively.
A  third  major  improvement  to  the  U.S  financial  infrastructure  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  already
implemented  deals  with  a  new  net  settlement  service  for  Fedwire.  The  net  settlement  service  was
1
BIS Review 93/2000
implemented in 1999 in response to requests from major US clearing associations. These groups asked
the  Federal  Reserve  to  help  their  members  reduce  settlement  risk  while  improving  operational
efficiency.  They  noted  that  Fedwire  itself  is  not  an  effective  way  to  settle  obligations  among  the
members of a clearing group. We agreed and rolled out a new settlement vehicle. This new service
helps  clearing  houses  and  related  arrangements  achieve  their  goals  by  offering  Fedwire-like,
immediate and irrevocable finality for entries that have been submitted in a convenient file format by a
group’s agent.
An important, even ground-breaking characteristic of this service is that it allows clearinghouses and
other groups to process and clear transactions on their own, although the clearinghouses will continue
to achieve final settlement of the underlying obligations on accounts at the Federal Reserve in central
bank  funds.  By  permitting  this  separation  of  clearance  and  settlement,  the  new  service  opens
opportunities for the private sector to develop clearance solutions while using the most sound and risk-
free settlement mechanism available.
In addition to these major developments, the securities industry has put the T+1 project in motion for
the settlement of equities and privately issued debt instruments. Like the CLS Bank project and the
new CHIPS design, the T+1 project is an important effort not only to eliminate significant settlement
and  pre-settlement  risks  from  the  payment  and  settlement  system,  but  also  to  raise  the  system’s
operational reliability and efficiency in the area of securities transactions.
All of these planned improvements to the functioning of the payment and settlement system demand a
high level of cooperation between the private and public sectors. In my view, it is especially important
for the financial services sector to support common interests and shared goals. I say this because I am
convinced that only through these joint initiatives can the financial services sector adequately address
efficiency issues and the potential for systemic risk in the current environment. At the same time,  I
recognize that industry-wide efforts pose new challenges as they are applied to ever more difficult and
complex issues. The push for T+1 will require the committed support of both the public and private
sectors because the stakes are very high.
I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  the  securities  settlement  system  and  the  Federal  Reserve.  Since  its
inception, the Federal Reserve System has been deeply interested in the design and operation of the
securities settlement system in the United States. The Federal Reserve’s interest stems from its overall
concern for the efficiency, reliability and stability of the financial system as a whole.
First  and  foremost,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  created  by  Congress  in  1914  to  oversee  the
stability of the nation’s financial system. As part of its oversight responsibilities, the Federal Reserve
Banks stand ready to lend funds from the discount window to US depository institutions and, under
extraordinary circumstances, to other US entities. In addition, the Federal Reserve is a member of the
international  community  of  central  banks,  bank  supervisors  and  securities  regulators  and,  as  such,
works cooperatively with its counterparts in other countries to promote financial stability globally.
Second, the Federal Reserve is responsible for supervising US depository institutions and US bank and
financial  holding  companies,  some  of  which  are  very  involved  in  the  securities  settlement  system.
Commercial  banks  provide  wholesale  custodial  services  to  both  institutional  investors  and
intermediaries in the securities business. Commercial banks also lend to firms in the financial services
sector,  providing  short-term  credit  and  thereby  adding  critical  liquidity  to  securities  markets.
Furthermore,  some  of  the  very  largest  commercial  banks  earn  a  substantial  portion  of  their  net
revenues from the various payment and credit services they offer to the securities industry. In addition,
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  jointly  regulate  and  oversee  the
Depository  Trust  and  Clearing  Corporation  through  which  privately  issued  bonds  and  equities  are
settled in the United States.
Third, as fiscal agent, the Federal Reserve provides a variety of payment-related services on behalf of
the United States Treasury and other government agencies. These services include the processing of
government payments as well as the creation, safekeeping, and transfer of book-entry records detailing
ownership of the public debt. As an extension of these fiscal agent duties, the Federal Reserve also
seeks to promote the efficient operation of the government securities market.
BIS Review 93/2000
2
Fourth, the Federal Reserve oversees private  clearing  and settlement  systems  and  provides  payment
services,  principally  Fedwire.  These  services  are  central  to  overall  financial  stability  because
disruptions  in  payment  systems  have  the  clear  potential  to  impair  the  functioning  of  the  financial
sector and the real economy. Moreover, a major financial or operational problem at a key institution in
a securities settlement system can also spill over to the payment systems that it uses and thereby have
systemic repercussions.
Finally, to enhance the general welfare of the US economy, the Federal Reserve promotes the efficient
functioning of the payment system and helps to supply payment services. A secure, fast, and reliable
payment and settlement system is a key element in a modern economy. Through its Payment System
Development Committee, the Federal Reserve seeks to address emerging payments-related issues. The
basic  aim  of  this  committee  is  to  work  with  the  private  sector  to  advance  the  use  of  electronic
payments throughout the US economy.
In taking the step to T+1, the US securities industry will be assuming an important leadership role in
the evolution of securities settlement systems around the world. I should also note that implementation
of  a  shorter  settlement  cycle  is  consistent  with  the  position  taken  by  the  International  Securities
Services Association (ISSA), the securities industry’s own review body. In a set of recommendations
this association released earlier this year and discussed at a session of the Sibos conference last month,
ISSA explicitly calls for adoption of a T+1 settlement cycle in its member countries.
I  would  like  to  make  clear  that  the  Federal  Reserve  supports  the  SIA’s  effort  to  adopt  the  T+1
settlement cycle. Faster, more reliable, and more cost-efficient processing of securities transactions is
desirable for several reasons.
First,  high  or  excessive  transaction  fees  may  serve  to  distort  or  hinder  financial  activity.  Inefficient
trading and settlement arrangements used by the secondary market for securities could discourage the
use of securities relative to other financial instruments. The choice of instrument should be based on
the needs of borrowers and investors.
Second,  inefficient  settlement  arrangements  may  interfere  with  active  risk  management.  High
settlement  fees  could  discourage  institutions  and  portfolio  managers  from  taking  full  advantage  of
advances in risk management techniques.
Finally, a  high  cost structure  for  securities  settlements could  influence  competition  among  financial
centres. The efficient processing of commercial and financial transactions, including those generated
by  securities  trading,  is  a  necessity  in  a  marketplace  as  competitive  as  ours  is  in  the  United  States
today. In my view, we are likely to see much more competition among financial centres in the future
because  financial  centres  provide  a  source  of  high-paying  jobs.  Cities  around  the  world  will
increasingly compete to be prime financial locations.
In sum, your efforts in moving to T+1 are part of an industry-wide effort to reduce risk and thereby
ensure that our payment and settlement system continues to work well under all conditions. We are
supportive of your efforts and applaud your initiative because we all want our payment and settlement
system to remain sound, secure and efficient as it adapts to the changing needs of our global economy.
3
BIS Review 93/2000
