Ernst Welteke: Different aspects of change in today’s financial systems
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Joint  Bundesbank/BIS
conference  on “Recent developments in financial systems  and  the  challenges  for  economic  policy”,
held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I.
Welcome to Frankfurt, and welcome to our conference. I am delighted to see that so many of you have
been able to take up our invitation.
I  am  glad  to  announce  distinguished  members  from  international  institutions;  most  of  all  from  the
Bank for International Settlement (BIS), which is co-organising this conference with the Bundesbank,
but also from the IMF.
In addition, I have the pleasure to welcome colleagues from central banks in the United States, Japan,
and obviously from Europe, who will present their views.
Further, we are happy to have several speakers from the private financial sector. And last, but by no
means least, from academe.
Bankers certainly understand the same kind of language. So let me say: I hope your attendance here,
seen as an investment, will yield you a decent return.
In  opening  this  conference,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  this  is  the  first  time  that  the  Bank  for
International Settlements and the Deutsche Bundesbank have co-hosted such an event. What is more,
here in Frankfurt, the “capital of the euro”, if I may say so.
There are, of course, good reasons for this venue. The perception is becoming increasingly accepted
that central banks also have a mandate to ensure the stability of the whole financial system.
The reasons for that are obvious. A well-functioning financial system is an essential precondition for
safeguarding price stability without impairing developments in the real economy.
In  this  context,  I  may  assume  that  it  is  well-known  that  the  Bundesbank  has  a  long  tradition  of
stability-oriented policies.
Further,  it  is  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  as  the  “central  bank  for  central  banks”,
which plays a prominent role in the ongoing international endeavours to foster financial stability.
For this reason, the Financial Stability Forum - set up last year at the suggestion of my predecessor,
Professor Tietmeyer - is very fitly accommodated under the wing of the BIS. The Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision also meets at the BIS.
So let us take the big view, and focus on the different aspects of change in today’s financial systems.
Indeed, these ongoing changes appear to be of a global nature in many respects. In Europe, however,
they undoubtedly need to be seen against the background of European Monetary Union, as well.
II.
In the international financial markets, since the 1960s, we have been witnessing a fast and furious pace
of development. The development here warrants the general designation of “globalisation” more than
in any other sector.
The major financial markets have grown closer and closer together. In fact, the barriers to cross-border
capital  movements  have  increasingly  been  lifted  as  a  result  of  political  measures  and  technological
advances.
1
BIS Review 80/2000
The global integration of the financial markets is anything but an end in itself. Not only does it open
up to investors a broad new range of investment opportunities for diversifying portfolio risks. It also
improves the refinancing options open to issuers of securities. In addition, it tends to boost securities
trading.
A high degree of liquidity in trading is a key prerequisite of efficient  price  formation in the capital
markets.  And,  after  all,  efficient  capital  markets  are  an  essential  component  of  a  well-functioning
economy.
Global integration has, of course, its drawbacks: the reason for this is that the openness of the financial
markets may also serve to spread turbulences.
Risks  may  have  their  roots  in  major  groups  of  investors,  in  the  shape  of  overly  credit-financed
leverage. Also, to some extent, in the form of an observed tendency towards herding behaviour.
What can a central bank do to counteract the dangers presented by globalisation?
The stance of the Bundesbank on this has been quite clear. Let me say it again: a good policy creates
incentives for market players to cope consciously with risks on their own. Thus, a good policy need
not set new controls on, or obstacles to, international capital movements.
Rather, a good policy excels in shaping appropriate underlying macroeconomic conditions. For it  is
precisely when stable monetary conditions are lacking that the risks associated with financial  assets
become difficult to evaluate.
I  think  this  stance  is  appropriate,  at  least  for  the  large,  developed  economies  with  mature  financial
markets. However, an important lesson of the crises in Asia in 1997 - and thereafter also in Russia and
Latin  America  -  is:  for  the  so-called  “emerging  economies”  a  gradual  and  measured  integration
strategy is to be pursued.
Further liberalisation of the capital markets promises only success when and where they have reached
a recognisably high degree of structural maturity and stability.
Certainly, a sound banking system and well-functioning banking supervision are needed for that. Here,
it would be irresponsible to take the second step before the first one.
III.
Eventually, maybe already in the near future, the direct cost of executing securities transactions will no
longer hinder further integration of the financial systems. Given the progress made in technology and
integration, one may at least come to this conclusion.
We are therefore likely to see investment banking increase rapidly in importance. We can also expect
further professionalisation of investment decisions, for instance, in the form of investment funds.
In  the  bond  markets  of  the  euro  area,  government  bonds  and  bank  debt  securities  still  greatly
predominate.  Nevertheless,  a  strong  increase  in  corporate  bond  issuance  is  already  apparent.  And
equity markets are growing rapidly in continental Europe.
The  advance  of  market-based  financing  structures  is  changing  the  role  played  by  banks  in  the
financing cycle.
For  one  thing,  the  refinancing  of  banks  is  shifting  from  the  traditional  taking  of  time  and  savings-
deposits to the issuing of debt securities of their own.
Moreover, simple corporate lending is losing ground as a source of income to commissions stemming
from issuance or derivatives business.
Of  course,  precisely  where  the  structural  change  in  the  European  banking  sector  is  leading  remains
uncertain. But there are signs that banks as a whole are keeping their lending business focused on the
domestic markets.
BIS Review 80/2000
2
This is one reason why a decentralised banking supervision system - still a national responsibility - is
objectively  warranted  in  the  European  Monetary  Union.  One  also  has  to  consider  the  persistent
differences from country to country - despite the harmonisation of European banking legislation. Local
supervision  may  therefore  be  more  efficient,  given  its  better  knowledge  of  the  market  and  greater
proximity to the banks.
Nevertheless one has to take due account of the banks’ cross-border activities. For this reason, central
banks and the supervisory authorities already cooperate closely today on a multilateral basis.
New technologies and the intensification of competition point to comprehensive consolidation in the
banking  sector  in  the  next  few  years.  As  a  consequence,  banking  supervisors  are  naturally  facing
correspondingly great challenges.
Clearly, questions of systemic stability are moving to the top of the agenda for banking supervisors.
IV.
Besides the globalisation of the financial markets, the launch of European Monetary Union constitutes
a  particular  challenge  of  its  own.  Monetary  policy  is  now  being  applied  to  a  major  financial  area.
Moreover, this area is undergoing a very rapid process of change, partly propelled by the euro itself.
Let me say from a central bank’s perspective: the main requirement for financial systems is generally
that  central  bank  measures  be  transmitted  via  the  system  as  smoothly  as  possible  to  the  goods  and
labour markets.
A central bank must know the transmission channels of its measures. We in Europe are engaging in an
essential  learning  process.  We  must  therefore  keep  a  constant  and  watchful  eye  on  the  remaining
differences within the euro area. And we have to be aware of the structural and behavioural changes in
the financial systems.
Further, one has to ensure that the signals set by monetary policy makers are “properly” understood by
the market players. This is, of course, primarily the responsibility of the central bank itself: we have to
pursue a comprehensible strategy and explain our decisions appropriately.
In  the  Eurosystem,  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  oriented  towards  keeping  the  expansion  of  the
money stock in line with the real growth potential of the economy. This makes our actions calculable.
It minimises uncertainty about price and interest-rate movements. In this way, we can greatly help to
undermine a major potential cause of instability in the financial system.
The second strategic pillar is the appraisal of inflation prospects, using a broad range of real economic
and financial indicators.
At this juncture, allow me to repeat my point as clearly as I can: the final goal of European monetary
policy is to ensure price stability. That is to say, to safeguard an inflation rate in the euro area of less
than 2% per annum.
It should not be doubted that the external value of the euro plays an important part in the attainment of
that objective. Insofar, there is no such thing as “benign” neglect - neglect is always “malign”.
Price  stability  will  eventually  help  the  euro  to  attain  a  greater  role  as  an  international  reserve  and
investment currency as well. Such a role will not only be in keeping with the sheer economic weight
of the euro area. It will also reflect the high degree of external integration in the global financial and
product markets.
Globalisation,  technological  progress,  competition  and  European  Monetary  Union:  ladies  and
gentlemen, these well-known buzz-words have all figured several times in my opening remarks.
V.
3
BIS Review 80/2000
In the context of monetary policy, and of the responsibility for stable financial systems, these words do
indeed have far-reaching implications. I hope that I have been able to bring it home to you once again:
further, major structural changes lie ahead.
These changes and advances in the financial system will open up many new options.
They naturally also imply uncertainties. These are, however, unavoidable if competitive trends are to
remain dynamic. But they likewise imply a real prospect of greater economic prosperity.
The fundamental prerequisite of such greater prosperity remains, of course, order and stability in the
financial system.
Needless to say, there are major challenges ahead; cut-and-paste approaches will not get us very far.
At the same time, it is important to learn from the experience and perceptions of others.
Therefore, the two days that we are about to devote to these matters seem to me a very worthwhile
investment.
BIS Review 80/2000
4
