Willem F Duisenberg: The euro and the single monetary policy
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
10th anniversary of the Amsterdam Institute of Finance, Amsterdam, 10 November 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  invited  to  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Amsterdam  Institute  of
Finance. I wish to express my warmest thanks to the organisers for their invitation. This Institute is
rightly famous for providing top-level courses in finance. I think that such a mission is indeed of great
relevance  today,  as  financial  instruments  and  techniques  are  constantly  evolving,  and  dynamic
economies  require  professionals  to  update  and  obtain  further  qualifications  throughout  their
professional lives.
Now, I should like to talk to you about the first two years of experience with the euro and the single
monetary policy.
The  new  monetary  regime  introduced  in  January  1999  with  the  start  of  European  Economic  and
Monetary  Union  has  proved  to  be  a  success  in  many  respects.  The  operational  framework  through
which  the  Eurosystem  provides  liquidity  to  banks  has  functioned  very  well.  The  ECB’s  monetary
policy  strategy  has  been  firmly  established,  widely  explained  and  is  being  increasingly  understood.
The ECB has taken and shall continue to take the necessary decisions to ensure the maintenance of
price stability over the medium term. Moreover, the introduction of the euro has acted as a catalyst for
restructuring and enhancing competition in Europe. The euro is one of the reasons behind the current
pace of economic growth on our continent. Finally, capital markets in Europe have clearly benefited
from the establishment of Monetary Union.
Allow  me  to  elaborate  further  on  these  issues.  The  single  monetary  policy  relies  on  an  efficient
operational  framework,  which  has  been  implemented  without  major  difficulties.  It  has  proved  to
function  very  smoothly.  It  has,  indeed,  managed  to  clearly  signal  the  monetary  policy  stance,  by
steering  short-term  market  interest  rates  and  by  providing  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  in  an
efficient  manner.  A  key  element  of  the  functioning  of  the  operational  framework  has  been  the
TARGET payment system which interlinks the 15 national real-time gross settlement systems and the
ECB  payment  mechanism  by  providing  a  uniform  platform  for  the  processing  of  cross-border
payments in real time. This is a great technical achievement which has made  it possible to  create  a
single  interbank  market  interest  rate  across  the  euro  area.  In  September  2000  70%  of  the  value  of
payment instructions/orders/transactions through gross settlement systems in Europe were processed
through TARGET.
Let me now turn to the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. A close understanding of the framework of
our analysis is indispensable in order to fully grasp the policy pursued by the ECB.
The first element of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is the published definition of price stability.
Price  stability  has  been  defined  as  “a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer
Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%”. The ECB has also stated that price stability is to be
maintained over the medium term. The definition is intended to securely anchor inflation expectations.
Moreover,  it  provides  a  clear  yardstick  against  which  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  can  be  held
accountable for the achievement of its primary objective.
In order to take appropriate decisions with regard to this objective, the ECB monitors a broad set of
indicators.  First,  a  prominent  role  has  been  assigned  to  money  as  the  so-called  first  pillar  of  the
strategy. The assignment of such a prominent role to money is justified by the available econometric
evidence. This evidence suggests the existence of a stable relationship in the  euro  area  between the
broad  monetary  aggregate  M3,  the  price  level  and  a  small  number  of  other  euro  area-wide
macroeconomic  variables.  The  important  role  assigned  to  money  has  been  signalled  by  the
1
BIS Review 102/2000
announcement of a reference value of 4½% for the annual growth rate of M3. The first pillar consists
not only of a detailed analysis of deviations of M3 growth from the reference value for the information
that  they  contain  about  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  but  it  also  embodies  a  thorough  analysis  of
monetary developments, including careful monitoring of the components and counterparts of M3.
In addition to a thorough analysis of monetary developments, a comprehensive assessment of a wide
range of other economic and financial indicators constitutes a further basis for monetary policy. This
assessment  encompasses  an  analysis  of,  inter  alia,  cost  and  price  indices,  the  exchange  rate,  real
economic  indicators,  and  financial  markets  indicators.  In  brief,  the  role  of  this  second  pillar  is  to
provide information about the prevailing economic situation and on the nature and magnitude of risks
to  price  stability,  which  are  not  made  apparent  from  an  analysis  of  the  monetary  aggregates  in  a
complete or timely way.
Some commentators have regarded this strategy, based on the assessment of two sets of indicators, as
unclear and overly complex. I have two responses to such criticism.
First, new methods and new strategies are not always fully understood from the outset. The learning
and familiarisation process can take some time.
Second, I would stress that the two-pillar structure of the ECB’s strategy has been adopted for a good
reason. Both pillars have well-defined, important and complementary roles. The first pillar consists of
approaches to the price determination process which assign a prominent role to money. The  second
pillar  comprises  analytical  frameworks  which  focus  mainly  on  real  economic  variables.  Both
approaches are valid and can be useful to analyse different aspects of the economic environment in a
manner which assists monetary policy decisions.
This broader approach, prompted by the adoption of the two-pillar structure, is particularly proficient
in  coping  with  the  uncertainties  inherent  in  modern  and  complex  economies.  We  should  recall  that
these uncertainties may have been compounded by the regime shift associated with the transition to
Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  changeover  to  the  single  currency  may  have
altered  the  way  expectations  are  formed  in  the  euro  area.  It  may  thus  have  changed  the  effects  of
monetary  policy  on  financial  behaviour,  consumption,  investment  and  wage  bargaining.  Or,  to
summarise, it may have changed the very nature of the monetary transmission mechanism in the euro
area.  In  such  an  uncertain  environment,  monetary  policy  analysts  must  use  a  “full-information
approach” and carefully cross-check the signals sent from different types of indicators.
Moving to more general issues associated with the introduction of the euro, there is no doubt that this
regime shift is acting as a powerful catalyst for economic growth and restructuring in Europe. Several
forces are at work. The introduction of the euro combined with the Single Market has increased the
“economic” size  of  the  market.  Price  transparency  has  significantly  improved  both  across  countries
and  over  time.  The  macroeconomic  horizon  of  investors  has  been,  so  to  speak,  “cleared”  by  the
principle of price stability and the rules of fiscal discipline. Moreover, the single currency provides an
impetus  for  the  development  and  the  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe.  This  in  turn  will
contribute to a more efficient allocation of savings across Europe.
The development and the integration of capital markets in Europe have been fostered for some time
now  by  financial  liberalisation,  globalisation  and  technological  innovation.  The  introduction  of  the
euro is giving this trend a significant boost in Europe. The single currency has removed the exchange
rate risk barriers between the countries of the euro area; it is facilitating  the standardisation of  debt
instruments  and  widening  the  range  of  investment  opportunities.  Corporate  bond  issuance  has
increased significantly since the introduction of the euro. There are indications that the focus of issuers
is shifting in some respects from country-specific to sector-specific risk assessment.
In the banking sector too, the changeover to the single currency seems to have intensified the trend
towards consolidation. Although most mergers  have  been domestic,  they  have  often  been  instigated
and  influenced  by  euro  area-wide  market  developments  and  the  integration  of  financial  markets
following the introduction of the euro. Moreover, there is no doubt that the introduction of the euro
has encouraged the internationalisation of banking activities. In particular, the rapid integration of the
BIS Review 102/2000
2
wholesale banking and capital markets, as well as large-value payment systems, has already created
closer links between banks at the euro area level.
Overall,  these  new  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  Europe  are  creating  new  investment
opportunities,  encouraging  industrial  restructuring  and  promoting  sound  competition  between
economic agents in a new, enlarged market. For sure, the beneficial effects of this new environment on
economic structures will only be felt gradually, but there is no doubt that these effects are deep and
lasting.
Meanwhile, other economic policies are needed to accompany this restructuring process. This is not to
deny that important progress has already been made. Over recent years, wage settlements have been
relatively moderate, public finances have improved, deregulation and liberalisation have been initiated
in  a  number  of  sectors,  and  there  are  signs  that  labour  markets  are  gradually  becoming  less  rigid.
Employment grew by 1.8% in 1999 and by over 2% in the first half of 2000, and since the start of
Monetary Union, the unemployment rate in the euro area has fallen by 1.5 percentage points.
However,  further  efforts  are  required  in  order  to  create  the  best  conditions  for  turning  the  current
upswing in economic activity into a period of sustained growth in an environment of price stability.
With  regard  to  fiscal  policies,  the  overriding  objective  for  governments  should  be  to  shelter  their
budgets not only from normal  cyclical fluctuations,  but  also  from  unexpected  shortfalls in revenues
and  interest  rate  increases.  In  the  current  favourable  economic  conditions,  it  is  crucial  that  any
loosening  of  fiscal  policy  be  avoided  and  that  further  progress  along  the  path  towards  fiscal
consolidation  is  made.  In  parallel,  governments’  budgetary  policies  also  urgently  need  to  address
longer-term issues, such as the structural reform of social transfer systems.
Significant reductions in unemployment can only be reached through resolute measures to improve the
functioning of labour and product markets. The successful experience in some countries of the euro
area  has  shown  that  such  reforms  can  rapidly  provide  important  benefits  for  the  economy  and  for
society.
Finally,  looking  at  the  process  of  regulatory  reform,  although  a  good  deal  of  deregulation  and
liberalisation of previously sheltered sectors has taken place, there is still plenty of scope for further
measures to increase the level of competition and stimulate entrepreneurial initiative.
Let me now shift the focus from structural to more conjunctural issues and briefly discuss the current
economic situation. The first message I should like to convey is that there is good reason to remain
confident that strong growth will be sustained in the euro area. Euro area real GDP has been growing
at  an annualised  rate  of  around 3½%  for  four  consecutive  quarters,  including  the  second  quarter  of
2000. Some monthly indicators, which extend into or cover the third quarter of this year, point to some
moderation  of  these  high  growth  rates.  In  particular,  the  pace  of  growth  in  industrial  production
appears to have declined somewhat and some survey data showed signs of moderation. At the same
time,  however,  confidence  remains  high,  underpinned  by  positive  factors  such  as  high  employment
growth.  The  extended  period  of  high  and  rising  oil  prices  has  certainly  increased  the  uncertainty
surrounding  the  sustainability  of  recent  growth  trends  in  the  world  economy.  However,  by  contrast
with previous periods of strong and prolonged increases in oil prices, the world economy is now less
dependent on oil and inflationary pressures are still being contained. This should help to ensure that
the impact of high oil prices on growth remains moderate over the medium term. All in all, the outlook
is for the continuation of robust growth in the foreseeable future.
Turning to monetary developments, M3 growth has been deviating from the reference value of 4½%
since the beginning of 1999. The three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 covering the
period  from  July  to  September  stood  at  5.4%.  Over  recent  months,  however,  a  moderation  in  M3
dynamics  has  taken  place,  as  is  visible  in  shorter-term  growth  rates.  For  example,  the  seasonally
adjusted and annualised growth rate of M3 stood at 3.6% in September.
At the same time, the recent increase in the growth rate of loans to the private sector should not be
overrated. This was considerably influenced by the financing of the payments for UMTS licences by
telecommunication companies. This does not imply high risks to price stability in the medium term as
long as the proceeds are used, as expected, to redeem government debt.
3
BIS Review 102/2000
In sum, recent developments seem to indicate that, following the series of interest rate increases by the
ECB, monetary developments are currently settling down at a more moderate pace of growth.
As for the developments in consumer prices in the euro area, annual HICP inflation rose to 2.8% in
September,  compared  with  2.3%  in  August.  This  increase  mainly  resulted  from  the  acceleration  in
energy  prices.  A  contribution  was  also  provided  by  the  higher  year-on-year  change  in  prices  of
non-energy industrial goods in the HICP to 0.8%, from 0.6% in August 2000. This, in combination
with the slight increase in the annual rate of change in processed food prices, led the rate of annual
HICP inflation excluding energy goods to increase to 1.6% in September 2000, from 1.5% in August.
Owing to developments in energy prices and the decline thus far in the euro, consumer price inflation
may remain above 2% for longer than was expected some months ago. It is important to recognise that
these  are  temporary  price  increases  resulting  from  external  factors  which  monetary  policy  cannot
counteract. The ECB, like all other central banks, is not able to influence consumer price inflation in
the short term owing to the time-lags of monetary policy. Moreover, such first-round effects do not
infringe upon the ECB’s objective of price stability, since the latter is to be fulfilled in the medium
term.  In  order  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  precisely  over  the  medium  term,  it  is,
however,  crucial that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  of economic  agents  do  not  increase.  In  this
respect, the past decisions to increase ECB rates should have contributed to maintaining confidence in
price stability over the medium term.
This  confidence  should  also  continue  to  guide  the  wage  formation  process  in  the  euro  area.  At  the
current  juncture,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  avoid  second-round  effects  of  the  increase  in  oil
prices  materialising.  I  am  confident  that  a  protracted  period  of  robust  economic  growth  and  price
stability lies ahead, provided that all policy areas fulfil their respective tasks.
BIS Review 102/2000
4
