Enrique V Iglesias: Economic Trends in Latin America
– The Context of a Globalized Economy
Statement  of  Mr  Enrique  V  Iglesias,  President  of  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank,  at  the
meeting of the Bank for International Settlements, in Mexico City, Mexico, on 13 November 2000.
 Dear Governors and friends:
I am honored that BIS invited me to speak to this distinguished audience of Central Bank Governors
from so many countries. That our host, the Bank of Mexico, is celebrating its 75th anniversary makes
this a particularly special occasion.
As you may expect, my topic today is Latin America. I would like to use this opportunity to convey
the views of the Inter-American Development Bank on the state of economic affairs in the region and
also to share with you some of our concerns about the future. I hope that some of these concerns may
be of interest to the BIS as they relate to its important work of strengthening financial systems.
I shall divide my remarks in three parts. FIRST, I shall briefly talk about the deep reforms that our
region  undertook  in  the  past  decade,  which  have  radically  transformed  for  the  better  the  economic
landscape  of  Latin  America.  However,  despite  the  strong  policies  and  institutions  that  were  put  in
place, as you know, our economies were overwhelmed by the external shocks suffered in recent years.
SECOND, I shall tell you how our region has experienced recent international financial turmoil and
how  it is currently  recovering  from  a  growth  slowdown. The  key  question  now  is  whether  changes
have been made to prevent the same experience from happening again and, after this painful episode
comes to an end, whether growth and stability will prevail. I certainly hope so, but, FINALLY, I shall
close  with  some  of  my  concerns  about  our  continuing  vulnerability  to  a  sometimes  hostile  external
environment, which I think are of interest to the BIS and others involved in reforming the international
financial architecture.
The reforms undertaken by the region in the last decade
1.
The  reforms  were  deep:  In  the  last  decade,  Latin  America  embarked  on  a  broad  range  of
macroeconomic  stabilization  efforts  and  structural  reforms  that  radically  changed  the  economic
environment.
Macroeconomic stabilization has been the result of a very important effort to correct our traditional
fiscal imbalances throughout the region. Fiscal deficits larger than 3% of GDP were common in the
eighties and are now exceptional: The average fiscal deficit in the last ten years has been just 1.4% of
GDP. Fiscal consolidation has been supplemented with sound monetary policies, which has resulted in
much  lower  levels  of  inflation  in  most  countries  of  the  region.  The  typical  rate  of  inflation  in  our
countries is now 6%.
The  progress  of  structural  reform  has  been  equally  impressive.  In  the  eighties,  the  typical  Latin
American  economy  was  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  financially  repressed,  and  seriously
distorted  by  all  sorts  of  government  interventions.  That  has  changed.  Trade  restrictions  have  been
virtually eliminated and tariffs have been drastically cut to less than 10% at present. Privatization has
been  the  most  visible  component  of  the  strategy  of  modernization  and  consolidation  of  the  state  in
Latin America. In the area of finance, liberalization measures have led to lifting controls on capital and
interest rates, as well as dismantling bankrupt systems of targeted credit.
Improvements in prudential regulation and supervision of banking systems, in large part based on well
learned  lessons  from  past  banking  crises,  merit  special  mention.  Banking  crises  of  the  past  led  to
important lessons. The shift towards accepting and acting on these lessons began in the late 1980s, but
gained its full impetus only after the Mexican financial crisis in 1994-95. The policy lessons extracted
1
BIS Review 113/2000
include  the  need  for  accounting  standards,  especially  concerning  the  valuation  of  loan  portfolios,
standards on information disclosure and auditing, the importance of regulating loan concentration and
connected lending, and the weakness of the supporting legal system, especially bankruptcy law. There
is growing recognition in the region that international Basle capital requirements may be insufficient
on average due to the larger shock volatility in Latin America, but in any event, requirements ought to
reflect overall portfolio risk, not only credit but also exchange and interest rate risks. Many of these
areas of regulation, such as most of the standards, are universal and the corresponding international
standards ought to be promptly adopted. Others are dependent on country diversity and international
convergence will be more difficult. Supervision needs to be independent. Bank restructuring needs to
be done promptly, making sure that owners are not unduly saved and face potential losses.
Not  everything  is  fine,  unfortunately.  For  all  their  promise,  a  decade  of  reforms  have  not  made  a
visible reduction in poverty or a dent in income inequality, which as you know is a very  big  social
problem in Latin America. Many economists think that inequality would have actually worsened in the
period in the absence of these reforms, and they may very well be right, but we will not be satisfied
until we see a significant drop in inequality.
Nevertheless, reforms have improved efficiency as expected and led to higher growth and resiliency.
Our  research  shows  that  macroeconomic  stabilization  and  structural  reforms  have  led  to  significant
gains in growth. As a result, 1997 was the year of fastest growth in 25 years. This same process led to
unprecedented resiliency in the face of serious challenges during 1998-99. In fact, with the exception
of  Ecuador,  fiscal  discipline  was  maintained,  inflation  was  tamed,  and  there  was  no  uncontrolled
currency crisis, widespread banking crisis, or external payments crisis.
The reforms are solid: they were not rolled back, but withstood the 1998-99 recession. Much has been
said about an alleged reversal of reforms. Such a reversal has not taken place. In spite of the serious
difficulties caused by the international financial crisis of 1998-99, virtually all countries of the region
continued to deepen the structural reforms instituted in earlier years. Of 14 countries evaluated by the
Bank, 10 promoted major fiscal or tax reforms in 1999, 7 were discussing significant reforms in their
social  security  systems,  4  had  made  major  progress  in  their  privatization  programs  and  4  were
discussing  deep  labor  reforms.  The  review  noted  an  additional  25  cases  of  reforms  in  financial
systems,  in  legislation  to  promote  competition  and  in  other  areas  of  economic  and  social  policy  in
those countries.
Recent experience with financial turmoil
2.
If reforms were so effective and fundamentals so strong, why did Latin America have a serious growth
slowdown and recession during 1998-99? The answer is the combination of negative external shocks,
to which the region remains quite vulnerable. In  their  absence,  the  region  was  poised  to  maintain  a
path of relatively high growth.
International terms of trade and commodity prices deteriorated substantially in 1998, in large part as a
result of the East Asian crisis. Most Latin American countries are still quite vulnerable to changes in
commodity prices. Some countries were severely hit by natural disasters, including El Nino.
These external shocks could have been accommodated with additional external financing, but it was
not available. Worse yet, normal external financing dried up and became the main problem. Not only
were international capital markets not there for Latin America when they were most needed, but they
actually  aggravated  the  problem.  Unfortunately,  this  procyclical  pattern  with  external  financing,
drying up when external conditions (such as terms of trade or interest rates) deteriorate, is typical in
Latin America.
Right  there  you  have  a  core  problem  in  our  region:  precarious  access  to  external  financing  that
disappears when it is most needed. That is why our hosts, our Mexican friends, decided to arrange a
special stand-by financial package under the umbrella of the IMF, “blindaje” as we say in Spanish, to
insure against any market surprise during the electoral season despite the strength of their economy.
This is a good example for the entire region.
BIS Review 113/2000
2
In this episode, fundamentals were quite strong and access would have been maintained if it were not
for the coup de grace of the Russian crisis. Subsequent financial contagion led to external financial
conditions  totally  misaligned  with  the  region’s  strong  fundamentals.  This  collapse  in  external
financing  resulted  from  the  problems  faced  by  our  main  foreign  investors,  not  problems  in  our
economies.  The  problem  was  not  our  countries’  creditworthiness  but  that  of  our  foreign  investors.
Over time, however, difficulties in accessing external finance do hurt fundamentals and may  render
countries truly uncreditworthy. From a Latin American perspective, international financial contagion
and  financial  panic  are  new  and  dangerous  sources  of  external  shocks  associated  with  financial
integration.
The  combination  of  negative  shocks  led  to  a  severe  contraction  in  imports  and  a  greater  growth
slowdown than during the Tequila crisis in 1995. The exception  is  Mexico,  which  benefits  from  its
current association with the US economy; but South America experienced negative growth in 1999.
The  collapse  in  private  foreign  financing  was  similar  in  both  the  Tequila  and  the  current  episodes.
However,  this  time  there  was  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  and  less  help  from
official sources.
Recovery  is  now  well  under  way  (albeit  hesitant  in  Argentina)  and  this  year’s  growth  rate  will  be
above  4%,  despite  the  fact that  commodity  prices  and risk  spreads  have  not  completely  returned  to
normal.  Prospects  are  excellent,  barring  new  external  shocks.  However,  the  volatility  of  financial
conditions  and  their  overall  deterioration  in  recent  months  sound  a  clear  warning  that  recovery  is
vulnerable  to  external  shocks.  In  fact,  our  concerns  for  the  future,  to  which  I  now  turn,  are
concentrated on the extent to which we have made progress in achieving deeper and  safer financial
integration.
3.
Is the financial world a better place now? Will growth and stability prevail in the
future?
How is the Region responding to the challenge of strengthening its financial systems?
The IDB is convinced of the importance of strengthening financial systems throughout the region. At
the IDB we have pioneered efforts to warn against the risk associated with credit booms and to derive
its implications for macroeconomic policy, to highlight the importance of standards to make regulation
meaningful, to insist on strong and countercyclical regulatory requirements, and to suggests ways to
improve the independence and quality of the institutions of bank supervision. In particular, we have
highlighted the need to adopt more strenuous capital and liquidity standards on account of the higher
volatility of our economic environment. I have just received an invitation from Andrew Crockett for
the  IDB  to  cooperate  with  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  in  raising  awareness  in  our  region  of  the
international standards that have been developed and to promote the discussion of the implementation
issues  that  would  arise.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  announce  here  that  I  am  delighted  to  accept  this
invitation to cooperate in this issue of common interest.
Countries are also very interested in finding ways to further strengthen their financial systems, to the
point  that  many  of  them  would  like  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  more  actively  in  the
development of new ideas and standards. As you can imagine, more participation in the elaboration
process would greatly facilitate the productive discussion of the implementation issues of the Forum’s
international standards that I have just mentioned. This issue of participation is critical in the case of
reform  of  the  credit  risk  capital  rules  to  ensure  that  it  addresses  the  needs  of  all  global  market
participants. The regulatory capital framework must be drafted with a view to its implementation in
emerging  markets  as  well  as  advanced  markets,  which  requires  more  intensive  and  effective
participation by emerging market regulators in the drafting process. It is my hope that Latin American
banking regulators will be involved in finalizing the regulatory capital rules in the next and final round
of  consultation  starting,  I  understand,  in  January  2001,  so  that  we  are  not  surprised  by  the  final
standards.
3
BIS Review 113/2000
As I already mentioned, there has been a solid response on the part of countries concerning the two
underlying factors of financial strength: macroeconomic stability and domestic reforms of prudential
regulation  and  supervision.  You  will  find  a  very  receptive  ear  to  ideas  to  further  strengthen  the
countries’ financial systems. But we need to recognize that domestic protection is limited and costly.
For  example,  countries  in  Latin  America  hold  huge  amounts  of  international  reserves  with  a
significant carrying cost at current rates and no clear stabilizing effect. In fact, there is the fear that the
very  use  of  the  reserves  may  signal  weakness  and  prompt  an  attack.  Many  countries  in  the  region
follow  prudent  policies  such  as  stringent  bank  liquidity  requirements,  or  long  debt  maturities,  or
controls on short-term capital inflows, but none has been spared from financial contagion. It is clear
that  the  systemic  problems  that  threaten  growth  and  stability  in  Latin  American  countries  require
systemic solutions, so the key question is:
How is the financial community responding to the challenge of countries exposed to contagion
effects?
Let me start by saying that we welcome the efforts of the international /financial community to work
on  systemic  initiatives.  But  one  concern  we  have  is  that  the  systemic  initiatives  to  reform  the
international financial architecture that are currently being implemented may not be of much help to
Latin America. For example, standards on banking regulation and supervision, information, etc. are all
very important and good. However, our region is already advanced in these areas, especially after the
Tequila  crisis.  The  fact  is  that  our  high  standards  do  not  appear  to  have  protected  us  much  from
instability during recent financial turmoil. Therefore, our region  could  benefit  only  marginally  from
the application of these initiatives. Furthermore, moral hazard induced by implicit public guarantees of
poorly regulated and supervised financial systems, which some identified as an important factor in the
recent  Asian  crisis,  is  not  a  significant  risk  factor  in  Latin  American  financial  systems.  Therefore,
initiatives aimed at reducing moral hazard might have little beneficial impact in our region.
In particular, we  are  concerned that  Latin  America’s  main  problem  of  precarious access to  external
financing, subject to contagion and panic, is not being specifically addressed. Latin America is now as
vulnerable to contagion and panic from abroad as it was before this last episode. (I will come back to
this key point at the end of my talk).
We  are  also  concerned  that  current  thinking  about  international  financial  architecture  does  not
enthusiastically support official rescue packages of the kind that were so successful in our region, in
1995 in Mexico and Argentina and in 1998 in Brazil. The current debate points to promoting stability
by impeding capital inflows through the increase in the cost of capital to the point that it reflects the
true  risk  of  investments,  which  would  be  underestimated  by  investors  because they  believe  that  the
official  sector  will  bail  them  out.  The  problem  is  that,  again,  this  source  of  moral  hazard  is  not  a
significant factor in Latin America. The simple fact is that rescue operations of past years stopped the
countries’ downfall, led to fast recovery, and were quickly repaid. Nobody was bailed out from high
risk.  Rather,  the  rescue  packages  eliminated  an  unnecessary  risk  (the  liquidity  risk),  yielding  an
enormous  benefit  to  countries  and  to  the  whole  region.  I  grant  you  that  there  is  the  risk  that  such
operations  may  not  always  work  as  anticipated.  But,  I  wonder:  how  conservative  would  donor
countries have to be in order not to  favor rescue  packages  in  countries  with strong  economies after
crisis prevention fails?
More generally, it is cause for deep concern that new thinking on international financial architecture
may involuntarily have counterproductive effects on Latin America. Our concern is that we simply end
up with lower capital inflows and growth but no worthwhile gain in stability. Subjecting the private
capital to uncertainty and discretion will have this effect. The curtailment of official financial support
with the purpose of eliminating moral hazard would at the same time fail to prevent liquidity crises. If
the latter is more relevant than the former, as I think it is in Latin America, the result would be not
only less capital but also less stability!
Let  me  offer  some  concrete  examples  of  our  concerns  in  connection  with  the  currently  proposed
modification of the Basle Capital Accord for bank credit risk. As I already mentioned, IDB has long
had  an  interest  in  strengthening  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks  and  making  it  flexible  to
BIS Review 113/2000
4
accommodate  financial  stress.  To  the  extent  that  the  new  regulatory  capital  rules  provide  emerging
market  supervisors  with  stronger  tools  for  assessing  the  strength  of  a  bank  and  for  encouraging
bankers  to  improve  their  risk  management  systems,  I  believe  that  the  proposed  new  rules  could
contribute  greatly  to  the  development  of  more  mature  lending  markets.  Having  said  that,  it  is
important to recognize that in this proposal the cost of capital will increase in most of our countries.
As  you  know,  at  present net  bank  lending  has largely  disappeared already  and this  may  be  a  lethal
blow  to  this  class  of  credit.  I  am  not  sure  this  is  a  cost  worth  paying.  Apart  from  that,  there  are  a
number of concerns that I take the liberty to stress:
• 
We do not think that the use of private rating agencies to determine capital requirements for
sovereign lending is a good idea. First, it puts the agencies in a position to play God with
countries’ fortunes, which neither the region nor the agencies want. And second, it is likely
to be destabilizing as agencies try to conform to market perceptions.
    In contrast, in Latin America we like to think that internal rating systems are a more sensible
basis for a BIS system. I should also mention that a number of countries in the region have
successful  public  credit  bureaus  that  should  also  be  taken  into  consideration  as  a  possible
standard to be used in setting requirements.
The proposal that no private company should receive a rating better than its sovereign’s is
not consistent with the evidence of corporate and sovereign market risk spreads and appears
to be an artificial limitation.
Capital requirements on short-term loans ought to be lower for countries in which domestic
liquidity provisions are more prudent. This is the case of Latin America. Uniformly higher
requirements  would  implicitly  put  our  region  at  a  disadvantage  and  discourage  its  own
prudential policies.
Finally, I understand that according to private banks the proposed changes to the definition
of short-term credit could adversely affect the trade financing business, and if so, I would be
very concerned too.
I would like to close by sharing some thoughts with you on the kind of reforms that we think would be
needed to address our key problem of precarious and unreliable access to external financing.
• 
First, liquidity crises appear to have become common in emerging countries. Like bank runs,
these  crises  can  be  prevented  and  solved  by  the  provision  of  liquidity.  An  international
mechanism  is  needed  to  produce  the  required  funding.  Real  progress  demands  addressing
this issue. I recognize the difficulties and risks, and think that easy access to liquidity has to
be  restricted  to  countries  prequalified  on  the  basis  of  their  fundamentals.  The  Contingent
Credit Line (CCL) Facility of the IMF, perhaps made more attractive to countries, is a good
first step in this direction.
  Second, it is imperative to contain the degree of financial volatility to which countries are
subjected  during  episodes  of  panic  and  financial  contagion.  I  think  we  need  to  look  at
regulations in developed countries and ask ourselves how they can be adjusted to address the
problems  created  by  contagion  and  panic  in  emerging  countries.  It  seems  to  me  that
regulations ought to be flexible in order to lean against the wind of financial turbulence and
discourage the propagation of  contagion.  For example,  impose less  stringent regulation  on
emerging country financing in times of international financial contagion. At the same time,
the IDB and the rest of the official sector need to be ready to offer financial support during
these temporary emergencies.
And  finally,  there  is  the  important  issue  of  how  to  coordinate  the  efforts  of  countries,  the
private  sector,  and  the  official  sector, especially  in  the  most  severe  crises.  I  think  that  the
official  sector  should  lead,  move  first,  and  propose  a  consistent  plan.  However,  this
coordination  requires  some  rules  of  the  game,  and  not  be  left  to  improvisation,  so  that
official  intervention  is  not  perceived  as  arbitrary  by  countries  and  private  investors.
“Constructive ambiguity” in this case produces “destructive ambiguity”. Ex ante rules would
5
BIS Review 113/2000
go a long way in solving some of the tensions surrounding private sector involvement. But I
would  go  further.  It  seems  to  me  that  those  rules  should  contemplate  a  private  sector
contribution only to the extent needed, so that countries can quickly regain access to private
financial markets.
In  a  recent  article  in  Financial  Times,  Martin  Wolf,  commenting  on  emerging  market  economies,
ended with these words that deserve our attention:
“Optimists are not wrong: we do know how to make emerging market economies
more seaworthy than they have been. But pessimists are also right: the turbulent
global  capital  markets  remain  dangerous  for  the  unprepared.  Those  managing
emerging market economies should be aware of the risks. They must understand,
too,  that  they  will  receive  only  modest  help  from  outside.  The  price  of  safety
remains careful preparation and eternal vigilance.”
Thank you very much for your attention.
BIS Review 113/2000
6
