T T Mboweni: Recent economic and financial developments in South Africa
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  luncheon  of  the
South  African-German  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  held 
in  Johannesburg,  on
10 October 2000.
 Introduction
1.
World  economic  activity  expanded  at  a  rapid  pace  during  1999  and  the  first  nine  months  of  2000.
Forecasts for the growth in global production by the major multilateral institutions for the year 2000
generally vary from 3½ to 4½%. Moreover, the strengthening in world economic activity was fairly
broadly based, except for Japan which had negative growth in 1999. However, from the beginning of
2000, Japanese economic growth started to pick up together with a rise in corporate profits and fixed
investment in the private sector.
Nearly every other region of the world has seen an improvement in economic performance during the
past year. Many of the world’s poorest countries, including some in Africa, are recording respectable
growth  rates.  Growth  in  Europe  has  picked  up  remarkably  and  the  United  States  is  enjoying  the
longest  expansion  it  has  ever  recorded.  The  remarkable  economic  boom  in  the  United  States  has
undoubtedly made an important contribution to the strength of the recovery in the world. But so too
have the achievement and maintenance of price stability around the world. Despite a substantial rise in
oil prices and strong international demand, inflation in nearly all the industrial countries has remained
subdued since the beginning of 1999.
Slow economic growth in South Africa
2.
In this buoyant economic environment it is rather surprising that the South African economy did not
perform better. The high  international  economic  growth  was expected  to assist  growth in the  South
African  economy  through  increased  demand  for  exports,  higher  prices  on  commodity  markets  and
increased investments. After showing clear signs of a vigorous economic recovery during 1999,  the
economic  growth  in  South  Africa  slowed  down  in  the  first  half  of  2000.  The  annualised
quarter-to-quarter  growth  in  the  seasonally  adjusted  real  gross  domestic  product  at  first  accelerated
from  ½%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1998  to  3½%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1999.  Contrary  to  general
expectations, it then declined to 1% in the first quarter of 2000 and 1½% in the second quarter.
The low economic growth during the first half of 2000 was largely due to a decrease in agricultural
output that amounted to 7% after adjustment for seasonal factors and annualised. Torrential rain and
flooding  affected  agricultural  production  in  the  northern  and  eastern  parts  of  the  country,  and  high
temperatures  and  veld  fires  in  the  south-western  wine  and  deciduous  fruit  producing  areas  caused
extensive  damage  to  crops.  On  top  of  this,  farmers  could  not  harvest  the  maize  crop  in  the  second
quarter  of  2000  because  of  the  generally  wet  conditions.  Maize  output  was  therefore  shifted  to  the
third quarter of 2000 and should be an important plus factor for higher growth in the second half of the
year.
Economic  growth  in  South  Africa  during  the  first  half  of  2000  was  also  negatively  affected  by  an
oversupply  of  coal  on  international  markets,  so  there  was  less  demand  for  one  of  South  Africa’s
important export commodities. Gold output continued to fall, contributing to a further decline in the
value added by the mining sector. In addition, manufacturing output was affected by negative business
sentiment  related  to  the  depreciation  of  the  rand,  volatile  conditions  in  financial  markets  and
socio-political developments in some sub-Saharan African countries.
1
BIS Review 87/2000
Many of these negative factors now seem to have improved, calmed down or disappeared completely.
The  outlook  for  economic  growth  is  accordingly  much  more  favourable.  Higher  growth rates  could
probably be expected during the second half of 2000 and in 2001. Prospects for long-term production
growth,  however,  are  still  somewhat  bleak  in  view  of the  current  low  fixed  investment  ratio.  Fixed
capital formation of about 15% of gross domestic product is not enough to sustain a high rate of output
growth and job creation. High sustainable economic growth can only be obtained if there are larger
additions to the production capacity of South Africa and increased productivity.
We not only need to work harder, we also need to work smarter. Since 1994 there has been a marked
improvement in labour productivity. In the past five years the growth in production per worker in the
non-agricultural formal sector of the economy has averaged more than 3½% per year. These increases
in labour productivity were, however, obtained by substituting new fixed investment to replace labour,
rather than by expanding the productive base of the economy. Multifactor productivity, in other words
the combined productivity of labour and capital, grew far less impressively than labour productivity
alone.
According  to  the  findings  of  the  1999  October  Household  Survey  of  Statistics  South  Africa,
employment increased in the year to October 1999. This finding is based on a broader definition of
employment, namely employment in the formal sectors including agriculture and some self-employed
persons as well as the workers in the informal sector. This survey shows that the overall number of
jobs in the economy increased by about 10% to a level of around 10.4 million over the 12 months up
to October 1999. The number of unemployed people remained unchanged over this period, resulting in
a decline in the official unemployment rate. The official rate measures the unemployed as a percentage
of the economically active population. This rate declined from just more than 25% in October 1998 to
about 23% in October 1999.
According to this survey, South Africa was therefore able to provide work to its growing population
and  to reduce the number  of  unemployed  people,  even  at  relatively  modest  economic  growth  rates.
One  should,  however,  immediately  add  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  increase  in  employment  took
place in the informal sector of the economy, meaning in the segment of the economy that has a low
potential for  rapid  growth.  Development  in  the  South  African  economy  is  currently  taking  place  in
low-growth  sectors  with  low  fixed  investment.  At  the  same  time,  our  savings  ratio  has  declined  to
about 16% of gross domestic product.
Despite  the  important  structural  changes  that  the  government  has  undertaken  and  the  sound
macroeconomic policy measures that have been applied, the economy still is not poised to obtain high
sustainable economic growth. This objective will require further adjustments to make the country even
more investor friendly, to attract direct foreign investors and to counter any negative socio-economic
issues.  When  determining  policy,  careful  consideration  is  given  to  factors  that  could  improve  the
general business mood and investments in South Africa.
Financial stability
3.
Some people also believe that we need lower real interest rates in South Africa if we want to achieve
higher fixed investments and sustainably high economic growth. This is, of course, a valid argument.
At low interest rates, the user cost of capital is lower and business people would be more inclined to
invest their money in risky but probably  lucrative  capital  projects.  In  this  way  the fixed investment
ratio of the country would be increased, leading to higher growth and more employment opportunities.
If only the real world was that simple, how easy my task would be as Governor of the Reserve Bank.
Unfortunately, it is well known that a lenient monetary policy with low interest rates and the creation
of money, does not lead to higher economic growth. The old adage is still true, it is like “pushing on a
string”.  Creating  more  money  only  leads  to  higher  inflation.  If  it  was  so  easy  to  achieve  higher
economic growth, there would be hardly any poor countries left in the world.
I  know  that  I  am  ridiculing  the  argument  for  lower  real  interest  rates.  Naturally,  it  is  not  easy  to
determine where the correct level of real interest rates should be to achieve high economic growth and
maintain price stability. It should, however, be realised that the interest rate is the price for money. The
BIS Review 87/2000
2
Reserve Bank can only influence short-term interest rates through the application of monetary policy
operational procedures. Although shorter-term interest rates influence the level of longer-term interest
rates, other factors are also important when determining these rates. For example, at times you  may
find that the Reserve Bank reduces the repo rate, which lowers money market interest rates but leads
to higher longer-term interest rates because of expected higher inflation. The Reserve Bank therefore
only has an indirect influence on the level of the long-term interest rates that affect investor decisions.
Moreover, the Reserve Bank cannot arbitrarily set short-term interest rates without taking careful note
of  underlying  economic  and financial conditions,  and  it  is  not  the  function  of  the  Bank  to  promote
economic growth in an artificial manner. At most, the Reserve Bank can only create stable financial
conditions, which are generally regarded as an important precondition for high sustainable economic
growth.
This we have attempted to do over the past decade in a way that would have the least harmful effect on
real  economic  activity.  The  policies  followed  by  the  Bank,  together  with  fiscal  and  other  policy
measures, succeeded in creating greater price stability in South Africa. In 1998 and 1999 the rate of
increase in the consumer price index excluding mortgage interest costs (CPIX) averaged 7% a year.
This rate of increase can be compared with inflation rates fluctuating around 15% in the 1980s and
early 1990s.
The endeavours of the Reserve Bank to create these stable financial conditions were at times seriously
hampered by exogenous shocks, particularly by volatile capital movements. In the past year we were
again  influenced  dramatically  by  this  volatility  in  foreign  portfolio  investments  in  South  Africa.
Non-resident investors sold large amounts of domestic securities because of socio-political events in
Africa,  a  shift  of  funds  away  from  commodity-based  countries 
to  high-technology  and
manufacturing-oriented economies, a rearrangement of portfolios as a result of surging energy prices
and higher international interest rates. After being net investors in South African bonds to the amount
of R16.5 billion from the beginning of 1999 until the end of January 2000, non-residents became net
sellers of bonds totalling R15.3 billion in the next six months up to the end of July 2000. Moreover,
the  net  purchases  of  shares  by  non-residents  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  fell  from
R40.6 billion in 1999 to only R6.8 billion in the first seven months of 2000.
Non-residents’ net sales of bonds then changed to net purchases of R2.8 billion in July and August,
before they again became net sellers to the amount of R5.2 billion  in  September  2000.  Fortunately,
over the same three months, they remained large net purchasers of South African shares on our stock
exchange.  These  purchases  amounted  to  R9.2  billion,  which  neutralised  their  sales  on  the  Bond
Exchange.
These substantial fluctuations  were recorded  in  the  financial  transactions  of  South  Africa,  despite  a
fundamentally  sound  balance  of  payments  position.  Although  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of
payments moved into a deficit from the second quarter of 1999, the deficit remained relatively small.
Throughout 1999 and the first half of 2000 the deficit did not exceed ½% of gross domestic product,
and in the second quarter of 2000 a surplus of R5.7 billion at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate
was recorded. This surplus was a remarkable achievement taking into account the substantial increase
in  the  country’s  oil  import  bill.  The  bigger  bill  was  due  to  a  rise  in  the  price  of  oil  from  about
US$ 10 per barrel at the beginning of 1999 to prices in excess of US$ 30 in the first half of 2000. The
strong  performance  of  the  current  account  can  largely  be  attributed  to  the  growth  in  merchandise
exports which neutralised increased imports. The favourable economic conditions in the world, a rise
in  international  commodity  prices  and  a  competitive  exchange  rate  level  in  South  Africa  led  to  a
considerable increase in both the value and the volume of exports.
As a result of this fundamentally sound balance of payments situation, the gross gold and other foreign
reserves of the country have increased substantially. At the end of 1998 the total foreign reserves of
the country amounted to R42.1 billion, which was equivalent to the value of about 10 weeks’ imports
of  goods  and  services.  At  the  end  of  June  2000  the  total  foreign  reserves  amounted  to  nearly
R70 billion, or to 17 weeks’ imports of goods and services. Moreover, the utilisation of foreign credit
facilities to boost gross foreign reserves was marginally reduced over this same period, indicating that
the Reserve Bank did not borrow funds abroad to support the level of the foreign reserves.
3
BIS Review 87/2000
Exchange rate of the rand
4.
In these circumstances one would have expected the external value of the rand to be strong, and indeed
this was the case during 1999. The nominal effective exchange rate of the rand in fact increased by
0.6% from  the  end  of  1998  to  the  end  of  1999.  This  strengthening  of  the  rand  was  boosted  by  the
listing  of  prominent  South  African  companies  on  the  London  Stock  Exchange  which  encouraged  a
large  net  inflow  of  portfolio  capital.  Only  in  the  middle  of  1999  was  the  strengthening  of  the  rand
interrupted for a while when problems in Latin America and a steep decline in the gold price led to a
sharp depreciation of the rand. This lasted only for a short time and the rand, on balance, strengthened
again during the last half of the year.
From the beginning of the year 2000, the rand at times came under severe pressure. It has depreciated
against  the  United  States  dollar  from  a  level  of  R6.15  to  the  dollar  at  the  end  of  1999  to  a  level
fluctuating  between  R7.20  to  R7.30  to  the  dollar  in  the  last  week  of  September.  This  represents  a
depreciation  of  nearly  18%.  The  rand  generally  also  depreciated  against  most  of  the  other  major
currencies, but to a much lesser extent than against the dollar. As a consequence, the weighted average
value of the rand declined by about 7% during the first nine months of 2000. This decrease was much
higher  than  the  inflation  differential  between  South  Africa  and  its  main  trading  partners  and
competitors.  After  adjustments for these  price  differentials, the  rand  probably  declined  at  a  roughly
estimated 3% in real terms over the same period.
The weakness of the rand was largely related to developments outside the borders of South Africa. In
particular, the exchange rate of the rand was seriously affected by the strength of the US dollar. The
general weakness of currencies against the US dollar is demonstrated by depreciations of almost 14%
for the euro, 10% for pound sterling and 20% for the Australian dollar from the beginning of the year
until the end of September 2000. The strength of the dollar was related mainly to the exceptionally
high and sustained growth in the United States, which encouraged long-term investments from Europe
and Japan to flow into America.
The recent sharp depreciation of the euro against the dollar led to a coordinated intervention by central
banks in the United States, Britain, Europe and Japan to support Europe’s ailing currency. It has been
estimated that the central banks of these countries spent about US$ 3 billion to US$ 5 billion to buy
euros in the last week of September. As a result the euro’s value against the dollar promptly rose from
below  85 cents  to  around  90 cents.  Subsequently  it  has  fallen  back  again  and  was  trading  between
85 cents  to  90 cents  at  the  beginning  of  October.  Although  it  did  have  this  immediate  impact,  it  is
doubtful if this one-off intervention will have the desired effect over a longer time period. Intervention
normally  only  works  if  it  is  aimed  at  stopping  speculative  capital  flows,  if  it  signals  a  change  in
underlying policies, if it is strongly supported by all parties participating and if the central banks are
prepared to intervene repeatedly and in large amounts.
These are also the main reasons that the South African Reserve Bank did not intervene in the foreign
exchange  market.  In  fact  the  Reserve  Bank  has  continued  to  buy  small  amounts  of  dollars  in  the
market to improve its net oversold open position in foreign exchange. After this position had improved
from US$ 23.2 billion at the end of September 1998 to US$ 10.3 billion at the end of March 2000, the
Bank continued to bring this position down slowly to US$ 9.6 billion at the end of September 2000.
This was part of the Reserve Bank’s objective to reduce its net open position in foreign exchange to
zero,  in  order  to  remove  one  of  the  perceived  risk  factors  in  the  economy.  Any  intervention  in  the
foreign exchange market to support the exchange rate of the rand may well have made the downward
pressure on the value of the rand worse, in view of this risk factor. The success of such intervention
would in any case have probably also been thwarted by the general strength of the US dollar.
Concluding remarks
5.
As could be expected, the depreciation of the rand and the substantial rise in energy and food prices
affected  price  increases  in  South  Africa.  For  example,  the  year-on-year  increase  in  the  CPIX
accelerated from 6.5% in October 1999 to 8.2% in August 2000. If fuel and food prices are excluded,
CPIX inflation declined slightly from 6.8% to 6.6% over the same period. Similarly, the year-on-year
BIS Review 87/2000
4
increase in production prices accelerated from 5.7% in September 1999 to 10.1% in April 2000, and
then declined slightly to 9.3% in August 2000. However, if energy and food priced are omitted, the
year-on-year  increase  in  production  prices  has  continued  to  accelerate  from  a  low  of  3.2%  in
November 1999 to 5.3% in August 2000. This upward trend was mainly due to increases in the prices
of  imported  goods,  while  domestically  generated  inflation  has  shown  a  declining  tendency  from
April 2000.
Despite the upward pressures on domestic prices arising from the depreciation of the rand and the rise
in the prices of energy and food, the Reserve Bank resisted the temptation to increase interest rates.
Instead,  the  Bank  pursued  a  policy  to  encourage  stable  money  market  rates  in  order  to  restrain  the
effects of volatile financial markets on the real economy. Under the circumstances, a rise in interest
rates  would  not  have  countered  the  effects of  supply  side  shocks  on  domestic  prices.  The  domestic
fundamental factors for inflation also remained favourable. These include seven main factors:
(i) 
a further slowdown in the year-on-year rate of increase in nominal unit labour costs from an
already low 4.5% in the second quarter of 1999 to 2.2% in the second quarter of 2000;
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
surplus  production  capacity  in  the  economy,  as  reflected  by  the  utilisation  of  production
capacity in manufacturing of only about 79% in the first quarter of 2000.
no  signs  of  excessive  growth  in  demand,  with  domestic final  demand  increasing  only  at a
seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 2½% and a surplus on the current account of the
balance of payments in the second quarter of 2000;
a sluggish growth in money supply of 8.6% over the 12 months to August 2000;
a low year-on-year rate of increase in total domestic bank credit extension of 7.1% in August
2000 and no signs that consumers have become willing to borrow excessively;
signs that the rate of increase in food prices seems to be levelling off.
continued prudent fiscal policies with government carefully monitoring expenditure; and
(vi) 
(vii) 
All  these  factors  indicate  that  the  inflation  target  of  the  authorities  will  be  attained  in  2002.  The
Reserve Bank will nevertheless continue to carefully monitor underlying economic developments, and
will  not  hesitate  to  take  the  necessary  steps  if  changed  circumstances  do  indicate  a  danger  that  the
inflation targets may not be met. We remain fully committed to meeting our inflation target of 6-3% of
CPIX by end of calendar year 2002.
5
BIS Review 87/2000
