Lars Heikensten: Six monetary policy issues
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Umeå School of
Business and Economics, in Umeå, on 7 November 2000.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to visit Umeå and talk about monetary policy.
The  Swedish  economy  is  developing  favourably.  Growth  has  been  impressive  in  recent  years,
averaging around 3% in annual terms, and at present the rate may be even higher. This has contributed
to a rapid reduction of unemployment and strongly rising employment.
A look at the statistics shows that the present expansion of employment in Sweden is the fastest since
the labour force surveys were first published in the early 1960s. And although growth has been strong,
inflation has remained moderate.
The explanations for the good circle in which our economy is now moving are not simple. But I do
believe that one contributory factor is the realignment of economic policy that has been achieved in
the past ten to fifteen years. This has involved deregulating the credit and foreign exchange markets,
modifying components of the transfers system and paving the way for stronger competition. All this
has helped to improve the workings of the economy. Another factor, perhaps the most important, has
been  economic  policy’s  commitment  to  stability,  with  price  stability  as  a  statutory  objective  and  a
successful consolidation of the public finances.
The last time I was in Umeå and talked about monetary policy almost three years ago, I presented a list
of eight questions. They covered what I perceived at the time to be the most topical monetary policy
issues:  What  is  good  about  low  inflation?  What  is  the  reasoning  behind  the  Riksbank’s  objective?
Why is central bank independence a good thing? And so on. I am glad that not all of those questions
are still as topical today. Progress has been made in the debate. But there are reasons for returning to
some of them and new questions have arisen; the latter are more specific and have to do with how we
operate and in what framework.
Let me first underscore that monetary policy regimes are not hewn in stone. It is important that both
monetary policy and the intellectual framework used by the Riksbank are scrutinised thoroughly and
continuously.  The  conditions  for  monetary  policy  change  as  we  gain  experience  and  acquire  new
knowledge.  A  constructive  dialogue,  inside the  Riksbank  as  well  as  elsewhere,  reduces  the  risks  of
making unnecessary mistakes in monetary policy.
Why 2% inflation?
1.
The Riksbank Act states that monetary policy’s objective is to maintain price stability. Partly in order
to  make  the  policy  intelligible  and  open  for  assessment,  the  Riksbank  has  decided  that  inflation
- measured  as  the  annual  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  -  is  to  be  held  at  2%,  with  a
tolerance interval of ±1 percentage point.
Motivating low inflation is not difficult. A great deal has been written on the subject. But perhaps it
will suffice to recall the Swedish experience in the 1970s and 1980s. The high and widely fluctuating
rate of inflation had clear negative effects on our economy. Productivity gains and investment growth
in that period were low. Sharply rising prices led to an arbitrary redistribution of income and wealth.
In  order  to  rectify  the  corporate  sector’s  competitive  position,  the  value  of  our  currency  had  to  be
written down on a number of occasions.
Bit by bit, however, more and more people, regardless of which political party they supported, realised
that  this  economic  policy  could  not  be  sustained.  So  in  the  early  1990s,  Sweden  finally  joined  the
growing number of countries that had chosen to re-focus their policy on low inflation.
1
BIS Review 98/2000
But while it is not difficult to advocate low, stable inflation, it is less easy to argue that just 2% is the
appropriate  rate.  When  the  inflation  target  was  adopted  in  1992,  it  was  noted  that  this  was
approximately  the  level  of  ambition  that  important  countries  had  chosen.  Moreover,  inflation  was
currently around that level when the decision was made.
Alan  Greenspan  has  argued  that  inflation  should  be  so  low  that  people  generally  do  not  give  it  a
thought when making economic decisions. That points to 2% as a reasonable level.
There  are  some  objections,  however.  Some  argue  that  an  inflation  target  ought  to  be  higher.  One
reason has to do with the downward rigidity of nominal wages. We know from experience that wages
rise, sometimes so much that they generate inflation. Downward wage adjustments are less frequent.
Seen from this angle, inflation might be regarded as a smooth way of achieving necessary adjustments
to real business costs.
Another risk, according to some observers, is that  an  unduly  low  inflation  target leaves too  small  a
margin for monetary policy. The economy is liable to land in a situation where the central bank is no
longer in a position to influence the development of prices by pushing the real interest rate down. It
simply is not possible to reduce the interest rate below zero per cent.
As  I  see  it,  the  Riksbank’s  decision  to  target  a  specific  annual  rate  of  inflation  and  implement  its
policy symmetrically has eliminated a large part of the risk of our being caught in a deflationary spiral
and  the  dilemma  of  zero  interest  rates.  Everyone  knows  we  strive  to  bring  inflation  back  to  the
targeted  level  of  2%.  Inflation  expectations  in  recent  years  have  in  fact  been  stable  around  the  2%
target.
A specific target also means that the labour market parties know the rules of the game, which I believe
has promoted reforms in wage formation. To a large extent, wage demands are now drawn up on the
premise of inflation being 2%.
All in all, I see no grounds today for reconsidering our 2% target. The objections in the literature to a
target  around  2%  seem  to  be  less  relevant  if  anything  than  they  were  some  years  ago.  The  labour
market is on the way to adjusting to low inflation. And the risks of deflation should diminish when
monetary policy targets inflation symmetrically.
What is the appropriate measure of inflation?
2.
The Riksbank has chosen the consumer price index (CPI) as monetary policy’s target variable. But all
indicators  of  inflation,  including  the  CPI,  have  drawbacks.  These  have  to  be  weighed  against  the
advantages. The CPI has the advantage of being an established indicator of inflation among economic
agents and familiar to people in general. It is also a comparatively broad price index. Being familiar
and  intelligible  made  the  CPI  particularly  suitable  for  the  process  of  establishing  the  new  inflation
targeting policy and stabilising inflation expectations.
Partly in view of the krona’s depreciation and the risk of inflationary impulses from import prices, the
Riksbank decided in 1993 that the target would not apply until 1995. This avoided a situation in which
meeting  the  new  target  might  have  required  a  sharp  monetary  tightening  that  could  have  led  to  an
unnecessarily large drop in output and higher unemployment. That shows that right from the start the
Riksbank realised there could be reasons for temporary deviations from the target.
A drawback with the CPI is that besides containing information about underlying or trend inflation, it
catches  transitory  price  movements  that  are  sometimes  difficult  or  almost  impossible  to  influence.
During  the  years  with  the  inflation  target,  various  transitory  factors  have  affected  the  CPI.  One
example  is  the  interest  rate  fluctuations,  which  have  shown  up  in  the  own  homes  item  in  the  CPI.
During 1996-97 in particular, the CPI was relatively far below not just the targeted rate but also the
lower tolerance limit. To a fairly large extent, this was because the Riksbank lowered the interest rate
markedly with a view to ensuring that the target would be met a little later on.
In the period 1993-98 the Riksbank tried to explain how effects of this kind would be handled. But not
everyone  considered  the  policy  was  sufficiently  clear.  The  Riksdag  (Sweden’s  parliament),  for
BIS Review 98/2000
2
example, assessed the Riksbank’s performance solely in terms of the CPI outcome even though there
had been long periods when monetary policy had focused on other indicators that exclude transitory
effects.
In the best of all possible worlds one would prefer to  use  an  indicator  of  inflation that  excludes  all
those effects one wants to disregard. Unfortunately, there is no such indicator that suits every situation.
For  example,  a  tax  increase  may,  under  certain  circumstances,  need  to  be  excluded  as  a  transitory
effect. In other cases, however, tax increases should be taken into account when formulating  policy
because they are a part of the inflation process.
Against this background, in 1999 the Riksbank declared that in connection with every monetary policy
decision, any grounds that existed for modifying the policy’s target variable would be clarified. This
forces the Riksbank systematically to consider whether there are any transitory factors that ought to be
disregarded when deciding the repo rate. It also facilitates a correct evaluation of monetary policy.
One risk with this arrangement is perhaps that the discussion may sometimes become rather technical
and focused on details. Should or should not the index we use include a given tax change that alters
inflation by one tenth of a percentage point? Continuous minor revisions of our target variable are also
liable  to  make  us  less  intelligible,  which  may  ultimately  render  monetary  policy  more  difficult  to
scrutinise.
So  we  evidently  face  a  difficult  choice.  Since the  clarification,  we  have  chosen  so far to  start  from
UND1X,  which  unlike  the  CPI  excludes  house  mortgage  interest  expenditure  and  price  effects  of
indirect taxes and subsidies. In addition, we present a more detailed picture of how we view certain
price movements that could be regarded as transitory, for instance the recent oil price rise.
There are those who argue that the Riksbank ought to disregard downward price effects from structural
factors. Examples are effects on the price level from various deregulations and the increasingly strong
international  competition.  Reasons  for  doing  so  are  difficult  to  find.  What  matters  is  not  whether  a
price movement is “structural” but whether it affects the path of inflation more fundamentally, that is,
as a part of the inflation process. If it does, it ought to be taken into account when policy is formulated,
regardless of whether its effect is downwards or upwards. Matters would be different if the effects in
question were temporary, so that they only affect the price level for a year or so. In  that case  there
might be grounds for disregarding them. But deregulations and increased international competition are
presumably as much a part of the inflation process today as were the opposite effects that increased
employer contributions and other taxes exerted in the 1970s and 1980s.
Why have a rule of action?
3.
The Riksbank formulates monetary policy primarily on the basis of a forecast of inflation one to two
years ahead. If inflation, measured as the annual change in the CPI, is expected to be above 2% during
this time horizon, the interest rate is normally increased and vice versa. This rule of action is intended
to:
• 
• 
• 
The rule of action has been an important support for the Riksbank in recent years. Besides helping to
make monetary policy more intelligible, it has contributed to a tighter analysis and a more structured
internal discussion. But a simple rule such as this clearly cannot be applied mechanically.
act as a support for internal decision-making;
make policy more intelligible;
enhance external credibility.
A  noteworthy  aspect  is  the  time  horizon  to  which  the  rule  refers.  The  Riksbank  is  required  to
maximise  goal  fulfilment,  that  is,  to  keep  inflation  in  line  with  the  target,  for  ever.  As  I  shall  be
discussing, moreover, it is reasonable that the Riksbank considers developments in the real economy
and tries, when making decisions, to avoid unnecessary disturbances and fluctuations in growth and
employment.
3
BIS Review 98/2000
One  reason  why  the  Riksbank  did  not  opt for a  shorter target  horizon  is  the  time  lag  that  normally
occurs before interest rate adjustments affect the economy. I say normally because, for example, the
exchange  rate  sometimes  speeds  up  the  effect from  the  interest  rate. Moreover,  a large  interest  rate
adjustment is presumably associated with a quicker effect, for instance if household wealth is affected
via share prices. Developments beyond the current two-year period are excluded by the target horizon
because, for example, it is often difficult to predict what will happen so far ahead. But certain trends
may  be  fairly  clear  at  times  and  monetary  policy  should  then  take  them  into  account.  So  although
policy is guided by the prospects one to two years ahead, there are normally reasons for also paying
some consideration to inflation’s forecast path in the coming year as well as beyond the target horizon.
To date the Inflation Report has contained detailed assessments of inflation two years ahead. In the
next report, in December, we intend to include a section with a more general description of inflation
prospects two to three years ahead. This is intended to promote a better discussion of the choices that
lie ahead.
Another important matter is how strictly the rule should be applied. There are many sides to this. One
has to do with whether monetary policy ought to allow for other matters besides inflation, for instance
the real economic situation or  the  risk  of  problems  that  might  threaten financial  stability.  I  shall  be
returning to that shortly. Another is the timing of an interest rate adjustment.
It is, of course, primarily the inflation forecast that guides monetary policy. But there may be room at
the margin for other aspects. Normally it is a matter of whether a measure can be taken a little sooner
or  later  than  otherwise.  This  may  be  desirable  to  ensure  that  the  measure  is  well  received  in  the
financial  markets,  for  example.  On  other  occasions  we  have  prepared  the  general  public  for  future
decisions  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  conflicts  and  discussions  in  society.  When  we  raised  the
interest rate in 1997, for instance, the decision was timed with a view to sending a clear message in
advance of the wage negotiations at that time.
Should we take output and employment into account?
4.
Price  stability  is  the  Riksbank’s  policy  objective.  The  antecedents  to  the  Riksbank  Act  state  that,
without  prejudicing  this  objective,  the  Riksbank  should  also  endeavour  to  promote  other  economic
policy goals that the Riksdag has established, for example a favourable development of growth and
employment.
One  reason  for  focussing  on  low  inflation  is  that  most  things  suggest  this  is  a  prerequisite  for  a
favourable  long-term  development  of  growth  and  employment.  That  means  it  is  also  the  best
contribution monetary policy can make to combating unemployment.
A short-run increase in employment can be obtained by stimulating demand, even if this entails a risk
of  higher  inflation.  But  this  short-term  exchange  can  be  risky,  as  we  know  not  least  from  the
experiences in the 1970s and 1980s I referred to earlier. And just the fear of an unduly expansionary
policy that may lead to rising inflation is liable to push interest rates up, leading to weaker growth and
employment. For monetary policy it is therefore crucial that confidence in the low-inflation regime is
strong.
The construction of the inflation target automatically involves some allowance for economic activity.
Weaker  growth  that  leads  to  a  capacity  surplus  normally  implies  diminishing  inflationary  pressure
from demand. This in turn leaves room for a more expansionary monetary stance: the interest rate is
lowered, thereby stimulating demand. Conversely, unduly high demand involves a risk of excessively
high  capacity  utilisation,  with  upward  pressure  on  prices  and  wages.  To  prevent  this,  the  monetary
stance has to be tightened by raising the interest rate. In this way, the Riksbank’s endeavour to fulfil
the inflation target normally contributes to economic stabilisation.
There are, however, situations in which this relationship does not apply. One case is when inflation is
being driven from the supply side, for example because an isolated oil price rise is pushing prices up.
There  may  then  be  grounds  for  accepting  a  temporary  increase  in  the  price  level  instead  of  acting
swiftly to push inflation down. Unnecessary fluctuations in the real economy can then be avoided. As I
BIS Review 98/2000
4
mentioned earlier, the Riksbank has therefore clarified that if higher or lower inflation is judged to be
a transitory phenomenon, attempts to counter it immediately and fully are sometimes not desirable.
From these clarifications it will be clear that in the conduct of monetary policy we do in fact also take
the real economic consequences directly into account. It should be underscored, however, that making
allowances  of  this  kind  does  presuppose  a  basic  confidence  in  monetary  policy  -  that  different
economic agents count on our fulfilling the inflation target, if not immediately then at least in the near
future.
There has been a discussion recently, among economists as well as in the public debate, as to whether
the interest rate should be raised already even though a threat to the inflation target is not apparent in
the  coming  two  years.  In  that  way  we  could  avoid  a  build-up  of  imbalances  that  in  the  longer  run
might necessitate a drastic repo rate increase and thereby expose the real economy to major strains.
I have no objections to this view in principle. We can indeed take such matters into account in  our
intellectual framework. It is important, however, to be clear about which imbalances one is referring to
and what real economic effects they might have. It should also be borne in mind that the rule of action
with a two-year horizon should normally give us enough time in which to act.
Being forced to confront one’s observations and assessments with a rule of action has in my opinion
helped to focus the Riksbank’s thinking in these matters. When the time comes to make a decision, it
is of course a question of balancing the different risks.
Should the risks of financial instability be taken into account?
5.
The Riksbank is responsible by law for Sweden’s payment system, which means we have to oversee
financial  stability  and  take  it  into  account  in  our  policy.  But  as  I  touched  on  earlier,  financial
imbalances also affect the general economy indirectly.
An extensive academic literature in this field has grown up in recent years. The financial sector’s role
in the national economy is becoming increasingly important. And as financial markets are now global,
the horizon has to be widened. This was evident from the Asian crisis.
It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  stable  prices  reduce  the  risk  of  financial  imbalances.  With  lower
inflation, economic agents are less likely to misinterpret prices and make imprudent investments. The
wave of property speculation in the 1980s was occasioned in part by the misleading signals which the
high-inflation economy transmitted.
A favourable economic trend that is accompanied by a strong expansion of credit which people use in
the hope of getting a quick return, is liable to generate financial bubbles. Over the years there has been
clear  evidence  of  this  in  connection  with  excessively  high  expectations  in  the  stock  market  or  the
property market, for example. In the end, it becomes difficult to justify prices in terms of economic
fundamentals. Elements of this have been apparent in recent years, for instance in the United States.
One issue is whether central banks ought to consider asset prices when setting the interest rate. The
notion here is that asset prices may influence the path of inflation. An increase in household wealth on
account  of  rising  share  prices,  for  example,  is  likely  to  affect  consumption  and  thereby  demand  in
general  and  the  price  trend.  Effects  from  expectations  are  also  involved.  Rising  share  prices  may
mirror expectations of permanently higher corporate profits and lead to expectations of higher lifetime
incomes. If confidence in the future becomes much stronger in this way, the effects on demand may be
considerable. Share price increases may perhaps affect the corporate investment propensity in a similar
way.  The  Riksbank  takes  this into  account  as far  as  possible  in  the  inflation  assessment.  But  much
remains to be done, theoretically as well as empirically, when it comes to understanding the nature of
these relationships. A lively  discussion  is  in progress,  at  the  Riksbank  as  well  as among  those  who
scrutinise us, about what a given development of asset prices should imply for monetary policy.
There  is  even  less  agreement  as  to  whether  central  banks  should  conduct  policy  so  that  the
development of asset prices is affected directly. This immediately raises the difficulty of determining
when an asset market can be said to be over-valued. And if one does decide to intervene, how can one
5
BIS Review 98/2000
be sure of deflating the bubble in an orderly manner? Just mentioning these two problems often leads
those concerned with central banking to conclude that intervention is not advisable.
I should like to broaden the argument. In addition to the objective of price stability, as the central bank
of Sweden the Riksbank is responsible by law for the payment system and financial stability. Without
prejudicing these aims, we should also strive to support economic policy’s other goals, such as high
growth  and  employment.  This  means,  for  instance,  that  we  should  take  pains  to  avoid  unnecessary
fluctuations in output and employment.
So if we see what we believe to be  mounting  financial imbalances  and judge  that  in  time  they  will
jeopardise  a  stable  economic  development,  I  consider  that  in  principle,  at  least,  there  is  a  case  for
acting with the repo rate even if we do not perceive a direct threat to the inflation target. The difficulty
in practice lies in deciding when an intervention is called for. To some extent, this is made easier by
the  risks  being  normally  inherent  in  the  growth  of  credit  in  the  economy  rather  than  in  the  actual
development of asset prices.
In conclusion I can mention that the Riksbank has been working on these matters a great deal in recent
years. Twice a year, for example, we publish a report on financial stability in the Swedish economy. In
these reports, any risks we identify are highlighted with a view to creating conditions so that they can
be  corrected.  On  the  basis  of  our  assessments,  we  are  also  in  a  position  to  influence  the  course  of
events by proposing rule changes and legislative amendments.
Why is clarity important?
6.
The Riksbank’s work with an inflation target has been developed over the years. The decision to adopt
an inflation target was made in 1993. Inflation indicators began to be published quite soon after that.
Comprehensive inflation assessments appeared some years later, followed by inflation forecasts. The
rule of action with a target horizon was then added, as well as the clarification of how monetary policy
would be formulated in the event of different shocks.
Future  developments  will  no  doubt  exact  additional  requirements.  Almost  every  time  a  new  policy
decision is at hand, any new information - on oil prices, taxes and price tendencies, for instance - has
to be related to the intellectual framework we have gradually built up. As I mentioned earlier, in the
next Inflation Report we intend to include a section on inflation in the somewhat longer run. We are
also thinking of publishing probability assessments not just of forecast inflation but also of forecast
growth.
The  approach  we  have  chosen  has  a  number  of  advantages.  In  that  the  inflation  assessments  are
published,  we  are  forced  systematically  to  appraise  all  the  relevant  information  about  future  price
tendencies.  This  is  done  in  internal  processes,  with  our  staff  playing  a  decisive  role  initially,  after
which  the  Executive  Board  is  free  to  discuss  the  material  that  has  been  prepared.  There  are  other
strong  reasons  why  the  Riksbank  should  be  open.  As  I  mentioned  earlier, it  means  we  have  had  to
tighten  the  analysis.  It  also  makes  it  easier  to  follow  what  we  do  and  enforce  various  forms  of
accountability.
In the public debate it is sometimes argued that we are too bound by our established principles. I hope
it  is  clear  from  what  I  have  already  said  that  that  is  not  the  case.  We  are  free  to  extend  the  target
horizon, take any risks of problems in the financial sector into account or take timely action to avoid a
marked economic slowdown further ahead. But before doing so, we require good, clear grounds for
our actions that really will stand up to scrutiny.
I am sometimes exhorted to be more pragmatic and less tied down by our intellectual framework. The
US Federal Reserve is often cited as a good example. That is a little surprising, mainly because in the
United States the academic discussion advocates the opposite - that a clearer target for price stability
would perhaps be preferable. The background here is that the policy is currently associated so strongly
with a single person, Alan Greenspan, and there is concern about what will happen after him.
To me, proposals of this kind about a more pragmatic policy seem rather naive. Policy principles that
are  less  clear-cut,  combined  with  a  less  transparent  basis  for  decisions,  by  no  means  guarantee  a
BIS Review 98/2000
6
successful  policy  in  the  longer  run.  Just  the  reverse,  I  would  say  in  the  light  of  many  years  of
decision-making in economic policy. One of the most important things to do in work of this type is try
to build up distinct processes whereby a foundation for decisions based on sound economic analysis is
produced systematically and then subjected to as broad a scrutiny as possible. One will then at least
have  provided  conditions  for  consistent  and  wise  decisions.  That  in  turn  is  fundamental  for  all
credibility in monetary policy, too.
I believe, moreover, that decisions should be made in ways that contribute to insight and afford good
opportunities of evaluating them and exacting accountability. These are requirements I consider people
in  Sweden  should  be  entitled  to  make  of  an  institution  which  has  been  given  such  a  strong  and
independent status as the Riksbank.
The current monetary policy situation
Let  me  conclude  by  briefly  presenting  my  view  of  current  economic  developments  and  their
implications for monetary policy.
For a couple of years now the Riksbank has had reason to count on rising economic activity. Future
demand growth has been judged to exceed what the economy can cope with in the long term without
generating higher inflation. To date, however, price trends - not least in the domestic economy - have
been  lower  than  we  had  expected,  even  though  our  forecasts  were  below  those  of  most  other
observers.
One  recent  event  is  the  notable  fall  in  share  prices.  To  date,  however,  this  seems  to  be  more  of  a
desirable normalisation than a fall that endangers economic activity.
There are also more and more indications that the recent strong growth of production and employment
is tending to slacken. To date, however, that has been broadly in line with our earlier assessment.
Finally, there is the rather mixed information about the ongoing wage negotiations. This year’s wage
outcome is, if anything, somewhat lower than expected. At the same time, it looks as though several of
the demands that have been presented are a little bit high in relation to the inflation target, particularly
considering the risk of future wage drift in an increasingly strong labour market.
These are matters we will be deliberating in the Riksbank in the run up to the next Inflation Report and
monetary policy meeting in December. For my part, there seems to be no reason at  present  for  any
appreciable change in the assessment I made in October, namely that a repo rate increase will probably
be needed in the future in order to safeguard the continuation of a favourable and stable development,
with low inflation and rising output.
7
BIS Review 98/2000
