Villy Bergström: The Riksbank’s role for stable growth
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a breakfast meeting at
Swedbank in Stockholm on 7 November 2000.
 The Swedish economy is now developing very favourably. GDP has increased on average by 3% for
the past three years and, in the Riksbank’s most recent assessment, it will continue to grow at between
3  and  4%  in  the  coming  two  years.  This  strong  growth  has  brought  about  a  fall  in  unemployment,
which is now close to 4%. While this is much higher than it was in the 1970s and 1980s, it is lower
than what many people thought possible when the crisis in the Swedish economy was at its deepest in
the early 1990s.
Lower central government debt reduces the future burden of interest
The central government debt, which dramatically increased in the years after the crisis, is now being
paid  off.  At  most,  central  government  debt  totalled  80%  of  GDP  in  1994.  It  is  expected  to  fall  to
approximately  60%  of  GDP  this  year.  Sweden  is  thereby  one  of  the  most  successful  countries  in
Europe as regards tackling the problems of public sector finances. The requirements made on us to be
able  to  participate  in  EMU  have  sometimes  been  highlighted  in  general  discussion  as  the  most
important reason for the savings. The convergence requirements made in the Maastricht Treaty aim at
reducing  the  risk  for  problems  in  the  union  with  a  single  monetary  policy.  Reducing  the  central
government debt to adapt to these requirements is naturally a sufficient reason for those countries that
wish to take part in the union.
However, for the Swedish economy, a high central government debt creates major problems regardless
of  whether  we  participate  in  the  monetary  union  or  not.  Weak  central  government  finances  lead  to
uncertainty about future tax burdens. The experiences of the mid-1990s show that uncertainty of this
kind can lead to high interest rates, a weak exchange rate for the krona and substantial fluctuations in
both variables. As a small country, Sweden is wholly dependent on international companies and the
international financial markets. In order to safeguard welfare, we must carry out policies that create
confidence in investors and financiers. We have no freedom of choice in this respect.
Reducing  the  interest  burden  for  future  generations  is  also  important  bearing  in  mind  the  future
changes in population. The proportion of persons in the labour force will decrease considerably in the
coming decades compared with those outside. Greater numbers of older people increase the costs of
old age care and health care. At the same time, internationalisation means that it will be increasingly
difficult to finance a welfare system by having higher taxes than elsewhere. In the light of this, it is
firstly  important  that  labour  force  participation  and  the  number  of  hours  worked  increase  in  the
economy so as to increase government revenue and payment capacity. Secondly, it is necessary that
central government finances continue to be in surplus in the next 10-15 years, which can be used for
amortisation.  A  lighter  debt  burden  creates  scope  for  future  increases  in  costs.  The  government’s
expenditure ceiling and balance targets aim at creating such space.
At present, the prospects for growth in the economy are so good that the surplus in central government
finances is expected to be sufficient to amortise central government debt at a rapid rate and to reduce
income  tax.  The  challenge  lies  in  maintaining  this  ambition  over  a  long  period.  It  is  therefore
important that economic policy is focused on creating the conditions for growth. In this perspective, it
would in my opinion be unfortunate to take decisions on a shortening of working hours since it would
worsen the prospects for growth by reducing the supply of labour.
By taking responsibility for stable prices and financial stability, the Riksbank can make a contribution
to creating favourable conditions for long-term good and even growth.
1
BIS Review 98/2000
Stable inflationary prospects and free resources make possible low interest rates
The strong upswing that we are now experiencing has been supported by the Riksbank being able to
keep the interest rate at a relatively low level due to low inflationary pressure. Despite us being ahead
of Europe in the cycle, we have an instrumental rate which is one per cent lower than in the euro area.
Since inflation is at the same time lower, the differences in the real interest rate are less, however. An
important reason for inflation being so low is the broad agreement on the price stability target that now
seems to exist. An expression of this is that inflationary expectations remain at a stable level despite
expectations on a continued very strong upswing. The Riksbank’s most important duty in future is to
ensure that expectations remain at around 2% inflation.
The very low inflation which is now registered has, however, surprised many people, including us at
the  Riksbank.  An  important  explanation  as  to  why  GDP  growth  has  now  been  able  to  exceed  the
growth  in  output  that  is  possible  in  the  long  term  for  many  years  without  threatening  the  inflation
target is, of course, that the upswing started from a level of output that was greatly depressed after the
years  of crisis,  where  a  lot  of  resources  had  been  made  redundant.  When  unemployment  was  at  its
peak, there were many who feared that it would persist permanently at a considerably higher level than
we  were  previously  used  to.  There  was  also  opposition  to  the  inflation  target  policy  just  for  that
reason. Examples were pointed to in Europe where unemployment had been over the Swedish for a
long time, but where there had been greater success in combating inflation.
The labour market is performing better than expected
It is difficult to determine the rate at which GDP can increase in the long term. However, the Riksbank
makes the assessment that an annual rate of increase of 2-2.5% is reasonable. In the short term, output
can continue to increase more rapidly as long  as  there are  free resources.  An important  issue  is  the
extent to which unemployment can fall before the situation in the labour market becomes so strained
that  wages  and  prices  start  to  increase  so  much  as  to  threaten  the  inflation  target.  The  most  recent
demands  in  pay  bargaining  indicate  that  the  new  contracts  will  be  somewhat  higher  than  their
predecessors, which probably reflects the fact that we are now in a period of increasing resource use.
However,  developments  during  the  recent  period  show  that  large  groups  who  have  previously  been
unemployed have been able to return to the labour market. The increased use of resources has not led
to a rise in nominal wage increases, which indicates that flexibility in the labour market is higher than
we previously believed. The labour market policy carried out by the government  may  have  made  it
easier in various ways for people to move from unemployment  to  work  although  the  importance  of
labour market policy is difficult to measure. However, it is reasonable to assume that re-entry into the
labour market is facilitated by unemployed people being given the opportunity via various measures of
maintaining normal routines. Employability may also have increased due to the labour market training
offered.
Stable  inflation  expectations  and  new  arrangements  for  collective  agreements  have  probably  also
reduced wage inflation. At the same time, real wages have increased strongly in recent years despite
low nominal pay increases. This has probably increased support for the inflation target and contributed
to holding down the nominal wage increases.
The  weak  development  of  inflation  and  the  moderate  pay  increases  despite  strong  growth  in  the
economy  have  led  the  Riksbank  to  modify  its  assessment  of  the  amount  of  free  resources  in  the
economy. Developments in the labour market indicate that it is possible to increase output more than
we previously thought without threatening the inflation target.  If  we  include those in  labour  market
policy  measures,  unemployment  still  amounts  to  almost  7%,  which  indicates  about  3%  more
unemployed now than in the 1970s and 1980s.
Change of inflation regime expensive in the short-term
In  retrospect,  we  can  note  that  the  changeover  to  low-inflation  economy  after  several  decades  with
high and varying inflation required high unemployment and depressed output for a rather long period
BIS Review 98/2000
2
of adaptation. High inflation expectations despite low registered inflation and abundant free resources
resulted in the Riksbank considering it necessary to hold interest rates up quite a long time with the
good  intention  of  maintaining  stable  prices  in  the  long  term.  Experiences  from  this  period  clearly
indicate then that the macroeconomic costs can be very great if inflationary expectations are allowed
to  increase.  At  the  same  time,  with  high  interest  rates,  fiscal  policy  was  focused  on  reducing  the
budget deficits. In the light of this, it is not surprising that criticism of the Riksbank’s approach was
strong at times. The discussion on making the Riksbank more independent aroused strong feelings not
least  among  many  social-democrats  and  in  parts of the trade  union  movement.  There  are  obviously
different views of the extent to which it is necessary with such a stringent monetary policy during the
years of adaptation. We can never obtain an answer to this but we can at any rate note that we now
seem  to  have  achieved  the  stable  prices  we  aimed  at.  To  date,  it  is  too  early  to  say  whether  price
stability can be combined with as high employment as previously, but what we are now seeing gives
rise to optimism.
Price stability requires some independence for the Riksbank
The strong pessimism on the future prospects for the Swedish economy that affected the general mood
after the crisis in 1992 has then in recent years been transformed into an equally strong optimism! We
can now draw the conclusion that the pessimism was exaggerated but we know nothing yet about the
situation  with  respect  to  today’s  optimism.  It  would  seem  to  be  a  fact  that  there  has  been
over-optimism about developments in certain IT-related industries, although the question is how we
should regard the more long-term growth of the Swedish economy.
Many  structural  reforms  have  been  carried  out.  The  financial  markets  have  been  deregulated,
competition on the goods markets has also increased and many state monopolies have been abolished.
Information technology has developed rapidly and even if the stock markets reacted too optimistically,
the technological development  should  be favourable for rather  more  long-term  growth.  Productivity
has  also improved  in  recent  years,  which  may  also  be  a  sign  that  we  are  on  our  way  into  a  higher
long-term growth track.
The approach of economic policy has then been successful. Support and understanding also seems to
have been attained for the price stability target taking precedence over other ambitions and demands.
By giving central banks independent responsibility for the price stability target, an attempt has been
made to avoid suspicions being created that the price stability target would be set aside for short-term
employment considerations. In the long-term, a demand-stimulating economic policy would only be
expressed in inflation when full utilisation of resources is reached. For central banks that, after a long
period  with  a poor inflation  record,  are  to  establish  credibility  for  price  stability,  independence  can
facilitate this transition.
When credibility and support for price stability has been achieved, there is less risk of monetary policy
coming into conflict with short-term employment objectives. I would first like to briefly describe the
basis of the monetary policy decisions made by the Riksbank.
Simple decision-making rule as a guide
The  new  Riksbank  Act  has  now  been  in  force  for  almost  two  years.  This  act  stipulates  that  the
objective  of  the  Riksbank  is  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to  safeguard  a  reliable  and  efficient
payment  system.  When  the  Executive  Board  met  for  the  first  time,  it  clarified  the  approach  to  be
adopted in monetary policy. It was already the case that inflation measured by CPI was to amount to
2%  with  a  tolerance  interval  of  plus/minus  1  percentage  point.  The  Riksbank  had  also  previously
announced that the target horizon would be 1-2 years in normal cases. We clarified that we can decide
to disregard certain factors affecting prices which are not related to resource use in the economy and
which only have a temporary effect on inflation. However, the prerequisite is that the effect on prices
is temporary and should thus not affect inflation expectations. Subsequently, we  have  also  said  that
there may be reasons for taking into account developments before and after the target horizon. When
3
BIS Review 98/2000
we depart from the main rule, we have undertaken to say that we are doing so and give reasons for
why we are departing from the rule.
The monetary policy decisions are  based on  forward-looking assessments  of  inflation  measured  as
CPI.  This  assessment  is  based  on  the  interest  rate  being  unchanged  during  the  forecast  period.  An
important factor for determining inflation is the degree of resource use in the economy, the output gap.
The thinking underlying this is that inflation will be stabilised if the  increase in  output is  in  accord
with the long-term growth track. If there are free resources in the economy in the initial situation, GDP
can  increase  more  quickly  than  the  long-term  sustainable  growth  without  resources  being  under  so
much strain that inflation exceeds the target and vice-versa in a situation where resources are already
under  strain.  This  is  conditional  on  inflation  expectations  being  around  2%.  However,  CPI  is  also
affected by price changes that have other basic causes than the demand situation. Examples of such
factors  are  changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies,  housing  costs  and  oil  price  changes  caused  by
supply disturbances. Inflation expectations also take this into account.
However,  forward-looking  assessments  include  a  large  measure  of  uncertainty.  In  the  Riksbank’s
inflation report, we describe the scenario thought to be most probable. If we make the assessment that
the risks of higher inflation are greater than the risks of lower inflation or vice-versa, this is normally
taken into consideration in the conduct of monetary policy.
Macroeconomic costs can motivate departures
When the credibility of the inflation target has been established, the probability is less that inflation
target policy will lead to conflict with the desire to stabilise output and employment. In the long-term,
monetary  policy  cannot  affect  growth  and  employment  other  than  by  creating  stable  expectations
about future inflation. However, if monetary policy is very strictly focused on always stabilising CPI
inflation at 2%, this can cause major fluctuations in output. Among other things, this has to do with the
time  it  takes  for  monetary  policy  to  have  an  effect  on  inflation.  It  has  also  to  do  with  CPI  being
affected by price changes in components that cannot be related to the state of demand. This has been
taken into consideration in the design of the main rule and in clarifications and expansions. There has
been an endeavour to design the rules in such a way  as  to avoid  unnecessarily  large  fluctuations in
employment  and  output.  However,  there  must  never  be  any  doubt  that  monetary  policy  is  always
governed by the inflation target, although different strategies to achieve this objective in practice can
produce different economic costs in the form of fluctuations in output and employment.
The fact that the target horizon is normally stated as 1-2 years is justified by the major fluctuations in
output that can result from attempts to influence inflation in a shorter time perspective. Interest rates
affect inflation with a time lag through effects on demand or the output gap and attain their greatest
effect after 1-2 years. In order to reduce inflation in the short term, the interest rate would therefore
have to be greatly increased with major negative effects on growth.
If CPI is affected by factors that are unrelated to the demand situation, a monetary policy that strictly
complies  with  the  main  rule  can  also  lead  to  unnecessary  variations  in  output  and  employment.  In
order to counteract, for instance, that certain changes in charges lead to CPI exceeding the target, we
would be obliged to carry out a monetary policy that would either lead to the use of resources in the
economy being too low or too high. Provided that inflationary expectations are not affected, we can, to
avoid  unnecessary  fluctuations  in  output,  therefore  decide  in  certain  cases  to  conduct  a  monetary
policy that leads to the CPI target not being achieved in a 1-2 year time perspective. For instance, we
have  normally  decided  to  disregard  certain  factors  that  affect  CPI  by  focusing  monetary  policy  on
UND1X - a price measure that disregards housing costs and indirect taxes and fees.
Concern for macroeconomic stability can in certain cases also justify our extending or shortening the
time horizon. It is, for instance, conceivable that it may be justified to extend the target horizon if we
make  the  assessment  that  there  is  a  risk  of  a  substantial  increase  in  inflation  immediately  after  the
normal horizon. If, in such a situation, we wait to increase the interest rate and thus comply with the
main rule, we could subsequently end up in a situation where we were forced to increase the interest
rate  very  sharply  to  avoid  inflation  expectations  accelerating  and  persisting  when  inflation  rises
BIS Review 98/2000
4
rapidly.  However,  a  large  interest  rate  increase  would  have  negative  effects  for  output  and
employment in the short term. To avoid ending up in a such a dilemma in future, we can decide to take
into account inflation developments after the target horizon.
From what I have said until now, it is evident that our monetary policy decisions are normally based
on the main rule that says that we should aim at keeping CPI inflation at two per cent 1-2 years in the
future. However, on every occasion when decisions are made, we must consider how to relate to the
guidance  provided  by  this  simple  decision-making  rule.  This  assessment  is  based  on  the  extent  to
which  the  main  rule  leads  to  unacceptable  macroeconomic  costs  in  the  form  of  fluctuations  in
employment  and  output.  However,  departures  from  the  rule  must  not  damage  credibility  in  the
inflation  target  or  lead  to  inflation  expectations  being  affected.  As  we  have  gained  experience  and
increased our knowledge, we have clarified how we intend to apply our decision-making rule. We will
in all probability, continue to obtain new insights and be confronted by unexpected events. This means
that we must continuously evaluate and review our strategies.
Independence requires openness
A very important part of our strategy, which I have not taken up before, is openness and transparency
as to how monetary policy is conducted. This part can hardly be reconsidered.
The  Riksbank’s  independence  creates  good  conditions  for  achieving  and  maintaining  credibility  for
the price stability target. In order for the Riksbank’s legitimacy to be maintained, it is required that we
show great openness on the grounds on which the monetary policy decisions are made. The conceptual
framework and the decision-making rules that are guiding the monetary policy decisions make up the
basic framework for our communications with the surrounding world. We describe how we conduct
monetary policy in the inflation reports, minutes and speeches.
However  skilful  we  are,  we  cannot  guarantee  that  we  will  always  meet  the  target.  The  economic
correlations change and unexpected events take place. We must therefore be evaluated on the basis of
the quality of the assessments of growth and inflation that have served as the basis for the monetary
policy  decisions  and  the  balance  struck  when  we  have  arrived  at  decisions.  It  is  therefore  very
important that we always state when we depart from the main rule I have described and the reasons for
the departures. In this way, we will also avoid misunderstandings about our intentions.
A high degree of transparency sharpens and improves the internal analysis as well since we are then
exposed  to  continual  review  by  experts  outside  the  Riksbank  in  the  academic  world  and  in  the
financial markets at home and abroad.
Clarity about the grounds on which we make our decisions creates good conditions for players in the
financial markets to assess how the repo rate will develop in future. The more certain assessments are
about future interest rate developments, the lower risk premiums that investors will require to purchase
short-term, interest-bearing treasury paper, for instance, or the banks to lend money to businesses and
households.  Great  uncertainty  leads  to  macroeconomic  costs  such  as  lower  investments  and  higher
costs for central government debt. There is therefore a wish not only on the part of the participants in
the financial market but also from the Riksbank to be as clear as possible about the factors underlying
monetary policy decisions. However, absolutely most important is to make the inflation target credible
since that controls the long-term interest rates. However, it is important to be as clear as possible about
the conduct of monetary policy in the short term to avoid unnecessary uncertainty.
But  this  does  not  mean  that  we  can  remove  the  uncertainty  that  actually  exists  about  future
developments.  We  continuously  evaluate  our  previous  assessments  when  new  information  and
statistics are received. And we continuously develop our methods and models and may, when we have
received  new  information,  be  obliged  to  re-evaluate  earlier  conclusions.  This  was  the  case,  for
instance, in the spring when we revised our assessments about the output gap. The conclusion of that
is that the interest rate path cannot be announced in advance and even less that we can undertake to
supply the interest rate decisions that the market participants sometimes consider that we have given
indications of.
5
BIS Review 98/2000
The inflation target is necessary
Transparency stimulates debate both about the monetary policy strategy we have adopted and about
the  way  in  which  the  Riksbank  carries  it  out.  We  have  recently  been  criticised  for  not  slavishly
complying with the simple decision-making rule that I have just described. However, debate has also
taken  place  on  the  suitability  of  having  an  inflation  target  as  a  guide  for  monetary  policy.  The
alternative would be a monetary policy based on discretionary decisions resting on assessments of the
monetary policy that would best favour long-term stable growth.
As  will  be  evident  from  what  I  have  said,  while  monetary  policy  is  guided  by  a  simple
decision-making rule, the rule serves as a guide and not a straitjacket. We can depart from the rule if
we make the assessment that the costs of complying with it will lead to unnecessary fluctuations in
output and employment provided that inflation expectations and the credibility of monetary policy are
not  affected.  Monetary  policy  decision-makers  are  always  confronted  to  some  extent  by  having  to
strike a balance between price stability and output variability in the short term. The balances must be
struck so as to maintain confidence in price stability. It is easy to see that a central bank with a good
reputation and many years of successful combating of inflation has more freedom than a central bank
in a country with many years of negative experiences of high inflation. On our part, it is undoubtedly
the case that the inflation target is necessary as a lodestar in order for monetary policy to be able to
contribute to creating good conditions for long-term growth.
BIS Review 98/2000
6
