Joseph Yam, JP: Open and connected – Scaling new heights
Luncheon Address by Mr Joseph Yam, JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at
the 7th Annual Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce Business Summit “Hong Kong: The Hub
of Asia”, held in Hong Kong on 13 December 2000.
 I  am  grateful,  and  much  honoured,  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  this  7th  Annual
1.
Business Summit of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce. This conference is billed as a
‘business  summit’.  The  word  ‘summit’  always  makes  me  think  of  one  of  my  favourite  hobbies  –
hiking. Those of you who have enjoyed – or endured – some of the more spectacular mountain trails in
Hong Kong will know what I mean. I am thinking especially of the steep ranges in the remoter parts of
Sai Kung, but you don’t have to go far in Hong Kong before you find yourself in the middle of one of
our wild and mountainous country parks. They are among the attractions that make Hong Kong such a
special place. In my view, they should be included in any list of the qualities that make Hong Kong a
desirable city to do business in – along with the rule of law, a low and simple tax regime, an educated
workforce, and so on. If you haven’t enjoyed these mountains, I recommend you take advantage of
this long-awaited fine autumn weather to try them out. But if you are used to eating lavish lunches like
this one every day, check with your doctor before you tackle the mountains in Sai Kung. And avoid
Sharp Peak, the steepest, slipperiest and sharpest summit of the lot.
Hong  Kong’s  economic  development  bears  some  resemblance  to  its  mountain  ranges:
2.
indeed, the dramatic ups and downs of the past decade alone form as stark a profile as anything that
can be seen on the Maclehose Trail – the most daunting and relentless of all of Hong Kong’s hiking
trails. Go back further into Hong Kong’s history, and it is possible to see, decade after decade, this
same  jagged  landscape.  The  remarkably  rapid  reconstruction  of  an  entrepot  economy  after  the
devastation  of  World  War  II.  Then  the  blow  to  Hong  Kong’s  entrepot  position  from  the  UN
embargoes on China during the Korean War, which, far from destroying Hong Kong, helped stimulate
its dramatic transformation into a major manufacturing economy. And again, in the late ’70s and early
’80s, when the Mainland began to liberalise its economy, and when manufacturing industries began to
shift from  Hong  Kong  to  the  Pearl  River  Delta and  beyond,  Hong  Kong’s  re-creation  of  itself  as  a
regional  entrepot  and  its  further  development  beyond  into  an  international  financial  and  services
centre. Hong Kong has been sent more than its fair share of challenges, and there have been hardships
and casualties along the way, but it has scaled each of them with the skills and the stamina of the best
mountaineers.  And,  while  pausing  to  enjoy  the  view,  it  has  also  found  it  possible  to  look  beyond
through the mist to the taller peaks gleaming in the distance.
WTO and Hong Kong
3.
The  most  prominent  of  these  peaks  –  at  least  among  those  visible  to  us  now  –  is  the
prospective accession by China to the WTO. It is still not clear when exactly this event will take place,
although the latest predictions seem to put it at some time during the second quarter of next year. Nor
is it entirely clear how extensive an impact the event will have on China, on the world, on the region,
or on Hong Kong – or how fast or slow the impact will be to take effect.
Some initial assessments about the impact on Hong Kong of China’s WTO accession were,
4.
in fact, quite negative. A few were even alarmist. The trend of analysis now seems to be more positive.
It is, however, qualified by a recognition of the challenges that Hong Kong faces, and of the standards
we  need  to  maintain,  and  improve  on,  if  we  are  to  make  the  most  of  our  uniquely  advantageous
position. The Chamber’s own detailed analysis of the implications (which has provided a solid basis
for the discussion at this summit) is, in my  view, an excellent example of what we need to  help  us
understand  this  historical  turning  point  in  world  trade  relations:  a  rational,  balanced,  informed
approach to a complex issue. The study focuses its analysis through another form of ‘turning point’ –
1
BIS Review 114/2000
the  ‘hub’  –  in  positioning  Hong  Kong  as  a  logistical,  financial  and  digital  centre  of  intermediation
between  the  Mainland  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  Indeed,  China’s  entry  into  the  WTO,  along  with
globalisation and technological advance are the three processes that I believe will shape Hong Kong’s
role as such a hub over the coming years.
5.
I  have  recently  spoken  in  some  detail  elsewhere  on  the  economic  implications,  and,  in
particular, the implications for Hong Kong’s banking and financial sectors of China’s entry into WTO.
So I shall deal with these only briefly here, before turning to the other two processes of globalisation
and  technological  advance.  To  summarise  the  research  by  the  World  Bank,  the  HKMA  and  other
organisations: China’s share in the world’s external trade is predicted to double in the space of five
years as a result of WTO entry – from around three-and-a-half per cent to more than seven per cent.
This rapid growth in the Mainland’s share of world trade, coupled with a projected growth  in  trade
volume at the rate of 7% per annum, is likely to mean yet more Mainland-related business for Hong
Kong,  just  as  it  will  undoubtedly  also  mean  a  great  deal  more  business  for  Shanghai  and  other
Mainland cities as well. In other words, the business ‘creation effect’ stimulated by WTO accession
will  far  outweigh  the  ‘diversion  effect’,  under  which  the  pessimists  had  been  predicting  that  Hong
Kong’s trade would gradually dry out and shrivel up. To put a figure on it, our estimates within the
HKMA suggest that Hong Kong’s annual GDP growth rate will be boosted by somewhere between
half to one per cent through the increase in re-export trade resulting from China’s membership of the
WTO.
But that is not the end of it. For our less visible trade, in financial, technical and professional
6.
services,  the  outlook  is  even  more  promising.  These  lucrative  service  industries,  which  are
increasingly taking pride of place in Hong Kong’s economy, will be greatly boosted by business from
Chinese  enterprises  seeking  to  expand  their  capabilities  and  improve  their  governance  to  handle
increased trade and meet foreign competition. They will also be stimulated by overseas investors who
need advice on how to make the best of the opportunities on the Mainland and who find Hong Kong
the best place at which to obtain that advice. These trends have been in play for a long time – indeed
they reflect Hong Kong’s historic role as a hub of commercial, technological and cultural exchange
between China and the rest of the world. But there are clear signs that these mediatory and advisory
services are now receiving a boost in anticipation  of  WTO entry,  as  companies  in  the  Mainland, in
Hong Kong and overseas position themselves for new kinds of commercial relationships.
How do banking and finance fit into all of this? We expect to see two main developments
7.
over  the  next  few  years.  The  first  is  the  greater  demand  for  banking  services  resulting  from  the
growing volume of business that will follow WTO accession. The second is the financial deepening,
stimulated by more rapid financial liberalisation, greater banking competition, and product innovation
induced by the terms of WTO accession. These developments will accelerate the reforms already in
train  within  China’s  domestic  banking  sector  –  reforms  that  cover  the  whole  spectrum  of  banking
management  and  services  from  corporate  governance  to  the  professional  training  of  staff.  The
developments will also progressively open China’s business environment to competition from banks
from outside the Mainland. In two years’ time, foreign banks will be able to conduct RMB business
with Chinese enterprises in Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tianjin and Dalian. Within five years, they will be
able  to  deal  with  all  Chinese  enterprises  without  any  geographical  restriction.  The  advantages  for
banks with a base in Hong Kong are obvious. Many of them have a head start on the Mainland, with
networks  of  branches  and  more  than  a  generation  of  practical  experience.  They  also  have  all  the
advantages  of  geographical  proximity,  a  common  language  and  culture,  yet  separate  financial  and
legal jurisdictions that Hong Kong’s unique position in China brings. Forty per cent of the Mainland’s
trade  is  routed  through  Hong  Kong.  Hong  Kong  is  the  Mainland’s  largest  source  of  foreign  direct
investment and China’s main financial conduit and funding centre. There is every reason to expect that
these  activities  –  all  of  which  require  banking  services  at  a  variety  of  levels  –  will  continue  to  be
channelled through Hong Kong.
8.
But there are also potential diversion effects, which Hong Kong’s banks will need to address
if they wish to make the most out of their natural competitive advantages. Size is perhaps the greatest
problem.  Quite  apart  from  the  obvious  economies  of  scale,  and  the  momentum  for  expansion  that
larger operations can enjoy, there seems to me little likelihood in the near future of any relaxation of
BIS Review 114/2000
2
the size criterion of US$20 billion for entry into the Mainland’s banking  market. Hong Kong banks
that  do  not  currently  meet  this  criterion  will  have  to  find  a  way  of  dealing  with  this.  The  obvious
solution is consolidation, which already has many other advantages to commend it. And for those who
are  fortunate  enough  to  have  been  admitted  before  the  introduction  of  the  size  criterion,  they  can
alternatively  lobby  and  hope  for  a  favourable  outcome  of  Beijing’s  consideration  of  the
“grandfathering” proposal that we have already put on the table on their behalf. On this I am hopeful,
given that the grandfathering arrangement in relation to a change in policy is internationally accepted
practice  and  that  such  an  arrangement  would  apply  to  banks  from  Hong  Kong  as  well  as  other
jurisdictions. But I also do not wish to understate the complexity of the matter when considered in the
context of WTO negotiations.
9.
This  substantial,  but  not  insuperable,  reservation  aside,  I  am  confident  that,  in  terms  of
producing  business  for  Hong  Kong’s  banks,  the  creation  effect  of  WTO  entry  will  outweigh  any
diversion that will arise from the preference of some foreign banks and enterprises for dealing directly
with the Mainland. There will still be factors that will encourage international businesses to use Hong
Kong as a financial centre. These include the efficiency and sophistication of Hong Kong’s financial
markets  and  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  critical  mass  that  goes  with  being  the  world’s  fourth
largest banking centre, and all the qualities that single out Hong Kong, of which an audience such as
this needs little reminder: the rule of law, the free movement of goods, capital and information, light
government, and a trained and energetic workforce.
Globalisation
10.
WTO is about globalisation. So let me turn to that subject now. Hong Kong’s openness, and
our  connectedness  to  the  larger  world,  place  us  in  an  excellent  position  to  take  advantage  of  the
acceleration of globalisation that trade and financial liberalisation, and other forces are bringing about.
Globalisation is not a new phenomenon. Our ancestors embraced the idea with the opening of trading
routes, the building of canals and steamships, and the laying of railway lines and telegraph cables. And
for a hundred and fifty years or more, Hong Kong has been a classic example of a global hub – a city
at  the  crossroads  of  a  number  of  regional  and  transcontinental  trading  routes.  The  process  of
globalisation is not, as we are frequently reminded, a universally benevolent force. But the process has
largely ensured that international capital is allocated to where it can be most efficiently used, and that
nations produce goods and services for which they have a competitive advantage. And, whatever the
risks and shortcomings, the more efficient the global financial system, the more effective the process
of globalisation is. As a result, global growth and development benefit.
It is possible to discuss this subject from a number of angles and for a very long time. But I
11.
should like to focus on two aspects today. One is how globalisation, as we are experiencing it today, is
changing  the  role  of  governments.  The  other  is  the  implication  of  globalisation  for  the  choice  of
exchange rate regimes by individual jurisdictions.
12.
To  benefit  from  globalisation,  national  economic  systems  have  made  a  distinct  movement
towards  what  Alan  Greenspan  has  called  ‘market-oriented  capitalist  structures’.  Fifty  years  or  more
ago, the clear trend was towards state regulation, centralisation, and – at the extreme – nationalisation.
Today,  it  is  in  the  opposite  direction:  the  themes  are  liberalisation,  privatisation  and  deregulation.
Indeed,  economies  are  now  graded  on  the  extent  of  their  market  orientation.  Governments  have
become  smaller  relative  to  the  economies  they  serve.  Market  competition,  freed  from  distorting
regulation or dirigiste policies, has come more fully into play, with lower transaction and information
costs and increased market efficiency. There is generally greater recognition of the beneficial impact
of market-oriented policies, and greater realisation that globalisation has made intervention, however
desirable it might be in some cases, a great deal less effective.
13.
We have therefore seen a sea change in the way in which governments approach economic
management.  In  the  post-war  period  the  imperative  of  reconstruction  and  concerns  about  market
failure predominated: so the approach was extensive government involvement in the functioning of an
economy and frequent intervention. The consensus approach now, followed to one degree or another
in  most  major  economies,  is  government  retreat  from  economic  management,  though  without
3
BIS Review 114/2000
abdicating the responsibility for seeking to ensure that the arenas in which market forces come into
play operate in a fair, equal and transparent way.
14.
Hong Kong came into this new paradigm much earlier than most. In fact, the general view
outside Hong Kong is that we are the most developed example of the paradigm. The philosophy  of
positive  non-interventionism,  coined  twenty-odd  years  ago  to  describe  the  paradoxical  but  highly
effective economic policy the government had already been following for some years, intersects neatly
with the rise of global ‘market-oriented capitalist structures’ of whatever size and complexity. Our free
market tradition and our openness to the world have positioned us well for the new globalism.
15.
But  globalisation  has  brought  challenges  of  a  scale  and  immediacy  that  we  have  not  seen
before,  and  our  very  openness  has  at  times  been  our  vulnerability.  The  most  difficult  of  these
challenges have been in the financial market, where problems from outside can rapidly escalate into
crises that threaten the integrity of our whole system. Capital flows, particularly those that are boosted
by high leverage, have become large, fast, volatile and sometimes quite destabilising. Large economies
with deep markets may have been able to withstand the volatility without their stability being seriously
undermined.  Yet,  even  then,  government  intervention  in  one  form  or  another  has  been  necessary:
witness the LTCM episode in 1998, or the more recent interventions in support of the euro. For small
and  open  economies,  such  as  our  own,  the  challenge  is  even  harder  to  meet,  and  the  measures
necessary to prevent market failure have been even more dramatic. We faced our own episode here in
Hong Kong in 1998, when the shock waves from highly mobile and volatile international capital flows
threatened our markets with collapse. Our intervention in the stock market in August 1998 to keep our
markets working earned us a great deal of vilification at the time, and – for the wrong reason perhaps
since we did not go in to make a profit – a great deal of praise since. But let’s leave the last word on
this – at least for the time being – to Alan Greenspan. He said, in his post mortem earlier this year on
the Asian financial crisis, the following words:
Official  safety  nets  and  interventions  cannot  be  eliminated  entirely.  There  are
limits to the size and extent of the shocks that the private sector can manage, at
least in the short run, without official assistance.
16.
Looking  ahead,  to  minimise  the  need  for  government  intervention  aimed  at  heading  off
market failures induced by large  and  volatile  capital  flows,  we  need to  build  bigger  markets  and to
strengthen the markets we already have. The challenge here – in an age when grandiose government
schemes  are  no  longer  palatable  or  feasible  –  is  to  find  ways  of  doing  this  without  too  much
government,  including  regulatory,  involvement.  Among  the  more  significant  developments  in  the
international efforts to deal with this issue are codes of practice,  rather  than regulatory  impositions,
and the promotion of transparency. Increasingly, the focus is not so much on architecture – building
something grand and visible to replace the now defunct Bretton Woods system – but on infrastructure:
laying  down  the  connections  and  making  sure  they  work  properly  rather  than  building  walls  and
barriers. I shall say more about this in a few minutes.
A crucial element in the management of international capital flows is, of course, the question
17.
of exchange rate systems, which were a special target of large speculators looking for short-term profit
opportunities during the Asian financial crisis. Where there is an exchange rate target against which
bets can be laid, the pressures that build up can be quite formidable. Even when the exchange rate is
freely floating, and therefore theoretically free of any precise exchange rate target, when sentiment is
one-sided,  which  is  often  the  case  in  financial  markets,  exchange  rate  overshooting  can  be  quite
common.
18.
Largely  against  the  background  of  financial  crises  in  the  1990s,  in  which  the  choice  of
exchange  rate  regime  has  been  a  prominent  issue,  there  has  been  a  clear  trend  in  thinking  on  what
constitutes an effective and credible choice. This choice  boils  down  to two  options, in  what  is  now
commonly referred to as the two corner solutions: either an exchange rate target that is perceived to be
impregnable  or  a  regime  that  does  not  involve  any  exchange  rate  target,  as  in  a  free  float.  Neither
solution is, admittedly, immune to crisis, particularly in the case of open and liquid markets. And the
precondition  has  to  be  that  any  exchange  rate  regime,  if  it  is  to  be  credible,  is  built  upon  sensible
economic policies, strong institutions and robust market infrastructures.
BIS Review 114/2000
4
Clearly,  no  exchange  rate  regime  can  be  perfect,  and  no  simple  regime  can  suit  all.  The
19.
present trend is towards floating regimes, though these seem to work best for the larger economies,
whose  foreign  exchange  markets  are  big  enough  to  absorb  voluminous  capital  flows,  and  for  the
smaller  economies  where  controls  and  restrictions  are  practised.  For  Hong  Kong,  we  have  in  our
linked exchange rate system the most extreme case of an exchange rate target that is perceived to be
impregnable – and has been proved to be impregnable under the most adverse of conditions. The link,
in combination with sound fundamentals and well managed banks, has helped us through the recent
crisis:  not  without  hardship,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  but  with  considerably  less  damage  and
uncertainty than we would have experienced had it not been in place. The tight discipline it exerts on
our economy is helping to propel improvements in productivity, an important element in our current
robust recovery. Indeed, the evidence to date suggests that Hong Kong experienced one of the fastest
rebounds in  productivity  growth in  the  region.  Labour  productivity,  measured  in  terms  of  GDP  per
person  employed,  registered  the  strongest  gains  of  10%  in  the  post-crisis  period,  well  above  other
Asian economies, whose gains were in the range of 5 to 8%. Because the exchange rate link suits an
externally oriented, entrepot economy, it will continue to serve Hong Kong well in its expanding role
as a regional and international hub, as China enters the WTO. And this applies, it should be added,
regardless of the path taken by the renminbi – a path that will likely involve careful  and controlled
experiments  with  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  the  not  too  distant  future,  and  cautious  and
considered moves towards currency convertibility in the fullness of time.
Technological advance
20.
I  made  reference  earlier  to  the  emphasis  in  international  financial  reform  on  laying  down
connections,  rather  than  on  raising  up  walls  and  restrictions.  So  let  me  turn  to  the  process  of
technological  advance,  my  final  topic  today.  This  is  intricately  linked  with  the  question  of
globalisation, particularly in the case of information technology.  Indeed,  without  it,  globalisation  as
we  understand it  would  not  be  taking  place.  Again, this  is  not  a  new  trend:  over  the  centuries  new
navigation aids, railways and steamships, the telegraph, the telephone, and later radio, television and
satellites have all boosted the speed and quantity in which information travels around the world. Now
the internet and other electronic channels have vastly expanded that capacity.
21.
In the field of financial services, recent advances in information technology have played an
enormous role in determining the speed and manner in which money circulates and the nature of the
competitive landscape. Money, which was once solid, heavy and difficult to shift around, turns into
electronic pulses, which can be sent around the world at the touch of a button in a matter of seconds.
At the consumer end of the industry many of us now rarely enter a bank, but carry out our transactions
on cash machines, over the telephone, and increasingly through computer terminals, and, no doubt in
time, over WAP telephones. The little plastic card, of which we all have at least one in our pockets,
has seen a growth in business by more than thirty times in the past thirty years. Technology does not
only  manifest  itself  in  web  and  wires,  but  also  in  the  rarefied  area  of  financial  engineering,  with
advanced  mathematical  models  and  complex  equations  developed  to  price  new  derivative  products.
These have become useful instruments for hedging purposes and for offloading and allocating risks to
those who have the appetite and capacity to take them on.
But  these  developments  have  brought  dangers  and  anxieties  as  well  as  benefits  and
22.
convenience. The Y2K episode – though it was well managed and ultimately uneventful – underlined
how  dependent  we  have  become  on  the  technology  created  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  and  how
irreversible that technology is. More recently, and now that the Y2K anxiety has been overcome, the
rapid  development  of  e-banking  has  underlined  other  concerns  about  privacy,  security,  risk
management, customer protection – even about the very nature of banking – in a borderless world. The
dangers posed by  innovative  financial  products hardly  need to  be  laboured in  a  place  that  has been
very much at the brunt of their more destructive forces in recent years.
23.
What can a monetary authority do in the face of such difficulties? I have referred already to
the drastic measures taken in 1998, and more than enough has been said on that matter elsewhere. In
the  field  of  regulation  and  supervision,  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  keep  pace  with  the  rapid
5
BIS Review 114/2000
developments  going  on,  so  that  anxieties  about  e-money  and  e-banking  –  real  or  imagined  –  are
properly addressed. In this area, Hong Kong has been one of the first regulatory authorities to issue
guidelines that, among other things, require banks to ensure that their internet security platforms are
airtight  and  that  risk  management  systems  are  properly  in  place.  We  have  strengthened  our
supervisory skills and resources to enable us to check that this is being done. This is not going to be an
easy process. No-one can predict what directions technical innovation, customer behaviour, or latent
practical problems will take. The challenge for regulators like the HKMA is to seek a balance between
not allowing these developments to bring unmanageable risk and not stifling the application of useful
new technology by holding back innovation. It is a difficult balance to achieve. Too great an interest
by  the  regulator  in  new  initiatives  by  the  bank  can  often  be  misunderstood  as  heavy-handed
over-regulation. The answer to the dilemma, clearly, is for regulator and industry to work hand in hand
in  a  constructive  way.  Our  policy  in  this,  as  in  other  areas,  is  to  consult  with  -  and  listen  to  –  the
industry organisations as well as to the public at large and its representatives.
24.
In  other  areas  of  its  work,  the  HKMA  has  itself  become  something  of  a  pioneer  and  is
currently  a  clear  leader  in  this  time  zone.  Of  particular  importance  here  is  our  work  on  financial
infrastructure. This is how we look at the matter. It is now possible to trade globally over the telephone
or over the net from anywhere in this world – and no doubt, with the right equipment, from out of this
world as well. But those who trade have to come down to earth to effect settlement and, very simply,
Hong Kong is where we would like them to be when they land. To  serve  as a  financial  centre in  a
world connected in this way means primarily having the capability and infrastructure to capture these
deals and provide safe, efficient and inexpensive settlement and clearing services. This is why we in
the  HKMA  have,  since  our  establishment  in  1993,  been  paying  particular  attention  to  building
financial infrastructure as the foundation of our strategy in developing Hong Kong as the financial hub
of Asia.
25.
We built over ten years ago a fully computerised and paperless debt clearing system as part
of our efforts to develop the domestic debt market. We have since linked that system with similar debt
clearing  systems  in  a  number  of  other  jurisdictions  to  facilitate  cross  border  and  cross  currency
investments in debt markets. We are about to develop our debt clearing system further into what we
call an ICSD or an international central securities depository in an attempt to pull debt issues in the
region into our system.  In respect of the safety and efficiency  in the  movement  of  money,  we  built
almost five years ago a state-of-the-art Real Time Gross Settlement system for the full range of Hong
Kong dollar financial transactions. This RTGS system has a seamless interface with our debt clearing
system – the first of its kind in Asia. We have just replicated that payment system for the US dollar,
enabling US dollar transactions to be settled real time in our time zone rather than having to wait for
New  York  to  open.  The  US  dollar  payment  system  is  also  linked  up  with  the  Hong  Kong  dollar
payment  system  and  in  September  this  year  we  achieved  the  first  payment  versus  payment  (PvP)
transaction  in  world  financial  history  between  two  different  currencies.  This  arrangement  makes  it
possible for Herstatt risk –  the  risk  that  money  might  get  lost  during  transactions  between  different
time zones – to be eliminated. If payment systems for other currencies in this region are also linked up
with our US dollar payment system, then most foreign currency transactions involving the US dollar
conducted  in  this  region  can  benefit  from  this  risk  reduction  service.  There  is  a  standing  invitation
from us to central banks in the region running real time payment systems for their currencies. I hope
they will take up this offer. And five days from now, the final phase of the system, which will allow
paper cheque clearing and delivery versus payment settlement of debt securities denominated in US
dollars in Hong Kong, will fall into place. Those among you with responsibility for corporate treasury
functions should consider making use of this system, which will lower costs and considerably reduce
settlement risks.
26.
Technology changes our lives fundamentally. We are somewhat lucky to be living in an age
of rapid technological revolution, and are perhaps luckier than our ancestors who experienced similar
revolutions, because the revolution now going on is directed largely towards the arts of peace rather
than  of  war.  I  say  ‘lucky’  because,  despite  all  the  uncertainties  and  disruptions  it  brings,  this
technological  revolution  has  the  potential  to  change  people’s  lives  for  the  better.  But  it  also  brings
about  pain,  and,  if  not  applied  with  skill,  can  accentuate  inequalities  of  geography,  education  and
BIS Review 114/2000
6
wealth. Labour is displaced by machines and software, and labour requirements turn away from the
purely  physical  to  the  more  knowledge-based  –  witness  the  slowness  in  the  improvement  of  our
unemployment  rate.  The  workforce  will  need  to  adapt.  And  our  economy  will  need  to  adapt  to
accommodate the kind of knowledge-based industries that are concentrated into a logistics, financial
and digital hub. And technology itself, in the understandably confused state of revolution, is awfully
difficult to price in financial markets, particularly when the highly uncertain nature of future earnings
in respect of technologically intensive companies has to be taken into account, typically in the equity
market, not to mention derivatives thereof. There has therefore been an additional, micro dimension of
technology induced financial market volatility and this could well be manifested in enormous creation
or  destruction  of  wealth  possibly  to  the  extent  equivalent  to  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  GDP.
Investors and the regulators of markets and of institutions providing credit will also need to adapt.
Conclusion
27.
But Hong Kong and its people have been always good at adapting in the past: this is a super-
flexible and super-adaptable city. There is every evidence now – after a flicker of self-doubt in the late
1990s – that the vigour, the creativity that brought us through the last 50 years is still in full flow. We
shall need all of that vigour and creativity if we are really to make the most of the opportunities and
ride  out the  volatilities  of  the  coming  decades.  As  with  most  things  in  life,  these  opportunities  and
volatilities  come  tangled  together:  we  cannot  just  say  yes  to  the  opportunities  without  exposing
ourselves  to  the  volatilities.  In  my  speech  today,  I  have  explored  what  I  see  as  the  three  main
opportunities for Hong Kong in the  coming  few  years.  Trade  liberalisation, in its  most  far-reaching
manifestation – China’s prospective entry into the WTO, brings enormous opportunity for Hong Kong
to  enlarge  and  deepen  its  intermediary  role.  Globalisation  is  transforming  the  way  in  which
government and business relate to each other, and Hong Kong is in an excellent position as an open,
lightly  governed  city  to  take  advantage  of  the  process.  Technological  advance  offers  new  tools  to
realise the practical benefits of globalisation, particularly in the field of financial services, and Hong
Kong is in the vanguard of the innovative work that is going on.
28.
But these processes also carry risks and uncertainties, which can be reduced, through hard
work and vigilance, but never eradicated. How much business  will  be  diverted  from  Hong  Kong  to
other cities after China enters the WTO? How should small, open markets like Hong Kong safeguard
themselves against the shocks and threats which are transmitted more quickly, more sharply and more
forcefully through globalisation? And how, when we frankly have very little idea of where innovation
is taking us or of where the dead ends may be, do we cope with the volatilities and unknowns – not
least  in  the  financial  projections  of  technology-led  companies  –  of  a  white  hot  technological
revolution? These are among the many challenges of living in a logistics, financial and digital hub. As
one  of  the  world’s  most  open  and  connected  of  cities,  Hong  Kong  is  better  placed  than  most  to
respond  to  these  challenges  and  to  deepen  further  its  role  as  a  global  city.  We  can  certainly  look
forward to an interesting and exciting few years ahead.
7
BIS Review 114/2000
