Lars Heikensten: Monetary policy in Sweden
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Autumn
Conference of the Centre for Business and Policy Studies, held in Stockholm on 17 November 2000.
 Thank you for the invitation to talk about monetary policy. If my memory serves me right, this is the
fifth  autumn  conference  I  have  addressed  as  deputy  central  bank  governor.  For  me,  the  annual
opportunity  of  discussing  monetary  policy  with  some  of  our  country’s  leading  economists  and
economic observers has become a very enjoyable tradition.
I shall begin, as usual, with a brief account of the past year, taking 1999’s October assessment as my
starting  point.  Even  though  our  appraisal  of  inflation  at  that  time  was  relatively  optimistic,  the
outcome  has  been  better  than  we  foresaw.  Developments  in  the  past  year  raise  questions  about  the
economy’s  inflation  propensity.  That  topic  was  already  up  for  discussion  at  last  year’s  conference,
though the reason then was that several leading observers considered the risks of inflation were being
underestimated  by  the  Riksbank.  A  third  matter  I  shall  be  talking  about  is  our  monetary  policy
guidelines. In the past year we have been criticised for basing repo rate decisions on appraisals that are
too narrow. Finally, I shall be looking ahead and commenting on our view of inflation in the coming
years.
Inflation in the past twelve months
In the third Inflation Report last year the Riksbank’s growth forecast for Sweden in the coming years
was revised upwards. This mainly mirrored a more favourable outlook for international activity; it also
seemed  likely  that  domestic  demand  would  be  stronger  than had  been expected  earlier.  Our  overall
growth  forecast  agreed  with  most  other  observers.  Some  predictions,  however,  did  include  an  even
stronger increase in household consumption, the reason being that rising asset prices in general and the
stock market boom in particular were judged to lead to a markedly increased consumption propensity.
Our higher growth forecast was accompanied by little change in the assessment of inflation we had
presented earlier in the year. Thus, we judged that the relationship between growth and inflation would
be more favourable than we had previously calculated. In this respect we  differed from  many  other
observers and that occasioned a good deal of discussion.
The  background  to  our  forecast  was that  inflation’s  path  had  been  surprisingly  favourable  and  that,
instead of being just a result of occasional factors, this had to do with more fundamental features in the
economy that would continue to influence inflation up to our two-year horizon.
Here is a picture of our inflation assessment last October and the outcome (Chart 1). I have chosen to
present it in terms of UND1X because that is the indicator of inflation on which monetary policy has
been focused in the past year. The chart also shows the price of imports and an indicator of underlying
domestic inflation, UNDINHX. As you will see, we believed inflation would move up gradually in the
wake of rising activity. This would be countered by low, even falling, import prices in connection with
a stronger exchange rate, lower oil prices and generally strong global competition.
Even our inflation forecast was evidently on the high  side,  at  least  to date.  It  is  perhaps  even  more
noteworthy  that  underlying  domestic  inflation  has  turned  out  to  be  appreciably  lower.  This  is
something that observers of the Swedish economy cannot ignore, particularly as the past decade has
provided  so  many  surprises  of  this  sort,  though  not  as  dramatic.  The  main  point  to  consider  is,  of
course,  how  permanent  the  changes  are  likely  to  be.  To  what  extent  should  we  abandon  earlier
relationships and commit ourselves to a continuation of the relationships that have applied in recent
years?
1
BIS Review 107/2000
Why has inflation been low?
The first thing to note is that this development has not been confined to Sweden. Inflation in many
other countries has also been unexpectedly low. There, too, the reasons for this are not entirely clear.
Some  pieces  of  the  puzzle  have  been  identified  but  not  enough  to  make  up  a  clear  picture.  As
decision-makers, however, we cannot simply shrug our shoulders and say we don’t know. Decisions
have to be made and it would not be reasonable to go on acting as though nothing had changed until
sufficiently long time series are available for econometric analyses.
Recently  I  had  the  pleasure  of  chairing  a  central  bank  seminar  that  the  BIS  arranged  on  just  these
issues. My impression was that it has proved difficult to produce definite evidence of any structural
shift in the relationships that govern inflation, such as various versions of the Phillips curve. In many
countries, including Sweden, appraisals of resource utilisation, for example, are now more optimistic.
As you are no doubt aware, in the past five years our output gap estimates have in fact been revised a
number of times. One explanation I find fairly plausible is that after the profound crisis in the early
1990s  we  simply  misjudged  the  size  of  the  gap.  There  is  also  some  support  for  the  possibility  that
productivity  has  followed  a  more  favourable  trend  than  expected,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  of
bottlenecks.  Total  factor  productivity,  for  instance,  has  been  on  a  rising  trend  since  1993.  Another
possibility  is  that,  for  various  reasons,  the  labour  market  is  functioning  more  efficiently.  One
indication of this is that rapidly falling unemployment in recent years has not been accompanied by
acute  labour  shortages.  Perhaps  I  should  mention  that  we  have  also  detected  certain  changes  in
inflation relationships. In a box in one of last year’s inflation reports, for example, we found that the
impact on inflation from a given output gap has decreased; one explanation for this could have to do
with inflation expectations being more stable.
At the BIS seminar, moreover, two papers provided indications of changes in relationships behind the
prices  of  imported  goods.  That  agrees  with  the  picture  we  have  formed  in  recent  years.  The
pass-through to inflation from exchange rate movements, for example, is lower than before. This may
be connected with stronger competition at various levels. It also seems clear that permanent exchange
rate adjustments have price effects that differ from and are greater than those elicited by movements
that are a natural part of today’s flexible regime.
In  any  event,  in  the  last  few  years there  have  also unquestionably  been favourable effects from  the
deregulation of electricity and telecom markets. Even though similar changes of equal importance for
the rate of price increases in the coming years are not easy to identify today, both deregulations and
generally growing competition will presumably be important features in the picture of inflation.
Another  point  worth  making  is  that  in  a  world  where  monetary  policy  with  a  more  independent
mandate  is  focused  on  low  inflation  in  a  growing  number  of  countries,  low  inflation  as  such  is
BIS Review 107/2000
2
presumably  an  important  factor.  That  is  really  what  the  textbooks  teach  us  to  expect,  with  their
standard message that inflation is a monetary phenomenon, determined precisely by monetary policy.
Inflation expectations that are low and stable clearly help to combat inflation.
But I believe the low-inflation policy has wider implications. It is presumably one factor behind the
recent improvement in trend productivity in Sweden. Firms today are exposed to considerably stronger
pressure to change than they were in the 1980s. The conditions for labour market negotiations have
also changed in ways that may well have positive effects on unit labour costs and thereby on inflation.
Another consequence is that measures for strengthening competition have suddenly become politically
relevant in ways that were not the case at least when I was working on such questions in the 1980s.
Deregulation  and  the  enhancement  of  competition  can  now  have  positive  effects  that  are  directly
evident  in  the  form  of  low  inflation  and  thereby  lower  interest  rates  and  higher  economic  growth.
Moreover, with the division of responsibilities that now applies in stabilisation policy, fiscal policy is
freer to focus on long-term issues and structural matters.
The Riksbank’s way of working
I should now like to comment briefly on how the Riksbank works and on the implementation of our
so-called rule of action. These matters have featured in the general debate in the past year, presumably
just because inflation and our inflation forecasts have continued to provide relatively weak arguments
for raising the repo rate even though activity is strong.
In  simple  terms,  the  Riksbank  can  be  said  to  formulate  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  inflation’s
forecast  rate,  in  the  first  place  one  to  two  years  ahead.  If  inflation  is  expected  to  be  above  the  2%
target during this time horizon, the interest rate is normally raised and vice versa.
This rule was formulated with a view to making policy more intelligible, to ourselves  as  well  as to
others. We also believed a rule of this kind would serve as a structure for decision-making and help to
enhance  confidence  in  monetary  policy.  In  my  opinion,  the  rule  has  served  these  purposes.  It  has
contributed,  not  least,  to  a  more  structured  discussion  of  monetary  policy  issues  and  thereby  to  a
deeper understanding of the choices we have to make.
Have we observed our rule? Judging from this chart, I would say we have (Chart 2). The chart shows
the repo rate in practice together with the path indicated by the Riksbank’s inflation assessments. You
will  see  that  we  have  followed  our  forecasts  fairly  closely  and  thus  adhered  to  our  rule  of  action.
Deviations  have  occurred,  mainly  in  the  early  years  with  the  inflation  target;  I  believe  they  were
largely connected with concern about the exchange rate.
The Repo rate in practice and
the rule of action
10,5
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
9,5
8,5
7,5
6,5
5,5
4,5
3,5
2,5
1992
1993
1993
1994
1994
1994
1995
1995
1996
1996
1997
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1998
1996
Time
Source: Jansson and Vredin, The Riksbank (2000) 
3
BIS Review 107/2000
While I accordingly consider that a rule of this kind is of considerable value, I must underscore that
we never intended to implement it mechanically. What matters is that we secure our objective in the
longer run, really for ever.
We chose to focus on the period from twelve to twenty-four months ahead for a number of reasons.
One reason for not having a shorter target horizon is the time lag that applies before an interest rate
adjustment  normally  affects  the  economy  and  inflation.  But  effects  do  arise  in  the  shorter  run,  for
instance via the exchange rate. We pay less heed to developments more than two years ahead partly
because  forecasting  the  longer  term  is  normally  difficult.  Still,  although  monetary  policy  is  guided
mainly by prospects one to two years ahead, there are normally grounds for paying some attention to
forecasts both for the coming year and for the period beyond the two-year horizon.
Neither is it reasonable in  practice to  focus  solely  on  inflation.  For  one  thing,  the  Riksbank  is  also
accountable for the proper functioning of the payment system in general,  for  financial stability.  For
another, without prejudicing these two objectives, the antecedents to the Riksbank Act require us to
promote other economic policy goals, such as good economic growth and increased employment. This
amounts in practice to trying to make decisions that avoid major shocks and fluctuations in growth and
employment.
Highly respectable reasons can thus be found for deviating from the rule of action. If we decide to do
so,  however,  we  must  have  good  arguments  and  present  them  particularly  clearly.  General  talk  of
financial imbalances, for example, will not do. As I see it, we must be clear about which balances we
are referring to and why we consider they threaten the economic future. Another point to bear in mind
is that the rule of action with a two-year horizon should normally give us sufficient time in which to
adjust the monetary stance.
Before  turning  to  my  last  topic,  I  can  mention  that  from  time  to  time  we  are  exhorted  to  be  more
pragmatic and less tied down by our intellectual framework. It is quite often suggested that we should
follow the example of the Federal Reserve in recent years under Alan Greenspan. I find that basically
naive. Policy principles that are less clear-cut, combined with less transparency about motives and so
on, would by no means guarantee a more successful policy in the longer run. Just the reverse, I would
say, in the light of quite a few years in the vicinity of decision-making in economic policy.
Economic outlook in the coming years
A suitable starting point for a discussion of the economic future is the October Inflation Report. Our
assessment  there  assumed  that  international  economic  activity  will  tend  to  slacken  but  still  remain
relatively strong. We counted on GDP growth in the OECD area being 3.8% this year, followed in the
next two years by 3.0 and 2.7%, respectively. Inflation would remain relatively low, partly in view of
strong competition in the international markets.
Growth  in  Sweden  was  judged  to  be  4%  this  year,  3.7%  next  year  and  3.0%  in  2002.  Domestic
demand  growth  would  be  relatively  high  for  consumption  as  well  as  investment.  A  damper  was
expected, however, from an appreciation of the krona. A gradual increase in inflation was predicted, so
that two years ahead the rate would be approximately in line with our target.
As usual, we identified various risks in our forecast. One was the possibility of the oil price staying at
a high level. We also considered that the exchange rate might be weaker than economic fundamentals
in Sweden would warrant in the longer run. Another risk was that  of higher  wage increases.  It  was
conceivable  that  the  wage  rise  would  be  even  higher  than  the  annual  rate  of  just  over  4%  we  had
assumed for the coming two years, due, for example, to far-reaching demands for compensation and
parity. The main downside risk - lower inflation than in the main scenario - lay in favourable surprises
of the kind we have seen earlier in the relationship between growth and inflation.
So how does this picture from October stand up today? Fairly well, in my opinion.
BIS Review 107/2000
4
Price movements to date have been broadly in line with the forecast. And as we expected, there have
been signs that international activity is slackening. This is most evident in the United States but even
some slowing of growth in Europe seems likely in the coming years.
In Sweden, too, there are indications that activity has become calmer. Growth still seems to be high
but  households  as  well  as  firms  have  become  less  optimistic  about  the  future.  Order  books  are  not
growing as drastically as before. In general, this is in line with what we foresaw in October. But of
course we are keeping a close watch on developments. A more dramatic course cannot be ruled out,
particularly in the United States. The oil price remains high and the krona has weakened. So in these
respects, developments are more in line with the risk spectrum than with our main scenario.
Share prices, as we all know, have been volatile  in the  past  six  months  but the fall to  date is  not  a
major cause for concern. As I mentioned earlier, during 1999 and early this year a number of observers
saw rising share prices as a strong reason why the Swedish economy might become overheated. At the
Riksbank we were more inclined to wait and see. There is no reason now to adopt a different view and
exaggerate  the  risks  of  the  share  price  fall.  Consumption  is  being  sustained  in  the  first  place  by  a
strong development of income that stems from increased employment, a good increase in real wages
and a fiscal stance that is less restrictive than before.
There  is  some  cause  for  concern  in  the  present  round  of  wage  negotiations.  In  a  sense,  that  is
inevitably the case when many settlements are being concluded simultaneously and the wage share is
approximately two-thirds of the economy. That means that no other single factor is anything like as
important as the wage trend for the path of the Swedish economy in the coming years. The picture of
the negotiations that are now beginning is mixed. The outcome to date has been a positive surprise. It
also  looks  as  though  the  negotiating  parties  are  formulating  their  bids  on  the  basis  of  the  inflation
target.  Moreover,  the  available  picture  of  future  wage  expectations  looks  relatively  good  (Chart  3).
Here we see the wage outcome, wage expectations and unfilled job vacancies. It is evidently becoming
increasingly difficult to find the right people for the jobs that are advertised. This presumably makes
the  risk  of  wage  drift  greater  than  in  previous  years.  Moreover,  the  wage  demands  that  have  been
presented are higher than before the previous round of negotiations.
Wage outcome, wage expectations Nov-00 and
unfilled job vacancies
Per cent and thousands, respectively
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1994
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Faktisk lön (vänster skala)
Wafe outcome (left scale)
Arbetsmarknadens förväntningar nov-00 (vänster skala)
Wage expectations (left scale)
Kvarstående lediga platser (höger skala)
Unfilled vacancies (right scale)
1996
1998
2000
2002
Sources: Prospera Research AB and Statistics Sweden
5
BIS Review 107/2000
When it comes to judging future inflationary pressure, the degree of resource utilisation is the crucial
concept, at least as long as inflation expectations are parked around the 2% target. The next chart is
instructive  here  (Chart  4).  As  you  know,  we  estimate  total  resource  utilisation  econometrically  in
terms of the output gap. If we take the October estimates as a starting point and project them with the
accompanying GDP forecast, we find that for the first time in a number of years we look like having
full or more than full resource utilisation in the years ahead. Perhaps the picture exaggerates the risk of
future  inflationary  tensions.  The  cyclical  position,  for  example,  may  be  somewhat  calmer  than  we
counted on in October. But even with a growth rate of just over 3%, the Swedish economy would be
expanding more rapidly than we believe it is capable of in the longer run.
Econometric estimates of the output gap.
Per cent of potential GDP
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
PF
HP
UC
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
Source: The Riksbank
Let me conclude by underscoring what I mentioned initially, namely that forecasting inflation proved
difficult  in  the  1990s,  in  Sweden  as  well  as  elsewhere.  There  have  been  substantial  changes  in  our
economies,  partly  because  policy  now  focuses  on  stability  and  competition  has  become  stronger  in
various ways. Inflation in Sweden has been a positive surprise in recent years even though activity has
been rising strongly, so further positive surprises should naturally not be ruled out. Still, there are now
many indications that resource utilisation is relatively high and will  go  on  rising.  That  implies that,
little by little, inflationary pressure will grow.
We will be presenting a comprehensive assessment of inflation prospects in the December  Inflation
Report. In that context we will also be deciding the repo rate. Recent developments have not altered
the picture I formed in October. Although it is still too early to specify when, there will presumably be
grounds for increasing the repo rate in the future.
BIS Review 107/2000
6
