Jean-Claude Trichet: Worldwide tendencies in financial systems
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the Joint Bundesbank/BIS
conference  on “Recent developments in financial systems  and  the  challenges  for  economic  policy”,
held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure to  seize  the  opportunity  of  this conference  organised  upon  the joint initiative  of  the
Bundesbank and the BIS to present a few considerations on worldwide trends in financial systems.
It  is  clear  that  the  shape  and  operating  modes  of  financial  systems  have  undergone  far-reaching
changes under the combined impact of the marketisation and globalisation of our economies.
These developments were driven by two key factors:
• 
financial  deregulation,  reinforced  in  Europe  by  the  setting  up  of  Economic  and  Monetary
Union,  which  enabled  the  free  circulation  of  capital  flows  and  the  creation  of  competing
financial sectors;
 technical and financial innovation, which paved the way for the creation of financial markets
that are deep, liquid and interconnected.
Today, new trends are emerging in financial systems, and their consequences for monetary policy in
particular and financial stability in general need to be examined.
first, the trends currently shaping financial systems;
I shall therefore discuss the following three aspects:
• 
• 
• 
second, their consequences in terms of efficiency and stability;
third, their impact on the action of central banks and prudential authorities.
1.
Financial systems are being transformed by four driving forces.
First: intensifying competition between financial institutions
Whereas financial institutions formerly operated in separate segments of closed economies, they must
now  compete  in  financial  markets  with  other  financial  institutions,  both  domestic  and  foreign,
regulated and unregulated, as in the case of pension or hedge funds.
Financial innovation puts incessant competitive pressure on the providers of financial services which
were formerly clearly distinguishable. Credit institutions, investment firms and insurance corporations
increasingly  offer  products  that  have  some  similarities  in  terms  of  yield  or  hedging  and  thus  find
themselves competing for overlapping customer bases.
Competition between financial sectors has also increased in step with technological advances, which
have  enabled  the  emergence  of  new  players  in  the  financial  sector.  E-traders  and  e-brokers  are
challenging the dominant positions of banks and brokerage firms. The service providers for outsourced
activities peripheral to financial business, such as back-office or custodian services, are also becoming
increasingly  important.  In  the  future,  Internet  access  providers  or  telephony  companies  may  well
become fully-fledged financial players in their own right.
1
BIS Review 85/2000
Second: stiffer competition between markets
The development of information technology and telecommunications has allowed economic agents to
move  their  capital  at  will.  As  a  result,  their  investment  and  borrowing  decisions  are  based  on  the
opportunities available on all markets.
• 
Domestic  exchanges  have  become  mere  compartments  of  the  global  market  and  find
themselves competing with each other.
  Exchanges must also compete with the extraordinary expansion of over-the-counter markets.
The largest financial institutions are big players on these markets, which operate according
to  private  and  decentralised  mechanisms.  Total  notional  liabilities  on  OTC  derivative
markets rose from USD 72,000 billion in June 1998 to USD 88,000 billion at end 1999. The
average  daily  turnover  on  these  markets  increased  by  50%  between  April  1995  and  April
1998.
Users’  desire  to  improve  efficiency  has  also  driven  the  evolution  in  market  structures.
Planned  links  between  stock  markets,  particularly  in  Europe,  and  the  consolidation  of
delivery-vs-payment systems testify to these concerns. Domestic trading floors with regular
working hours are gradually giving way to electronic international markets open around the
clock.  And  the  official  trading  systems  of  the  various  financial  centres  are  in  turn  being
challenged by private trading systems such as Electronic Communication Networks.
Third: new demands for transparency and profitability in the financial industry
Spurred on by this competitive pressure, the principles of corporate governance and value-adding have
taken root, in particular under the impetus of fund managers. These principles force players to meet
new requirements in terms of transparency and profitability.
Such requirements encourage participants in the global market to adopt new investment behaviour, in
particular with the spread of index-linked management or massive recourse to leveraging.
These objectives also result in the use of fairly homogeneous risk management techniques, such as the
definition and use of limits, risk management with value-at-risk models and the development of stress
testing.
In  addition,  these  objectives  have  established  the  importance  of  rating  agencies  for  financial
institutions, both in determining the conditions of their funding and in defining the structure of their
portfolios.
Fourth: restructuring to cope with this increased competitive pressure
If they are to survive, traditional financial intermediaries must expand and/or innovate.
• 
The current consolidation of the financial industry is driven by the search for market power
and/or economies of scale. Mega-institutions emerge, more and more internationalised and
diversified. These developments give rise to financial conglomerates aiming at economies of
scale.
 Product  or  process  innovation  is  an  alternative  -  or  complement  -  to  the  search  for  a  size
effect. It can translate into a variety of strategies: developing new products to exploit market
niches, entering into partnerships with other service providers - financial or not - in order to
consolidate  market  share,  or  developing  remote  service  offers  to  attract  new  customer
segments and cut costs.
In Europe, the pace of this restructuring is accelerated by the euro.
BIS Review 85/2000
2
2.
These various trends have three consequences for efficiency and stability
The first consequence: improved macroeconomic efficiency in financial systems
Free capital movements, interconnected markets, the integration of market segments and the hedging
opportunities  provided  by  the  new  financial  instruments  allow  a  better  fit  between  the  financing
capacities  and  borrowing  requirements  of  general  governments,  households  and  companies.  Market
interest rates, which represent the markets’ consensus on the risk incurred, are fully beneficial to the
efficient allocation of capital.
Lowering the barriers to entering the financial sector, the free circulation of information and fiercer
competition have also brought financial markets closer to a situation of perfect competition, which is
of benefit to all consumers.
Lastly, the growth of market financing has allowed savings to be channelled directly into investment.
Reducing  the  share of  bank  financing,  and  therefore to  a certain  extent that  of  money  creation,  has
enabled the financing of the economy to be less inflationary.
Second consequence: a new framework for conducting monetary policy
Financial deregulation has contributed to change the conduct of monetary policies.
More  open  economies  and  greater  interdependence  between  financial  systems  has  completely
overhauled the context in which monetary policy is implemented.
• 
Financial markets can now penalise inflationary monetary policies by withdrawing capital,
with a subsequent rise in long-term interest rates and/or depreciation of the exchange rate.
 At  the  same  time,  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanisms  have  become  more
diversified and complex.
This situation is one of the reasons why there has been a substantial clarification at a European and
global level of the division of labour amongst economic policies. In this context, monetary policy has
been clearly assigned the objective of maintaining price stability.
Today, monetary policies are conducted within a framework characterised by two main features:
• 
Firstly, the reducing of inflation expectations depends on compliance with a number of rules
that have been clearly defined in advance. Consequently, this policy can only be effective if
the  authority  responsible  for  defining  and  implementing  is  credible.  The  conjunction  of  a
clear,  overriding  objective  of  price  stability  (which  has  been  explicitly  laid  down  in  the
statute of the ECB), with well-established institutional independence ensures the continuity
of the monetary policy decisions made by the authorities.
 Secondly, the emergence of a globalised market has quite naturally led to new developments
in  monetary  policy  instruments.  Interest-rate instruments have  gained in importance  to  the
detriment of quantitative and regulatory instruments.
Third consequence: renewed set of risks to the stability of financial systems
First of all, it is worth noting that financial liberalisation did not eliminate the occurrence of financial
crisis.
The development of new financial instruments, increasingly mobile and rapid capital flows, and faster
reactions  on  the  part  of  the  players  have  rendered  markets  more  volatile.  Moreover,  stock  market
prices  and  interest  rates  in  the  various  financial  centres  have  become  closely  correlated  due  to
increased  arbitraging  between  currencies  and  financial  products  and  the  spread  of  disintermediated
financing.
In fact, the last two decades have experienced a string of financial crises:
3
BIS Review 85/2000
  banking crises in the United States at the end of the 1980s, in Scandinavia at the beginning
of the 1990s and subsequently in the rest of continental Europe and Japan;
the 1987 stock market crash;
the bond market crisis of 1994;
currency  crises  in  the  emerging  economies,  in  Mexico  in  1994  and  more  recently  in
Southeast Asia from 1997 onwards, which spilled over into Russia and Latin America before
spreading to the industrialised countries, as illustrated by the default of the LTCM fund.
Secondly, the trends at work in financial systems have triggered new threats of distortions throughout
the markets.
The interplay between participants’ expectations, their self-fulfilling nature and market spillover pave
the  way  for  the  emergence  of  possible  financial  bubbles.  These  bubbles  are  frequently  fed  by  easy
access to credit as well as the use of instruments with a high gearing effect. Imbalances may thus arise
and, in certain cases, be protracted. The current uncertainty regarding the valuation of new technology
stocks is a prime example of this problem.
The  standardisation  of  risk  management  methods  and  the  resulting  herd  instinct  on  the  part  of
market-dealers brings with it a number of disadvantages, such as liquidity shortages on certain market
compartments,  which  lead  to  more  volatile  prices,  credit  rationing  for  certain  borrowers  and
micro-financial  contagion  whereby  “innocent  victims”  bear  the  brunt  of  imbalances  stemming  from
other economies.
Such risks have become greater with the development of over-the-counter derivatives markets, which
are a potential source of instability for the overall financial system. Liabilities are generally financed
with  credit,  they  are  based  on  asymmetric  information  and  risks  are  concentrated  on  some  of  the
largest global financial institutions.
These institutions may also be tempted to take excessive risks when they come under pressure from
heated competition and shareholders’ demands for value. Of course, the prudential authorities approve
of high returns on equity, but systematically aiming for returns on equity of 15%, 20%, or more while
world growth averages 3% to 5%  could  make  institutions  more  vulnerable.  Actually,  the  search  for
profitability should not induce institutions to resort to extreme gearing in which debt replaces capital,
or distort portfolio structures by undue focus on high-yield financial assets which also entail  a  high
degree  of  risk.  Nor  should  it  lead  them  to  curtail  operating  costs  excessively,  thus  reducing  the
resources devoted to internal control. On credit markets, the financial position of banks can also  be
seriously jeopardised if they are tempted to reduce margins drastically in order to maintain or increase
their market share, or if they make insufficient provisions during cyclical upturns.
More generally, some of the most widespread management methods are not entirely without risk:
• 
The  accounting  practice  of  marking-to-market  most  of  the  assets  in  credit  institutions’
balance  sheets  renders  them  more  vulnerable  to  price  fluctuations.  The  spread  of  market
valuation  through  the  concept  of  “fair  value”  could  make  banks’  total  assets  and  profits
highly  volatile.  This  is  why  French  prudential  authorities  have  reservations  about  this
method.
  In  the  same  vein,  the  Asian  crisis  has  highlighted  the  limits  of  systematically  resorting  to
rating agencies, which can reinforce the herd behaviour of markets. These ratings, which can
never  be  perfectly  accurate  and  up-to-date,  should  be  taken  for  what  they  are:  just  one  of
several instruments for risk management.
The  turbulence  surrounding  the  Asian  crisis  also  clearly  showed  that  the  models  used  for
managing complex derivatives do not adequately take into account abrupt gyrations in one or
several markets.
BIS Review 85/2000
4
And lastly, the public authorities must meet new challenges.
• 
In  general,  the  default  of  the  LTCM  fund  in  September 1998  underscored  the  risk  of
contagion between financial systems. However, the resolution of the crisis demonstrated the
ability  of  the  monetary  and  prudential  authorities  to  undertake  effective,  coordinated  and
pre-emptive action which prevented it from turning into a full-blown financial crisis.
   The increase of bond markets, shorter durations for  interbank  financing  and  the  growth of
derivatives [such as structured bonds with index-linked yields] challenge the involvement of
the private sector in the resolution of international financial crises.
The  process  toward  larger  and  more  complex  financial  institutions  calls  for  particular
attention from the supervisory authorities. The institutions born of mergers should not incur
excessive risks because they feel that they  would be  “too  big  to  fail”. More  generally,  we
have to be aware of some potential dangers of this race for size. It may lead to oligopolies.
An  oligopoly  is  not  a  desirable  situation for  at  least  two reasons:  first, it  could  distort  the
allocation  of  capital,  and  second,  it  could  increase  the  instability  of  financial  systems.
However, the risk of an oligopoly may be mitigated by the presence of new entrants in the
financial sector, which reflects the fact that the market remains contestable.
The  implementation  of  traditional  prudential  regulations  is  complicated  by  the  growing
importance of non-regulated participants, such as highly-leveraged institutions which have
close  links  with  regulated  institutions,  and  the  spread  of  innovative  distribution  channels,
mainly in the field of remote financial services.
In sum, the recurrence of financial crises, the emergence of market distortions and the new challenges
facing  supervisors  have  prompted  some  analysts  to  wonder  whether  there  would  exist  a  dilemma
between efficiency and stability. Is instability the price to be paid for the improved efficiency resulting
from financial deregulation? Allow me to present now the answers I think central banks and prudential
authorities could give to these questions.
3.
Monetary and prudential policies should promote an environment in which financial
systems are both stable and efficient
First, monetary policy should act as a stabiliser
Monetary policy alone cannot guarantee the stability of financial systems, which may be jeopardised
by shocks from both the financial and the real economies. However, it does have a stabilising effect. In
general,  the  objective  of  price  stability  lowers  economic  agents’  uncertainty  regarding  future  price
developments.  In  addition,  by  committing  itself  to  a  long-term  objective,  the  central  bank  reduces
market uncertainty, which can be a source of disruption to  the  financial economy.  Interest  rates  are
less volatile as a result, which is of benefit to the long-term growth of the economy.
To  achieve  this,  the  central  bank  must  send  clear  and  consistent  signals  to  agents  and  markets  and
maintain  a  constant  exchange  of  information.  Financial  innovation  and  the  liberalisation  of  capital
movements have made  such  communication  more  sensitive.  Central  banks  must  now  systematically
explain discrepancies between actual and projected results if they are to preserve their credibility.
However, for financial systems to be stable, monetary policy must be consistent with the other aspects
of  economic  policy,  that  is,  fiscal  policy  and  structural  programmes.  The  policy  mix  must  be
well-balanced  at  the  international  as  well  as  the  domestic  level.  Placing  too  heavy  a  burden  on
monetary policy in terms of achieving the main economic and financial balances is detrimental to its
effectiveness.  In  particular,  it  diminishes  its  ability  to  maintain  and  consolidate  financial  market
stability. This concern underlies the implementation of the Growth and Stability Pact in Economic and
Monetary Union. By obliging fiscal policies to commit to stability, the pact allows the fiscal buffers to
fulfil their role as stabilisers.
5
BIS Review 85/2000
Lastly, one must also take into account the fact that, by their information and expectations, investors
can penalise imbalances affecting the main world economies or diverging developments in different
countries.  To  reduce  this  constraint,  economic  and  monetary  policies  must  be  harmonised  at  the
international level in order to achieve more balanced international financial relations.
Second, prudential policies should try to reconcile efficiency and stability in financial markets
I would like to insist on three objectives I feel are fundamental to promoting efficient and balanced
financial systems.
Supervisors’ first objective should be to monitor the soundness of financial institutions
To do so, they must work at two levels.
At  the  micro-prudential  level,  they  must  ensure  that  the  restructuring  of  financial  systems  is
well-balanced and that the merged institutions are healthy. Similarly, they must focus on promoting
and  disseminating  sound  management  practices.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  the  fair  pricing  of
financial services to ensure a competitive playing field that is not detrimental to the sound position of
the financial participants.
At  the  macro-prudential  level,  it  falls  to  the  relevant  authorities  to  ensure  macro-financial  and
macro-prudential oversight.
• 
Domestic supervisors play a fundamental role in this respect. They have close links to the
financial  players  and  have  a  deeper  understanding  of  developments  in  their  respective
sectors. They can monitor such developments in real time and react to them more effectively.
 The  internationalisation  of  activities  and  of  financial  institutions  also  calls  for  in-depth
discussion and close cooperation between national supervisors.
The  work  conducted  by  international  supervisory  organisations,  such  as  the  Basel  Committee,  the
IAIS  or  the  IOSCO,  makes  a  vital  contribution  to  this  effort.  The  implementation  of  the  numerous
international codes and standards developed by these bodies has now to be carefully examined. Allow
me to seize this opportunity to salute the work the Financial Stability Forum is accomplishing in this
respect.
The financial authorities’ second objective should be to constantly verify the relevance of safety
nets.
Regulators  must,  of  course,  ensure  that  their  supervisory  mechanisms  are  adapted  to  an  evolving
financial sector. The Gramm Leach Bliley Act adopted last year by the United States illustrates this
concern, which has resulted in a new allocation of the roles of the different American supervisors.
As regards the European Union, the integration of national financial systems within a large, efficient
market is the ultimate objective of the regulatory harmonisation. Since 1977, when the first banking
coordination directive was laid down, two key principles have constantly been applied:
• 
On the one hand, the “European passport” gives the right of establishment and freedom to
provide services within the area.
 On the other hand, supervision on a consolidated basis entrusts the consolidated supervision
of banking groups to the home country, in cooperation with the host country.
These  are  the  two  pillars  of  our  European  prudential  framework.  They  are  the  basis  for  a  clear
definition  of  the  respective  roles  of  and  close  cooperation  between  national  supervisors.  Thanks  to
these  principles,  prudential  supervision  within  the  EU  has  for  many  years  been  conducted  in  a
decentralised and cooperative manner which has proved its worth. In this respect, national supervisors
are well prepared for the integration of the different national financial systems.
BIS Review 85/2000
6
The same principles broadly apply for the supervision of insurance companies and insurance firms. As
for  cross-sector  pan-European  complex  institutions,  we  believe  that  a  similar  combination  of
specialisation and intense cooperation is the best solution.
Lastly, the third objective of financial authorities must be to achieve a new balance between
regulations and market discipline
The first generation of prudential rules - chiefly a raft of prudential ratios with the Cooke ratio as its
symbol - was devised at the end of the 1980s under the aegis of the Basel Committee, the IOSCO and
the IAIS.
As financial activities evolved, these quantitative standards were gradually supplemented with a more
qualitative approach based on risk management and market discipline. I would like to emphasise that
far from being at odds, these two approaches are complementary and inseparable.
Financial participants must be encouraged to take more responsibility in mutual surveillance in order
to encourage market discipline. This means that they must adopt more transparent procedures.
However,  regulators  and  supervisors  still  have  an  essential  role  to  play  in  ensuring  the  stability  of
financial systems which is necessary to the common good.
• 
Maintaining  a  balance  between  market  discipline  and  regulations  should  lead  to  a  more
flexible  approach  whereby  prudential  standards  are  adapted  to  the  individual  situations  of
financial  institutions.  This  is  the  purpose  of  the  revision  of  the  solvency  ratio  currently
underway in Basel, in particular via the second and third pillars.
  In addition, the mechanisms for safeguarding the soundness of financial systems should be
adapted to  the  changing  features  of  these systems.  Some  of  the  aspects  we  feel  should  be
given priority are:
  how  to  deal  with  financial  institutions  that  are  not  yet  regulated,  such  as  financial
conglomerates and highly-leveraged institutions, or certain types of financial holding;
how to deal with remote financial services.
Finally, regulators must ensure that the new regulatory mechanisms they have devised fit in
with  the  other  objectives  of  economic  policy.  The  impact  of  these  regulations  on  the  real
economy must be carefully assessed in order to avoid privileging stability to the detriment of
efficiency  by  creating  new  competitive  distortions.  In  general,  prudential  concerns  about
financial  stability,  monetary  concerns  about  price  stability  and  social  concerns,  that  is,
protecting consumers, must be reconciled.
In conclusion, allow me to mention the key role played by central banks in reinforcing financial
stability
First of all, I would like to stress what I feel is the highly complementary nature of the price stability
and  financial  stability  objectives.  I  believe  that  price  stability  is  the  bedrock  on  which  financial
stability is built. It is of course a prerequisite.
Secondly, I consider central banks to bear a special responsibility arising on their central position at
the heart of financial systems:
• 
• 
Their close and constant contacts with credit institutions give them a thorough understanding
of banking systems.
They contribute directly to supplying liquidity to the economy.
They are responsible for ensuring that payment systems operate smoothly.
• 
Central banks thus find themselves at the intersection of the various aspects of financial systems, and
accordingly appear particularly well-suited to maintaining financial stability.
7
BIS Review 85/2000
Thirdly, in my opinion, the correct answer to the changes underway in financial systems is not to set
up vast centralized supervisory bodies at a global or a European level. In this domaine to be close to
the  credit  and  financial  institutions  concerned  is  decisive  for  efficiency.  I  am  convinced  that
establishing  a  new  generation  of  prudential  standards  and  reinforcing  active  and  close  cooperation
between decentralised supervisors will be for us the best means to reconcile efficiency with financial
stability. To deal with these challenges, given their specific features, central banks are obviously at the
heart of the process.
BIS Review 85/2000
8
