Christian Noyer: The euro and the banking sector
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Duisburger
Banking  Symposium,  organised  by 
for  Financial  Services,  on
27 September 2000.
the  European  Center 
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure for me to speak here at the Duisburger Banking Symposium. The famous American
comedian, Bob Hope, once typified a bank as “a place that will lend you money if you can prove that
you don’t need it”. As we all know, this description does not give credit to the extremely important
role that banks play in a  modern  economy.  Nowadays,  economic  life  simply  would  not  be  possible
without the wide range of services and products that banks offer to various groups of society.
The issue that I shall address today - the euro and the banking sector - cannot be fully comprehended
without considering the particular, and to a large extent unprecedented, nature of the introduction of
the  euro.  The  single  currency  does  away  once  and  for  all  with  internal  exchange  rate  fluctuations,
completes the structure of the Single Market and, by virtue of its availability  to  almost  300  million
people, increases the efficiency of currency use in an unprecedented manner. The introduction of the
euro was a regime shift that will undoubtedly have a major impact on the euro area economy and its
financial structure in the years to come. We have already seen some evidence of more diversification
in the sources of finance of private firms in the euro area, in particular the increasing use of securities
financing.1  The  euro  will  continue  to  act  as  a  catalyst  in  further  integration  of  national  financial
structures  of  the  euro  area  into  a  truly  euro  area-wide  financial  structure.  The  euro’s  function  as
catalyst is particularly important for the banking sector. It will reinforce already prevailing trends in
the  EU  banking  systems,  such  as  pressure  for  the  reduction  of  excess  capacity,  increased
internationalisation and conglomeration, and further mergers and acquisitions.2
I  intend  to  approach  the  relationship  between  the  euro  and  the  banking  sector  from  two  different
angles. First, I shall discuss the factors underlying the changing structure of the financial system, in
general, and the banking sector, in particular. Second, I shall touch upon the impact of the euro on the
euro area banking sector in the field of both wholesale and retail business.
Factors underlying the changing structure of the financial system and the banking sector
Widespread deregulation and liberalisation, accompanied by technological development, have changed
the  environment  in  which  banks  are  operating.  In  addition,  globalisation  and  the  increased  and
transformed wealth of individuals have affected the operations of financial institutions, in general, and
of banks, in particular. In the euro area, the impact of these developments has been amplified further
by Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union, in particular as a result of the introduction of the
euro, the single  monetary  policy  and the  integration  of  the  euro  area  financial  markets.  I  shall  now
briefly discuss how these underlying factors are expected to affect the banking sector.
First of all, technology has already been shaping the structure of the financial system. It has reshaped
the relative costs of different banking and financial services and facilitated the provision of new types
1 ECB Monthly Bulletin, “The euro area one year after the introduction of the euro: key characteristics and changes in the
financial  structure”,  January  2000;  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series  No  1,  “The  impact  of  the  euro  on  money  and  bond
markets, July 2000”.
2 European Central Bank, “Possible effects of EMU on the EU banking systems in the medium to long term”, February
1999; ECB Monthly Bulletin, “Banking in the euro area: structural features and trends”, April 1999.
1
BIS Review 83/2000
of  services.  The  costs  of  collecting,  processing  and  using  information  have  decreased  dramatically.
This  has,  for  example,  led  to  greater  efficiency  in  the  provision  of  financial  information  and  better
techniques for assessing and pricing risks, in turn reducing the cost of external finance. On balance, it
has tended to favour markets more than banks as it has allowed the former to rely more heavily on
public rather than private information.
It  has  also affected  banks’  income  and  cost  structures,  as  they  have  been  able  to  make  profits  as  a
result  of  advances  in  technology.  That  is,  banks  have  been  able  to  specialise  in  the  provision  of
information and the monitoring of credit exposures, for example in the context of loan securitisation,
thus  raising  the  share  of  non-interest  income.  On  the  other  hand,  banks’  profits  have  come  under
pressure in some areas, such as lending to large firms. This resulted from the fact that technological
progress  has  opened  these  areas  to  competition  from  inside  the  domestic  banking  sector,  from
international banks and also from other financial intermediaries such as institutional investors. In point
of  fact,  the  development  of  institutional  investors  has  been  facilitated  by  technological  changes
reducing the costs of collecting savings, gathering and disseminating public information, and assessing
risks.
Technological  development  has  also  facilitated  the  rapid  development  of  new  financial  products.
While  a  large  proportion  of  innovations  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  breakthroughs
achieved  in  financial  theory,  it  has  been  predominantly  technological  progress  that  has  made  the
widespread use of these innovations possible.
The second factor underlying the structural changes in the financial system and banking sector is the
process of financial liberalisation which has been ongoing for some time already.  It  has  allowed an
increase  in  the  overall  level  of  competition  in  financial  systems.  In  the  EU,  financial  liberalisation
gained momentum with the Single Market programme. The single most influential act for banks was
the introduction of the Second Banking Coordination Directive, which provided a passport for banks
to offer services across the European Union.
Liberalisation in the EU financial  services  sector is  already  very  extensive.  What  we see  now  is an
ongoing  adjustment  of  the  regulatory  environment  implemented  in  the  1980s  and  early  1990s.  In
effect, it allows other driving forces to have a more profound effect on the financial system. One of
these factors, which has been facilitated by liberalisation, is the trend towards globalisation. This trend
is occurring in most private sectors of the economy. As companies and individuals requiring financial
services  are  becoming  more  globally  oriented,  they  demand  appropriate  financial  services.
Globalisation is expected to increase competition in most areas of financial services, and it may also
be able to realise economies of scale and scope. At the same time, globalisation has opened up new
markets for banks, particularly in trading, asset management and investment banking activities.
Finally, the wealth of individuals has increased, and a larger proportion of the population is making
portfolio  investments.  This  is  partly  a  result  of  the  ageing  of  the  population,  which  has,  in  itself,
increased the average wealth of people. At the same time, it is also due to changes in pension systems
in a number of countries from a “pay-as-you-go” to a funded basis. The prospects for the future are for
more of such change, as reflected by the recent proposals for pension reforms in Germany and France.
The  increased  number  of  wealthy  individuals  has  changed  the  demand  for  financial  services.
Traditional  banking  services or  products,  while  maintaining  a  strong  position in  liquidity  provision,
are not adequate for people interested in diversification and maximisation of returns subject to risks in
the  context  of  long-term  investments.  The  associated  rise  in  demand  for  securities  has  led  to  an
increasing  need  for  brokerage,  fund  management  and  consultancy  services.  While  there  are  new
providers for these services, banks could remain at the centre stage, albeit with their services oriented
more towards asset management.
In addition to the overall increase in the wealth of individuals, the composition of wealth has shifted
towards a greater emphasis on wealth in the form of financial assets. This is manifest in the increase in
the relative market value of stock exchanges, which is clearly visible in most euro area countries. The
increase in financial wealth relates closely to the shift towards a market-oriented financial system and
also to the increased importance of institutional investors.
BIS Review 83/2000
2
All the developments I have discussed so far underlie recent changes in the structure of the financial
system.  Financial  systems  in  the  euro  area  could  be  departing  from  a  bank-dominated  structure,
becoming more market-oriented or even securitised. An indicator for this development is the declining
share  of  deposits  in  households’  portfolios.  Meanwhile,  aided  by  technology,  the  disintermediation
process on the assets side is under way in a number of countries, even though the process has been
quite slow.
However, the actual effect of the structural change towards more market-based financial transactions
could be larger than the share of external financing from the market would suggest. The existence of
market-based financing through increasing competition within the banking sector may have affected
the terms and conditions of bank lending in the sense that banks are now more clearly no longer the
only  potential  supplier  of  external  funding  for  all  but  the  smallest  firms.  In  other  words,  the
contestability of external financing may have increased, with potential competition from market-based
financing  limiting  the  scope  for  banks  to  profit  from  lending  relationships.  It  could  be  added  that
banks  have  been encouraged  to  take  part  in the process  of  securitisation  by  undertaking  investment
banking activities such as underwriting, which uses their capacities for collecting information as well
as  private  information  based  on  existing  credit  relations.  This  also  tends  to  boost  the  share  of
non-interest income in the total revenues of banks.
The changes in the structure of the financial system and the role of banks are also illustrated by the
emergence of new types of players in the financial system. Most apparent is the rise of institutional
investors who are gaining a more important role in allocating savings from the household sector to the
corporate  sector,  both  domestically  and  across  borders.  On  the  one  hand,  they  have  provided  new
types of savings products, often supported by tax concessions on pension or life insurance savings, as
well as by technological changes which reduce the costs of collecting savings, gathering information
and assessing risk. On the other hand, they have created more demand for different types of securities.
While they have enhanced structural changes in the financial system, they have also started to compete
with traditional banking services in respect of both assets and liabilities.
However, in the euro area these institutional investors often form part of the banking groups. Banks in
the euro area still have the most extensive distribution network of all types of financial institutions,
even if the importance of this is declining. Their existing customer relations give them a competitive
edge  in  the  provision  of  many  new  financial  services.  Therefore,  while  interest  income  is  being
reduced  by  the  process  of  disintermediation,  the  growth  of  new  products  may  increase  non-interest
income in the same banking groups.
The euro and the banking sector
Despite these fundamental factors which are changing the nature of the financial services business, it
is important to note that the financial systems, in general, and the banking sectors, in particular, in the
euro  area  countries  have,  in  the  past,  been  relatively  nationally  based  and  fragmented  with  little
cross-border retail activity. However, the euro should function as a catalyst with regard to the effects
of  the  fundamental  factors  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  and  thus  increase  the  pressure  for  structural
change. By structural change, I mean not only domestic consolidation, but also increased cross-border
cooperation and mergers. In short, the euro area banking sector is expected to look and behave more
like the banking sector of a single economy in the future.
Economies of scale and scope may have been changing in different areas of banking and may even
have taken different directions. However, the general picture is that the banking industry needs to be in
a  position  to  adjust  to  a  new  reality.  Indeed,  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  number  of  bank
mergers  in  the  euro  area,  including  mergers  between  relatively  large  institutions,  have  been
announced. Such “high-profile” mergers are likely to contribute towards an acceleration of the pace of
both the consolidation and integration process of the banking systems in the euro area.
The recent pattern of consolidation constitutes a continuation of a longer-term trend in the European
banking industry, as is highlighted by the large decline in the number of credit institutions in the euro
area  countries  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  In  the  mid-1980s,  there  were  more  than  11,000  credit
3
BIS Review 83/2000
institutions in the euro area countries, compared with around 7,500 now. This reflects a decrease of
3,500 credit institutions over 15 years, or an average annual decrease of around 230 institutions. The
changeover to the single currency seems to have intensified the consolidation trend in the euro area
banking sector. The decline in the number of credit institutions is mainly the result of mergers among
savings  and  cooperative  banks,  which  epitomise  what  are  known  as  “consolidating”  or  “defensive”
mergers, aimed at cutting costs and possibly also at diversifying risks.
So far, this consolidation process has taken place mainly within national boundaries, with the possible
exception of some mergers in the Benelux and Nordic countries. The preference for domestic mergers,
as opposed to cross-border mergers, may be explained by the fact that the relevant market for retail
services is still national rather than pan-European in character. Furthermore, the scope for cost cutting
appears  to  be  larger  if  the  activities  of  the  institutions  merging  overlap,  although  there  is  no
particularly strong empirical evidence of this as yet. The fact that cultural “proximity”, notably in the
corporate style of governance and management, is traditionally seen as a key factor in the success of
mergers  may  also  help  to  explain  the  limited  cross-border  merger  activity.  It  has  to  be  said  that
although  most  mergers  have  been  domestic,  they  have  often  been  instigated  and  influenced  by
area-wide market developments and the integration of financial markets following the introduction of
the euro.
As of today, there is no doubt that the introduction of the euro has fostered the internationalisation of
banking activities. In particular, the rapid integration of the wholesale banking and capital markets, as
well as large-value payment systems, has already produced more and new kinds of links among banks.
As a result, banks are increasingly exposed to risks from abroad, and risks to financial stability are far
less frequently confined to national borders.
The  most  substantial  increase  in  cross-border  activity  and  market  integration  has  taken  place  in
wholesale  activities.  For  example,  the  currency-based  segmentation  of  the  markets  for  unsecured
interbank deposits disappeared very quickly after the euro was introduced. This could be seen from the
rapid convergence of national spreads. Furthermore, market integration has not only been reflected in
price quotations, but also in trading volumes. The share of cross-border transactions currently accounts
for  more  than  50%  of  overall  activity  in  both  the  unsecured  and  the  repo  markets.  Some  large
institutions  are  starting  to  act  as  “money  centre”  banks  with  an  area-wide  scope  of  activity.  The
smaller  institutions  still  mainly  operate  with  their  domestic  counterparts.  They  nonetheless  benefit
from the more equal market conditions. Accordingly, the share of cross-border transactions in the area
of large-value payment transfers through the TARGET system has been increasing steadily.
In addition to the single monetary policy, two main reasons explain the rapid integration of wholesale
activities in the euro area, in general, and the market for unsecured interbank deposits, in particular.
First, the  smooth functioning  of  the  settlement  of  cross-border  payments,  mainly  performed  via  the
TARGET system, allows banks to trade safely throughout the euro area. Second, the swift acceptance
of euro area indices such as EONIA  and  EURIBOR  forms  a  common  basis  for  pricing.  Experience
with  TARGET  demonstrates  the  importance  of  the  market  infrastructure  in  allowing  arbitrage  to
operate effectively.
Let  me  now  turn  from  wholesale  activities  to  banks’  customer  business.  As  European  banks  are
typically  universal  banks,  they  combine  a  wide  range  of  products  within  a  single  institution.  The
markets for these products have varying degrees of integration - some are already global or European,
while  others  have  remained  national  or  even  local  in  character.  At  least  the  major  banks  already
operate  in  highly  internationalised  markets  for  a  number  of  their  products  and  have  geographically
diversified  activities.  Even  if  banks  remain  nationally  based,  they  are  increasingly  subject  to
international  market  developments.  National  tendencies  are  increasingly  influenced  by  international
developments. Hence, the usual argument that cross-border mergers and acquisitions are a necessary
condition in order to achieve a more integrated and international banking system does not seem very
strong.
In  particular,  many  of  the  asset  management  and  investment  banking  services  are  already  quite
internationalised  as  the  capital  markets  have  taken  significant  steps  towards  integration  and  growth
following  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Banks’  own  holdings  of  securities  have  also  become
BIS Review 83/2000
4
increasingly diversified across borders. The trend has been quite strong for government securities, as
well as for corporate bonds.
To take an example of the financial services provided by banks in the capital market area, the leading
underwriters of bonds issued by European firms are the major European banks, alongside the largest
US  investment  banks.  The  “league”  in  which  these  players  compete  is  clearly  not  a  domestic  one.
Another example, which is particularly telling of integration, can be drawn from the rapidly expanding
new European equity markets for technology and growth companies. Underwriting the initial public
offerings or IPOs of this type of firm is the kind of service where we should expect the greatest degree
of  national  segmentation,  since  the  companies  are  usually  accessing  the  capital  market  for  the  first
time, possibly as captive  customers  of  local  banks.  However, experience so  far shows that,  in  most
cases, a foreign institution was present alongside a domestic one.
By  contrast  with  the  services  provided  to  other  financial  institutions  and  large  corporations,  retail
activities for personal customers and small and medium-sized firms are still confined quite noticeably
to  national  territories.  Within  the  euro  area,  both  lending  and  deposit-taking  by  banks  are  largely
conducted with domestic residents. Nevertheless, internationalisation is also making progress in this
area.  Business  with  customers  located  in  other  euro  area  countries  is  growing  faster  than  domestic
business in terms of all major balance sheet items of banks. It should also be noted that retail banking
services  still  tend  to  be  localised,  even  in  individual  countries  such  as  the  United  States.  Thus,
segmentation of retail services should not necessarily be seen as the failure of integration.
As regards the costs of payment services which banks offer, in particular for cross-border payments, I
believe that these costs are still too high. Since the introduction of the euro, private customer prices of
cross-border payment services have not decreased and in too many cases, the payee has been charged
with some costs even though the payer has been requested to bear all costs. Furthermore, as the service
provided in the case of cross-border payments is still poorer than that for domestic transfers in terms
of the speed of the transaction, the higher price is not justified by better quality.
In a report published by the Eurosystem in September 1999, it was emphasised that consumers should
be able to transfer money as rapidly, reliably and cheaply from one part of the euro area to another as
is now the case within each Member State. However, it was also acknowledged that this objective was
far  from  being  reached.  Since  the  publication  of  this  report,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in
preparing the ground for a more efficient handling of cross-border retail payments. The banking sector
has  agreed  on  so-called  straight-through  processing  standards,  which  will  allow  the  automated
execution of cross-border payments. Furthermore, the  Euro  Banking  Association  has  announced the
development of a payment system specifically designed for low-value cross-border payments.
In addition, the European Credit Sector Associations have taken two initiatives to further improve the
prices and quality of cross-border customer payment services. First, a multilateral interbank exchange
fee is being developed, which should solve the problem of “double charging” and, second, a “basic”
service will be defined which should provide a level of guaranteed service and ensure transparent and
attractive price conditions.
In  a  progress  report  published  this  month,  the  Eurosystem  has  made  several  recommendations  to
achieve further improvements in the price level and quality of the cross-border payment services for
both corporate and private customers. Without a doubt, we shall continue to monitor this process very
closely in order to ensure further cost and efficiency benefits for euro area corporations and citizens.
Conclusions
I  have  outlined  the  factors  that  are  the  main  determinants  underlying  the  changing  structure  of  the
financial system in general and the banking sector in particular. Overall, the various elements of the
banking sector show that it is likely that a number of banking activities will be affected by this change.
The  foreseen  structural  changes  require  the  need  for  adjustment  to  be  taken  seriously  by  all
participants  in  the  financial  system.  This  adjustment  appears  to  have  intensified  in  recent  years,  as
there has been an increase in merger activity, an establishment of alliances and an introduction of new
5
BIS Review 83/2000
products  and  services,  often  based  on  modern  information  technology.  The  process  of  structural
change embodies an element of risk, but if these risks are identified early and analysed carefully, then
they can be duly taken into account.
What the ECB can do to help in this area is, first of all, to maintain stable monetary conditions. By
creating an environment of price stability, we allow private sector agents to focus their attention on
those questions which are of most relevance to their activities and to take advantage of the benefits of
this stable environment, such as the possible extension of their planning time horizons. Secondly, we
can, to some extent, increase the awareness of the developments in the euro area’s financial structure
and banking sector by providing euro area-wide information, and also analyses of these developments.
All in all, the introduction of the euro and the single monetary policy has created a fundamentally new
environment for banks in the euro area. A new environment that will entail certain risks, but that will
also  provide  many  opportunities  for  growth  and  enhanced  efficiency  in  the  banking  industry.  I  am
convinced that the latter will prevail.
BIS Review 83/2000
6
