Gazi Erçel: Focus on inflation targeting
Opening remarks by Mr Gazi Erçel, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, made at
the Conference on Inflation Targeting which was organized by the Central Bank of the Republic of
Turkey in Ankara on 19 October 2000.
 I  am  very  honored  to  present  the  opening  remarks  at  this  conference  on  Inflation  Targeting  (IT)
Framework. First I would like to extend our appreciation to the lecturers of the Conference who came
a long way geographically, and considering the state of the economy they reach. The issues that are
going to be addressed will be of great interest, particularly for developing and dis-inflating countries.
The  attendance  of  so  many  speakers  from  the  Central  Banks  and  international  institutions  is
particularly  motivating.  This  Conference  will  review  the  country  experiences  on  inflation  targeting,
particularly  touching  on  the  best  ways  to  design  policy  objectives,  responses,  and  implementation
issues.  Some  papers  will  consider  not  only  inflation  targeting  framework,  but  also  the  case  of
economies during the shift to low inflation.
Let  me  begin  my  remarks  by  focusing  on  a  framework  that  has  been  widely  validated  among
academics and policymakers during the last 10 years.
Inflation targeting is an innovative approach to monetary policy being applied by a growing number of
central banks of not only industrial but also emerging market countries of the world.
Now,  more  than  ever,  businesses  are  operating  in  a  rapidly  changing  world.  Even  the  marginal
uncertainties  have  become  important.  Rapid  changes  in  technologies,  globalization  and  increasing
competition are the challenges of the day for the business community.
In the dynamic economic environment of the 1990s, business communities have been taking not only
the risks of their new investments on technology, but the risk of inflation as well. In an inflationary
environment,  businesses  and  individuals  end  up  spending  more  time  and  money  either  protecting
themselves against inflation or trying to benefit from it.
The rapidly changing environment affected not only the business decisions but the monetary polices as
well. The traditional anchors for monetary policy and of central bank accountability - exchange rate
targets and money aggregate targets - have fallen victim to liberalized capital mobility, inter-dynamic
markets namely, by the introduction of new financial instruments, technology, financial globalization,
and as a result unstable money demand.
At this juncture, the role of the central banks and the framework of the monetary policy needed to be
drawn  more  clearly.  The  ultimate  goal  of  monetary  policy  has  become  reasonable  price  stability,
which  is  generally  understood  to  point  the  inflation  at  rates  low  enough  not  to  affect  economic
decisions.
Thus, the rise of an inflation targeting monetary framework is not a surprise but it is a natural reaction
to a dynamically changing economic environment.
Here I would like to briefly review the footsteps of inflation targeting framework. The first issue that I
would like to touch on is the time-inconsistency problem in monetary policy.
Monetary policy works with relatively long lags. Any action taken by a central bank today must be
based largely on considerations about the rate of inflation one to two years down the road. So even
though the underlying rate of inflation has been lower, central banks have to consider what is likely to
happen to prices in the future. Long and variable lags made it difficult to know what the appropriate
policy  was  at  each  moment  for  the  purposes  of  fine  tuning  future  economic  activity.  In  addition,
political  pressures  tended to  emphasize  the  immediate  or  short-term  benefits  of  stimulating  the  real
economy  at  the  expense  of  long-term  increases  in  inflation  from  such  policies  (myopia).  The
combination of these lags and myopia imparted an inflationary bias to policy with the result that in the
1
BIS Review 95/2000
long run inflation was higher than it otherwise would have been, with no gain in real output. The more
systematically  monetary  policy  was  used  to  fine-tune  economic  activity,  the  more  the  inflationary
consequences  of  such  policies  were  anticipated.  An  anticipated  monetary  stimulus  would  be  passed
through immediately to prices with no affect on real output.
A second problem of the monetary policy is the need for a nominal anchor.
If monetary policy could not be expected to dampen business cycles by fine tuning, it might do so by
stabilizing inflation expectations as the result of a clear and credible commitment to a nominal anchor
that is believed to stabilize prices on average in the long run.
Such a policy has two goals: the first is to provide the market with reliable information on what the
rate of inflation will be so that investment, wage setting, and other market decisions can be made with
greater confidence in what the future price level will be.
The  second  is  to  ensure  that  the  inflation  rate  is  very  low  in  order  to  improve  the  quality  of  price
signals. Such a policy might minimize the gap between actual and expected inflation that spill over to
the real economy. By removing the inflation bias of discretionary policy, nominal interest rates would
be lower, and by diminishing uncertainty over the future price levels, a credible nominal anchor would
reduce the inflation risk premium in both nominal and real interest rates.
Here,  there  is  a  need  for  clear  operational  rules  to  know  what  short-run  stance  of  policy  would  be
appropriate for the future. The purest examples of such rules are a fixed exchange rate and a fixed rate
of growth in a monetary aggregate. Either rule provides a clear anchor for inflation expectations.
A credibly fixed exchange rate is the most transparent nominal anchor. A floating exchange rate with a
money  growth  rule  as  the  nominal  anchor  is  also  easy  to  monitor,  if  somewhat  more  difficult  to
achieve.  Both  anchors  suffer,  to  some  extent,  from  being  indirect  routes  to  the  real  objective  of
monetary policy,  which  is  price  stability. Targeting  the  price level  directly,  however,  was  generally
considered  not  possible  since  the  linkages  between  policy  instruments  and  prices  were  somewhat
uncertain and contained the long and variable lags.
These  problems  led to  two  new  issues  which  brought  about  a  revolution  in  the  approach  to  central
banking. These are transparency and improved forecasting.
Clearly, monetary policy is most effective in the presence of a firmly established nominal anchor, and
the more understandable that anchor is to the public the better. An effective commitment to long-run
price stability is just such a nominal anchor that the target rate of inflation communicates to the public
the price level the central bank is aiming to achieve at specified dates in the future.
Any move away from policy rules for long periods must face and deal with long and variable lags in
the  economy’s  response  to  changes  in  policy  stance.  Improved  modeling  and  forecasting  is  giving
central banks increasing confidence in basing current policy decisions on expected future outcomes.
transparent;
accountable;
When  we  sum  up  these  developments  in  monetary  policy,  we  need  a  monetary  framework  which
includes the following components. It should be:
• 
• 
• 
• 
This  is  also  why  the  IT  (inflation  targeting)  countries  introduced  these  institutional  and  operational
features into their monetary policy frameworks.
predictable and easy-to-monitor; and
reliable.
Before passing to the key issues for the success of IT regime, I would briefly like to focus on the basic
key requirements of the inflation targeting framework in the literature. These are:
• 
The public announcement of medium-term numerical targets for inflation with due advance
notice.
BIS Review 95/2000
2
   The  recognition  of  price  stability  as  the  sole  objective  of  monetary  policy  without  other
nominal targets.
Increased  transparency  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  through  communication  with  the
public and the markets about the plans, objectives and decisions of the monetary authorities.
An independent central bank both in the context of the institutional and operational arena.
Development of appropriate policy instruments and a clear understanding of the underlying
monetary policy transmission mechanism or at least a reliable model for forecasting medium
to long-run inflation.
The  announcement  of  inflation  targets  communicates  the  central  bank’s  intentions  to  the  financial
markets  and  to  the  public,  and  in  doing  so  helps  to  reduce  uncertainty  about  the  future  course  of
inflation. Many of the costs of inflation arise from this uncertainty or variability rather than from its
level; for example, uncertainty about inflation exacerbates the volatility of relative prices and increases
the riskiness of non-indexed financial instruments and contracts set in nominal terms.
By  making  explicit  the  central  bank’s  medium-term  policy  intentions,  inflation  targets  improve
planning in the private sector, enhance the public debate about the direction of monetary policy, and
increase the accountability of the central bank.
Under an inflation targeting  regime  the  central  bank  would be  forced  to  calculate  and  publicize  the
long-run  implications  of  its  short-run  actions,  thus  ensuring  that  they  would  be  subject  to  public
scrutiny and debate. To the extent that the central bank governors dislike admitting publicly that they
may miss their long-run inflation targets, the existence of an inflation targeting framework provides an
incentive for the central bank to limit its short-run opportunism.
The  advantage  of  the  inflation targeting  regime  is its  great  emphasis  on  the  regular  communication
with  the  public  and  transparency.  This  property  plays  an  important  role  in  the  success  of  inflation
targeting, particularly in the industrialized countries. The policy makers in the developed countries use
every opportunity to communicate with public speeches, and takes a step further by way of inflation
reports.
Transparency  and  openness  of  the  operating  framework  of  monetary  policy  can  bring  important
credibility gains, and institutional arrangements such as greater independence of the central bank can
be helpful in this regard. European Central Bank and central banks in the EU zone are good examples
for a model. Hence, it is perhaps not surprising that in many countries the adoption of official inflation
targets  has  been  accompanied  by  moves  toward  central  bank  independence  and  accountability.
Nowadays,  central  banks  are  increasingly  publishing  information  on  their  policies  that  they  would
have  considered  state  secrets  only  twenty  years  ago,  like  minutes  of  board  meetings  and  policy
models.
The key for the success of inflation targeting is the existence of a strong institutional commitment to
price  stability.  This  is  particularly  important  in  emerging  markets  that  have  had  a  past  history  of
monetary  mismanagement.  The  institutional  commitment  involves  having  a  central  bank  that:  1)  is
insulated  from  political  interference;  2)  has  full  and  exclusive  control  over  the  setting  of  monetary
policy instruments and 3) has a mandate to achieve price stability as its primary goal.
To  conclude  with,  I  will  stress  once  more  that  the  IT  approach  appears  to  be  very  propitious  for
emerging  market  countries  in  converging  with  international  levels  of  inflation.  However,  concrete
macro fundamentals still remains the indispensable condition for preserving price stability under any
monetary policy framework.
Now, I would like to leave the floor to Mr Douglas Laxton who is one of the senior economists in the
Research Department of the Fund.
Thank you.
3
BIS Review 95/2000
