Urban Bäckström: The current situation for monetary policy
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, before the Standing Committee on
Finance, Stockholm, on 10 October 2000.
 It  is  gratifying  to  be  able  to  note,  as  on  so  many  of  my  previous  appearances  here,  that  economic
developments  in  Sweden  are  impressive.  Having  achieved  a  growth  rate  in  the  past  six  years  that
averages  3%,  it  seems  that  our  economy  is  now  expanding  at  an  annual  rate  of  around  3  to  4%.
Employment has really taken off. To date this year the number of people in work is 70,000 higher than
in  the  same  period  of  1999.  I  can  also  note,  once  again,  that  notwithstanding  the  rapid  economic
growth, the rate of inflation has remained moderate.
But these favourable developments do not mean that the Riksbank can sit back and relax. The path
ahead contains a number of risks to which we must be alert.
What lies behind the favourable economic trend?
A basic factor behind the Swedish economy’s favourable path is, in my opinion, the economic policy
realignment that has been carried out in the past decade and a half. Credit and currency markets have
been  deregulated,  the  tax  system  has  been reformed,  components of the transfers  system  have  been
modified  and  competitive  pressure  has  increased.  All  this  has  helped  improve  the  workings  of  our
economy. Then there is economic policy’s commitment to stability, with price stability as a statutory
objective, as well as a successful consolidation of the government finances.
In the inflation forecast we are presenting today, productivity growth is judged to be marginally higher
than we foresaw in the June forecast. That in itself is a sign that the economy is functioning better.
The Riksbank’s assessment of productivity has been revised gradually over the past few years. Higher
productivity  means  that  more  can  be  produced  with  the  same  input  of  resources.  So  a  lasting
improvement  raises  the  economy’s  potential  long-term  output. The higher  productivity  growth  does
not seem to be solely connected with the economy’s upward phase. Whereas productivity growth in
the  period  from  1974  to  1993,  for  example,  averaged  less  than  1.5%  a  year,  the  average  rate  since
1994 has been almost 2%.
At the same time I want to underscore that there are not yet any clear signs of the kind of accelerating
productivity  growth  which  has  occurred  in  the  United  States.  One  explanation  for  the  discrepancy
between our economies may lie in the different ways in which productivity is measured in the United
States and in Europe. There are also some indications that productivity growth may accelerate in the
future but they are still too uncertain to support any more far-reaching conclusions in the formation of
monetary policy.
It  is  accordingly  conceivable  that  the  Swedish  economy  will  move  into  a  process  with  accelerating
productivity growth but let us wait until that happens before incorporating it in our expectations and
policy decisions. Our economy is developing favourably enough as it is.
A  growth  process driven  by  rising  investment  and  productivity  can  result  in  good  circles.  To  some
extent,  that  can  be  said  to  have  been  the  case  in  recent  years.  It  accordingly  helps  to  explain  the
favourable  economic  developments  in  Sweden.  Another  cause  lies  in  the  various  deregulations  that
have been implemented.
1
BIS Review 87/2000
Inflation this year improved by deregulation and competition
Thus,  it  is  other  positive  supply  side  effects  that  have  helped  to  achieve  the  rapid  output  growth
without generating inflationary impulses. The effects have come from the deregulation of electricity
and telecom markets, as well as from the EU’s agricultural reform. Meanwhile, the temporarily lower
rate of inflation  has  meant  that real  wage  growth  has  exceeded expectations  and  thereby  acted  as a
general demand stimulus.
On  the  whole,  however,  the  effects  are  of  the  one-off  kind  that  lower  the  price  level  and  stimulate
demand for just a limited period. But if these effects have a gradual impact on different segments of
the economy, their overall impact on inflation may be spread over many years.
Another explanation for the favourable overall price trend is the generally stronger competition. It is
now more difficult for firms to raise prices in order to improve profit margins, as usually happens at
this stage in a business cycle. To some extent this may also be because firms know that price impulses
from  that  quarter  will  inevitably  cause  the  Riksbank  to  raise  the  instrumental  rate.  To  achieve  a
reasonable return on capital, firms are obliged instead to make production more efficient. That tends to
result in better productivity.
The increased oil prices can be cited correspondingly as an example of a negative supply shock. That
is not an entirely adequate description, however, because to a certain extent, rising oil prices have to
do with the better global activity, which normally leads to a general increase in commodity prices. The
oil price increases tend to push prices up and curb output. But so far, the combined impact of all the
supply shocks seems to be positive, that is, lower inflation and high demand growth.
Larger amount of unutilised resources
Yet  another  explanation  for  the  moderate  path  of  inflation  could  be  that  the  amount  of  unutilised
resources  is  larger than  we - and  many  others - counted  on  earlier.  Last autumn,  for  example,  many
observers  believed,  along  with  the  Riksbank,  that  labour  shortages  would  lead  to  increased  price
pressure  via  higher  wages.  But  our  fears  have  not  yet  been  confirmed.  Wage  increases  have  been
moderate even though the increase in employment is the highest for 40 years and unemployment has
dropped  to a  level  that few  believed  would  be feasible  after  the  profound  crisis  in  the  early  1990s.
Moreover, the labour shortage figures in the Swedish economy have continued to be moderate.
More people have joined the labour  market.  Many  of  those  who  were full-time  students  earlier  and
thus not classified as participating in the labour force have now found work. The number of persons on
labour  market  programmes  has  also  fallen,  thereby  making  a  further  contribution  to  the  increased
labour supply and helping to meet demand.
These are some signs that the extent of the unutilised resources has been somewhat larger than allowed
for  earlier.  We  have  therefore  gradually  altered  our  appraisal  of  resource  utilisation  in  the  Swedish
economy in recent years.
There  are,  accordingly,  a  number  of  factors  that  have  contributed  to  such  a  good  economic
development in recent years. A combination of favourable circumstances has so far made it possible to
combine high total demand with price stability.
But if the strong demand continues, sooner or later there will be labour shortage situations. Shortages
of  labour  with  certain  qualifications  already  exist  in  some  regions.  As  the  labour  market  becomes
increasingly tight and shortages arise more generally, the risk of accelerating wage and price increases
will grow. Then, if not before, the repo rate will have to be raised.
The present assessment
Today the Riksbank is presenting a new economic assessment of the coming one to two years. The
general features of the picture are the same as in our June report. Although the economy has moved
further  along  the  upward  phase,  we  continue  to  believe  in  a  main  scenario  that  combines  a  strong
BIS Review 87/2000
2
economic trend with no unduly alarming inflationary tendencies. It is important to note, however, that
there are also a number of clear risks that we must keep an eye on in the future.
Monetary policy is currently formulated on the basis of an assessment of inflation excluding transitory
effects from indirect taxes, subsidies and house mortgage interest expenditure (UND1X). In the main
scenario in the Inflation Report, UND1X inflation with an unchanged repo rate of 3.75% is forecast to
be  1.5%  one  year  ahead  and  1.9%  after  two  years.  When  various  alternative  paths  are  taken  into
account - above  all  the  risks  of  a  higher  oil  price,  a  weaker  exchange  rate  and  more  rapid  wage
increases - the  rates  of  inflation  are  judged  to  be  somewhat  higher,  namely  1.6%  and  2.1%,
respectively.
The inflation assessment starts from a continuation of strong international economic activity. Together
with  rising  consumption  and  a  favourable  development  of  investment,  this  provides  conditions  for
further rapid growth in Sweden, too. GDP growth in the main scenario is forecast to be 4% this year,
3.7% in 2001 and 3% in 2002. Compared with the June Report, only minor revisions have been made
to  GDP  growth  in  Sweden  up  to  2002.  Neither  has  the  inflation  forecast  been  altered  more  than
marginally. That future inflation is not higher, even though the economic upswing is continuing and
the  forecast  horizon  has  been  shifted  ahead,  is  partly  a  consequence  of  the  amount  of  unutilised
resources now being considered to be somewhat larger.  Wage increases  are judged  to  be somewhat
lower, accompanied by marginally higher productivity growth. In the short run, however, inflation is
expected to be somewhat higher than forecast in June, mainly because the oil price is higher and the
exchange rate somewhat weaker.
While the oil price and exchange rate assessments have been revised in the light of developments in
the  summer  and  early  autumn,  the  forecast  of  inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead  still  counts  on  a
successive appreciation of the krona and a gradual fall in the price of oil. However, the uncertainty is
considerable. A higher oil price and a weaker exchange rate could lead to inflation rising more rapidly
than assumed in the main scenario.
The  assumption  of  a  somewhat  lower  rate  of  wage  increases  is  supported  by,  for  example,  wage
outcomes  to  date  this  year  as  well  as  inflation  expectations  that  are  relatively  low  and  stable.  Still,
there  is  considered  to  be  some  risk,  albeit  relatively  small,  of  a  development  of  wages  that  is
considerably stronger, for example as a result of negotiators’ demands for parity and compensation.
Together with confidence in the low-inflation policy, the situation in the labour market and the coming
wage negotiations will be of crucial importance for the future formation of monetary policy.
The present decision to leave the repo rate unchanged for yet another while is to be seen in the light of
the  assessment  that  for  virtually  the  whole  of  the  time  horizon  the  Riksbank  currently  appraises,
inflation  is  calculated  to  be  below  2%.  When  various  alternative  paths  are  incorporated  in  the
assessment, however, inflation two years ahead is marginally above the target. The picture of a strong
upswing in the Swedish economy still holds, with rising resource utilisation in the labour market, for
example. That suggests that the repo rate may need to be raised in the future.
3
BIS Review 87/2000
