Svein Gjedrem: Norwegian monetary policy
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank,  held  in  Copenhagen  on
17 November 2000.
 Introduction
I am happy to have this opportunity to speak to you here in Copenhagen about trends in the Norwegian
economy and about Norwegian monetary policy.
Norway’s  choice  of  monetary  policy  regime  is  closely  linked  to  the  structure  of  the  Norwegian
economy.  Norway  is  a  welfare  society  with  a  large  public  sector,  a  high  level  of  transfers  to
households and enterprises and high direct and indirect taxes. Our economy is also characterised by
the  great  significance  of  petroleum  activities.  We  have  a  growing  aquaculture  industry,  and  our
manufacturing is also partly resource-based. The engineering industry - which is substantial - is partly
based  on  petroleum  activities.  The  exposed  sector  of  the  mainland  economy  has  been  fragile  and
vulnerable.  A  key  concern  in  economic  policy  since  the  1970s  has  been  to  avoid  undermining  the
exposed  sector  too  much,  in  view  of  our  desire  to  avoid  becoming  too  dependent  on  petroleum
revenues. In this address I will discuss the relationship between the special structure of the Norwegian
economy  and  Norwegian  monetary  policy.  I  will  attempt  to  shed  some  light  on  certain  differences
between  the  Norwegian  and  Danish  economies,  and  how  these  differences  have  influenced  the
formulation of monetary policy.
Background
Oil production started in the early 1970s and has gradually increased. Forecasts show that production
will  peak  in  2002,  and  thereafter  decrease  gradually.  Gas  production  is  expected  to  continue  to
increase in the years ahead, and will account for a growing proportion of total petroleum production.
The long-term forecasts for oil and gas extraction are highly uncertain, and future price movements for
oil,  market  opportunities  for  gas  and  production  and  extraction  costs  in  the  petroleum  sector  are
shrouded in uncertainty.
1
BIS Review 105/2000
The  revenues  from  the  petroleum  sector  are  of  great  significance  to  the  Norwegian  economy  as  a
whole,  and  to  the  public  sector  in  particular.  In  the  1990s,  the  export  value  of  oil  accounted  for
roughly one third of total exports excluding ships and oil rigs.
Government revenues from petroleum activities  are  currently  extremely  high,  due  to  high  oil  prices
coupled with high production volumes. Current projections indicate that petroleum revenues will peak
in 2002, and thereafter decline in pace with the production volume and lower oil prices.
BIS Review 105/2000
2
Government  revenues  from  petroleum  activities  have  contributed  to  substantial  government  budget
surpluses in recent years. As can be seen from the chart, considerable surpluses are also expected in
the next few years. The amount of petroleum revenues used to finance public expenditure varies from
one year to the next. A large portion of the revenues is saved, and is invested in foreign equities and
bonds through the Government Petroleum Fund.
Long-term fiscal policy challenges - the role of the Government Petroleum Fund
Nevertheless,  the  Norwegian  economy  is  facing  considerable  challenges  as  a  result  of  an  ageing
population and a marked rise in pension expenses and in the cost of nursing and care services.
The  number  of  old-age  and  disability  pensioners  is  estimated  to  rise  by  50%  by  2030,  and  central
government expenditure on old-age and disability pensions is expected to increase from approximately
7% of GDP in 2000 to 15% in 30 years’ time.
3
BIS Review 105/2000
In order to meet these long-term fiscal policy challenges, it is appropriate for resources to be put aside
in times of high petroleum revenues. The larger the Petroleum Fund, the less dependent we will be on
petroleum revenues in the future.
The  Norwegian  Ministry  of  Finance  assesses  the  long-term  outlook  for  public  expenditure  using
generational accounts.1 Such accounts can be used to assess whether the tax burden will need to be
increased in the future to meet the government’s long-term social security obligations and to maintain
public services and amenities.
The  calculations  presented  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance2  indicate  that  the  generational  accounts  are
more  or  less  balanced.  The  ministry  emphasises  the  uncertainty  shrouding  this  type  of  long-term
assessment of fiscal policy.
Fluctuations in the oil price and petroleum earnings also create challenges for economy policy in the
short and medium term.
Let us suppose that the oil price temporarily increased by USD 1 per barrel. This is a small change,
well within normal variations from one year to the next. Government revenues - and thus the budget
surplus  -  would  increase  by  almost  1%  of  Norway’s  annual  GDP.  If  the  increase  in  petroleum
revenues is used in Norway, it corresponds to almost half of the annual growth in the non-oil economy
in a normal year. If the private sector of the economy is also expanding, and the economy is already
close to capacity, this policy would swiftly lead to strong pressures on the resources in the economy.
This  would  result  in  a  rise  in  wages  and  prices,  and  would  also  lead  to  unstable  conditions  in  the
foreign exchange market.
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  shall  serve  as  a  buffer  against  short-term  fluctuations  in  oil
revenues. As large portions of the revenues from oil activities accrue to the state, fluctuations in oil
prices and oil revenues will primarily result in changes in allocations to the Petroleum Fund. Since all
of the capital in the Petroleum Fund is invested abroad, such changes will in principle not influence
1
2
See Auerbach et al (1993).
See Report to the Storting No 1 (2000-01), the National Budget for 2001.
BIS Review 105/2000
4
the level of activity in the economy. This makes the Norwegian economy more robust to fluctuations
in oil prices and thus less dependent on oil, even in the short run.
Some of the petroleum revenues are therefore used to finance central government budget expenditure.
The portion used by oil companies in Norway, partly to finance investment, also has an effect on the
mainland economy.
We  can  say  that  oil  revenues  enter  the  Norwegian  economy  through  an  external  and  an  internal
circular flow. The distinction between the external and internal circular flow is important for exchange
rate stability. This means, among other things, that short-term changes in oil prices shall not influence
the  orientation  of  economic  policy.  If  the  distinction  between  the  two  circular  flows  were  to  break
down, and the use of oil revenues were to fluctuate more in step with oil prices, we would have an
unstable economy, and hence an unstable exchange rate.
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  thus  has  two  objectives.  It  serves  as  a  buffer  for  the  mainland
economy  against  fluctuations  in  oil  revenues,  and  it  manages  a  considerable  portion  of  the
government’s financial wealth.
In  addition  to  capital  outflow  from  the  Petroleum  Fund,  in  recent  years  there  have  also  been
considerable capital outflows from various non-oil sectors. As in other Nordic countries, large asset
managers such as life insurance companies and securities funds accumulated substantial holdings of
foreign equities and bonds in the latter half of the 1990s. These portfolio investments abroad reflect a
desire to diversify risk. The substantial net outflow of long-term capital from the private sector may
partly reflect a thin Norwegian capital market. The Norwegian bond market is not very developed and
the total value of equities in the Norwegian market in relation to GDP is very low.
Norwegian monetary policy
In the long term, a country’s exchange rate tends to move in line with developments in domestic price
and cost inflation compared with other countries. If the level of prices in one country rises at a faster
pace, that country’s currency will tend to depreciate to the same extent over time. Empirical evidence
for these effects has been found for a number of countries, although the effects are relatively weak in
5
BIS Review 105/2000
the short term. However, substantial medium-term convergence in purchasing power parity has also
been found between Norway and its trading partners.3 This means that higher inflation in Norway than
in  our  trading  partners  has  been  followed  by  depreciation  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate.  This  is
reflected in the fact that the real krone exchange rate has been relatively stable over time.
Movements in the krone exchange rate against the German mark over the past 30 years may serve to
illustrate  this.  In  the  1970s  and  1980s  interest  rates  were  kept  low,  and  they  were  politically
determined.  Price  and  cost  inflation  was  generally  higher  than  that  of  Norway’s  trading  partners.
Frequent devaluations were used to redress the negative effects of high price and wage  inflation  on
3 See Akram (2000).
BIS Review 105/2000
6
competitiveness.  The  average  rate  of  increase  in  prices  between  1973  and  1987  was  almost  10%  -
twice as high as the level in Germany. The value of the Norwegian krone against the Deutsche mark
was nearly halved between 1973 and 1987. We paid about 2 kroner for 1 mark in 1973 and close to
4 kroner in 1987. Since 1987, the krone exchange rate against the Deutsche mark has remained more
or  less  unchanged.  During  this  period,  price  inflation  in  Norway  has  been  no  higher  than  that  in
Germany.
We  cannot  be  sure  how  fast  the  inflation  differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries  will
translate into changes in nominal exchange rates in the future. Nevertheless, we must expect that any
differences in the rate of inflation may be a key cause of changes in the nominal krone exchange rate
over time.
The Norwegian monetary authorities abandoned the devaluation approach in 1986. From 1986 to 1992
Norway had a fixed exchange rate with a defined central rate and fluctuation margins. This system was
abandoned  in  1992  following  extensive  speculation  against  the  krone  in  connection  with  the
turbulence in European exchange markets. After the krone was allowed to float on 10 December 1992,
the guidelines for monetary policy were also revised. Monetary policy was still oriented towards the
objective  of  krone  exchange  rate  stability,  but  no  specific  central  rate  with  fluctuation  margins  was
stipulated.
The krone depreciated slightly in 1992, but thereafter it remained relatively stable. Looking back at
developments  in  the  Norwegian  foreign  exchange  market  in the  1990s, no  significant  change  really
appears to have occurred in 1992.
However, there was a marked shift in January 1997. From that time, daily and monthly variations in
the krone exchange rate show that the krone is floating. Our analyses suggest that oil price fluctuations
are just one of several contributory factors behind the variation in the krone exchange rate in recent
years.4 In the short term the krone exchange rate is also affected by uncertainty in the global economy
and turbulence in international financial markets.
The  Exchange  Rate  Regulation  -  which  is  the  mandate  assigned  to  Norges  Bank  by  the  political
authorities  -  states that  monetary  policy  shall be  aimed  at  maintaining  a  stable  krone  exchange  rate
4 See Bernhardsen and Røisland (2000).
7
BIS Review 105/2000
against European currencies. Since 1 January 1999, Norges Bank has defined European currencies as
the euro.
The Exchange Rate Regulation takes into account that the krone exchange rate may remain outside its
normal  range.  In  the  event  of  significant  changes  in  the  exchange  rate,  Norges  Bank  shall  orient
instruments  with  a  view  to  returning  the  exchange  rate  over  time  to  its  initial  range.  The  concept
“significant changes” is not quantified. The term  must  be  given  an  economic  content.  Norges  Bank
considers an exchange rate change to be significant if it influences expectations concerning price and
cost inflation to the extent that the change in the exchange rate may become self-reinforcing.
In  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  Norges  Bank  places  emphasis  on  satisfying  the  fundamental
preconditions for exchange rate stability against the euro: instruments must be oriented with a view to
reducing price and cost inflation to the level aimed at by the European Central Bank (ECB). At the
BIS Review 105/2000
8
same  time,  monetary  policy  must  not  in  itself  contribute  to  deflationary  recessions,  as  this  could
undermine confidence in the krone.
According  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  main  objective  of  the  ECB  is  the  maintenance  of  price
stability. The ECB has defined price stability as inflation of less than 2%.
Inflation in Norway cannot remain higher than inflation in the euro area year after year without this
having consequences for the exchange rate of the Norwegian krone against the euro. If price and cost
inflation  remains  higher  than  the  rate  of  increase  aimed  at  by  the  ECB  over  a  long  period,  our
experience indicates that the krone will depreciate against the euro sooner or later. Norges Bank must
therefore counter such a development.
There  are  institutional  differences  between  the  Norwegian  monetary  policy  regime  and  monetary
policy in countries with an inflation target.
Norges Bank will inform the government authorities (via the Ministry of Finance) if measures other
than those available to the central bank are required in the event that the krone exchange rate cannot be
returned to its initial range without creating inflation or a deflationary recession. For instance, in the
UK the Bank of England reports to the Treasury if inflation deviates by more than 1 percentage point
from  the  inflation  target  of  2½%.  Other  inflation  targeting  countries  have  chosen  various  other
reporting arrangements.
The Norwegian system allows economic policy as a whole to focus more strongly on movements in
exchange rates. The reason for this is the considerable emphasis placed on the consideration of healthy
growth in the exposed sector. This in turn reflects the risk of the Norwegian economy becoming too
dependent on oil. In the medium term, growth in the exposed sector is affected to a large degree by the
proportion of petroleum revenues included in the Norwegian economy via the government budget.
With large and to some extent varying budget revenues, the basis for determining central government
expenditure  and  taxes  from  one  year  to  the  next  may  easily  be  impaired.  If  budget  expenditure  is
allowed  to  fluctuate  in  step  with  oil  prices,  the  result  may  be  abrupt  shifts  and  instability  in  the
Norwegian economy. Changes in oil prices may then quickly influence wage and price expectations,
the  exchange  rate  and  long-term  rates.  In  that  case  it  will  be  very  demanding  to  achieve  nominal
stability. Short-term interest rates will have to be adjusted frequently and sharply and will generally
reflect a high risk premium for the Norwegian krone. It is therefore important that the annual budgets
are anchored in a long-term strategy that takes into account that oil revenues can fluctuate from one
year to the next. It is an advantage if fiscal policy can also be used to counter fluctuations in demand
9
BIS Review 105/2000
and production. In this way fiscal policy can contribute to ensuring stable operating parameters for the
exposed sector. When fiscal policy is given responsibility for stabilisation policy, the government and
the Storting have a firmer basis for their annual budget decisions. The political authorities also place
emphasis  on  the  fact  that  by  using  the  fiscal  budget  to  stabilise  economic  growth,  they  are  able  to
dampen fluctuations in short-term interest rates. This is important because, for instance, dwellings are
to  a  large  extent  financed  through  short-rate  loans,  and  many  Norwegians  have  owner-occupied
dwellings.
It is the political authorities, ie the government and the Storting, which formulate the guidelines for
monetary policy in Norway. The Norges Bank Act also states that the King makes decisions regarding
the  exchange  rate  arrangement  for  the  krone.  The  Exchange  Rate  Regulation  is  based  on  this
provision. The actual conduct of monetary policy is the responsibility of Norges Bank. The Bank has
explained its interpretation of the Exchange Rate Regulation, and the Bank’s Executive Board makes
decisions concerning the use of monetary policy instruments.
Executive and advisory authority is invested in Norges Bank’s Executive Board, which consist of the
Central Bank Governor, the Deputy Central Bank Governor, and five external members appointed by
the government. As in Australia, it is thus a body consisting partly of external members which makes
decisions on interest rates. As in Australia and Canada, by law the political authorities have the right
to issue instructions to the central bank in matters of special importance. However, this right has never
been exercised.
The Norges Bank Act requires Norges Bank to inform the ministry when, in the opinion of the Bank,
there is a need for measures to be taken by others than the Bank in the field of monetary, credit or
foreign exchange policy.
For example, in a scenario with a sharp and prolonged fall in oil prices, the krone exchange rate may
remain outside the initial range for an extended period. If Norges Bank responds by raising interest
rates in order to force the krone back to its initial range, monetary policy could trigger a recession of a
type that will undermine confidence in the krone. Similarly, after an appreciation a situation may arise
in which interest rates must be set at such a low level to return the krone exchange rate to the initial
range  that this  results in  higher  inflation.  The  basis  for  exchange  rate  stability  is  weakened  in  both
cases. Hence, Norges Bank cannot with open eyes orient policy instruments in such a way that they
fuel inflation or lead to a deflationary recession.
If a situation arises where Norges Bank is not able to return the krone to its initial range without such
consequences, as already mentioned, the Bank will inform the government authorities that measures
BIS Review 105/2000
10
other than those available  to  the  Bank  are required. This  may  involve  recommendations  concerning
fiscal  measures  that  make  it  possible  to  return  the  krone  exchange  rate  to  its  initial  range  and  to
stabilise it. In the event of pronounced and prolonged shifts in the economy, fiscal policy and wage
determination  must  contribute  to  restoring  balance  in  the  economy.  However,  if  fundamental  and
permanent changes have taken place in the framework conditions for the Norwegian economy, it may
also be appropriate to consider a revision of the guidelines for monetary policy.
Monetary policy instruments
In theory, Norges Bank conducts its monetary policy through two main instruments: the interest rate
and exchange market interventions. However, in Norges Bank’s experience, extensive and sustained
interventions  to  influence  exchange  rates  have  yielded  poor  results.  Interventions  can  often  lead  to
game  situations  in  which  market  operators  regard  the  central  bank’s  attempts  to  influence  the
exchange rate as an interesting opportunity to make a profit. Events in  autumn  1992,  at  the  start  of
1997 and in autumn 1998 show that exchange market interventions cannot stem the pressure on the
krone. This is why Norges Bank’s primary instrument of monetary policy is the interest rate.
The  interest  rate  is  a  powerful  instrument  for  influencing  cyclical  trends,  and  thus  inflation,  in
Norway. Long-term fixed-rate financing is far less common in Norway than in Denmark, for instance
for financing dwellings. As a result, interest rate changes have a greater impact in the relatively short
term. However, the strong impact of the interest rate also places constraints on its use to underpin the
exchange rate.
The situation in Denmark, with its well-developed bond market, is somewhat different, since here the
short-term  interest  rate  has  rather  less  pronounced  effects  on  the  real  economy  and  prices,  and  can
therefore be used to a greater extent to underpin the exchange rate. Consequently, a monetary policy
strategy in which interventions are used to influence the exchange rate will have greater credibility,
and the risk of ending up in game situations with the market is smaller than in Norway.
Norges  Bank  does  not  intend  to  act  in  a  way  that  will  prompt  game  situations.  The  bank  may
nevertheless use interventions to a limited degree if the exchange rate moves significantly out of line
with what we consider to be reasonable on the basis of fundamentals or in the event of exceptional
short-term volatility in thin markets. In such circumstances, there is less risk of ending up in a game
situation against exchange market operators.
We  have  also  experienced  game  situations  in  which  one  or  more  major  operators  were  behind  the
krone  exchange  rate  fluctuations  at  the  same  time  as  they  took  speculative  positions  in  the  bond
market in the expectation that Norges Bank would raise its key interest rate to defend the krone. If we
focus too narrowly on the exchange rate when setting the interest rate, we are liable  to  end up  in  a
game  situation.  Speculators  have  little  to  gain  from  such  game  situations  if  Norges  Bank  adopts  a
gradualist approach and avoids abrupt changes in interest rates.
In practice, the interest rate is therefore the only monetary policy instrument available in Norwegian
monetary  policy.  The  interest  rate  can  influence  the  exchange  rate  directly  through  the  differential
between domestic and foreign interest rates, and indirectly through inflation expectations.
Higher interest rates normally make it more attractive to hold NOK-denominated assets. An increase
in the interest rate will result in an appreciation of the krone, and a lower interest rate will weaken the
krone.  However,  this  relationship  presupposes  that  the  market  is  confident  that  monetary  policy
provides the economy with a nominal anchor. In some situations, interest rate changes may have the
opposite effect. A higher interest rate can weaken the krone if it contributes to a deflationary recession,
and  a  lower  interest  rate  can  strengthen  the  krone  if  it  contributes  to  preventing  a  deflationary
recession. The interest rate only has a predictable effect on  the  krone  exchange  rate  when it  affects
price inflation in the right direction.
The interest rate functions in different ways in our two economies. There are also other dissimilarities
between the functioning of our respective economies and between our institutional frameworks which
may shed some light on the differences between our monetary policy regimes:
11
BIS Review 105/2000
 Denmark has a long history of a fixed exchange rate which inspires credibility;
Denmark’s  membership  of  ERM  II  provides  exchange  rate  policy  with  an  institutional
anchor;
Denmark has more stable terms of trade than Norway.
• 
Moreover,  there  is  strong  and  well-deserved  confidence  in  the  ability  of  fiscal  policy  to  stabilise
economic growth in Denmark.
The  most  substantial  changes  in  the  Norwegian  terms  of  trade  are  due  to  fluctuating  oil  prices.
Variations in Denmark’s terms of trade are negligible.
In  this  sense  the  Norwegian  economy  has  more  in  common  with  countries  like  New  Zealand  and
Australia, which are also large exporters of commodities. A substantial change in the terms of trade
BIS Review 105/2000
12
translates into considerable changes in  these  countries’  earnings  and  balance of  payments.  Over  the
years this has resulted in sizeable exchange rate fluctuations.
The exchange rate is a buffer against changes in the terms of trade. While a country like Denmark has
maintained a stable exchange rate, commodity-producing countries typically experience fluctuations in
the exchange rate in tandem with changes in the terms of trade.
In New Zealand, Australia and many other countries monetary policy is oriented directly towards price
stability,  and  these  countries  permit  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.  This  means  that
monetary policy bears the primary responsibility for price stability, whereas fiscal policy is to a greater
extent oriented towards long-term stability in government finances.
In  Norway,  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  acts  as  a  buffer  against  fluctuations  in  petroleum
revenues. This makes the Norwegian economy more robust and in the short term less dependent on oil,
at least as long as the government budget is running a substantial surplus. The Government Petroleum
Fund is  Norway’s  most  important  shock  absorber against  shifts in  the  terms  of trade. This  explains
why we have had far greater exchange rate stability than New Zealand or Australia.
For  the  past  15  years,  cyclical  trends  in  Norway  have  been  desynchronised  in  relation  to  other
European  countries.  Because  of  the  stagnation  in  the  1990s,  inflation  has  been  particularly  low  in
Europe in recent years. Norway, on the other hand, experienced a long period of economic expansion
in the 1990s. Since 1997, price inflation in Norway has been higher than in the euro area countries.
This is reflected in the higher level of interest rates in Norway compared with the euro area. Even if
instruments are oriented with a view to stability in the krone exchange rate against the euro, cyclical
differences will result in inflation differentials between Norway and euro area countries.
This year we have seen a tendency for the krone exchange rate against the euro to be strong at times.
This is due in part to the weakness of the euro, not least against the US dollar and the Japanese yen.
On the other hand, the effective krone exchange rate - the krone exchange rate measured against an
average of our trading partners’ currencies - has not been particularly strong. If Norges Bank were to
respond  to  this  situation  by  using  the  interest  rate  to  attempt  to  fine-tune  the  krone  exchange  rate
against the euro in the short term, this would lead to higher price and cost inflation. This would lay the
foundation for subsequent instability in the krone exchange rate.
13
BIS Review 105/2000
The orientation of monetary policy in the past year (and in the future)
Projections  of  future  inflation  and  macroeconomic  developments  play  an  important  part  in  the
orientation of monetary policy. Norges Bank’s projections are published in quarterly Inflation Reports,
which  provide  an  overview  of  recent  price  trends  and  factors  influencing  price  and  cost  inflation.
These Inflation Reports contain a review of the outlook for the Norwegian economy, and the Bank’s
projections  of  inflation  with  a  two-year  horizon.  Norges  Bank’s  assessments  are  summarised  in  a
leader in each report.
If  the  Bank’s  inflation  projections,  for  a  given  interest  rate  scenario,  do  not  approach  the  level  of
inflation aimed at by the euro area countries at a two to three-year horizon, this will constitute grounds
for  adjusting  interest  rates.  This  system  has  similarities  with  what  Lars  Svensson  terms  “inflation
forecast targeting”.
In recent years we have attached importance to contributing to a transparent monetary policy. This is
in keeping with trends in many other countries. Transparency promotes predictability in the behaviour
of the central bank and helps diminish uncertainty for all participants in the economy. It is our hope
that in this way the Norwegian economy will be less exposed to doubt and speculation concerning the
setting of interest rates, with attendant greater stability in the formation of expectations and smoother
movements in long-term interest rates. We aim to create a pattern of continuity and consistency in the
implementation of monetary policy.
Developments  in  financial  indicators  do  not  indicate  that  there  is  great  uncertainty  in  the  markets
regarding  developments  in  the  internal  and  external  value  of  the  Norwegian  krone.  For  instance,
developments in bond yields show that the risk premium has been relatively stable in recent years. The
pricing of the Norwegian krone in the options market indicates that substantial uncertainty with regard
to movements in the value of the krone against the euro is not factored into the price of options.
Norges Bank’s Executive Board engages in a broad discussion of monetary policy every six weeks.
Any  decisions  concerning  interest  rate  changes  or  other  important  changes  in  the  use  of  monetary
policy  instruments  are  normally  taken  at  these  meetings.  Monetary  policy  decisions  made  by  the
Executive Board (be they decisions to change key rates or to leave them unchanged) are announced in
press  releases  at  2  pm  on  the  day  of  the  meeting.  Monetary  policy  decisions  usually  include  a
statement  of  bias,  ie  the  probability  that  the  next  change  in  interest  rates  will  be  an  increase  or  a
reduction. At the same time as the press release, a press conference is held at which a more detailed
account of the background for the decision is given.
BIS Review 105/2000
14
15
BIS Review 105/2000
On 20 September this year, Norges Bank decided to increase its key interest rate, the deposit rate, by
0.25  percentage  point  to  7%.  This  has  brought  the  overall  increase  in  interest  rates  this  year  to
1.5 percentage  points.  This  has  happened  in  a  climate  of  interest  rate  rises  in  other  countries  and  a
relatively  weak  effective  krone  exchange  rate.  Moreover,  the  past  year  has  seen  increased  risk  that
price and cost inflation may remain considerably higher in Norway than in other European countries.
Norges Bank had no choice but to counter this, in order to satisfy the fundamental preconditions for
exchange rate stability. This is why the Bank has raised its key rates.
I would like to conclude by once again thanking you for inviting me to give this account of the basis
for Norwegian monetary policy.
References:
Akram, Q F (2000): “PPP despite real shocks: An empirical analysis of the Norwegian real exchange
rate”. Working paper 2000/7, Norges Bank, Oslo.
Auerbach,  Alan  J,  Jagadesh  Gokhale,  Laurence  J  Kotlikoff  and  Erling  Steigum  Jr:  “Generational
Accounting in Norway: Is Norway Overconsuming Its Petroleum Wealth?” Report No 75, Foundation
for Research in Economics and Business Administration, Bergen 1993.
Bernhardsen,  Tom  and  Øistein  Røisland  (2000):  “Factors  affecting  the  krone  exchange  rate”,
Economic Bulletin No 4 2000 (to be published).-{}-
Report to the Storting No 1 (2000-2001), National Budget for 2001.
BIS Review 105/2000
16
