Otmar Issing: Monetary policy in a new environment
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Joint  Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the
challenges for economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 The new monetary policy environment - challenges for the ECB
1.
On 1 January 1999 the European Central Bank (ECB) assumed responsibility for monetary policy in
the euro area - the second largest economic area in the world after the United States. Overnight, the
euro became the currency of almost 300 million people. The transfer of responsibility for  monetary
policy  from  eleven  national  central  banks  -  many  of  them  characterised  by  long  histories  and
impressive track records - to a new supranational institution was met with a great deal of scepticism.
Sceptics noted the historically unique situation created by the asymmetry between, on the one hand, a
single central bank and, on the other, eleven - and, with the participation of Greece from January 2001,
soon to be twelve - national governments.
The  adoption  of  the  single  currency  marked  a  watershed  in  the  history  of  European  integration.  It
constituted a fitting climax to what was overall a period of impressive, if at times hesitant, progress in
this direction through the second half of the 20th century. In the 21st century too, European integration
will no  doubt  enjoy  periods  of  progress  punctuated  by  occasional  setbacks.  For  example,  while  the
enlargement of the European Union (EU) is an important goal, it will call into question the EU’s entire
institutional  structure.  The  single  monetary  policy  will  also  be  affected  by  the  accession  of  new
members.
This is simply one example of what will be the main theme of my remarks. Both the European Central
Bank  and  the  single  monetary  policy  are  -  and  will  continue  to  be  -  faced  with  great  challenges.
Among these challenges numbers the continuing problem of high unemployment. Unemployment in
the euro area remains intolerably high and constitutes the main economic and social problem facing
policy makers. The euro area economy cannot exploit its potential for employment and real economic
growth  unless  the  implementation  of  appropriate  structural  reforms  results  in  more  flexible  labour
markets, less regulation in product markets and lower taxation. The best contribution monetary policy
can make in this regard is to maintain price stability and low inflation expectations, thereby providing
an environment in which structural reforms will work most effectively.
This having been said, an assessment made today of the first 21 months of European monetary policy
confirms that the single monetary policy has been introduced with resounding success. During its short
period  of  existence,  the  ECB  can claim  to  have  gained the  confidence  of  investors  in  the  sustained
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The  financial  markets  act  as  objective  and  pitiless
judges  in  this respect. The  development  of  the  long-term  interest rate and  other  financial  indicators
confirm the credibility of the monetary policy of the ECB.
What makes these successes even more satisfying is that they have been achieved in what has often
been a difficult and uncertain environment. The introduction of the euro took place in the aftermath of
the  Asian  and  Russian  financial  crises  of  1997-98,  which  served  to  weaken  external  demand  and
increased  uncertainty.  Furthermore,  the  past  years  have  seen  a  period  of  exceptional  volatility  in
international oil prices, which has had implications for price developments.
The  uncertainties  related  to  these  economic  shocks  are  compounded  by  the  significant  regime  shift
associated with the transition to Stage Three of Monetary Union. The introduction of the euro has no
doubt changed - and continues to change - the way expectations are formed in the euro area, thereby
altering  forward-looking  economic  behaviour.  The  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  financial  market,
consumption, investment, and wage bargaining - and therefore the whole transmission mechanism of
1
BIS Review 82/2000
monetary  policy  to  developments  in  the  price  level  -  have  been  among  the  important  economic
relationships more or less affected by this regime shift.
Of course, in itself this may be no bad thing. Indeed, the contribution of the regime shift implied by
the  transition  to  Stage  Three  to  changing  both  public  and  private  sector  behaviour  in  favourable
directions  may  be  one  of  the  largest  gains  that  the  euro  area  can  extract  from  Monetary  Union.
Nevertheless, these changes have complicated the implementation of monetary policy, at least in the
short  term,  as  past  relationships  between  macroeconomic  variables  may  no  longer  be  sufficiently
reliable to constitute a basis for policy decisions.
The  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to the  price  level  in  the  euro  area  is  therefore  not
known  with  certainty.  This  is  hardly  unique  in  itself  -  after  all,  no  central  bank  operates  in  an
environment  of  complete  certainty.  However,  uncertainty  about  the  transmission  mechanism  is
exacerbated not only by the regime shift associated with the introduction of the euro, but also by the
fact that, until quite recently, harmonised and comprehensive data have simply not been collected or
constructed for the new monetary and economic area EMU created. Although a growing number of
area-wide statistics are now available, they are based on new concepts, and the properties of the series
are sometimes not yet well known. In some cases, the long runs of high quality back-data required for
empirical economic analysis are unavailable.
These uncertainties - arising directly from the transition to Stage Three itself - are both compounded
by, and inter-related with, the broader economic context in which Monetary Union was established.
The increasing internationalisation of the global economy, and the current rapid pace of technological
change, have affected all sectors of the economy, and the banking and financial systems in particular.
One manifestation of these changes is the current intensive debate about the possible emergence of a
so-called “New Economy” in the euro area. This debate is watched closely at the ECB and possible
indications  of  a  New  Economy  are  carefully  monitored.  As  yet,  there  appears  to  be  relatively  little
evidence  of  a  New  Economy.  Further  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area  may  be  required  if  the
introduction  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies  are  to  yield  faster  productivity
growth.
All  the  factors  I  have  just  described  will  alter  the  relationships  between  economic  variables  that
monetary policy makers have used as a guide to their decisions in the past. Nevertheless, I believe the
ECB is well placed to meet the considerable challenges posed, inter alia, by these changes. It operates
within  a  well-designed  institutional  framework  that  clearly  delineates  its  responsibilities  and
objectives. It has articulated how these objectives will be achieved by announcing its monetary policy
strategy. And it has at its disposal a modern and efficient set of monetary policy instruments.
Against this background, today I should like to focus in particular on two important and topical issues
which are of direct relevance for monetary policy decisions: first, the role of the definition  of  price
stability  in  the  institutional  framework  of  the  ECB;  and  second,  the  role  of  forecasts  in  the  ECB’s
monetary policy strategy.
The institutional framework
2.
Monetary  policy  is  not  omnipotent.  Unfortunately,  this  was  not  always  recognised  in  the  design  of
institutional frameworks for monetary policy. In the past, central banks have often been charged with
meeting several, potentially conflicting, objectives. Because the central bank mandates underlying the
definition of these objectives failed to respect the neutrality  of  monetary  policy  with  respect to  real
variables over the medium term, many of these objectives were simply not realistic or achievable goals
for monetary policy. Unsurprisingly, the resulting inadequately designed institutional frameworks led
to poor overall economic outcomes.
Today,  with  the  regrettable  experience  of  high  and  rising  inflation  in  the  1970s  in  mind,  the
capabilities and limitations of monetary policy are better - although still not universally - understood.
A broad consensus now exists that the maintenance of price stability is the appropriate objective  of
monetary  policy.  This  consensus  is  rooted  in  the  belief  that  monetary  policy  makes  its  best
contribution  to  overall  economic  welfare  by  maintaining  price  stability  -  and  thereby  allowing  the
BIS Review 82/2000
2
relative price mechanism to work more efficiently. This proposition is strongly supported by a very
broad economic literature investigating the medium-term relationship between real economic growth
and price developments, both across countries and across time.
The  institutional  framework  for  the  single  monetary  policy  described  in  the  Treaty  establishing  the
European  Community  reflects this  economic  consensus.  Of  course,  the  Treaty  was  written  with  the
experience of the 1970s - and the results of the academic literature that emerged in the aftermath of
that unfortunate episode - in mind. First and foremost, the Treaty clarifies the objective of the ECB.
The  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  The  Treaty  therefore  establishes  a
clear  hierarchy  of  objectives  for  the  single  monetary  policy,  with  price  stability  unambiguously
assigned overriding importance.
The  experience  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  not  only  demonstrated  the  importance  of  assigning  central
banks  the  clear  objective  of  price  stability.  It  also  illustrated  the  advantages  of  central  bank
independence in the pursuit of this goal. A monetary  policy  subject to  short-term  political  concerns
and  influences  could  not  adopt  the  medium-term  orientation  required  to  maintain  stable  prices
credibly. Academic studies of the time consistency problem in monetary policy, such as the seminal
work of Barro and Gordon, offered an insight into this issue, while empirical evaluations showing a
correlation  between  central  bank  independence  and  greater  price  stability  provided  compelling
supporting  evidence.  By  the  early  1990s,  the  benefits  of  central  bank  independence  had  become
conventional  wisdom.  An  increasing  number  of  central  banks  achieved  greater  institutional
independence. This world-wide trend was reflected in the Maastricht Treaty, which made the ECB one
of the most independent central banks in the world.
Assigning  responsibility  for  an  important  public  policy  to  an  independent  institution  needs  to  be
accompanied  by  a  transparent  and  accountable  policy  framework.  In  a  democratic  society,  a  high
degree  of  transparency  and  accountability  in  monetary  policy  making  should  bolster  both  the
legitimacy  of  the  central  bank  and  public  support  for  its  price  stability  mandate.  At  the  same  time,
transparency and accountability impose an external discipline on policy makers which can add to the
credibility, and thereby the effectiveness, of monetary policy. The ECB has set high standards in both
regards  by  establishing  channels  for  communication  and  accountability  suited  to  the  specific,  and
distinctive, institutional and cultural setting in Europe.
I  will  return  to  the  important  issue  of  communication  later  in  my  remarks.  With  regard  to
accountability,  let  me  simply  highlight  one  crucial  point.  The  institutional  framework  for  monetary
policy in the euro area assigns the clear objective of price stability to an independent European Central
Bank.
Using a terminology developed in the academic literature, it is clear that the ECB enjoys “instrument
independence” - that is to say, the Governing Council of the ECB is fully responsible for monetary
policy  decisions  and  the  setting  of  monetary  policy  instruments.  Yet  the  ECB  is  not  “goal
independent”. The primary objective of the ECB is mandated by the Treaty - it is not chosen by the
Governing Council. The governments and parliaments of the Member States of the EU - representing
the people who elected them - have chosen to enshrine the primary objective of price stability in the
Treaty.  On  the  basis  of  sound  economic  argumentation,  this  gives  the  primary  objective  a
constitutional  status.  Acting  as  sovereign  bodies,  the  legislatures  -  but,  of  course,  not  the  central
bank - took a conscious decision to protect the mandate for monetary policy, namely price stability,
from the influence of short-term political considerations, such as changes in government or upcoming
elections.
Of course, in principle nothing is set in stone for eternity. The objective for monetary policy could also
be changed. A democratic procedure for such a change exists, namely an amendment of the Treaty.
This  is  a  constitutional  process  similar  to  that  which  originally  set  the  mandate  which  requires
approval by the legislatures of all Member States.
The status of the primary objective of price stability is therefore fundamentally different from that of
an  inflation  target  in  a  direct  inflation  targeting  regime.  Inflation  targets  are  typically  set  by  the
government of the day for a fixed and relatively short horizon. In contrast, in the euro area the primary
3
BIS Review 82/2000
objective  of  price  stability  has  a  special  constitutional  -  and  thus  lasting  -  status,  placing  it  above
shorter-term political influences.
Having been assigned the mandate to maintain price stability, the ECB - in view of its desire to  be
both  transparent  and  accountable  -  could  not  simply  have  remained  silent  on  how  it  interprets  this
concept.  Consequently,  drawing  on  the  successful  experience  of  those  central  banks  which  later
formed  the  Eurosystem,  in  October  1998  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided  to  publish  a
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  both  as  a  focus  for  inflation  expectations  and  to  provide  a
clear yardstick against which the public, its elected representatives and agents in the media, can hold
the ECB accountable. The Governing Council therefore defined price stability as an annual increase of
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%.
Many considerations went into the formulation of this definition. In theory and prima vista, it would
have been simpler to define price stability as a zero change in a specific price index. However, such an
approach  would  have  ignored  important  statistical  issues,  such  as  the  potential  existence  and
magnitude of so-called measurement bias in consumer price indices.
Nonetheless, one issue was clear. The ECB had no option other than to define its primary objective in
a way that deemed inflation rates above 2% in the medium term inconsistent with price stability. This
largely  reflects  the  legacy  of  the  definitions  of  price  stability  used  by  the  national  central  banks
(NCBs) prior to the irrevocable fixing of intra-euro area exchange rates at the start of January 1999. At
the  outset  of  Monetary  Union  with  the  introduction  of  a  wholly  new  currency,  it  was  extremely
important  that  the  public  was  reassured  that  the  environment  of  price  stability,  which  had  been
successfully achieved through the convergence process in the 1990s, was here to stay. Price stability
should not be viewed as a temporary phase, but rather as a lasting - indeed, permanent - feature of the
euro area economy.
Announcing a quantified definition of price stability and credibly committing to the maintenance of
price  stability  on  this  definition  helps  to  stabilise  medium-term  inflation  expectations,  thereby
improving  the  effectiveness  of  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability.  The  1980s  and  1990s
provide ample evidence of the costs of inflation. These are often most visible during the process of
disinflation, which is just the other unavoidable flip side of the preceding inflation. With price stability
achieved in the euro area at the start of Monetary Union, it was vital that the associated benefits were
“locked in” by the ECB.
It  is  especially  important  that  those  responsible  for  wage  developments  base  their  decisions  on  the
clear  commitment  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  to  maintaining  price  stability  over  the
medium  term.  Short-run  deviations  from  the  primary  objective  which  we  observed  in  past  months
should  clearly  not  be  taken  as  a  reason  to  end  the  process  of  wage  moderation  which  has  been  so
effective in contributing to the reduction of unemployment which we observed over the last years. It is
crucial that medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain safely below 2%.
The monetary policy strategy of the ECB
3.
The  most  difficult  task  for  the  European  Central  Bank  was  the  development  of  a  monetary  policy
strategy suitable for the new environment of Monetary Union. The definition of price stability which I
just explained is one of the key elements of this strategy. Regarding the other elements, the Council
recognised  that  options  that  had  been  tried  and  tested  in  a  completely  different  context  were,  for  a
number  of  reasons,  out  of  the  question.  While  it  was  important  to  learn  from  the  experiences  and
successes of other central banks, it was also crucial to recognise the new environment for monetary
policy making in the euro area, and acknowledge the high level of uncertainty which was an inevitable
result of the introduction of the new currency and the creation of such a large and complex currency
area.  A  broad  range  of  empirical  and  theoretical  findings  were  taken  into  account  in  this  unique
situation.
While  no  central  bank  can  afford  to  neglect  the  fact  that  ultimately  inflation  is  always  a  monetary
phenomenon, the conditions for a monetary target did not exist in the special circumstances prevailing
in the euro area at the outset of Monetary Union. Two important questions therefore arose: first, how
BIS Review 82/2000
4
could the central  bank  specifically  take into  account  the  importance of  money  and,  more  generally,
liquidity, for monetary policy making? Second, how should the ECB - in an honest and transparent
way -  account  for  the  fact  that,  at  least  up  to  now,  there  is  no  agreement  on  the  structure  of  the
economy in general, and the precise role of money in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy
in particular?
The Governing Council of the ECB has provided answers to both questions. As regards the first, the
Council decided to assign a prominent role to money. This prominent role was signalled to the public
by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  the  growth  of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate.  The
prominent  role  assigned  to  money  implies,  in  particular,  that  the  ECB  is  obliged  to  analyse  the
information content of monetary and credit aggregates with a view to identifying the nature of shocks
hitting the euro area economy and assessing the resulting risks to price stability.
The prominent role of money constitutes the “first pillar” of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. The
analyses underlying this pillar provide very valuable information which needs to be taken into account
in  forward-looking  monetary  policy  decisions  aimed  at  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the
medium  term.  Given  the  lags  in  monetary  transmission,  it  is  difficult  at  this  still  early  stage  of
Monetary Union to make a thorough assessment of the importance of the prominent role of money.
Nevertheless, with the benefit of hindsight, one can say that monetary analysis, and also the signals
given by “headline” growth rates of key monetary aggregates, have proved more reliable guides for
monetary policy decisions than many external observers anticipated when the strategy was announced
two  years  ago.  Of  course,  one  can  never  exclude  that  monetary  aggregates  may  be  significantly
distorted  in  the  future.  We  may  face  shocks  to  money  demand  or  special  factors.  Therefore,  the
Governing  Council  has  always  made  clear  that  it  does  not  react  in  a  mechanistic  way  to  monetary
aggregates - rather a careful reading and thorough analysis of (headline) monetary developments will
always be needed.
As  regards the  second  question,  the  Governing  Council  recognised  that  although  the  monetary  data
contain information vital to informed monetary policy making, on their own they will not constitute a
complete summary of all the information about the economy required to set an appropriate monetary
policy which maintains price stability. Therefore, in parallel with the analysis of monetary growth in
relation to the reference value, a broadly based assessment of the risks to price stability in the euro
area  -  the  so-called  “second  pillar”  -  plays  a  major  role  in  the  ECB’s  strategy.  Analyses  in  which
monetary and credit aggregates do not play a major role are consolidated in the second pillar. These
analyses include the assessment of a wide range of non-monetary economic variables, such as labour
market indicators, including wages and unit labour costs; fiscal policy indicators; and, financial market
indicators, such as the yield curve and stock prices.
The  two  pillar  structure  of  the  ECB’s  strategy  is  often  misunderstood  by  external  observers  as
implying  multiple  targets  for  monetary  policy,  such  as,  on  the  one  hand,  an  intermediate  monetary
target  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an  inflation  target.  However,  as  I  have  already  discussed,  the
maintenance of price stability in the euro area over the medium term is the primary objective of the
strategy. Both pillars of the strategy should be understood as instruments which help us to achieve this
ultimate overriding objective. Taken together, the two pillars of the strategy form a framework which
organises the presentation and analysis of the “full information set” which is relevant for monetary
policy making in order to assess risks to price stability and allows for cross-checking of information
from different sources and approaches.
Precisely because of the lack of consensus about the structure of the economy and in particular the role
of money in the transmission mechanism, economists are currently forced to work with a number of
approximating  models  and  frameworks,  which  each  capture  some  important  aspects  of  reality,  but
each of which is - when viewed on its own - inherently incomplete or mis-specified.
In  this  situation,  a  strict  adherence  to  a  single  framework  or  model  to  the  exclusion  of  alternatives
would be unwise. It would carry the risk of making substantial policy mistakes if the framework used
for policy turned out to neglect those aspects of economic behaviour which ultimately came to play an
important role. In this context, a well-designed monetary policy will be “robust”. It should ensure that
price stability over the medium term is maintained in a variety of relevant possible settings or models
5
BIS Review 82/2000
of  the  economy,  rather  than  narrowly  focus  on  trying  to  pursue  some  narrow  notion  of  optimality
within one specific framework.
One implication of the need to make robust policy decisions is that there is a need to take an eclectic
and  diversified  approach  to  guide  policy  judgements,  incorporating  as  broad  a  range  of  data  and
analyses  as  is  feasible.  This  approach  will  reduce  the  risks  of  making  large  policy  errors.  The  two
pillar  structure  of  the  strategy  adopted  by  the  ECB  provides  precisely  this  diversified  approach and
thus far has avoided making mistakes. This marks a not insignificant achievement in the environment
of pervasive uncertainty which we face at the beginning of Monetary Union.
The role of macroeconomic forecasts within the strategy
4.
The ECB is expected to publish macroeconomic forecasts for the first time at the end of the year.
Against  this  background  let  me  clarify  some  important  issues  regarding  the  role  of  forecasts  in
monetary policy and in particular in the ECB’s strategy. Many misunderstandings exist regarding this
issue - not least on the part of some prominent observers and critics of the ECB.
There can be no doubt that forecasts play an important role in the monetary  policy  process. This is
necessary given the forward-looking orientation of the ECB’s strategy. Forecasts help to summarise
and  synthesise  a  large  quantity  of  information  that  may  otherwise  become  too  unwieldy  to  form  a
sensible basis for policy discussions. Forecasts provide a platform for the integration of analysis in a
coherent  and  internally  consistent  way,  which  respects  accounting  identities  and  basic  economic
relationships.
There are many organisations and public companies which regularly produce forecasts. The staff of
the  Eurosystem  also  does  so.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  of  the  ECB,  which  brings
together experts from both the ECB and the NCBs, is in charge of producing two forecasts per year.
These are not the only forecasts which are produced within the Eurosystem, but they are certainly the
forecasts which involve the greatest interaction between ECB and NCB staff experts.
The Eurosystem’s macroeconomic forecasts are produced using a number of inputs. First, a variety of
macroeconometric models of the euro area are used. Employing a suite of models, each embodying a
different view of the world or estimated using a different methodology, is preferable to relying solely
on a single - and inevitably imperfect - framework. Second, the projections produced by these models
are influenced and adjusted using the technical judgement of staff experts both at the ECB and at the
NCBs. Introducing such adjustments is standard forecasting practice and a necessary component of an
effective forecasting procedure. Given this description of the Eurosystem’s forecast process, it should
be clear that forecasting is not treated as a mechanical exercise. Realistic forecasts cannot be produced
by the mechanical application of a single model. Nor should they be.
The ECB forecast is thus produced twice per year by the staff of the Eurosystem and is based on the
staff’s  technical  expertise.  The  forecast  is  therefore  an  input  into  the  policy  making  process.  The
forecast does not embody the policy judgement of members of the Governing Council.
When the public evaluates forecasts published by the ECB, the fact that forecasts are an input to policy
making  will  be  extremely  important  to  keep  in  mind.  The  published  forecast  does  not  necessarily
represent  the  opinion  of  members  of  the  Governing  Council.  Policy  makers  will  always  need  to
exercise  a  policy  judgement  in  deciding  how  to  interpret  the  staff  forecast  and  the  uncertainties
around it. This exercise of judgement is part of what has been called the “art of central banking” - it
is what distinguishes policy making from a purely mechanical or technical exercise. Any blurring of
the  distinction  between  policy  making  -  which  is  the  preserve  of  the  Governing  Council  and  is
ultimately captured in the final monetary policy decisions - and preparing technical analysis as input to
the decision making process - which is the responsibility of central bank staff - will only serve to cause
confusion.
Precisely  because the  exercise  of  policy judgement  remains  the  preserve  of the  Governing  Council,
one should not expect policy decisions to feedback mechanically from developments in the published
BIS Review 82/2000
6
macroeconomic  forecast.  Forecasts  are  only  one  -  albeit  important  -  input  into  the  policy  process.
They are always evaluated in the context of other analyses and indicators.
This is, by the way, true for all central banks. To my knowledge, there is no central bank in the world
which bases its monetary policy decisions solely on a mechanical reaction to an inflation forecast. One
reason for this is that macroeconomic forecasts suffer from a number of practical shortcomings which
mean that they cannot constitute the only input into policy decisions.
For  example,  in  practice  the  information  from  monetary  aggregates  is  not  incorporated  into
conventional macroeconometric forecasting models. However, monetary analysis is an important piece
of  information  for  assessing  risks  to  price  stability  from  a  different  perspective.  As  the  ECB’s
macroeconomic forecasts rely on structural macroeconomic models, they should be seen as forming
part of the second pillar of the ECB’s strategy. These forecasts have to be cross-checked against the
information from monetary aggregates for future price developments. This is the essence of the two
pillar  strategy.  Both  pillars,  from  different  perspectives,  analyse  economic  developments  in  a  way
which contributes to forming a judgement about risks to price stability and thus inform well-designed
forward-looking monetary policy decisions.
When  looking  at  forecasts,  other  aspects  also  need  to  be  kept  in  mind.  For  example,  the  latest
developments of key real economy variables cannot be fully integrated into macroeconomic forecasts
in a timely manner. Moreover, the assumptions on which the forecast is based - such as the assumed
paths of oil prices or external demand - can change rapidly, causing the forecast to become quickly
outdated.
Furthermore, it has to be kept in mind that the projections which could be published by the ECB are
the products of a technical exercise which are based on the assumption that policy interest rates will
not  change  over  the  forecast  horizon.  For  this  reason,  they  are  not  true  forecasts  about  future
developments but merely an input into the decision making process which is designed to inform the
Governing Council about what to expect if interest rates are not changed for some time into the future.
Obviously,  if  the  Governing  Council  identifies  risks  to  price  stability  and  acts  on  this  basis  by
changing  interest  rates,  the  projections  made  by  the  forecast  will  not  materialise.  This  is  crucial  to
understand. The forecasts which will be published by the ECB are not predictors of the most likely
outcome  under  all  circumstances.  Rather  they  will  be  scenario  exercises  describing  what  would
happen if interest  rates  did  not  change.  For  this  reason  the  Governing  Council  will  make  sure  that,
when forecasts are published, inflation expectations should and will remain  firmly  focused  on  price
stability.  The  publication  of  conditional  inflation  projections  should  not  in  any  way  influence  the
formation of inflation expectations.
Of  course,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  look  also  at  forecasts  produced  by  other
organisations as well as financial market expectations, for example as embedded in bond yields. All
this information should form the basis for decisions by the Governing Council and allows for the best
possible insight into the situation.
All these remarks should make clear that the Eurosystem forecast does not constitute the sole or even
necessarily the main vehicle for policy decisions. On the contrary, a key feature of the Eurosystem’s
strategy  is  that  it  permits  a  diversified  approach  to  the  assessment  of  economic  developments  and
encourages  cross-checking  between  different forms  of  analysis. This robust  approach  is  intended  to
help avoid major policy errors.
My remarks should also have made clear that neither the Eurosystem’s strategy as a whole, nor the
second pillar within it, should be characterised as inflation targeting. More specifically, it certainly
should  be  clear  that  monetary  policy  decisions  do  not  feed  back  from  deviations  of  the  inflation
forecast  (based  on  the  assumption  of  unchanged  policy  interest  rates)  from  an  inflation  target  at  a
specific time horizon.
Publication of macroeconomic forecasts would thus not change the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.
In particular, the role of forecasts in decision making which I have described at some length will be
unaffected.  The  ECB  has  adopted  a  new  and  distinct  strategy  which  reflects  the  complexity  of
implementing  monetary  policy  in  a  large  and  diverse  single  currency  area  consisting  of  soon  to  be
7
BIS Review 82/2000
twelve  different  sovereign  nations.  This  complexity  is  compounded  by  the  challenges  posed  by  the
novelty of the monetary policy regime, which implies that the tools and approaches used to identify
risks to price stability as well as the procedures used to produce macroeconomic forecasts for the euro
area need  to  be  continuously  re-evaluated and  monitored closely.  Even  less than  would  be  possible
under “normal” circumstances, in such an environment monetary policy cannot be reduced to reacting
in a quasi-mechanical manner to monetary developments or inflation forecasts. The complexity of the
environment requires a more sophisticated approach, embodied in the ECB’s strategy.
Let me finally say that I am hopeful that the publication of macroeconomic forecasts will improve the
presentation and explanation of monetary policy decisions to the public. By publishing an important
input into the decision making process, the considerations facing the Governing Council when taking a
decision should become clearer to the public. However, for this to be the case, both the assumptions
underlying the forecast and the role of the forecast as an input into the policy process need always to
be kept in mind.
The communication aspect of the strategy - transparency and accountability
5.
The  strategy  must  not  only  ensure  that  policy  makers  receive  all  the  information  required  to  take
appropriate monetary policy decisions in a structured and coherent form. It must also constitute a clear
framework for presenting monetary policy decisions, including the economic rationale on which they
are based, to the public in a consistent manner over time. Today I should like to present just a brief
discussion  of  this  external  aspect  of  the  strategy,  beyond  what  I  already  said  regarding  the  role  of
forecasts. Regarding the latter l should simply like to stress again the crucial point that publication of
forecasts would not change the strategy. The Council would not be responsible or accountable for the
published  forecast.  Publication  would  be  just  one  further  step  in  our  continuous  effort  to  be  a
transparent  institution  by  making  available  to  the  public  information  which  is  available  to  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  In  this  respect  it  is  logical  that  we  also  intend  to  provide  more
information regarding the first pillar analysis to the public over time.
Much has been said and written about the communication of the ECB. It still remains true, however
many times it is repeated, that the ECB, in terms of transparency, need not shy away from comparison
with other leading central banks.
When  discussing  the  presentation  and  explanation  of  monetary  policy  decisions  by  the  ECB,  it  is
important  to  recognise  that  the  change  in  the  environment  for  monetary  policy  making  has  been
particularly challenging in the area of communication. The euro area consists of eleven - soon to be
twelve - different sovereign nations, each with its own distinct monetary  history  and  heritage.  With
each policy announcement or Monthly Bulletin, the ECB must thus communicate with the public of
eleven different countries and must speak in all the official languages of the EU. Such a situation is
unprecedented.
This diversity of language, history and culture  across the  euro area  raises further  challenges for the
ECB. Over the years, each national central bank had developed its own strategy and, linked to this, its
own  “monetary  policy  language”  for  communicating  with  the  public  in  the  nation  it  served.  This
language reflected the unique circumstances of the country in question. Over time, the strategies and
the  related  language  and  conventions  of  monetary  policy  came  to  be  so  well  understood  as  to  be
almost second nature.
When  the  ECB  announced  its  strategy  in  October  1998,  some  observers  tended  to  look  for  those
features with which they were most familiar and ignore or neglect others. These observers therefore
formed  an  incomplete  view  of  the  strategy  as  a  whole.  Since  their  view  and  understanding  of  the
strategy  is  incomplete,  these  observers  inevitably  find  it  harder  than  otherwise  to  understand  the
decisions taken within the context of the ECB’s strategy.
Since the creation of the ECB there have been fruitful exchanges of views and discussions with many
observers and watchers from different professions. To my mind, both sides have learnt a lot from these
discussions  and  we  are  already  beginning  to  see  some  clear  improvements  in  the  public’s
understanding of our strategy and decisions.
BIS Review 82/2000
8
The  ECB  is  sometimes  criticised  for  pursuing  a  complicated  two  pillar  strategy  that  is  difficult  to
understand relative to the simplicity of “pure” monetary or inflation targeting. However, complexity is
inevitable  if  the  complex environment  in  which  the  single  monetary  policy  is  implemented is to  be
successfully confronted. The ECB’s strategy honestly and transparently reflects this  complexity  and
does not attempt to simplify policy making in an unrealistic way. The Eurosystem has taken the view
that  by  being  honest,  realistic  and  transparent  about  the  intricacies  involved  in  making  monetary
policy decisions, the credibility and effectiveness of the single monetary policy is enhanced and the
primary objective of price stability is best served.
The ECB’s communication instruments are familiar. The press conferences directly following the first
Governing  Council  meeting  of each  month and the  detailed  commentary  on  monetary  policy  in  the
ECB Monthly  Bulletin  stand at the centre. The Monthly  Bulletin is intended to  provide the  general
public and financial markets with a thorough assessment of the economic environment, as well as with
articles about the economy’s structure and topical issues important for the single monetary policy. In
speeches, members of the Governing Council also inform the public about monetary policy and the
economy.
I believe that the explanations we give in the aforementioned contexts are perfectly comparable with
what other central banks call minutes. In some respects - such as timeliness - the approach adopted by
the ECB is clearly superior.
Moreover,  working  papers  and  technical  analysis  by  ECB  staff  are  published  on  their  own
responsibility  for  professional  review  and  scientific  assessment.  Academic  conferences  have  been
organised by the ECB and the ECB staff participate actively in discussions with outside experts. All
this information is widely disseminated via the ECB’s Website.
However,  for  good  reasons,  we  have  decided  not  to  publish  individual  voting  records,  as  this  may
create specific problems in the context of the new monetary policy environment. Obviously, the single
monetary policy must adopt an area-wide perspective. If the voting records of individual Governors of
NCBs were published, there is a danger that the public discussion of monetary policy is couched in
national terms, thereby hindering the required development of an area-wide view. It may also expose
Governors  to  national  political  pressures.  For  these  reasons,  individual  voting  records  are  not
published.
The ECB recognises that its strategy requires a constant and active effort at communication with the
public. Active communication is particularly important for the Eurosystem given its unique and new
institutional  position.  The  ECB  wishes  to  be  held  accountable  not  just  in  a  formal  sense  to  the
European Parliament as described in the Treaty, but also more broadly to the public at large. In order
for the public to assess the performance of the ECB against the yardstick offered by the definition of
price stability, the ECB must ensure that the public is provided with the relevant information.
Concluding remarks
6.
I  have  described  in  some  detail  the  main  aspects  of  the  ECB’s  policy  making  framework.  The
monetary policy strategy in particular addresses the considerable challenges and uncertainties faced by
the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  in  the  new  and  unique  environment  created  by  Monetary  Union.  Our
experience with the strategy has generally been good and I am confident that the robust approach to
policy decisions embodied in the strategy has helped to avoid policy mistakes thus far. This is not an
insignificant achievement.
Of  course,  we  and  others  are  still  learning  how  to  operate  in  the  new  environment.    This  learning
process is particularly important in the area of communication. The ECB has always striven to be open
and honest in its presentation of policy decisions and their rationale to the public. Provided that the
role of forecasts in our strategy is properly understood - and the remarks I have made in this regard are
of central importance - the publication of forecasts could help in our communication and presentation
of decisions.
9
BIS Review 82/2000
