Bank of Japan’s November report of recent economic and financial
developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 20 November 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  gradually,  with  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment
continuing to increase.
With regard to exogenous demand, public investment is decreasing gradually since the implementation
of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  1999  has  peaked  out.  Net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real
imports)  continue  to  follow  a  moderate  upward  trend  due  to  steady  developments  in  overseas
economies. As regards domestic private demand, business fixed investment is on an increasing trend.
The  recovery  in  private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole  through  lack  of  notable
improvements in employment and income conditions, although there are somewhat positive signs in
some indicators. Housing investment is mostly unchanged.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production is increasing. Corporate profits
and  sentiment  continue  to  improve,  and  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as
increasing  the  amount  of  fixed  investment,  is  increasing,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Income
conditions  of  households still  remain  severe but regular  and  overtime  payments  as  well  as  new  job
offers  continue  to  increase  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  corporate  activities,  and  compensation  of
employees has stopped decreasing.
As for the outlook, public investment is expected to continue decreasing for the time being. While the
U.S. economy is decelerating gradually, the expansion in overseas economies is projected to continue,
albeit  at  a  slower  pace.  In  these  circumstances,  the  increase  in  exports  is  likely  to  slow  down,  as
inventories of some raw materials and  electronics  parts  are  somewhat  excessive  at  present in  Asian
economies.  Meanwhile,  imports  are  projected  to  continue  increasing,  particularly  for  those  of
consumer goods, and capital goods and parts. Therefore, net exports will level off for a while. In the
corporate sector, firms still strongly feel that they have excess equipment and that they should reduce
their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.  However,  it  is  very  likely  that  fixed  investment  in  high-
growth  sectors,  including  those  related  with  information  technology  services,  will  increase  as
corporate  profits  continue  to  recover.  Moreover,  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  will  increase
household  income  and  this  in  turn  is  expected  to  boost  private  consumption.  However,  the  pace  of
recovery in household income will be modest for the time being, since firms’ perceptions of excess
employment still persist, and thus significant changes have not been observed in their efforts to reduce
personnel expenses. The increase in industrial production is expected to slow down somewhat for a
while mainly because of the slower rise in exports. Overall, the economy is likely to recover gradually
led mainly by business fixed investment, while the developments in crude oil prices as well as foreign
and  domestic  capital  markets,  along  with  their  effects  on  the  economy,  need  careful  monitoring.  In
addition, the favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s sustaining easy monetary
stance and the new economic stimulus package are expected to underpin the economy.
1
2
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was held on November 17, 2000.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 17 as
the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 103/2000
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, reflecting an increase in international commodity prices
such as crude oil prices since April. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding the rise in prices of
petroleum products reflecting the increase in crude oil prices, are mostly unchanged mainly due to the
decrease  in  prices  of  electrical  machinery.  Meanwhile,  although  prices  of  petroleum  products
increased,  consumer  prices  continue  to  be  somewhat  weak  owing  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  other
imported products and their substitutes. Corporate service prices are still falling slowly.
As for the condition surrounding price development, the balance between supply and demand in the
domestic  market  is  projected  to  be  on  a  gradual  improving  trend,  while  an  economic  recovery  is
expected to continue moderately. In these circumstances, upward pressure on prices is likely to arise
temporarily from the increase in crude oil prices. On the other hand, in addition to the declining trend
of machinery prices due to technological innovations and the weakening of semiconductor prices, the
decline in prices of consumer goods arising from the streamlining of distribution channels will exert
downward pressure on prices. Overall, prices are expected to be stable or weak somewhat for the time
being.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around 0.25 percent.
As  for  interest  rates  on  term  instruments,  Euro-yen  transactions  maturing  beyond  the  year-end  are
rising somewhat while TB and FB rates are declining slightly. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  have  been  declining  since  mid-October  and  are  recently
moving around the level below 1.8 percent. The yield spread between private bonds (bank debentures
and corporate bonds) and government bonds remains mostly unchanged as a whole.
Stock prices remain weak overall and are recently moving around the lowest level since the beginning
of this year.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  continues  to  be  stable  and  is  currently  being  traded  in  the
range of 107-110 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Recently, however, the
expansion in the  year-to-year  decline  seems  to  be ceasing.  Meanwhile,  issuance  of  corporate  bonds
continues to be steady. Issuance of CPs is increasing towards the year-end.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) grew faster in October compared with the previous month on a year-on-year
basis.
Funding  costs for firms  basically  remain  unchanged  although  the  short-term  funding  rates  maturing
beyond the year-end increased somewhat.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy.
BIS Review 103/2000
2
