Klaus Liebscher: The prerequisites and key challenges
for participation in the euro area
Luncheon speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at a conference of
the Austrian National Bank and the Joint Vienna Institute, held in Vienna, on 7 November 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen!
I am glad to have this opportunity to personally thank you for your participation and all speakers for
their active involvement in this year’s East-West Conference, which centers on topics that are crucial
for the future economic development in the transition countries and, ultimately, for the people living in
these  countries.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  us  to  continue  the  tradition  of  offering  our  annual
East-West Conferences as a platform and a meeting place for the debate on issues relevant to transition
countries in order to help better answers to the challenges ahead to be developed.
Since  the  very  inception  of  transformation,  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  has  had  the  unique
opportunity  to  be  an  active  partner  for  central  banks  in  transition  countries.  At  the  same  time,  the
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  has  been  actively  participating  in  another  historic  project,  the
realization of the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the introduction of the euro.
The establishment of the euro as the single currency in 11 sovereign countries of the European Union
at the beginning of 1999 was certainly not a purely economic move, but rather another very important
political step in the process of European integration that began more than half a century ago.
…
The creation of EMU can certainly be considered a success. Soon after transformation had begun, a
common agreement was reached between the Member States of the European Union in the Treaty of
Maastricht to build EMU. In the second half of the nineties, this decision markedly shaped economic
and financial developments in the European Union, as it led to an impressive process of disinflation, to
nominal  and  real  convergence  within  the  EU  as  well  as  to  a  process  of  consolidation  of  public
finances.
Right from the start of Stage Three of EMU, a unified, deep and liquid euro area-wide money market
was successfully established, and the area-wide market has displayed considerably less volatility than
the 11 individual money markets before. Moreover, the euro has received widespread acceptance in
the  bond  markets.  To  give  but  two  figures,  30%  of  the  outstanding  volume  of  international  debt
securities  were  denominated  in  euro  at  the  end  of  June  2000,  and  the  euro-denominated  issuance
volume  was  roughly  comparable  to  that  in  USD  in  the  first  quarter  of  2000.  Both  sovereign  and
corporate borrowers are making use of the favorable financing conditions created by the introduction
of the euro.
The EC Treaty  established  a clear  institutional  framework  for  the  euro  area’s  monetary  policy.  The
President and the Vice President of the ECB plus the other four members of the ECB Executive Board
and the Governors of the national central banks of the 11 countries participating in the euro area form
the Governing Council of the ECB, which is responsible for monetary  policy  decisions. The Treaty
enshrines the maintenance of price stability as the primary objective of monetary policy.
The Governing Council of the ECB has decided that price stability should be defined as a year-on-year
increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%, and that
this objective has to be achieved over the medium term. If the Eurosystem’s track record is measured
against this clearly defined target, it can be stated that the objective of price stability has been reached,
and I am convinced that it will be attained in the future, as well. With consumer prices in the euro area
1
BIS Review 101/2000
increasing  by  just  1.1%  in  1999,  inflation  has  come  down  to  one  of  the  lowest  levels  in  the  past
50 years.
During  the  course  of  this  year,  inflation  increased  to  2.2%  year-on-year  in  the  period  January  to
September and to 2.8% year-on-year in the month of September, owing mainly to external factors. It is
obvious that influences by the price development of raw materials, in particular oil, and by exchange
rate developments cannot be remedied by monetary policy alone or even in the short term - and that is
precisely  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  our  definition  of  price-stability  relates  to  the  medium  term.
Moreover, as it is imperative to contain upward pressure on prices in the medium term, the Governing
Council of the ECB has gradually raised the interest rate on the main refinancing operations by a total
of  2.25  percentage  points  to  4.75%  since  November  1999.  These  measures  aim  at  avoiding
second-round  effects  on  wage-bargaining  and  price-setting  at  the  national  level  and  at  fostering
confidence in the maintenance of price stability over the medium term.
…
The  euro  area  is  one  large,  relatively  closed  currency  area  which  has  replaced  eleven  smaller  open
currency  areas,  and  the  euro  is  one  of  the  key  currencies  of  the  world.  This  explains  why  the
Eurosystem has no exchange rate target. However, the development of the external value of the euro is
taken into account in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy, which is based on two pillars. The
first pillar consists in the analysis of the monetary developments, with an announced reference value
for  the  growth  of  M3.  The  second  pillar  comprises  the  analysis  of  other  economic  and  financial
indicators  which  may  signal  inflationary  risks,  and  the  exchange  rate  is  precisely  one  of  these
indicators.
In particular, in so far as the strengthening of the USD against the euro has contributed to the recent
acceleration of inflation in the euro area, it is certainly a reason for concern which has to be addressed
adequately. Looking at the main underlying causes, the high rate of domestically based real growth in
the United States seems to have been one of the main underlying factors of that strength. However, it
is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  historic  dimension  of  the  euro  area  as  a  common  European
project,  and  the  adequate  approach  to  evaluating  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  against  the  USD  is
certainly a long-term one.
…
How can we turn the current expansion in the euro area into a prolonged period of non-inflationary
growth? There is no doubt that this is a challenge for both society as a whole and policymakers. What
it takes is people who are prepared to act as entrepreneurs and are willing to take risks. What it takes
are  policymakers  who  set  incentives  and  push  for  continuous  economic  reform  and  adjustment.
Existing regulations have to be checked continuously in terms of their adequacy, and adaptations have
to be introduced as timely as possible, while paying due attention to social needs. In particular, it is
important that the current economic expansion should be used to enhance the fiscal consolidation.
…
How does this experience translate to countries in transition? What is the relevance of this experience
for them ?
Obviously, there is a consistent need of economic reform in all societies. While those reforms which
can be characterized as transition-specific will sooner or later come to an end, “completing transition”
- the theme of this conference - should not be mistaken as “completing reforms”, as reforms will never
be complete and the need for further adjustments will always arise again.
Constant reform efforts are the key to achieve a path of sustainable high real growth. Maintaining a
faster pace of average real growth than in the European Union is a minimum condition for keeping the
catching-up process going in the transition economies. We all need and benefit from this catching-up
BIS Review 101/2000
2
process, both in Europe as a whole and on a global level, as we cannot afford the persistence or even
widening of the existing gaps between poor and rich countries. Moreover, a balanced and consistent
policy-mix  will  be  of  crucial  importance  also  for  the  transition  countries  in  their  catching-up  and
integration efforts. In that respect, I am glad that this conference provides an excellent opportunity to
review the policy challenges the transition economies face in the most important fields of economic
policy.
…
Let  me  briefly  touch  these  fields,  which  range  from  microeconomic  reforms  over  macroeconomic
policies to integration policies.
Firstly, structural reforms are the key to long-term success. Existing productive capacities have to be
reshaped,  and  new  ones  have  to  be  built,  above  all  in  the  service  sector.  In  particular,  financial
services,  which  were  practically  non-existent  when  transition  started  a  decade  ago,  have  to  be
strengthened  further.  Developing  structures  and  institutions  of  financial  intermediation  is  the
prerequisite  for  ensuring  the  high  level  of  productive  real  investment  necessary  for  high  real  GDP
growth. More broadly, structural convergence is a conditio sine qua non for successful transition and it
is an indispensable basis for sustainable macroeconomic stability.
Secondly,  in  the  field  of  macroeconomic  policies,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  importance  of
formulating  and  implementing  stability-oriented,  sustainable  and  consistent  fiscal  and  monetary
policies.  To  keep  the  accession  process  manageable  even  now  that  the  Union  is  negotiating  with  a
comparatively  large  number  of  countries,  it  will  be  essential  to  key  the  pace  of  negotiations  as
objectively  as  possible  to  the  further  progress  of  the  candidate  countries  toward  fulfilling  the
conditions for EU membership.
This  involves  two  aspects:  first,  the  speed  of  enlargement  must  not  compromise  its  quality,  and
second, differences between the countries in the two former groups of candidates must be taken into
consideration  if  there  is  a  factual  reason  to  do  so.  An  overly  ambitious  approach  which  is  not
adequately underpinned by developments in the real economy may lead to losses in credibility or even
turn out to be counterproductive to stability and to the long-term catching-up process. From my point
of view, it is clear that adequately designed stability-oriented policies facilitate structural change. In
that way, prudent efforts towards stabilization and structural change can reinforce each other and will
foster the catching-up process.
…
Turning to monetary policy, I am convinced that a sound stance and conduct can best be achieved if
the  central  bank  is  fully  independent.  Central  bank  independence  -  ie  institutional,  personal  and
financial independence - is a basic building block any country that intends to join the European Union
has to put in place. Moreover, I am sure that price stability should be regarded as the primary objective
of monetary policy in transition countries, as well. However, in most transition countries that objective
can  only  be  defined  in  concrete  terms  by  taking  into  account  the  specific  characteristics  of  the
transition  process  and,  in  particular, the  fact that  structural  convergence  is  a longer-term  process  as
well.  While  steering  a  clear  course  towards  disinflation,  a  cautious  approach  to  monetary  policy,
especially in setting explicit targets, is called for.
…
The  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  which  are  involved  in  accession  negotiations  with  the
European  Union  are  confronted  with  the  basic  question  of  how  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
features in the overall context of enlargement. As far as we can judge today, we see the economic and
monetary  policy  integration  of the  candidate countries  proceeding  in  three  steps.  In  a  first  step,  the
3
BIS Review 101/2000
candidates will accede to the European Union, then they will participate in the ERM II, the exchange
rate mechanism of the Union, and finally, they will introduce the euro as their national currency.
Let me make very clear that fulfillment of the Maastricht convergence criteria is not a prerequisite for
membership in the European Union. Still, a reasonable degree of macroeconomic prudence is essential
in the run-up to EU accession, as stability-oriented policies facilitate structural change and foster the
catching-up process in Central and Eastern Europe.
In this context, it is important to underline that there are no institutional constraints on exchange rate
policies  during  the  preaccession  period.  Any  exchange  rate  regime  is  feasible  during  this  stage,
provided  that  it  contributes  to  and  is  embedded  in  an  overall  set  of  policies  that  is  sound  and
effectively geared toward stability. What really matters is not the exchange rate regime as such, but the
consistency  and  soundness  of  the  policy  mix  as  a  whole.  Experience  shows  that  stability-oriented
policies underpinned by wide-ranging structural reforms contribute substantially to limiting exchange
rate variability.
Not only institutional and legal aspects as well as the principle of equal treatment, but also economic
considerations strongly suggest the step-by-step procedure I have sketched out. Adopting the euro too
early could place severe strains on such countries’ economies, and perhaps even trigger substantial and
lasting disturbances. Such a course of action would be in the interest neither of the current euro area
members, nor of future members of the euro area.
…
A number of Central and Eastern European transition countries have already achieved a high degree of
trade  and  financial  integration  with  the  European  Union  and  have  reached  quite  close  convergence
with these countries. As a next step, this economic integration has to be deepened and complemented
by institutional integration. Finally, the efforts of these countries to become members of the European
Union will further enhance their integration into the world economy.
Personally, I am convinced that both the economic preparations during the preaccession period as well
as the accession itself will boost structural reforms and developments,  thus reinforcing  the  dynamic
structural adjustments that we have witnessed as a consequence of transformation in general and trade
liberalization  under  the  Europe  agreements  (ie  the  EU  association  agreements)  in  particular.
Companies seem to have started already to take into account the perspective of EU enlargement for
their investment decisions.  Moreover,  the  adoption  of  the  acquis  communautaire  and the  process of
institution-building  for  an  effective  implementation  of  this  acquis  will  harmonize  and  improve  the
institutional and legal setup in these countries.
…
Before concluding, let me come back to an important  issue  I  already  touched  briefly  -  central  bank
independence. What does the European Union mean by “central bank independence”? Basically, it is
independence  from  other  authorities,  in  particular  political  authorities,  in  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy  and,  more  broadly,  in  the  performance  of  all  the  tasks  that  are  related  to  the  ESCB,  the
European System of Central Banks, in which the central banks of all EU Member States participate.
Central bank independence is essential for  the  credibility  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks
and  for  the  effective  conduct  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  Independence  has  three  main
dimensions - the institutional, the personal and the financial dimension.
• 
Institutional independence primarily means that central banks are prohibited from seeking
or  taking  instructions  from  Community  institutions  or  bodies,  from  any  government  of  a
Member State or from any other body. Likewise, rights of third parties to approve, suspend,
annul or defer central bank decisions on ESCB-related tasks are incompatible with the EU
Treaty. The same is true of any rights to censor such decisions on legal grounds.
BIS Review 101/2000
4
  Personal  independence  is  about  ensuring  tenure  for  members  of  the  ESCB’s  decision-
making bodies by minimum terms of office and giving protection against arbitrary dismissal.
To  make  this  latter  aspect  more  concrete,  a  central  bank  governor  may  be  relieved  from
office only if he or she no longer fulfills the conditions required for the performance of his or
her duties or if he or she has been guilty of serious misconduct, with the possibility of appeal
to the European Court of Justice.
Financial independence, in essence, denotes that central banks have to be in a position to
avail  themselves  of  the  appropriate  means  to  ensure  that  they  can  properly  fulfill  their
ESCB-related tasks.
Those applicant countries which engaged in accession talks with the European Union in 1998 already
dealt, in detail, with the issue of central bank independence during the membership negotiations last
fall, when the chapter “Economic and Monetary Union” was on the agenda. Progress in the candidate
countries  on  this  issue  is  being  monitored  very  closely  by  the  European  Union  at  large  and  by  the
European System of Central Banks in particular.
…
Let me draw the conclusion that the key challenge facing the applicant countries in the next few years,
consists in strengthening their market economies and their competitiveness by firmly pushing ahead
with structural reform and by subsequently adopting the Community acquis in the process. Only on
this basis will the EU candidate countries from Central and Eastern Europe be able to attain durable
and sustainable macroeconomic stability, and only by taking these steps will they ultimately be able to
fulfill, in a lasting manner, the prerequisites for participation in the euro area.
Thank you very much for your attention.
5
BIS Review 101/2000
