Willem F Duisenberg: Hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels,
23 November 2000.
 As usual, I shall report on recent monetary policy decisions taken by the ECB and on the reasoning
underlying these decisions. In addition, I should like  to  inform  you  about the  decision  taken  by  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  last  week  to  publish  staff  economic  projections  for  the  euro  area.
Finally, I should like to say a few words about the progress report, which has been published by the
ECB as part of its initiative to improve cross-border retail payment services in the euro area.
Economic and monetary developments
1.
After  the  last  hearing  before  this  Committee  on  12  September,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB
decided to increase the ECB’s main interest rates by 25 basis points on 5 October 2000. The decision
was  taken  to  ensure  that  upward  pressures  on  consumer  prices  would  not  translate  into  more
permanent tendencies. It was based on evidence from both pillars of the monetary policy strategy of
the  ECB,  notably  continued  money  growth  above  the  reference  value  and  upward  pressure  on
consumer prices owing to oil price and exchange rate effects in an environment of robust economic
growth.
Let  me  comment  in  more  detail  on  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  the  current  economic
situation. In the period from July to September 2000, the three-month average of M3 growth stood at
5.4%, above the reference value of 4½%. However, some indicators suggest that over recent months a
moderation in monetary growth has been occurring.
Let me now turn, within the second pillar, to the prospects for economic growth in the euro area, as
these  represent  a  key  factor affecting  the  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  The  latest
estimate by Eurostat for the second quarter of 2000 indicated a real increase in GDP of 0.8%. The pace
of new job creation has remained high and the unemployment rate currently stands at 9.0%, a level not
seen  since  mid-1992.  Some  monthly  indicators  suggest  that  some  moderation  in  real  GDP  growth
might have occurred in the second half of this year, mainly as a result of the negative impact of the
recent  increases  in  oil  prices  on  domestic  income.  However,  by  contrast  with  previous  periods  of
strong oil price rises, the euro area economy is now less dependent on oil. This should help to prevent
any sustained negative effect on confidence. There are therefore good reasons to remain confident with
regard to growth prospects.
On the external side, euro area export growth should benefit further from the expansion of the global
economy. Considering these factors together, the growth dynamic in the euro area can be expected to
be  maintained  in  the  coming  years.  Forecasts  by  international  and  private  organisations  currently
project euro area real  GDP  growth in  the  coming  one  to two  years  to be  somewhat  lower  than this
year’s more than 3%, but to remain at around 3%.
The exchange rate of the euro has remained a cause for concern. The depreciation of the euro during
1999 and 2000 has added to upward pressures on consumer prices in the euro area. The exchange rate
of the euro has now remained out of line with economic fundamentals for a prolonged period of time.
The G7 expressed concern  about  the  global  repercussions  of the  current level  of  the  euro  exchange
rate. In order to support the euro, concerted interventions by all G7 members, on the initiative of the
ECB, took place on 22 September, and the Eurosystem intervened several times in November.
Recent Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation rates have been higher than could have
been expected only a few months ago. Current inflation reflects the unexpected sharp rise in oil prices
1
BIS Review 109/2000
in  recent  months.  Notwithstanding  a  possible  decline  in  oil  prices,  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  are
likely to remain above 2% for some time to come.
It  needs  to  be  recognised  that  current  upward  pressures  on  consumer  prices  can  be  alleviated  most
smoothly if economic agents see them for what they are, namely one-off or temporary price increases
resulting  from  external  factors.  In  this  respect,  when  forming  their  expectations,  economic  agents
should count on the commitment of the Governing Council of the ECB to maintaining price stability,
defined  as  HICP  inflation  below  2%,  in  the  medium  term.  Monetary  policy  will  not  accommodate
inflationary tendencies in the euro area.
It will be critical to ensure that the temporary upward pressure on HICP inflation is not followed by
more lasting upward pressure from domestic factors. The interest rate measures taken by the ECB over
the past few months were aimed at containing the emergence of inflation expectations and convincing
the social partners, as well as the public at large, that price stability in the euro area will be maintained.
By ensuring that wages continue to grow at a moderate pace in 2001 and, may I add, beyond next year,
wage-setters would facilitate the ECB’s task of maintaining  price  stability.  They  would  at the  same
time make an important contribution to maintaining the current strong employment growth in the euro
area.
The maintenance of robust non-inflationary growth is a challenge faced in many policy areas, as well
as  by  the  social  partners.  Many  euro  area  countries  have  embarked  on  a  path  of  structural  reform,
which they now need to adhere to strictly. Increasing the flexibility of labour markets and deregulating
product  markets  will  enhance  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  by  allowing  for  a  better
exploitation of the opportunities which are offered, for instance, by the single currency and the new
information  and  communications  technologies.  Reforms  are  all  the  more  important  to  help  the
economy adapt smoothly to external shocks such as those currently observed.
In many countries, governments also need to press ahead with fiscal consolidation and fiscal reform.
Budget deficits in the euro area as a whole are expected to improve this year, but this will mainly be
the  result  of  strong  economic  growth  and  one-off  revenues  from  the  sale  of  UMTS  licences.
Abstracting  from  these  factors,  there  has  been  little  further  progress  in  the  consolidation  of  public
finances on average. Moreover, current budget plans for 2001 imply that the average fiscal stance will
be slightly more expansionary next year. For the first time since 1993, the primary balance ratio as a
percentage  of  GDP  for  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  deteriorate  in  2001.  This  somewhat  more
expansionary  stance  demonstrates  that  the  reform  strategies  have,  in  some  cases,  been  unbalanced.
Many countries have enacted reductions in personal and corporate income taxation and social security
contributions, but have not set ambitious expenditure ceilings. While the tax reforms currently being
implemented or planned in a number of euro area countries are a welcome stimulus to the supply side,
they need to be accompanied by restraint in government spending.
The longer-term sustainability of budget positions also needs to be ensured in several countries with
regard  to  the  consequences  of  planned  fiscal  reforms,  such  as  those  of  pension  systems,  and  the
reduction of taxes. The policy adjustments necessary to create the financial leeway for these reforms
should  be  prepared  now.  A  loosening  of  the  fiscal  stance  stemming  from  an  unbalanced  reform
strategy not only jeopardises fiscal consolidation but, from a longer-term perspective, also reduces the
potential for positive supply effects of fiscal reform on economic growth.
Publication of staff macroeconomic projections by the ECB
2.
I shall now turn to the envisaged publication of staff macroeconomic projections by the ECB.
I have previously stated in my remarks to the European Parliament that the ECB could commence the
publication of macroeconomic projections during the course of this year. I am now happy to inform
you that our preparations have been concluded. As was announced on 16 November, the Governing
Council has decided to commence publication of its staff macroeconomic projections in the December
issue  of  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin.  This  decision  reflects  the  Governing  Council’s  conviction  -  as
reflected  in  practice  -  that  the  information  and  analysis  underlying  its  monetary  policy  decisions
should be shared with the public to the greatest extent possible, subject, of course, to  the  necessary
BIS Review 109/2000
2
preparation.  Provision  of  this  information  will  further  enhance  transparency  and  lead  to  a  better
understanding of the single monetary policy.
The ECB has decided that the time has come to publish its staff macroeconomic projections, which are
already used as an input into the assessment of the outlook for price stability. These are prepared twice
a  year  by  Eurosystem  staff  as  one  of  a  number  of  inputs  into  the  deliberations  of  the  Governing
Council.  The  projections  will  be  published  in  the  June  and  December  issues  of  the  ECB  Monthly
Bulletin,  commencing  in  December  2000.  Projections  will  be  published  for  the  growth  rate  of  real
GDP  and  its  components  and  for  HICP  inflation.  They  will  have  a  two-year  horizon,  so  that  the
projections for both 2001  and 2002  will  be  published  in  December this  year.  In  order to accurately
reflect the  degree  of  uncertainty  attached to  such  exercises, the  projections  will be  published  in the
form  of  ranges,  based  upon  the  average  absolute errors  made  in  previous  national  central  bank  and
Eurosystem projections. The projections will be accompanied by a text describing their main features.
I should emphasise that we use the word “projection” in order to signal that the published projections
are  the  results  of  a  scenario  based  on  a  set  of  underlying  technical  assumptions,  including  the
assumption  of  unchanged  monetary  policy.  This  is  the  way  forecasts  are  produced  in  many  central
banks in order to best inform monetary policy decision-makers. As the Eurosystem’s staff economic
projections are the products of a technical exercise, which assumes, inter alia, that short-term interest
rates and the exchange rate will not change over the forecast horizon, it should be clear that the staff
projection  will  not,  in  general,  be  the  best  predictor of future  outcomes,  in  particular  for  somewhat
longer  horizons.  Rather,  it  represents  a  scenario  which  is  likely  to  be  falsified  in  practice,  since
monetary policy will always act to address any threats to price stability.
On making this announcement, it is crucial that I explain again the role which staff macroeconomic
projections play in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.
The ECB’s primary objective is the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. Given the lags in
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  price  level,  monetary  policy  must  be  forward-looking.
Therefore, all analysis undertaken at the ECB is focused on the risks to future price stability.
The  analysis  underlying  monetary  policy  decisions  is  organised  within  two  frameworks,  which  we
refer  to  as  the  two  pillars.  The  Governing  Council’s  forward-looking  assessment  of  the  economic
situation and the outlook for price stability is based on both a prominent role for money, denoted as
the first pillar, and a broadly based assessment of other economic and financial indicators, labelled the
second pillar. The projections that will be published by the ECB as from December are, as with any
conventional  macroeconomic  forecast  or  projection,  derived  from  analytical  frameworks  in  which
money plays only a limited role, if any. Hence such projections, which mostly reflect developments in
variables other than money, naturally form part of the second pillar of the ECB’s strategy.
The projections help to underpin the forward-looking orientation of monetary policy. They summarise
and synthesise a large quantity of information that might otherwise be too unwieldy to form a sensible
basis  for  policy  discussions.  They  also  provide  a  platform  for  the  integration  of  economic  analysis
under  the  second  pillar  in  a  coherent  and  internally  consistent  way,  which  seeks  to  reflect  past
experience and fundamental economic relationships.
Twice  a  year,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Eurosystem  undertakes,  with  the  help  of  a
Working Group on Forecasting, a forecasting exercise which brings together staff from both the ECB
and  national  central  banks.  The  macroeconomic  projections  produced  by  these  exercises  combine
analysis  based  on  a  variety  of  econometric  models  with  expert  assessments  made  by  staff.  The
Eurosystem’s  staff  projections  are therefore  not  the  result  of  the  mechanical  application  of  a  single
econometric model. On the contrary, they combine a variety of different analyses, all of which rely on
the staff’s technical expertise.
Although  they  play  a  useful  and  important  role,  the  projections  are  not  a  panacea.  First,  they  are
always based on specific assumptions - such as those concerning oil prices or exchange rates - with
which it is possible to disagree or which can change rapidly, so that the projections become outdated.
Second,  the  final  projection  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the  underlying  conceptual  framework  or
techniques  employed  in  its  production.  Third,  by  their  very  nature,  economic  frameworks  can  only
3
BIS Review 109/2000
provide a summary description of the economy and thus do not incorporate all relevant information. In
particular,  some  information  is  not  easily  integrated  into  the  framework  used  to  produce  the
projections  or  may  change  after  they  are  finalised.  Fourth,  expert  views  are  inevitably  incorporated
into projections and there can be good reasons at any moment of decision-making to deviate from the
particular views or approaches on which they are based.
The two-pillar approach chosen by the Eurosystem - including a prominent role for money as the first
pillar - is, to some extent, a reflection of these general limitations of forecasts and projections.
I should stress that, because of these limitations, the second pillar of the ECB’s strategy also includes
other  forms  of  analysis  in  addition  to  macroeconomic  projections.  First,  the  ECB’s  projections  are
cross-checked  and  compared  with  forecasts  produced  by  others,  such  as  international  organisations
and  private  sector  entities.  Second,  the  forward-looking  information  and  expectations  embodied  in
financial  prices  and  yields  is  thoroughly  analysed  and  evaluated.  This  information  can  also  be
compared  with  the  staff  projections.  Finally,  any  information  that  is  not  contained  in  the  staff
projections for practical or timing reasons - such as the latest available outturns of certain data series -
must also be incorporated into the overall assessment. Developments in individual indicators are also
closely followed outside the framework of the forecasting exercise.
It  follows  from  this  discussion  that  the  Governing  Council  does  not  use  its  staff  projections  as  the
main tool for organising and communicating its assessment. Rather, the Governing Council evaluates
them alongside - and compares them with - many other pieces of information and forms of analysis
organised in the two-pillar framework. In the context of the ECB’s strategy, macroeconomic forecasts
and projections therefore play an important - albeit limited - role.
Two important  points  follow from  the role  of  projections in the  ECB’s  strategy  and  the  procedures
used to produce projections within the Eurosystem.
First, the  projections  are  produced  by  staff  experts  and  do  not  embody  the  policy  judgement  of  the
Governing  Council.  They  therefore  represent  one  input  into  the  policy-making  process  and  not  the
outcome  of  the  Governing  Council’s  deliberations.  The  Governing  Council  must  exercise  a  policy
judgement  in  evaluating  the  projections  it  receives,  alongside  all  other  analyses,  when  drawing
implications for policy decisions.
Second, since policy decisions are based on a broad range of analyses conducted under the two pillars
of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy - of which the Eurosystem’s projections constitute only a part -
one  should  not  expect  policy  decisions  to  respond  mechanically  to  developments  in  the  published
macroeconomic projections. In this respect, the projections published by the ECB and their role differ
considerably from the forecasts published by some other central banks.
One question which has been raised since the announcement is why the Governing Council does not
assume full responsibility for the projections to be published by the ECB, whilst of course accepting
full  responsibility  for  the  staff  that  produces  them.  Let  me  answer  this  question  by  recalling  the
Governing  Council’s  ultimate  responsibility,  namely  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.
Within the framework of the Treaty establishing the European Community (EC Treaty), the Governing
Council  shall  be  held  accountable  for  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  accordance  with  its
published definition. The Governing Council is neither responsible for the content of these projections,
nor  should  its  performance  be  judged  against  them.  While  macroeconomic  projections  are  a  useful
instrument  for  undertaking  the forward-looking  assessment  on  which  monetary  policy  decisions  are
based, the limitations I have outlined imply that such projections cannot be the only tool used by the
Governing  Council.  The  Governing  Council  should  no  more  assume  responsibility  for  the  staff
macroeconomic projections than it does for the content of other analyses that constitute inputs into its
policy decisions, such as the monetary analysis under the first pillar or the evaluation of developments
in individual indicator variables or financial prices and yields. Assuming responsibility for one input
into its decisions would detract from the Governing Council’s true responsibilities, first for monetary
policy decisions and ultimately for the maintenance of price stability.
Given the Governing Council’s overriding commitment to the maintenance of price stability, the only
forecast for which it could take responsibility would be one that was consistent with price stability.
BIS Review 109/2000
4
Such  a  forecast  -  which,  by  its  nature,  would  not  change  over  time  -  would  not,  in  itself,  be  very
informative  about  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  the  prevailing  economic  situation.  The
Governing  Council’s  own  guidepost  for  the  future  was  published  at  the  outset  in  the  form  of  its
quantitative  definition  of  the  ECB’s  primary  objective.  This  definition  serves  a  different  purpose,
namely to anchor inflation expectations.
Against  this  background,  the  published  macroeconomic  projections  should  not,  under  any
circumstances,  be  seen  as  calling  into  question  the  commitment  of  the  Governing  Council  to
maintaining price stability over the medium term. The public, wage and price-setters, and all firms and
households should continue to rely on the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability as the “best
prediction”  of  medium-term  price  developments,  since  the  Governing  Council  is  committed  to
changing monetary policy whenever this is necessary to maintain price stability.
The publication of staff macroeconomic projections thus informs the public about an important input
into  the  Governing  Council’s  decision  process,  which  has  already  been  used  in  the  past.  The
publication of projections has to be considered in the context of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.
Publication thus changes neither the ECB’s monetary policy strategy nor the role of these projections
within it.
I am convinced that publication of these staff projections can help to improve the ECB’s presentation
and explanation of monetary policy decisions. However, if this is to be the case, the public - and the
European Parliament and your Committee - must recognise the limitations of forecasts and projections
that I have just described, and the implications these limitations have for the role of staff projections in
the ECB’s strategy.
Cross-border retail payment services in the euro area
3.
You  may  recall  that  in  September  1999  the  ECB  published  a  report  presenting  the  views  of  the
Eurosystem on how to improve cross-border retail payment services and defining the objectives that
the industry is expected to achieve by 1 January 2002. In September this year, the ECB published a
progress  report.  This  report  concludes  that,  although  most  objectives  have  not  yet  been  fulfilled,
substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  preparing  the  ground  for  a  more  efficient  handling  of
cross-border retail payments. Allow me to give you some examples:
i. 
The banking sector has agreed on straight-through processing standards, which will allow the
automated execution of cross-border payments;
ii. 
iii. 
The  Euro  Banking  Association  has  developed  a  payment  system  specifically  designed  for
cross-border low-value payments, which commenced operations on 20 November 2000;
As from 2002, cross-border payments below EUR 12,500 will no longer need to be reported
for balance of payments purposes and hence statistical reporting will no longer constitute a
justification for high customer fees.
Insufficient progress has been made in the field of customer prices. In too many cases, the payee has
been  charged  with  some  costs  even  though  the  payer  had  agreed  to  bear  all  costs.  Two  initiatives
currently  being  developed  by  the  European  Credit  Sector  Associations  are  intended  to  address  this
situation. First, a multilateral interbank exchange fee is being developed, which, provided that the fee
is low, could be acceptable and could indeed contribute to solving the problem of “double-charging”.
Second, and more importantly, a “basic” service will be defined which, for payment orders submitted
in the correct format, should provide a guaranteed service level with attractive conditions in terms of
price and execution time. The Eurosystem welcomes the idea of a basic service offer, but the progress
report went one step further by inviting banks to set up a “standard” cross-border payment service with
a  common  name,  to  be  provided  by  most  banks  in  the  euro  area.  Such  a  standard  service  would
contribute even more to greater price transparency and, consequently, enhanced competition.
The progress report also recognises that the achievement of the objectives depends not only on banks
but  also  on  companies  and  customers,  who  should  include  adequate  information  in  invoices  and
payment orders so as to facilitate straight-through processing. The Eurosystem is therefore urging the
5
BIS Review 109/2000
banking  industry  to  launch  an  information  campaign  and  expects  specific  proposals  by  the  end  of
2000.  The  organisation  of  such  an  information  campaign  would  be  greatly  facilitated  if  a  standard
service with a common name existed.
The  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  progress  made  by  the  banking  industry  with
regard to the outstanding issues, as well as developments in customer prices, in order to ensure that the
preparations currently under way do ultimately translate into adequate services for European citizens.
All  options,  including  the  operational  involvement  of  the  Eurosystem,  will  be  retained,  in  case  the
situation has not improved significantly by 2002.
BIS Review 109/2000
6
