David Carse: Recreating the financial services industry for
the new economy: a regulator’s perspective
Keynote speech by David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at
the Asian Banker Summit 2000 in Hong Kong on 24 October 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I  am  pleased  to  be  here  as a  keynote  speaker  for  this  major  conference  organised by  Asian  Banker
Journal. One of the themes of the conference is how the banking industry is trying to get to grips with
the  challenges  posed  by  the  New  Economy.  I  will  be  giving  the  regulator’s  perspective  on  these
important issues. As a banking regulator, I suppose that I am something of an Old Economy dinosaur.
And it is a bit daunting to be sharing the platform with two other speakers who are obviously more
expert in the New Economy than I am. One of these is Mr Jeffrey Koo Jr whom I saw described in a
recent  magazine  article  as  a  “30-something  Net-head”.  I’m  not  sure  exactly  what  that  means,  but  I
think that it was intended to be complimentary.
Unfortunately, some of the gloss has been taken off the New Economy in recent months. The dot.com
fever in the stock market seems to be well and truly over, and has joined the long list of speculative
crazes that have faded into history. Telecom stocks have fallen seriously out of favour, particularly in
Europe as the companies embark upon what the Economist has just described as perhaps the “biggest
gamble in business history”. This is the US$300 billion investment in 3G licenses and networks - a lot
of money to spend when the return on the investment is uncertain to say the least. It remains to be seen
–  outside  Japan  at  least  -  how  consumers  will  take  to  the  mobile  internet  concept.  The  lukewarm
response to WAP phones is not a good omen, although admittedly the technology in this case is much
cruder than what is being claimed for 3G. Let us just hope that 3G will live up to the expectations.
Even with the traditional pc-based internet, the signals are mixed. Everyone can see the ability of the
internet to transform communication, flows of information and business processes. But the means to
turn this into revenues and more especially into profits have  proved  to  be  somewhat elusive,  as the
closure or consolidation of a number of e-tailers has shown. In a period of radical transformation such
as we are going through at present there are bound to be a number of false starts and failures before the
business models that can successfully exploit the new technology emerge. This period of uncertainty
poses important strategic challenges and increased risks for the banks in their role both as major users
of  the  technology  and  as  providers  of  funds  to  the  companies  which  are  putting  that  technology  in
place. Banks, like other companies, need to discover what will or will not work in the internet world.
They are thus exposed to their own mistakes. But they are also exposed to the potential mistakes of
their customers. For example, if the telecom companies in Europe really have taken too big a gamble
on 3G, this would have repercussions for the banks that have financed them.
These challenges are also confronting banks in Asia as they recover from the hangover of the Asian
crisis. I do not think that bankers anywhere would ever claim that they have an easy life. But certainly
the existence for banks in Asia before the crisis was easier than it is now. If I take Hong Kong as an
example, the banks here have always competed actively. But that competition was taking place in a
buoyant market, whereas business is currently much harder to find. A few simple statistics illustrate
the point: in the six years from 1992 to 1997, domestic lending by the locally incorporated banks grew
at an average rate of 21% per annum, and pre-tax profits rose at an annual rate of 15% during the same
period. In contrast, the equivalent annual figures for the three years to mid-2000 were 1¼% and 4½%
respectively. It is true that bank profits staged a sharp recovery in the first half of this year. But growth
in  bank  lending  has  remained  sluggish.  Bank  liquidity  remains  at  historically  high  levels,  and  this,
coupled  with  the  fierce  competition  for  new  lending  business,  has  pushed  down  lending  margins,
particularly in the all-important mortgage portfolio.
1
BIS Review 93/2000
It is not only that the  market  is  not  growing  as fast  as  it  did. The  traditional, local  players are also
beginning to encounter more pressure from global firms, non-bank entrants and competing sources of
finance.
The competitive environment is giving added impetus to the need for banks to consider how they can
use the new technology, and particularly the internet, to drive down costs and broaden income sources.
In Hong Kong around 20 banks have introduced transactional banking services for retail customers.
Many have already introduced corporate banking services through the internet, or will shortly do so.
So far the take-up of these services seems in general to be rather slow. However, a few banks have
achieved reasonable levels of usage by customers either because they were early movers or because of
their leading market position.
Customer acceptance of the internet will undoubtedly grow. But it will not happen overnight, and the
contribution to the bottom line will be slow to emerge. In the meantime, the banks will have to bear
the extra costs of the investment in the new technology, while margins may come under pressure from
the increased ability of consumers to shop around and compare prices.
In order to succeed in the internet world, banks will need to ensure that they have the products that
customers  actually  want,  and  the  ability  to  tailor  these  to  individual  customer  needs.  But  mass
customisation of this kind requires enhanced management skills as well as investment in the necessary
human  and  technological  resources,  including  customer  relationship  management  systems.  Smaller
banks may have to recognise that it is going to be difficult to achieve this on their own.
I will not go into further detail as to how the banks should react to the changing environment because
that will no doubt be covered by other speakers. Let me turn instead to what should be the response of
the regulators. In doing so, I will be drawing upon our experience in Hong Kong. But I think that the
same trends will be evident elsewhere in the Region.
The first thing we have decided is that we have got to carry on the process of deregulating the banking
system.  In  particular,  Hong  Kong  has  had  controls  on  the  interest  rates  that  banks  may  offer  on
deposits since 1965. We believe that this is incompatible with a modern, competitive banking system,
and  has  served  to  hinder  innovation  on  the  liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  We  have  been
dismantling the controls over the last few years, and now all time deposits have been deregulated. The
next  stage  in  the  process  will  be  to  eliminate  the  prohibition  on  payment  of  interest  on  current
accounts and the interest rate cap on savings accounts. This should take place in July of next year. We
are also in the process of further opening up the banking system to foreign competition. Foreign banks
which were licensed after 1978 were formerly restricted to one branch in Hong Kong. We increased
this  to  three  branches  last  year,  and  we  may  decide  to  remove  the  restriction  altogether  when  we
review it next year.
It  may seem a bit strange in an environment of increasing competition, to give it added impetus by
deregulating.  However,  we  feel  that  we  need  to  get  rid  of  artificial  barriers  that  might  inhibit  the
response of the local banks to the changing market landscape. In particular, we want to remove any
disincentives  for  the  local  banks  to  focus  on  the  need  to  think  more  seriously  about  merger  and
acquisition. Our general position is that it would be desirable to see some consolidation in the local
banking sector. But this will have to come through market forces, rather than being mandated by the
regulators.
We are attempting to dismantle the barriers to competition in a careful way that will give the banks a
chance to adapt and avoid undue risks to the safety and soundness of the banking system. For the same
reason, we are also having to change our regulatory framework and supervisory approach to  ensure
that  they  keep  up  with  changing  market  conditions.  One  priority  has  been  to  take  account  of  the
e-banking developments I have already mentioned.
A particular landmark was the guideline on virtual banks which we issued in May of this year. I will
not go into the details of this except to say that it was first drafted when the dot.com frenzy was at its
peak, and I believe that the cautionary notes that we uttered have stood the test of time. In particular,
our  guideline  stressed  that  virtual  banks  must  have  substance  rather  than  being  a  concept,  and  that
BIS Review 93/2000
2
virtual banks are subject to the same risks as conventional banks and should be subject to the same
prudential criteria. Essentially, we were warning of the need not to be blinded by the technology.
We  also  warned  against  over-aggressive  pricing  and  of  the  need  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance
between acquisition of market share and earning a reasonable return. As with other new banks that we
authorise, we would normally expect a virtual bank to be making a profit by the end of its third year.
This was criticised in some quarters as being unrealistic and not in keeping with the internet business
model.  However,  as  events  have  turned  out,  it  was  that  model  that  was  unrealistic  rather  than  our
guideline.
Under our current rules, it is not possible to establish from scratch a new locally incorporated virtual,
or indeed conventional, bank in Hong Kong. That is something that we may review next year in line
with  the  process  of  deregulation  already  referred  to.  In  the  meantime,  this  need  not  be  a  barrier  to
setting up virtual banks, either by converting existing local franchises or, in the case of an overseas
bank,  by  setting  up  a  branch  in  Hong  Kong.  As  proof  of  this,  we  are  currently  considering  two
applications to set up virtual banks, and assuming that they can meet our authorisation requirements, I
hope that these can be in operation quite soon.
One of the main tests that these applicants will have to satisfy is that they have adequate security to
prevent  unauthorised  access  to  their  systems  and  to  protect  customer  information.  Weak  internet
security puts the financial position and the reputation of the bank at risk, and concerns about security
are the major barrier to more widespread customer acceptance of e-banking.  It is essential therefore
that  the  banks  get  this  right.  We  have  tried  to  help  by  issuing  guidelines  to  the  banks  on  various
aspects  of  security,  including  the  need  for  senior  management  to  commission  periodic  independent
assessments  of  the  security  aspects  of  their  e-banking  services.  We  have  recently  provided  further
guidance on how such assessments should be conducted and the areas they should cover. However, we
also need to be in a position to conduct meaningful on-site examinations of our own. This requires us
to build up our own in-house teams of IT experts and to provide them with the proper training and
guidance on what to look for. We are currently trying to do this and have recently hired an external
consultant to help us to develop the right processes and techniques.
This  is  part  of  a  more  general  move  to  enhance  our  supervision  to  make  it  more  sensitive  to  the
various types of risk  with  which  our  banks  are faced, and  more  focussed  on the processes  used for
managing  those  risks.  This  becomes  all  the  important  in  the  New  Economy,  because  although
technological change presents obvious new opportunities to the banks, it also magnifies their risks in
certain respects and increases the complexity of their business. Security risk is one clear example of
this, as I have already mentioned. But increased liquidity and credit risk could be added to the list - the
former because the internet will make it easier to move funds between banks at the touch of a button
and the latter because banks may in future have a more transitory relationship with their customers.
Technology risk is also a concern. With technology changing so rapidly, it becomes more vital that
banks invest wisely in new systems and choose the right moment to do so. Early movers run the risk of
being saddled with systems that do not work as promised, or which quickly become obsolete. Equally,
there is the risk of being left behind by competitors if you wait too long.
Such considerations mean that it is essential that banks have a sound strategy and good systems of risk
management.  The  main  responsibility  for  this  rests  with  the  board  of  directors  and  with  senior
management, although the regulators also have a responsibility to check that they are doing their job
properly. To assist us in that process, we have recently issued a guideline which sets out the standards
which we expect the board of directors to observe. One important feature of the guideline is the need
for a strong independent element on the board provided by non-executive directors who can bring a
fresh  perspective  to strategic  planning  based on  their  expertise  and  outside  experience.  Having  said
that, non-executive directors with the right degree of independence and expertise are not easy to find.
This is one of the main challenges in corporate governance in Asia.
Although sound strategic direction from the top and good internal systems of control are the primary
defences  against  increased  risk,  banks  also  need  to  make  sure  that  they  hold  sufficient  capital  to
support that risk. The present capital adequacy regime formulated by the Basel Committee has been in
place since 1988. Although it has served its purpose well, it is showing signs of its age and needs to be
3
BIS Review 93/2000
replaced.  The  Committee  is  therefore  proposing  to  introduce  a  new  Capital  Accord,  the  guiding
principle  of  which  is  that  it  should  be  more  risk-sensitive.  One  of  the  by-products  of  the  new
technology  is  that  it  does  enable  banks  to  measure  risk  more  precisely.  The  Committee  intends
therefore to exploit this by enabling banks to use an internal ratings-based approach to calculate the
credit risk for various types of borrowers and consequently the amount of capital they need to hold.
Less  sophisticated  banks  will  use  a  standardised  approach  where  the  risk  weightings  for  various
classes of borrower will be determined by external credit ratings.
One feature that is particularly relevant to today’s discussion is that for the first time there will be an
explicit  capital  charge  for  operational  risk.  This  seems  to  be  a  timely  move  given  the  increased
operational complexity introduced by technological change.
The new Accord will be unveiled for further consultation at the beginning of next year. Although its
implementation is still a few years away, I would strongly advise banks to start to prepare for it now,
for  example  by  upgrading  their  loan  classification  systems  and  beginning  to  measure  and  monitor
operational risk. The new Capital Accord will be relevant not only to capital requirements but also to
the pricing of risk. If regional banks wish to remain competitive with the global players operating in
their  territories,  they  will  need  to  become  more  conscious  of  return  on  capital  and  the  need  to
economise on the use of capital.
There  is  one  other  aspect  of  the  changing  environment  to  which  I  believe  banks  should  pay  closer
attention. This is what might be termed the rise of the consumer. As I mentioned earlier, the internet
shifts the balance of power from banks to the consumers by giving them increased opportunity to shop
around.  This  has  coincided  with  efforts  by  banks  to  switch  their  marketing  efforts  to  consumer
finance, credit cards and wealth management products in order to broaden their sources of income and
to make up for sluggish business opportunities elsewhere. The internet should help in the cross-selling
of  these  products  to  consumers,  but  it  is  not  by  itself  a  guarantee  of  success.  The  banks  must  also
ensure that they do not alienate their customers through unfair or opaque  terms  and  conditions.  For
example,  in  the  internet  context,  customers  should  not  be  held  liable  for  direct  losses  caused  by
unauthorised transactions where they are not at fault. Banks therefore need to become more conscious
of the fact that they cannot take their customers for granted. They must be prepared to offer them a fair
deal,  and  be  seen  to  do  so.  This  is  something  that  we  will  be  addressing  in  Hong  Kong  through
revisions to our Code of Banking Practice. In this connection, we have recently issued for consultation
some proposals on credit card practices which will eventually be incorporated into the revised Code.
These include, for example, a recommendation that banks should publish standardised APRs for the
cost of obtaining finance via credit cards.
I  will  close  by  returning  to the theme  of  the  New  Economy.  It  used  to  be said  that the  days  of the
banks were numbered. As prime examples of Old Economy dinosaurs, they would inevitably succumb
to  the  onslaught  from  new  competitors  like  virtual  banks,  technology  firms,  monoline  service
providers, portals and the like. The position of the banks is certainly not secure, but it is looking a bit
better than it did only a short time ago. The decline of the New Economy has seen the Old Economy
strike back, with even bricks and mortar coming back into fashion. The brand names of banks and the
credibility which their branch networks provide are not to be underestimated as marketing tools. The
ability  to  marry  the  branch  network  to  an  internet  delivery  channel  is  a  powerful  competitive
advantage. But it is also one that could easily be thrown away unless the banks are truly sensitive to
the needs of their customers.
BIS Review 93/2000
4
