Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Monetary policy and financial market
developments in Denmark
Speech by Mrs Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, at the Annual Meeting
of the Danish Bankers Association, held in Copenhagen on 6 December 2000.
 In 2000 monetary policy has been the focus of more attention than we are accustomed to. Monetary
policy  is  normally  a  relatively  anonymous  exercise  in  Denmark  –  except  in  periods  of  foreign-
exchange unrest.
But  the  debate  leading  up  to  the  referendum  on  Denmark’s  adoption  of  the  euro  on  28  September
brought  monetary  policy  into  the  limelight  in  two  respects.  Considerable  interest  was  shown  in  the
structure and  monetary  policy  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  while  Denmark’s  fixed-exchange-rate
policy and its significance to monetary policy were also in focus.
The ECB’s monetary policy naturally attracted interest because if Denmark had decided to adopt the
euro, we would have participated in the single monetary policy, and participated fully in the work of
the European Central Bank. Being outside the euro area, the ECB’s monetary policy is also of interest
to  us since  our  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  entails  that  our  monetary  policy  mirrors  that  of  the  euro
area.
Up to the introduction of the euro and in the spring of 1999 the European economy was characterised
by  weak  economic  growth,  with  very  low  inflation  expectations.  This  entailed  reductions  of  the
official interest rates. During most of 1999 the ECB’s benchmark interest rate was only 2.5 per cent.
However, as from autumn 1999 inflation prospects in Europe deteriorated and since November 1999
the ECB has successively raised its interest rate to almost twice that level, so that it is now just under
5 per cent.
In certain periods monetary policy also drew a lot of attention because of the great contrast between
economic growth in the USA and Europe, and the strong inflow of capital to the USA. This caused the
dollar  to  strengthen,  despite  a  massive  US  balance-of-payments  deficit.  Notwithstanding  the  euro’s
recent strengthening, there is general agreement that the euro is still clearly undervalued in relation to
the dollar.
However,  it is  not the task  of the  ECB to  directly  manage  the  euro/dollar rate  by  adjusting  interest
rates,  nor  is  this  the  responsibility  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  Both  central  banks  must  ensure  internal
stability  as  the  central  element  of  their  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  excessive  fluctuations  or
movements in exchange rates may be countered by intervention, as we have seen on a few occasions
this autumn.
The objective of the ECB is stated in the Treaty to be price stability. This has been defined as a rate of
price increases of less than 2 per cent in the medium term. It follows that the ECB’s central task is to
ensure the stability of the euro – not in terms of the dollar rate, but in terms of the euro’s purchasing
power.
The current average rate of inflation in Europe is somewhat higher than 2 per cent, primarily due to the
strong oil-price increases. But, as stated, the objective of the ECB’s monetary policy is to influence
inflation in the medium term. The decisive factor is thus not the current inflation rate, but expected
inflation. Interest-rate decisions are forward-looking and must be based on an assessment of expected
future inflation. The ECB recently announced its intention to publish its economic projection twice a
year.  Together  with  a  number  of  other  indicators  of  the  economic  and  financial  situation  this
projection forms the basis for discussions of interest-rate policy.
In  view  of  Denmark’s  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  vis-à-vis  the  euro  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy
determines  the  development  in  the  Nationalbank’s  interest  rates.  The  benchmark  short-term  interest
1
BIS Review 113/2000
rate, the Nationalbank’s rate for lending and certificates of deposit, is thus determined on the basis of
the euro interest rate, plus a spread reflecting Denmark’s foreign-exchange situation.
At the beginning of the year this interest rate stood at 3.30 per cent, which was 30 basis points higher
than the ECB’s equivalent interest rate.
In view of the considerable outflow of capital the interest-rate differential widened during the spring
and the summer. At the end of 1999 the foreign-exchange reserve amounted to kr. 165 billion. By the
end of the 3rd quarter of this year it had fallen to kr. 108 billion. Therefore the interest-rate differential
gradually widened from 30 basis points in January to 45 basis points in June, while at the same time
the Nationalbank followed suit on the four occasions that the ECB raised its interest rates.
At  the  end  of  June  the  ECB  adopted  a  new  method  of  determining  the  interest  rate  for  the  main
refinancing  operations.  A  minimum  bid  rate  is  now  fixed  at  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council.
Liquidity  is  allocated  every  Tuesday  under  a  tender  procedure.  In  the  tender  procedure  the  actual
lending  rate  tends  to  fluctuate  a  good  deal,  which  affects  the  Danish  interest-rate  differential.  The
Nationalbank  has  chosen  to  mirror  only  the  major  changes.  This  means  that  we  will  not  adjust  our
lending rate if the euro interest rates fluctuate by a few basis points in either direction.
Maintaining  Denmark’s  monetary  policy  unchanged  thus  requires  more  frequent  adjustments  in  the
light  of  the  ECB’s  new  procedure  for  liquidity  allocation,  as  a  consequence  of  which  the  actual
lending rate is subject to greater fluctuation.
Immediately  after  the  referendum  the  Nationalbank  raised  the  lending  rate  by  0.5  per  cent,  thereby
widening  the  interest-rate  differential  to  95  basis  points.  The  intention  was  to  prevent  uncertainty
concerning  the  krone’s  exchange  rate.  Since  then,  it  has  been  possible  to  narrow  the  interest-rate
differential to around 60 basis points, in view of a certain reflow of foreign exchange. Nevertheless,
the interest-rate differential is still twice as high as at the beginning of 2000.
It  is  very  satisfying  to  note  that  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  not  encountered  any  serious
difficulties during this year. Although money-market interest rates were rather high for a period up to
the referendum there was no actual foreign-exchange unrest at any time. There was a tendency for an
outflow  of  capital,  which  was  countered  by  the  Nationalbank’s  sale  of  foreign  exchange  and  the
widening of the interest-rate differential, so that a very stable krone rate could be held against the euro
in  2000  so  far.  This  could  only  be  achieved  on  the  basis  of  the  strong  confidence  in  the
fixed-exchange-rate policy.
Together with the effects of the Whitsun package of economic measures the development in exchange
rates  has  contributed  to  a  strong  improvement  in  the  balance  of  payments  over  the  last  two  years.
However, even with a favourable balance-of-payments situation and a stable exchange rate a fiscal-
policy tightening may  be  necessary,  if the low  unemployment  rate exerts  greater pressure  on prices
and wages. On several occasions the government has announced that it will not hesitate to tighten the
economy if the fixed-exchange-rate policy so requires.
The  fiscal-policy  agreement  does  not  represent  a  tightening  of  fiscal  policy.  Even  in  the  light  of  a
considerable government budget surplus in 2001 the Finance Act agreement must be characterised as
rather  expansionary.  Moreover,  it  does  not  entail  the  type  of  structural  improvements  in  the  labour
market which Denmark has implemented successfully in recent years.
It is to be hoped that other factors will counteract the expansionary fiscal policy in the coming year. In
any case it is important that fiscal policy is not weakened further during the year, and that the objective
is to return to a tight fiscal policy in the following years.
We are very proud of Denmark’s economic development in current years, but we must not forget the
old  saying  that  the  seeds  of  future  problems  are  sown  in  the  good  years.  This  applies  to  the
macroeconomic balance, but also to the financial sector.
That is why politicians and the Nationalbank alike have often on occasions like this warned the banks
against being too bold when the going is good. The old saying is still as valid as ever. It is now that the
banks must prepare themselves for future losses.
BIS Review 113/2000
2
It is therefore surprising to note that the Finance Act agreement includes a reduction of the liquidity
advantage  on  the  provisions  of  banks  and  mortgage-credit  institutes.  The  Nationalbank  will  not
comment  on  the  issue  of  whether  it  is  fair  to  increase  the  taxation  of  the  financial  institutions  to
counteract the reduction of the corporation tax. Nevertheless, we find the choice of a method which
reduces the incentive to make provisions to be unfortunate.
Experience  shows  that  a  prudent  provisions  policy,  together  with  ample  own  funds,  is  vital  to  the
ability of financial institutions to weather periods of recession.
The  financial  sector  has  seen  many  mergers  during  the  past  decades.  The  mortgage-credit  sector
accounted  for  most  mergers  in  the  1970s  and  the  1980s,  while  the  period  around  1990  saw  major
mergers  in  the  commercial  bank  and  savings  bank  sector.  Later  on,  the  special  focus  has  been  on
cross-border mergers, with the transgression of both sectoral and geographical borders.
This has resulted in larger, but also more complex, institutions which make new demands not only of
boards and management, but also of the authorities. A particular problem is that legislation is based on
financial institutions with a clear national foundation, even though they have extensive international
operations.
This has, for example, led to agreement on intensified cooperation between the supervisory authorities
of the Nordic countries. The Nordic central banks have also set themselves the task of evaluating the
role of the central banks in relation to the cross-border financial groups.
The  functioning  of  the  financial  markets  is  affected  by  the  restructuring  into  fewer  and  larger
institutions.
The  money  market  especially  is  characterised  by  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  participants.  The
money  market  is  an  inter-bank  market  for  trading  liquidity  between  banks.  An  active  market  and
efficient price formation require a suitable number of major market players. The mergers reduce the
number  of  participants,  however,  so  that  liquidity  flows  are  internalised  within  the  individual
institutions.
Prohibitions  or  regulations  cannot  change  this,  since  the  very  objective  of  the  money  market  is  to
distribute liquidity among the individual financial institutions. The fewer and the larger the banks, the
less need for redistribution. However, several smaller banks still depend on the money market and on
efficient price formation. We expect the large banks to continue to safeguard this structure. Otherwise,
the Nationalbank will occasionally have to play a more active role on the money market than before.
The foreign-exchange market is characterised by a small number of active Danish participants and also
a number of foreign participants trading kroner against foreign currencies.
Another  important  factor  is  that  as  an  element  of  internationalisation  major  capital  transactions  are
made  to  and from  Denmark  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  and sale  of  companies  and  portfolio
investments.
These transactions sometimes have a significant impact on the foreign-exchange market, emphasising
that the Danish krone is a small currency in international terms.
The third financial market, the capital market, may also be affected by the decrease in the number of
financial  institutions.  However,  efficient  price  formation  for  bonds  depends  especially  on  investor
behaviour.  The  restructuring  of  the  tax  system  from  real-interest  tax  to  return-on-capital  tax  has
eliminated the former locking effects on the capital market. The new rules on the taxation of the return
on capital of institutional investors are neutral in relation to portfolio restructuring within the sector.
The  cooperation  between  Danmarks  Nationalbank  and  the  Danish  Bankers  Association  and  its
members covers a wide range of topics. These years have seen a number of major projects calling for
the  development  of  new  types  of  cooperation.  The  payment  systems  have  been  modernised  and
significant innovations are being introduced in the  statistics area.  At the  beginning  of 2001  we  will
commence the publication of balance-sheet statistics for financial institutions in a new format. All of
these projects require a major effort on the part of the banks, and not least their IT departments.
3
BIS Review 113/2000
On behalf of the Nationalbank I would like to thank all of our cooperation partners who are part of the
Danish Bankers Association.
BIS Review 113/2000
4
