Padraid McGowan, Ireland - experiences in EMU
Presentation by Mr Padraig McGowan, Director General of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Central
Bank of Iceland on 7th December 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin by thanking you for inviting me to speak here today. It is a great
pleasure  for  me  to  have  this opportunity  to discuss  the  recent  performance  of  the  Irish  economy  as
well  as  some  of  the  challenges  for  Ireland  which  participation  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU) presents.
Economic performance since 1994
The performance of the Irish economy in recent years has been excellent, both in historical terms and
by international standards. Since 1994, the economy has expanded at an annual average rate of around
8%. Expressed another way, output at the end of 2000 will be around 70% higher in real terms than at
the beginning of the current phase of strong growth. To put this into perspective, the annual growth
rate of the Irish economy averaged around 3½% between 1960 and 1993.
The buoyant economic conditions of recent years have facilitated a significant improvement in living
standards - as measured by GDP per capita - relative to the EU average. In Ireland’s case, however,
GNP per capita - around 85% of per capita GDP - is a more appropriate measure of domestic living
standards, given the large profit repatriations of foreign-owned multinational corporations whose scale
of operations in Ireland has expanded significantly in recent years. On this measure, income per capita,
although rising, remains somewhat below the EU average. In addition, the stock of wealth in Ireland
remains below the EU norm.
This  strong  growth  has  paid  large  dividends  in  the  labour  market  -  traditionally  Ireland’s  Achilles’
heel.  For  many  years,  Ireland’s  employment  performance  had  been  quite  anaemic,  with  many
commentators  characterising  the  economic  situation  as  being  one  of  “jobless  growth”.  Total
employment actually fell during the 1980s. Since 1994, however, strong economic growth has been
associated  with  employment  increases  of  around  4¾%  per  annum.  In  overall  terms,  employment  is
now  almost  40%  higher  than  in  1994.  This  large  increase  in  employment  has  been  facilitated  by
transfers  from  unemployment  into  employment  as  well  as  a  significant  increase  in  the  size  of  the
labour force. The latter reflects the increase in the population of working age, increased participation
and  net  inward  migration.  This  has  resulted  in  the  employment  rate  for  the  active  population
increasing by around one-quarter between 1994 and this year.
Unemployment has fallen below 4% and, while precise estimates are difficult to pin down, it is now
clear that the economy is operating at or very close to full-employment. For an economy with a long
history of unemployment problems, the virtual attainment of full-employment is the most encouraging
feature of the recent economic performance. With sustained strong labour demand, the level of long-
term  unemployment,  i.e.  unemployed  for  one  year  or  longer,  has  fallen  dramatically  since  1997  to
1.4%  at  present.  Involuntary  emigration  -  for  so  long  a  symbol  of  Ireland’s  dismal  economic
performance - has been eliminated and, for a number of years now, Ireland has experienced net inward
migration.  Since  1994,  the  population  has  expanded  by  around  1%  per  annum,  with  net  inflows  -
returning migrants and others - accounting for about two-fifths of this increase.
The  transformation  of  the  economy  which  has  led  to  a  higher  level  of  economic  activity  has  also
resulted in a reversal of fortunes for the public finances. A surplus has been recorded since 1997 and
this year, a general government surplus of 3.7% of GDP is currently expected. The improved fiscal
position and the increase in output have resulted in a decline in the ratio of debt to GDP, to around
41.5% this year, one of the lowest ratios in the EU. With the increase in output experienced in recent
1
BIS Review 112/2000
years and with nominal interest rates relatively low by international standards, the burden of debt has
fallen significantly.
These favourable developments have given rise to a range of issues, some of which are new to us. The
rate of inflation has picked up significantly, there are increasing labour market pressures, and a wide
range of asset prices have been increasing very substantially for some years. This has been associated
with a rapid increase in bank lending and an accompanying increase in private sector indebtedness. In
addition,  a  considerable  infrastructural  deficit  has  emerged  which  has  implications  not  just  for
economic  development  but  for  the  quality  of  life  in  Ireland.  With  Ireland’s  participation  in  EMU,
monetary policy cannot be used to deal with these developments. I will return to these issues later.
Recent Indicators of Economic Performance a
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000 (f) c
6.3
6.0
3.2
14.7
2.4
78.8
- 2.0
40.1
42.1
8.2
7.7
5.0
12.2
2.5
86.3
- 2.2
37.4
39.7
7.4
6.6
3.6
11.9
1.6
87.6
- 0.2
37.8
38.0
9.3
8.3
3.9
10.3
1.5
90.7
0.7
36.9
36.2
7.8
6.6
6.8
7.8
2.4
98.9
2.1
36.0
33.9
7.8
6.7
6.3
5.6
1.6
8½
7¼
4¾
4½
5½
102.4
107.0
1.9
36.2
34.3
3.7
35.2
31.5
GNP
GNP per capita
Employment b
Unemployment b
Inflation (CPI)
Exports/GNP
General Gov. Balance
Revenue/GDP
Expenditure/GDP
(a) Growth rates, except unemployment (rate) and Government balance (percentage of GDP).
(b) As at April of each year, except for 1999 and 2000 which are full year averages of quarterly data.
(c) Central Bank of Ireland forecasts (Autumn 2000).
Experience in the EU
Changing structure of the economy
For  about  two  decades  up  to  the  late  1970s,  the  Irish  economy  had  performed  relatively  well,
following  the  adoption  of  more  outward-oriented  policies  from  the  late  1950s.  This  necessitated  a
restructuring  of  the  economy  and  the  inevitable  demise  of  some  firms  and  sectors  which  had
developed behind sometimes quite high tariff barriers. Membership of the then European  Economic
Community in 1973 was a major milestone on this road. However, given the point from which Ireland
was  starting  in 1973, it  was  evident that  the  advent  of free  trade  resulting  from  membership  would
bring major changes to the trading relations and structure of the Irish economy. Prior to membership,
Ireland  had  a  relatively  large  agricultural  sector,  which  was  highly  dependent  on  the  adjacent  UK
market.  Industry  was  predominantly  small-scale,  and  was  still  in  the  process  of  adjusting  to  the
lowering  of  tariff  barriers  to  improve  competition  and  to  the  adoption  of  a  more  export-oriented
perspective. In this environment, productivity and living standards were relatively low.
BIS Review 112/2000
2
Agriculture
Industry
Services
GDP by Sector: Percentage Distribution
1970
17
36
47
1980
12
37
51
1990
9
35
56
1999
4
38
58
Source: National Income and Expenditure (various issues), Central Statistics Office.
Transformation of Manufacturing Sector: Per Cent of Total
1983
1990
1998
Irish
41
61
Foreign
59
39
Irish
32
55
Foreign
68
45
Irish
18
53
Foreign
82
47
Output
Employment
Source: Census of Industrial Production, various issues.
The structure of the manufacturing sector has been radically altered in the thirty-odd years since EU
entry. The traditional sectors - typically relatively low skilled relying on local inputs - have declined in
relative  importance,  and  have  been  replaced  by  high-technology,  largely  foreign-owned  firms  in
sectors  such  as  computer  hardware,  chemicals,  software  and  medical  instruments.  Currently,  these
modern sub-sectors account for almost three-quarters of output and around one-third of employment in
the  manufacturing  sector.  The  structural  changes  in  the  economy  have  also  been  associated  with
substantial change in the destination of exports, mainly from the UK to the rest of the EU.
Destination of Total Exports: Percentage Distribution
UK
Other EU a
Elsewhere (Including USA)
1970
66
9
25
1980
1990
1999
43
32
25
34
41
25
22
43
35
(a) Countries comprising EEC/EC/EU in the relevant years.
Source: Central Statistics Office.
Foreign direct investment
There  are  a  number  of  factors  that  lie  behind  this  transformation  of  industry.  First,  the  regulatory
environment for setting up and running businesses in Ireland has been relatively light. Secondly, an
emphasis was placed on the rapid modernisation of the telecommunications infrastructure. Finally, and
most  importantly,  has  been  the  successful  industrial  policy  of  encouraging  inward  foreign  direct
investment. A wide range of measures have been used to attract foreign firms to Ireland. These include
a  low  corporate  tax  environment,  the  development  of  the  educational  and  technical  skills  of  the
workforce, a relatively low cost environment and the opportunity to use Ireland as a gateway to the
vast EU market.
Traditionally, foreign direct investment (FDI) in Ireland has typically taken the form of “greenfield”
investment as well as expansions of existing plants. This has had a greater direct impact on output and
employment than would have been the case if it had taken the form of mergers and acquisitions. In
addition, foreign direct investment has helped to transfer technology, skills and modern management
methods in a relatively easy way to the Irish economy. The high-technology sectors have imparted a
3
BIS Review 112/2000
new dynamism to business, and have led to a large number of start-ups by former employees of these
foreign-owned enterprises - the software industry being perhaps the  best  example.  It  should also  be
stated that,  although  there  has  been  a  sizeable  shake-up  of  domestically-owned  industry  in  the  new
free-trade environment, much of domestically-owned industry has been radically modernised and put
on a sound, efficient footing.
US Direct Investment Abroad: Irish Percentage Share of EU Total
Manufacturing
of which:
Chemicals
Electrical & Electronics
1994
8.4
6.9
7.6
1995
2.9
2.4
5.4
1996
10.9
13.0
18.0
1997
15.0
17.3
33.2
1998
7.0
15.4
39.2
Source: US Department of Commerce.
A significant proportion of FDI inflows into Ireland originates in the United States: in 1998, 41% of
all foreign-owned manufacturing firms in Ireland were from the US. Between 1994 and 1998, annual
inflows of manufacturing FDI from the US amounted to around 1½% of Irish GDP. Indeed, Ireland
receives  a  large  share  of  all  US  FDI.  For  example,  in  1998,  Ireland  received  7%  of  all  US
manufacturing inflows into the EU, a not insignificant proportion for a country with around 1% of the
EU GDP.
The  success  which  various  foreign  multinationals  have  enjoyed  has  encouraged  others  to  establish
manufacturing  bases  in  Ireland.  As  a  result,  agglomeration  economies  have  developed  over  time:
success has bred success. In more recent years, the manufacturing economy has benefited from what is
known  as  “distance  independence”  -  transports  costs  as  a  percentage  of  output  value  have  fallen
substantially  for  high-technology  outputs  such  as  software  and  chemicals.  This  has  significantly
reduced Ireland’s peripheral location disadvantage.
A  number  of  implications  arise  from  this  policy  of  targeting  high-technology  FDI.  Firstly,  a  sharp
dichotomy has emerged within the industrial sector between the relatively low value-added traditional
sector which produces largely for the domestic and UK markets, and the more dynamic higher value-
added  technology  sector,  which  produces  primarily  for  the  rest  of  the  EU  and  US  markets.  This
dichotomy  is  most  apparent  in  the  productivity  data,  with  the  high-technology  sector  being  an
estimated  five  times  more  productive  than  the  traditional  sector.  Secondly,  in  Ireland,  the  relative
importance  of  the  industrial  sector  has  been  rising  in  recent  years,  albeit  at  a  moderate  rate.  This
situation  contrasts  strongly  with  the  experience  of  other  advanced  economies,  where  the  industrial
sector has been in relative decline for some time.
EU financial support
I  should  also  mention  that  the  various  financial  support  mechanisms  of  the  European  Union  -  the
Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds - have been of assistance in adapting to the new economic
structures and in financing infrastructural development. These supports have averaged around 2¼% of
GDP  since  1989,  and  have  been  in  relative  decline  during  the  past  six  to  seven  years  of  strong
economic  growth.  Indeed,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  impact  of  the  structural  fund  process  on  the
administrative and political system has been at least as important as the investment itself. In particular,
transfers  under  the  Community  Support  Framework  encouraged  the  government  to  raise  public
investment from its extremely low level in the 1980s. Finally, transfers to the agricultural sector under
the  Common  Agricultural  Policy,  which  have  averaged  3½%  of  GDP  since  1989,  have  provided
protection to the farming sector from global trends.
BIS Review 112/2000
4
Experience in the EU single market
The full implication of the EU single market by the end of 1992 was regarded with some trepidation, it
has to be acknowledged, by a number of commentators on the Irish economy, when this EU initiative
was taken in the mid-1980s. This centered around a concern that the core countries of the EU would
reap most of the benefits of the new single market, with the countries on the periphery running the risk
of becoming  economic  backwaters.  These fears focused  on the  possibility  that  positive  externalities
and increasing returns to scale were most likely to be available to the developed, industrial core of the
EU. Industries that are characterised by increasing returns to scale - motor vehicles, heavy chemicals,
man-made fibres etc. - were deeply embedded in the economies of the countries at the centre of the
EU, but were of little significance in most of the peripheral countries such as Ireland. In this view, the
developed regions of the EU would therefore benefit from first mover advantage.
The counter-argument pointed to the benefits that could accrue to small countries from the much larger
market.  Even  if,  for  historical  reasons,  small  countries  did  not  have  many  sectors  characterised  by
increasing returns to scale, the opportunity existed for these to operate at an efficient scale in the new
large single EU market. The removal of barriers to trade and lower transport costs also reduced the
necessity for industry to be located close to the largest markets. Thirdly, less developed regions in the
EU were normally characterised by lower costs, and this, ceteris paribus, placed them at an advantage
in  the  development  of  new  sectors  and  enterprises.  Finally,  it  was  evident  that  the  location  of  new
knowledge–based  industries  characterised  by  innovation  and  technology  was  much  less  tied  to
comparative  advantage  based  on  natural  endowments.  Comparative  advantage  in  these  sectors  was
something that could be created and acquired in the right institutional and policy environment. In the
event, the worst fears of the pessimists in the argument of the periphery vis-à-vis the centre have not
been realised,  with the experience of  peripheral  regions  in  the  single  EU  market,  including  Ireland,
being generally satisfactory.
Ireland and the single monetary policy
Ireland adopted the euro at its inception in January 1999 and became part of a large monetary union.
This was not something fundamentally new in Ireland, however, as until 1979 Ireland had participated
in a currency area with sterling for over one hundred and fifty years previously; the Irish currency and
sterling were amalgamated at parity in 1826. With the introduction of the Irish pound in the late 1920s,
there was a no-margins one-for-one link between the Irish pound and  sterling  which  prevailed  until
1979. Coupled with complete freedom of capital mobility, this resulted in virtually the same levels of
interest rates in Ireland and the UK. Given the high degree of trade integration as well as capital and
labour mobility which existed during this period, it could be argued that this exchange rate regime was
an entirely natural phenomenon; in this regard, Ireland and the UK could have been regarded  as an
optimum currency area.
In the mid-1970s, the link with sterling began to be questioned following persistent high inflation rates
in  the  UK  coupled  with  a  significant  depreciation  of  sterling  which  inevitably  resulted  in  broadly
similar rates of inflation in Ireland. The establishment of the European Monetary System (EMS) - with
its primary objective of being a “zone of monetary stability” - provided an alternative to the sterling
link.  Ireland  joined  the  EMS  at  its  inception  in  1979,  and  the  link  with  sterling  ended  shortly
afterwards as sterling rose against EMS currencies.
The  experience  in  the  EMS  has  not  always  been  positive,  particularly  in  the  early  years,  with  a
sizeable  appreciation  of  sterling  and  the  pursuit  of  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies  which  undermined
stability.  In  August  1986,  the  Irish  pound  was  devalued  by  8%,  in  part  to  reverse  an  unwarranted
appreciation  of  the  Irish  pound’s  effective  exchange  rate  that  had  occurred  mainly  due  to  a  sharp
weakening of sterling. For over a decade thereafter, the nominal effective exchange rate for the Irish
pound was generally stable, apart from the 10% devaluation in January 1993. This devaluation, in the
context  of  the  European  currency  crisis  of  1992/1993,  was  again  partly  correcting  an  unwarranted
appreciation in the Autumn of 1992. This was an example of where Ireland was affected by contagion
in the international foreign exchange markets.
5
BIS Review 112/2000
From  1994,  the  Irish  economy  began  to  grow  strongly.  During  this  period,  economic  policy  was
primarily  driven  by  the  need to  meet  the  criteria  for  EMU  membership.  Policies  of  fiscal  prudence
were continued while exchange rate policy was consistent with price stability. In the two years prior to
membership  of  the  euro  area the  Irish  pound  was  relatively  strong.  This  was  consolidated  by  a  3%
revaluation of the Irish pound in the EMS in March 1998.
Benefits of EMU
In a small open economy with a high degree of trade integration into the EU and world economies, it
is logical for Ireland to be amongst the keenest supporters of EMU. A small economy such as Ireland,
which exports a significant part of its output to other participating countries,  should stand  to  derive
significant  benefit.  Secondly,  the  prospect  of  monetary  stability  will  have  a  long-term  beneficial
impact  on investment  and  growth.  Over  time,  in  accordance  with  the  price  stability  mandate  of  the
ECB,  inflation  is  unlikely  to  exceed  2%  per  annum  for  any  sustained  period  of  time.  As  a  result,
nominal interest rates should not, in  general,  carry  a  significant inflation  risk  premium.  In  addition,
EMU  imposes  a  discipline  on  participating  countries,  in  the  sense  that  sound  fiscal  policies  and
enhanced  structural  reform  assume  greater  importance  in  a  monetary  union.  Finally,  some  positive
effects resulting from the single currency will become evident in capital and financial markets. Over
time, for example, the development of deep and liquid capital markets will improve the potential for
companies to  raise  finance.  This  will  enhance  the  growth  prospects  of  younger  firms,  in  particular;
these  are  typically  innovating  firms  which  bring  new  technologies  to  the  market.  In  addition,  the
increased  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  financial  markets  in  the  euro  area  will  facilitate  an
increase in corporate restructuring through mergers and acquisitions activity. On the latter point, there
is evidence that this process is already underway.
Implications for policy of joining the euro area
From an  Irish macroeconomic perspective, however, the initial impact  of  the  adoption  of  the  single
currency  on  1  January  1999  was  a  significant  easing  of  monetary  conditions.  While  the  decline  in
nominal interest rates had for the most part been discounted, subsequent developments in relation to
real  interest  rates  -  in  the  light  of  Ireland’s  higher  inflation  rate  -  have  led  to  a  further  easing  of
monetary conditions. This has been compounded by the decline in the external value of the euro. This
easing of monetary conditions has occurred at a time when the Irish economy is performing very well
compared to the central euro area countries, with strong domestic demand in particular giving rise to
significant  risks  of  overheating  in  the  economy.  With  monetary  policy  now  geared  towards  the
objective of price stability for the euro area as a whole, it cannot be deployed to meet region-specific
requirements.  The  corollary  of  this  is  that,  in  order  to  cope  with  regional  or  country-specific
difficulties, policies other than the single monetary policy must be employed more vigorously.
Fiscal policy
In  particular,  fiscal  policy  must  assume  a  greater  role  in  restoring  macroeconomic  balance.  Within
EMU, fiscal policy must be conducted within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact, which
requires  the  national  authorities  to  ensure  that  their  budget  balances  are  “close  to  balance  or  in
surplus” over the medium-term. The reason for this is to limit negative externalities resulting from lax
fiscal policy by individual countries within the single currency.
For Ireland, it is arguably the case that fiscal policy is now more effective than in the past. With both
interest and exchange rates now given, the effects of fiscal policy are no longer likely to “crowd out”
or  “crowd in”  private  sector  consumption and investment.  In  these  circumstances,  fiscal  policy  is  a
relevant policy instrument for Ireland. Despite this, the impact of fiscal policy is subject to a number
of limiting criteria. Firstly, given the high degree of openness of the Irish economy, it is inevitable that
at least part of the impact of fiscal policy will be reflected in external trade developments rather than
in  domestic  activity.  Secondly,  given  the  large  exchequer  surpluses  which  have  been  recorded  for
some time now,  expectations  may  impose  some  constraint  on  a tighter fiscal  policy  stance.  Finally,
BIS Review 112/2000
6
given the consensus-based approach to macroeconomic determination, the stance of fiscal policy is, at
least  to  some  extent,  somewhat  pre-empted  in  Ireland  by  commitments  made  under  national  wage
agreements.
Incomes determination
The  evolution of  pay  in  Ireland  has  been  conducted  within  a  partnership  framework,  encompassing
government, employers and unions since 1987, with the first agreement applying from the beginning
of  1988.  The  current  agreement  -  Programme  for  Prosperity  and  Fairness  -  is  the  fifth  such
agreement.  The  pay  terms  typically  involve  a  three-year  process  in  which  unions  accept  moderate
nominal wage increases in return for income tax reductions. Indeed, these reductions in income taxes
have delivered a not insignificant part of the increase in take-home pay.
important  feature 
National  agreements  were  undoubtedly  an 
in  restoring  confidence  and
competitiveness in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The moderate evolution of nominal pay created a
virtuous  cycle  in  which  the  economy’s  competitiveness  improved  and  total  employment  rose.  As  I
outlined earlier, the public finances were put on a more stable footing while, over time, the income tax
burden was reduced significantly. In 1988, the standard and higher rates of income tax were 35 and
58% respectively; for the tax year which began in April 2000, the corresponding rates are 22 and 44%,
and the income level at which the higher rate in particular is applied has been increased significantly.
More  recently,  the  usefulness  of  national  wage  agreements  in  an  environment  of  virtually  full
employment  has  been  questioned.  The  fact  that,  at  present,  the  wage  agreements  apply  formally  to
only  around  one-third  of  workers,  many  of  whom  are  in  the  public  sector,  is  encouraging  this
questioning.
However,  for  a  small  open  economy  where  competitiveness  is  extremely  important,  one  should  be
wary about dismissing the partnership process. In particular, given the recent acceleration in headline
inflation,  the  partnership  approach  may  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  preventing  inflationary
expectations becoming entrenched in the decision making process and the emergence of a wage-price
spiral. Such an adverse eventuality could set the conditions for a serious loss of competitiveness in the
future, particularly if exacerbated by a significant strengthening of the euro.
Structural reform and competition policy
Structural  reform  is  another  tool  available  to  policymakers  in  EMU,  although,  by  definition,  the
benefits of any reforms will be limited in the short-term. Nevertheless, policies aimed at improving the
functioning of both product and factor markets can enhance the business environment and increase the
flexibility  of  markets  in  the  medium-term.  Such  reforms  play  an  important  role  in  meeting  the
economic objectives of higher growth and employment without creating inflationary pressures, and as
a result, in delivering higher living standards.
Some reform of markets has been undertaken  in recent  years. The  labour  market  is  one  area  where
flexibility has been improved. For example, income tax  reforms  have  enhanced incentives  in  recent
years,  while  labour  market  legislation  in  Ireland  is  somewhat  lighter  than  elsewhere  in  the  EU.  In
product markets, the process of liberalisation has been speeded up. In particular, markets which have
traditionally  been  under  direct  control  of  government  have  undergone  significant  reform:  the
telecommunications  sector,  for  example,  has  been  fully  liberalised  and  this  is  already  having  a
favourable impact on prices. Elsewhere, however, the pace of reform has been slower, with barriers to
entry, in particular, remaining a feature of a number of markets.
Prudential standards in the financial sector
The fourth strand in the range of policies that can be employed in EMU relates to the maintenance of a
sound financial sector. In Ireland, the Central Bank is responsible for supervision of almost the entire
financial  sector,  apart  from  insurance  companies.  In  particular,  credit  institutions  are  required  to
conform to a wide range of standards that have been agreed at BIS and EU Commission levels. What
is of importance for us at present is that credit institutions are constrained from over-extending their
7
BIS Review 112/2000
lending to individual, or a group of related, economic sectors. This limits the risk, for example, of an
undue  concentration  of  lending  to  the  broad  property  sector,  which  has  frequently  been  subject  to
booms  and  busts  in  many  countries,  with  consequential  problems  for  the  solvency  of  the  financial
sector.
The Central Bank has been active in alerting banks to the risks posed by rapid overall and property-
related  lending.  As  part  of  this  process,  banks  have  been  required  to  conduct  regular  stress  tests  to
assess how fitted they are to cope with various types of shocks including a catastrophic fall in property
prices. The results of tests so far suggest a high degree of resilience to such adverse developments.
Earlier this year, Ireland participated in the World Bank - IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP).  This  entailed  an  assessment  of  financial  sector  vulnerabilities  and  of  the  observance  and
implementation of supervisory standards and best practices. The FSAP found that Ireland had a sound
and highly developed financial system that has been very stable even during periods of international
turmoil.  Banking  sector  capitalisation  and  asset  quality  are  high,  and  profitability  levels  are  higher
than  for  most  European  competitors.  The  assessment  also  found  that  the  overall  framework  of
prudential regulation and supervision in the Central Bank is well developed, and shows a high degree
of  observation  of  international  standards  and  codes.  The  review  noted  that  current  developments  -
financial  sector  innovation,  increased  competition,  increased  cross-border  activities  associated  with
Dublin’s  International  Financial  Services  Centre  and  sustained  rapid  credit  growth  -  pose  a
considerable challenge to market participants and supervisors to maintain Ireland’s record of financial
stability.
In summary,  Ireland  is  now participating  in  a single currency  where  monetary  conditions  are  set in
terms  of  requirements  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Individual  countries  must  operate  within  this
context. This may not always be appropriate to their specific needs. As outlined above, policy-makers
have  a  number  of  instruments  available  to  tackle  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  to  respond  more
efficiently to regional-specific shocks that will inevitably occur from time-to-time. The effective use
of these tools should minimise the impact on the economy of the loss of monetary and exchange rate
policy.
Current problems and issues
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  greatest  challenge  within  EMU  is  to  steer  the  economy  onto  a  more
sustainable growth path after having experienced very strong growth over the last seven years. This
will be no easy task given that imbalances have already begun to manifest themselves.
Inflation
Perhaps the most visible example of current problems is the acceleration in headline inflation which
has occurred over the last twelve months or so. The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) has
accelerated  from  its  most recent low-point  of  1.8%  in  mid-1999  to  the  current  rate  of  6.0%.  While
some  of  this  increase  reflects  temporary  factors  such  as  indirect  tax  changes,  general  inflationary
pressures  have  been  evident  for  some  time.  The  headline  rate  in  Ireland  is  around  3¼  percentage
points higher than the comparable rate for the euro area as a whole. It is estimated that, in the context
of the decline of the euro in the foreign exchange markets, the greater exposure of the Irish economy
to  non-euro  currencies  accounts  for  around  ½  of  a  percentage  point  of  this  difference.  In  addition,
approximately 1 percentage point can be explained by higher productivity growth in the traded sector
relative to the non-traded sector. This results in higher  wages  in  the  non-traded  sector,  which  when
combined with lower productivity growth in this sector, leads to upward pressure on prices. Taking
account of these factors implies that the remaining inflation differential vis-à-vis the euro area is about
1¾ percentage points. About ¾ percentage points of this is due to Irish indirect tax increases, with the
remainder largely attributable to the strength of domestic demand in Ireland.
BIS Review 112/2000
8
Decomposition of Irish Inflation vis-à-vis the Euro Area
HICP - Ireland
HICP - euro area
Inflation Differential
of which:
Price Level Convergence
Larger Effective Exchange Rate Effect
Indirect Tax Effect
Excess Domestic Inflation
6
2¾
3¼
1
½
¾
1
Wage expectations
The  labour  market  is  an  area  where  imbalances  have  been  evident  for  some  time.  The  virtual
attainment  of  full  employment,  with  the  resulting  transfer  of  bargaining  power  from  employer  to
employee, has put upward pressure on wages in all sectors. While rising wage levels may ultimately
be one of the mechanisms which will slow the economy, there is a risk that wage developments are
being driven by expectations based on the exceptional growth of the recent past. In this context, wage
settlements must recognise the inevitability of a reduction in growth to a more sustainable rate, as well
as  the  openness  of  the  economy  which  increases  its exposure to external  developments.  At present,
firms in Ireland, particularly those in the indigenous sector, are benefiting from the decline in the value
of  the  euro  against  sterling.  In  this  environment,  wage  increases  which  were  compounded  by  any
significant appreciation of the euro could impose serious competitiveness difficulties on these firms.
Infrastructure
The  strains  on  the  economy’s  infrastructure  -  most  notably  transportation  and  housing  -  have  been
evident for some time. In more developed countries, economic development was, generally speaking, a
more gradual process. This facilitated improvements in the physical infrastructure to be undertaken in
tandem with economic growth. In Ireland, infrastructural developments have been unable to match the
intensity  of  economic  growth  which  has  occurred  over  a  relatively  short  period  of  time,  so  that
bottlenecks  have  emerged.  In  an  effort  to  reduce  the  infrastructural  deficit,  the  Government  has
initiated a programme of significantly increased expenditure as part of the National Development Plan.
However, since the construction sector is already operating at full capacity, it will be some time before
the benefits of this are visible.
Diversification/exposure to sector shocks
By definition, it is difficult for small open economies to ensure a high degree of diversification. As a
result, a  shock  affecting  one  sector can  have  implications for the economy  as  a  whole.  In  Ireland’s
case, it is useful to focus on the two very distinct broad sectors in the economy. The first comprises the
indigenous manufacturing sector as well as parts of the agricultural sector. These sectors remain quite
dependent  on  the  UK  market  and  are  exposed  to  euro/sterling  exchange  rate  developments.
Particularly  severe  trading  conditions  could  arise  if  an  acceleration  of  wages  in  this  sector  was
compounded  by  a  sudden,  significant  rise  in  the  euro  against  sterling.  Secondly,  parts  of  the  high-
technology sector remain particularly exposed to developments in the world economy and the US in
particular.  An  insight  into  this  exposure  is  obtained  from  the  fact  that,  in  1999,  ten  foreign-owned
enterprises accounted for over one-third of total exports of goods and services.
9
BIS Review 112/2000
Asset price increases
In the housing market, the rate of increase of prices accelerated sharply in 1996, and with very high
annual  growth rates  being  recorded  since  then,  house  prices  have  more  than  doubled.  A  number  of
factors  have  contributed  to  this.  The  demand  for  housing  has  risen  substantially.  This  reflects
fundamental  factors  such  as  the  rise  in  the  population  in  the  household  formation  age  group,
significantly  higher  employment  and  rising  disposable  income  levels.  In  addition,  the  expectation  -
and now the reality - of lower interest rates resulting from EMU participation have contributed to the
sharp increase in prices. On the other hand, the response of supply until recently was quite sluggish.
Over  the  last  year  or  so,  however,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  output,  so  that  some
moderation in the rate of house price inflation is expected.
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000 d
Property Prices: Annual Percentage Increases
Residential a
Commercial b
Rents c
4.1
7.2
11.8
17.2
22.6
18.5
13.9
7.6
4.2
11.1
17.0
32.1
23.8
21.6
2.3
1.8
8.2
10.6
14.6
16.1
16.2
(a) Department of Environment and Local Government, National New House Prices.
(b) Jones Lang LaSalle, Capital Values.
(c) Jones Lang LaSalle, Rental Value for Irish Commercial Property.
(d) Jan.-Sept. 2000, year-on-year.
Commercial property prices have followed broadly similar trends to residential property prices with
the rate of increase accelerating from 1996 onwards. Since then, prices have risen by 113%. The rate
of increase in rents in the commercial property sector also accelerated in 1996, and while still strong,
the cumulative rate of increase has been somewhat lower than for commercial property prices. These
increases  reflect  very  low  vacancy  rates,  low  nominal  interest  rates  and  a  high  level  of  business
confidence.
Associated with this acceleration in residential and commercial property prices, and perhaps to some
extent driving it, has been a large rise in bank lending. Personal sector credit, which is dominated by
residential  mortgage  lending,  has risen  strongly  in  recent  years, although  at  a  slower  rate  than  total
private-sector  credit.  The  share  of  non-housing  personal  sector  credit  in  total  lending  has  remained
relatively stable in recent years and was lower at end-1999 than end-1994. Lending to real estate and
construction activities rose from some 6% of total lending at end-1994 to over 8% at end-1999.
BIS Review 112/2000
10
Bank Lending: Annual Percentage Increases to Selected Sectors
Total Private-Sector
Credit a
Personal b,c
Building and
Construction b,d
Financial b,g
Other b,h
11.8
11.2
15.4
23.6
23.6
31.6
24.2
10.5
13.1
15.9
21.0
19.3
26.0
17.8
16.1
12.1
26.3
19.8
58.1
50.2
58.4
15.2
2.1
12.3
47.9
35.7
86.9
39.3
4.0
7.2
17.1
13.5
21.4
22.9
25.6
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000 i
(a)  Adjusted for lending to non-bank IFSC entities and for valuation effects resulting from exchange rate changes. The 1999
figure could not be adjusted for valuation effects because of the introduction of the euro in that year. The 1999 figure is
also boosted, for technical reasons, by the impact of the merger between Irish Life and Irish Permanent.
(b) Year-on-year growth rate in November for the years 1994 to 1998; for 1999, the figure is November 1998 to December
1999.
(c) Understated to some extent by the increasing prevalence of securitisations of residential mortgages.
(d) Break in the series in 1997. Lending to building and construction includes lending to property companies but does not
include lending under the heading hotels and restaurants.
(g)  Excluding IFSC.
(h) Total lending from sectoral return less lending to the personal, building and construction and financial sectors.
(i) Based on year to end-October. For Personal, Building and Construction, Financial and Other, Sept. 2000 vs. Aug. 1999.
Total indebtedness to resident credit institutions rose from 71% of GNP to just over 100% between
1994 and 1999. Personal sector indebtedness, as a proportion of GNP, rose from 33% to 44% over this
period,  and  to  a  greater  extent  in  relation  to  personal  disposable  income.  The  indebtedness  of  the
property  sector,  as  a  proportion  of  GNP,  doubled  between  1994  and  1999.  Overall  levels  of
indebtedness,  having  risen  from  a  relatively  low  level,  are  not  currently  particularly  high  by
international  standards.  However,  continued  growth  at  the  current  pace  would,  at  some  point,  raise
concerns about financial stability. In addition, higher levels of indebtedness increase vulnerability in
the event of an economic downturn.
Indebtedness to Banks: Percentage of GNP a
Total b
Personal c,g
Building and
Construction d,g
Financial g,h
Other g
71
70
73
79
85
101
33
34
35
37
39
44
5
5
5
6
8
10
8
7
7
9
11
18
24
23
24
24
25
28
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
(a) Outstanding credit by resident banks to various sectors.
(b) Excluding lending to non-bank IFSC entities. End-December data for credit.
(c) Includes residential mortgages.
(d) See footnote “d” in previous table.
(g) End-November credit data for 1994 - 1998. End-December for 1999.
(h) Excluding IFSC lending.
11
BIS Review 112/2000
Investment
Against  the  background  of  strong  economic  growth,  investment  has  increased  sharply,  rising  at  an
annual average rate of around 14% between 1994 and 2000. As a result, the investment share has risen
from around 18% to 28% of GNP over this period. Within this sector, building and construction has
expanded  very  strongly  over  the  period,  rising  from  about  10%  of  GNP  in  1994  to  18%  this  year.
Tighter monetary conditions in the euro area and a restoration of more sustainable growth rates would
inevitably reduce the returns on investment. This could raise questions about the viability of some of
this investment.
Investment: Percentage of GNP
Total
Building and Construction
Machinery and Equipment
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000 (f)
18.4
19.3
21.0
22.9
25.0
27.4
28.5
10.5
11.0
12.5
14.1
15.3
17.0
18.0
7.9
8.3
8.5
8.8
9.7
10.4
10.5
Source: National Income and Expenditure Central Statistics Office, and Central Bank forecasts.
These  developments  that  I  have  outlined  in  relation  to  property  prices,  bank  credit  and  investment
inevitably  raise  concerns  about  the  soundness  of  the  financial  sector.  The  Bank,  as  the  supervisory
authority, has impressed on credit institutions the need to continue to maintain prudent standards in
lending. In relation to mortgage finance, lenders have been requested to adhere to prudent norms in
regard  to  loan-to-value  ratios  of  houses  and  conventionally  accepted  income  multiple  norms.  As  I
mentioned earlier, institutions have also been required to undertake sensitivity analyses in relation to
adverse  events  such  as  an  economic  downturn  or  a  sizeable  interest  rate  increase.  Institutions  are
constrained by sectoral limits in regard to lending to specific sectors - this is a significant constraint on
undue  exposure  to  individual  sectors.  Institutions  must  also  apply  prudent  loan  loss  provisioning
policies. In this regard, the Bank is exploring ways in which counter-cyclical provision policies should
be actively pursued by credit institutions.
Conclusion
Ireland’s economic performance has been exceptionally strong over the period since 1994 following
the uncertainty and turbulence associated with the EMS exchange rate crisis of late 1992/early 1993.
Over  this  period,  the  growth  in  Ireland’s  Gross  National  Product  has  averaged  about  8%.
Decomposing this growth into its components in a growth accounting exercise indicates that about 4½
percentage  points  of  this  growth  is  due  to  increased  inputs  of  labour  and  capital,  with  all  other
influences  accounting  for  about  3½%  of  GNP  growth.  Some  part  of  these  other  influences  that
increase  growth  may  be  due  to  “new  economy”  effects  associated  with  structural  changes  in  the
economy and the contribution of foreign direct investment, mainly from the US. However, the greater
part of the overall strong growth performance is due to the substantive increase in inputs of capital and
labour  in  economic  activity.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  large  increase  in  the  employment  rate  of  the
active population, which has risen by around one-quarter since 1994. These facts would suggest that
our strong economic performance has been as much, if not more, a transitional catch-up phenomenon
rather than a cyclical one.
BIS Review 112/2000
12
Nonetheless, with the economy now operating at close to capacity following this protracted transition,
economic policy now faces some new issues. As I have outlined, the risks now relate to overheating in
product, labour and asset markets in a relatively easy monetary environment and being able to cope
with country-specific shocks that may arise. In regard to possible overheating, the principal task now
is to decelerate demand growth to a rate that is more in line with the medium-term growth potential of
the economy. This is currently estimated to be about 4½ to 5% and somewhat less than this further
out. Monetary policy in EMU is now set by reference to euro area economic conditions and cannot be
geared  to  deal  with  problems  peculiar  to  particular  regions  or  countries.  The  principal  policy
instruments  available  to  dampen  inflationary  pressures  peculiar  to  Ireland  are  fiscal  policy,  which
should  be  set  on  a  prudent,  moderately  restrictive  path,  and  incomes  policy.  At  the  present
conjuncture, it is desirable that incomes evolve in a manner that does not set off a wage-price spiral in
response  to  the  current,  essentially  temporary,  upturn  in  inflation.  In  addition  to  these  policies,  a
continuing  policy  of  structural  reform  and  the  promotion  of  competition  will  help  to  mitigate
idiosyncratic shocks that may arise in monetary union. Finally, in its role as supervisor of the financial
sector, the Central Bank will continue to ensure that banks pursue prudent lending policies that do not
jeopardise financial stability.
While there are risks of excesses arising in the current environment, it should be emphasised that these
vulnerabilities  are  not  critical.  As  well  as  the  four  policy  instruments  that  are  available  for  limiting
these  risks,  two  critical  features  that  could  enhance  these  risks  are  now  absent  from  the  Irish  case.
Firstly,  Ireland  has  quite  limited  exposure  by  way  of  short-term  external  liabilities  -  much  of  the
inflows  in  recent  years  have  taken  the  form  of  long-term  direct  investment.  Secondly,  by  the  same
token,  the  absence  of  a  specifically  Irish  exchange  rate  also  removes  a  vulnerability  that  has  been
evident in other countries where excesses have threatened to emerge.  In summary, after a  period  of
very strong economic growth, the authorities in Ireland are now faced with effecting a deceleration of
demand to the feasible growth rate in the context of monetary union where monetary conditions in the
round  are  relatively  easy.  This  presents  a  challenge  to  us  where  we  must  rely  on  the  remaining
domestic  policy  instruments  to  effect  the  transition  from  exceptionally  high  growth  to  moderate
growth in as smooth a manner as possible.
13
BIS Review 112/2000
