Andrew Crockett: Managing change in the European
financial system - lessons from experience
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  at  the  Joint  Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent
developments  in  financial  systems  and  the  challenges  for  economic  policy”,  held  in  Frankfurt,
28-29 September 2000.
 Profound, at times painful, unquestionably beneficial, and above all fundamentally uncertain: these are
the  essential  characteristics  of  the  transformation  that  the  financial  services  industry  has  been
undergoing  and  is  set  to  go  through  in  the  foreseeable  future.  “Profound”  because  it  has  affected
production and delivery processes, the boundaries between institutions and markets, the relevance of
geographic, functional and institutional distinctions, and the very way we think about the nature of the
services and products supplied. “At times painful” because, to borrow Schumpeter’s term, any process
of “creative destruction” has its winners and losers and cannot be smooth. “Unquestionably beneficial”
because it has resulted in a broader range of services, at lower prices, and more accessible terms than
ever before.
And above all, “fundamentally  uncertain”  because those  who  have  to  work  out the implications for
strategic business or public policy decisions find it practically impossible to predict how the system
will evolve. Who, for example, forecast in mid-1980 that the UK “Big Bang” would so sharply reduce
the  influence  of  traditional  British  financial  firms.  Who  forecast  in  the  early  1990s  that  centres  of
financial  influence  in  the  United  States  would  arise  in  Madison,  Wisconsin  and  Charlotte,  North
Carolina? And who is prepared today to forecast how electronic commerce will eventually change the
face of the financial industry worldwide?
The  European  banking  industry  has  been  experiencing  the  effects  of  this  transformation  with
increasing  intensity.  In  this  paper,  I  will  address  the  challenges,  risks  and  opportunities  facing  the
European  industry  against  the  background  of  those  faced  by  the  financial  industry  more  globally.  I
shall first outline the basic forces of change, then identify the key challenges and move on to sketch a
preliminary  assessment  of  how these  challenges  are  currently  being  met.  Finally,  I  will  draw  a  few
lessons for market participants and public authorities based on both European experience and that of
others.
In  doing  so,  I  will  emphasise  the  risks,  rather  than  the  obvious  opportunities  provided  by  these
ongoing changes. This focus is not just the professional deformation of a central banker. It reflects the
lessons  drawn  from  observing  how  frequently,  in  many  countries  and  over  many  decades,  rapid
change in the financial sector has been a source of significant economic disruption. It is only by being
fully cognisant of such risks that they can be managed successfully and the full benefits of financial
liberalisation realised.
While maintaining a focus on financial stability, I should note that I will tend to put more emphasis
than usual on industrial organisation issues. The reason is that the link between industry structure and
adaptability, on the one hand, and financial stability, on the other, has not received as much attention
as it deserves. This is particularly so in continental Europe.
Forces of change
I. 
Many  of  the  forces  of  change  behind  the  transformation  under  way  are  common  to  the  financial
industry globally. Because the financial industry in Europe has, in some respects, been less affected by
these forces to date, Europe should be in a good position to learn from the experience of others. Of the
global  forces,  three  can  be  highlighted,  viz.  technology,  the  declining  role  of  the  state,  and  the
1
BIS Review 80/2000
emergence  of  more  demanding  consumers  of  financial  services  and  shareholders.  In  addition,  two
distinctively  European  events  have  been  the  creation  of  a  single  market  and  the  birth  of  a  single
currency. This combination of lagging adaptation to global forces and idiosyncratic shocks implies a
particularly challenging time for the European financial industry over the next few years.
Technology is probably the most far-reaching and fundamental force. Technological advances in the
capture,  elaboration  and  dissemination  of  information  are  paramount  in  an  industry  whose  raison
d´être lies in informational frictions between ultimate suppliers and users of funds.
The  first  wave  of  technological  advances  affected  primarily  the  range  and  nature  of  the  products
provided,  through  the  elaboration  of  information.  Of  particular  importance  was  the  conjunction  of
conceptual break-throughs (such as option  pricing)  and  enhanced  computer  power  that spawned  the
creation and rapid growth of new financial instruments which allow the effective trading of risks.
The second, more recent, wave has affected primarily delivery channels in the widest sense, through
the  communication  of  information.  Consider  the  opportunities  provided  by  the  Internet  for  the
dissemination  of  information  about  products  and  for  trade  execution,  both  at  the  retail  level  and,
incipiently too, at the wholesale level. Once mainly a concern of commercial bankers, anxious about
retaining their deposit base, these electronic channels have become a key preoccupation of investment
bankers too, who until recently tended to dismiss this challenge as fanciful in the extreme.
The  ultimate  threat  posed  by  technology  is  the  “death  of  the  middle  man”,  the  very  essence  of
financial  intermediation  and,  indeed,  of  the  particular  form  of  relationship  banking  which  has
characterised Europe to date. In the process, technological advances have been reshaping the contours
of  economies  of  scale  and  scope  in  the  industry  in  ways  that  are  not  easy  to  fathom,  further
heightening business uncertainty.
The impact of the declining role of the state has had two manifestations, both of which are furthest
advanced (for better for worse) in the English-speaking  countries.  First,  there  has  been a  shift  from
controlling activities directly to retaining an indirect influence on the risks run by institutions, through
minimum prudential standards. Examples of this process include the elimination of direct controls on
prices  and  fees,  on  the  dismantling  of  functional  and  geographical  barriers,  and  on  the  sale  of
ownership interests.
Second, as public finances have come under increasing strain and demographic pressures have grown,
the  state  has  been  reducing  its  supply  of  pension  services,  both  in  absolute  terms  and  relative  to
demand.  Hence  the  generalised  shift  from  defined  benefit  to  defined  contribution  schemes.  These
processes  have  translated  into  much  greater  operational  freedom  for  institutions.  They  have  also
generated a hitherto unimagined demand for financial services, as witnessed by the rapid expansion of
the asset management industry.
The emergence of a more demanding consumer of financial services and of an equally demanding
shareholder is in many ways the result of the previous two forces. It represents a shift from the mere
acceptance  of  the  status  quo  to  more  aggressive  return  seeking  in  an  environment  where  economic
agents have become more alert to alternative opportunities and cannot rely as much as previously on
state  support.  The  result  has  been  to  heighten  the  need  for  innovative  and  quality  services  and  to
tighten corporate governance mechanisms. Hence, the rediscovery of “shareholder value” as a guide to
business decisions.
In  Europe,  the  single  market  programme  has  added  impetus  to  these  forces.  To  be  sure,
conduct-of-business restrictions still complicate the direct supply of cross-border services. Moreover,
different  legal,  tax,  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  still  hamper  cross-border  consolidation.
Nor  has  the  mortgage  sector  yet  been  exposed  to  the  full  rigours  of  international  competition  and
progress  has  also  been  rather  limited  with  respect  to  pension-related  services.  Nevertheless,  the
programme has set the ground for the establishment of a major integrated financial area in the global
scene.
Finally, the establishment of a single currency for EMU countries has acted as a major catalyst for
further restructuring. More effectively than previous deregulation, the creation of the euro has freed a
large set of institutional  players from  foreign  exchange  constraints on  their  portfolio  choices.  It  has
BIS Review 80/2000
2
boosted  transparency  across  the  spectrum  of  financial  services,  on  both  product  and,  equally
importantly,  cost-of-capital  sides,  and  reduced  the  informational  advantage  of  institutions  vis-à-vis
markets.  The  spectacular  growth  of  the  corporate  bond  market,  as  part  of  a  broader  fixed  income
market that rivals in size its US counterpart, is probably the most tangible illustration of the resulting
transformation. Prospectively, it is also one that has the greater potential for altering at its roots the
well-established relationships between banks and their clients.
In a nutshell, the forces underlying the transformation of the financial industry have vastly heightened
competitive  pressures,  broadening  the  range  of  potential  service  providers  well  beyond  traditional
financial firms. Experience in the United States indicates that those that can use new communication
networks to sell specialised products more effectively (like consumer credit and mortgages), or have
regular contact with potential customers (like supermarkets) can make rapid and significant inroads.
As economists would put it, the degree of “contestability” in the industry has taken a quantum jump.
Individual institutions have found themselves squeezed as a result. On the one hand, the tightening in
corporate governance mechanisms has gone hand in hand with more demanding profit targets. On the
other hand, the changes in the financial environment have made it harder to achieve any given target.
For the industry as a whole, deregulation and technological advances have exposed excess capacity in
a variety of segments, at both the retail and wholesale level.
A look at the performance of the banking industry globally illustrates the forces at work. Of course, in
the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  accounting  profit  measures  have  tended  to  be  stable  or  to  improve
slightly against the backdrop of generally favourable cyclical conditions, with crisis-hit Japan being a
major exception. From a longer run perspective, however, there has been a widespread narrowing of
intermediation  margins,  a  fairly  common  decline  in  “stand  alone”  credit  ratings  and  a  tendency  for
bank  share  prices  to  lag  behind  the  overall  index.  Interestingly,  the  United  States  has  been  an
exception  to  some  of  these  longer-term  trends  and,  according  to  some  of  the  above  measures,  the
United Kingdom has also outperformed continental Europe. I will come back to some of the lessons
that might be learned from these different experiences.
The fundamental challenges
II. 
What  are  the  challenges  for  European  market  participants  and  public  authorities  raised  by  the
transformation  under  way?  For  individual  institutions,  the  fundamental  challenge  is  to  raise
profitability on a sustainable basis. For public authorities, it is to ensure that the adjustment process of
the  industry  is  a  speedy  and  orderly  one.  It  is  worth  elaborating  briefly  on  these  points  and
highlighting why these challenges are especially demanding in the European banking industry.
In  banking,  just  as  elsewhere,  raising  profitability  on  a  sustainable  basis  requires  that  individual
institutions choose the combination and scale of activities consistent with their comparative strengths,
and  that  they  secure  cost-efficiency.  What  is  perhaps  less  well  appreciated  is  that,  more  than
elsewhere, it also calls for utmost attention to risk control. For, unlike in other industries, a good credit
standing is ultimately the basis of competitive advantage.
The  reason  is  that,  at  its  core,  banking  is  fundamentally  about  liquidity  provision  and  credit
intermediation.  Liquidity  provision  can  take  many  forms.  Examples  include  absorbing  the  risks
inevitably  involved  in  the  settlement  process;  holding  relatively  illiquid  assets  (such  as  loans)  or
contingent claims on such assets (such as back up credit lines or asset securitisation with some implicit
or  explicit  recourse)  against  relatively  short-term  liabilities;  and  market-making.  But  all  of  these
activities are grounded in banks’ greater ability to raise the necessary funding than ultimate users.
In  a  tougher  environment  where  the  banks’  franchise  is  under  threat,  this  advantage  is  increasingly
dependent on their own creditworthiness. Experience in the United States in the late 1980s and, to a
lesser  extent,  Japan  in  the  1990s,  confirms  that  the  loss  of  this  edge  sooner  or  later  results  in  a
haemorrhage  of  business  with  clients  of  good  credit  standing  leaving  banks  with  a  much  riskier
clientele than was traditionally the case.
3
BIS Review 80/2000
For their part, the authorities should ensure that, on the one hand, their policy framework is conducive
to a speedy adjustment to a more efficient financial system, and that, on the other, the risk of financial
distress at system level is contained. The recent  experiences  of  China,  India  and  a  number  of  Latin
American countries shows this process can unfold too slowly; while those of Japan, Mexico and many
countries in East Asia clearly indicate that it can also go too fast. In any industry undergoing profound
transformation, the restructuring process and elimination of excess capacity that should ultimately lead
to sustained risk-adjusted profitability entails certain dangers. This is an inevitable consequence of the
competitive system, in which individual firms fight to be the winners in a given market. Not everyone
can win, but those who do not dare, know they will be left behind, and potentially put out of business
entirely.  Such  reasoning  must  have  been  part  of  the  explanation  why  so  many  Telecom  companies
have  been  willing  to  bid  so  extravagantly  for  broad-band  spectrum  licences.  However,  in  banking
these common risks are further exacerbated by a unique “exit problem”.
By this I mean that the elimination of excess capacity in banking is harder than in other businesses.
There are two reasons for this. First, excess capacity can be less visible. In contrast to other industries,
excess supply does not necessarily put immediate downward pressure on prices and profits. In fact, it
can  contribute  to  lending  booms  which  tend  to  sustain  economic  activity  and  boost  asset  prices,
thereby improving for a while the financial condition of both borrowers and lenders. As a result, the
extent  of  the  underlying  imbalance  can  be  masked,  until  the  process  necessarily  turns  into  reverse.
Recent experience points to many such examples, with Japan perhaps being the most dramatic though
that of the Nordic countries in the late 1980s being closer to home.
Second, excess capacity can be more stubborn. For those very forms of official protection that have
historically buttressed the banks’ competitive advantage in liquidity provision tend to delay exit. They
do so by weakening market discipline on the institutions. Government ownership or other guarantees
can play a similar role. We have seen this in many emerging market economies, but it is by no means
uncommon in industrial countries as well. Finally, the introduction of cutting edge technology by large
firms  raises  their  fixed  costs  while  lowering  variable  costs,  thus  increasing  the  likelihood  of  firms
continuing to compete fiercely right up to the point of bankruptcy.
The  bottom  line  is  that  forces  specific  to  the  banking  industry  tend  to  generate  pressures  towards
excess  capacity  quite  apart  from  other  innovations.  This  complicates  the  required  restructuring.
Indeed, seen through this lens, financial crises can be viewed as a kind of “safety valve of last resort”,
a catalyst for needed structural adjustments. It would be better, of course, if market participants and
policy makers rather acted to ensure that restructuring occurred in a speedy and orderly way without
activating such extreme mechanisms.
Meeting the challenge: a preliminary assessment
III. 
How  well  has  the  restructuring  been  proceeding  in  the  European  financial  industry?  Assessing  the
progress  is  not  straightforward.  For  the  reasons  mentioned  above,  it  is  hard  to  disentangle  cyclical
from structural factors. Balance sheets and profit and loss accounts are especially difficult to interpret
in banking. And there is considerable uncertainty about what the correct business choices should be
regarding scale, combinations of activities and technologies. To simplify the analysis, I will focus on
the  direction  and  pace  of  change  rather  than  on  a  more  ambitious  comparison  between  current
conditions and some ideal benchmark.
Enterprises need to cut costs and branch networks while at the same time converting them to higher
value-added services. In the process, at least in the medium term, employment would have to fall and
skills be upgraded. There is widespread agreement on the desirable features of the restructuring. There
should be fewer and on average, larger financial institutions in Europe. Concentration, therefore, is set
to increase as it is in  most  other  geographical areas.  Consolidation  can  help to  withdraw  capital, to
alleviate  destructive  competition,  and  to  reach  the  minimum  critical  size  needed  to  support  the
required  expenditures  on  infrastructure.  It  can  thus  contribute  to  achieving  efficient  production  and
BIS Review 80/2000
4
distribution, notably in wholesale segments such as investment banking and the processing business
(eg global custodians).
While  generalisations  are  hazardous,  it  seems  fair  to  say  that  in  addressing  these  challenges,  by
comparison with the United States and even the United Kingdom, the banking industry in continental
Europe  has  faced  particularly  testing  conditions  which  may  explain  its  relatively  slow  pace  of
adjustment.
First, the degree of excess capacity appears to be greater, especially when assessed in relation to the
goal of an area-wide single market. This does not emerge so much from comparisons of the number of
institutions  or  size-concentration  measures.  It  is,  however,  more  apparent  from  indicators  of
profitability  such  as  returns  on  assets  and  costs,  especially  labour  costs,  and  (on  some  measures)
branch  density,  which  tend  to  be  less  favourable  in  much  of  Continental  Europe.  This  may  be  the
legacy of the more sheltered environment provided by governments.
Second,  corporate  governance  structures  have  been  less  sensitive  to  market  forces.  In  particular,
government  ownership  and  other  forms  of  support  have  been  more  pervasive.  In  addition,  for
historical reasons, savings, cooperative and mutual banks have accounted for a relatively large share of
the  overall  market.  In  a  sheltered  environment,  the  coexistence  of  different  types  of  ownership
structure was of little consequence. But with growing competition, it has become a significant factor
influencing the means and incentives of the various players to adjust, and hence the speed and pattern
of the restructuring. The degree of discretion enjoyed by management, the determination of acceptable
profit targets, the ability and willingness to take on risks, and  the  vulnerability  to  takeover,  are just
some  of  the  areas  where  corporate  governance  structures  can  play  a  key  role  in  hindering  or
encouraging necessary adjustments.
Finally, and I would stress this point, the European labour market has been relatively inflexible to
date,  even  if  important  structural  reforms  are  now  underway  in  many  countries.  Obstacles  to  the
adjustment of labour are just as important as obstacles to the adjustment of financial capital. They can
result in dangerous inertia in cost structures. And they may prevent the productivity gains otherwise
attainable  through  the  reorganisation  of  business  processes  and  products,  particularly  through  the
adoption of new technologies.
The pattern of the restructuring process under way in Europe tends in many respects to confirm these
propositions. Available evidence indicates that the tendency for the number of institutions to decline
and  concentration  to  rise  is  a  generalised  one.  At  the  same  time,  it  also  indicates  that  in  terms  of
cutting  branches  and,  above  all,  employment,  continental  Europe  is  lagging  well  behind
English-speaking  and  Nordic  countries.  This  broadly  underscores  the  picture  that  emerges  from  the
behaviour  of  indicators  of  profitability,  costs  and  creditworthiness  reviewed  above.  Tellingly,  the
evidence  also  indicates  that  the  restructuring  has  proceeded  fastest,  and  in  some  respects  has  gone
furthest, in those Nordic countries that experienced a banking crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
And it suggests that, while in terms of numbers of institutions consolidation has been most substantial
among savings, cooperatives and mutual banks, employment appears to have been comparatively less
responsive, except where financial difficulties have emerged.
Against this background of limited progress at the level of the firm, what can be said about the current
wave of mergers and acquisitions (M&A)? M&As are an important means through which restructuring
can take place. Indeed, the available statistics indicate that the share of financial  sector  deals  in  the
total  has  tended  to  increase  in  recent  years.  Also,  the  average  size  of  transactions  has  gone  up
substantially.  Mega-deals  of  unprecedented  proportions  have  been  making  headlines.  At  the  same
time, the experience with previous merger  waves  has, on  balance,  been  somewhat  disappointing.  In
addition, it stands to reason that the performance of merged entities is likely to be as sensitive as that
of  individual  firms  to  a  number  of  environmental  elements,  ranging  from  sub-optimal  corporate
governance  structures  to  inflexibility  in  factor  markets.  A  look  at  the  current  wave  shows  some
brighter spots but is not free of clouds.
On  the  positive  side,  cost-cutting  and  down-sizing  in  overcrowded  market  segments  has  received
higher  priority  in  announced  objectives. This  has  been  particularly  evident  in  the  case  of  in-market
mergers, where the scope to slim down overlapping branch networks is greater. The same can be said
5
BIS Review 80/2000
of  consolidation  in  wholesale  processing  segments,  such  as  among  global  custodians,  where  the
existence of economies of scale would seem obvious in light of recent experience in the United States.
Moreover,  on  balance,  both  rating  agencies  and  financial  markets  have  been  more  positive  in  their
assessment of recent M&A transactions in Europe.  It  has  not  been  uncommon,  for  instance,  for  the
prices  of  the  shares  of  both  the  target  and  acquirer  firm  to  rise  around  the  time  of  new  deals.  In
previous waves, by contrast, the price of the acquirer would often tend to  decline.  Another  positive
element is that “bancassurance” deals are more common in Europe than elsewhere, largely reflecting a
less  restrictive  regulatory  framework.  The  basic  logic  is  to  exploit  more  effectively  the  existing
distribution networks of banks for the delivery of insurance products. Of course, it remains to be seen
whether this strategy will eventually succeed or rather fall victim to organisational diseconomies and,
in some cases, to difficulties in embracing less expensive delivery channels.
What  about  the  clouds?  While  it  is  too  early  to  assess  the  effects  of  the  more  recent  deals,  studies
looking  at  actual  post-merger  performance  continue  to  cast  doubt  on  the  effectiveness  of  such
transactions. This seems to be the case both in Europe and in other jurisdictions. A majority of M&As
appear in retrospect to have failed to create value in contrast to original expectations. Organisational
diseconomies  are  commonly  underestimated  while  acquirers  tend  to  overpay  for  their  targets
(“winner’s curse”). The fact that the current M&A wave, as previous ones, has been taking place on
the back of a strong equity market also counsels caution. The same overly sanguine expectations that
could be  behind  aggregate  share  performance  may  taint the perception  of  individual  transactions  as
well.
Likewise, it may also be too early to tell whether share repayments, which are increasingly common,
are truly a reflection of prudent management faced with declining profit opportunities as opposed to
representing, at least in part, an attempt to raise rates of return on equity by increasing leverage. And
finally, the assessment of credit rating agencies, while more positive on average, has not been uniform.
It  has  tended  to  be  more  uncertain  about  cross-functional  operations,  where  very  different  lines  of
activity  and  business  cultures  are  brought  together.  In  addition,  assessments  have  varied  across
countries,  taking  into  account  the  specific  environmental  factors  likely  to  impede  necessary
adjustments.
The  fact  that,  at  least  until  recently,  cross-border  mergers  in  Europe  have  been  comparatively  rare,
especially in the retail segment, is difficult to assess. On the one hand, it can be judged positively in
that  it  reflects  a  prevailing  view  of  differences  in  business  cultures  and  of  limited  prospects  for
increasing profits in the retail sector. Cross-border mergers seen to date have tended to take place in
regions  where  certain  cultural  affinities  have  been  in  place.  On  the  other  hand,  the  paucity  of
cross-border mergers may also stem less positively from obstacles that would prevent the restructuring
required to reap higher profits. It is probably not a coincidence that rating agencies have tended to be
less optimistic about M&A deals in those cases where the environmental impediments to cost cutting
and to the adoption of potentially higher-productivity technologies have been greater.
Lessons
IV.
If  the  foregoing  analysis  is  correct, a  number  of  lessons  follow,  both  for  the  official  sector  and  for
market  participants.  As  noted,  the  key  challenge  for  the  public  authorities  is  to  ensure  that  their
policies  are  supportive  of  a  speedy  and  orderly  restructuring.  Besides  monitoring  developments
closely, they can make a positive contribution through policy initiative in four broad areas.
First,  the  authorities  can  lessen  the  obstacles  to  the  adjustment  of  labour  and  capital.  Some
significant  progress  has  indeed  been  made  in  reforming  labour  markets  in  Europe,  but  this  has  not
been uniform across countries, nor have all the steps taken necessarily been in the right direction.
As regards the adjustment of capital, the issues are considerably more complex. In particular, taken at
face  value  the  empirical  evidence  on  the  benefits  of  M&As  might  suggest  that  an    even  more
restrictive attitude might be justified. If M&As involving financial firms do not add value, and if at the
same  time  the  systemic  risks  inherent  in  ever  larger  and  more  complex  firms  are  increased,  then
facilitating  M&As  through  changes  in  take-over  or,  more  indirectly,  tax  codes  might  not  seem
BIS Review 80/2000
6
warranted. However, it would be rash to draw such a conclusion in view of the solace it would give to
national,  rather  than  European,  interests  and  to  the  supporters  of  the  status  quo.  It  is  particularly
important to ensure that it is economic rather than political considerations that guide policy decisions;
and in this context, a number of non-transparent impediments to cross-border mergers deserve special
attention. More generally, the policy focus should primarily be on promoting conditions that  favour
business decisions directed at value generation and the long-term performance of firms.
Second, and consistently with the previous point, the authorities can encourage more market-sensitive
structures  of  ownership.  This  should result  in  business  decisions  more  consistent  with the required
adjustments. Privatisation plays a key role here. Much has been achieved in this area, but more could
still  be  done.  [Prospective  rulings  by  the  European  Commission  in  response  to  concerns  raised  by
private  banking  sector  organisations  about  state  supported  financial  institutions  could  prove  a
watershed in this regard.]
Third,  as  a  complement  to  ownership  structures,  public  policies  can  aim  at  improving  market
discipline. Several strategies fall into this category. One is  to  enhance  disclosure standards,  so  that
outsiders  are  in  a  better  position  to  assess  the  underlying  profitability  and  risk  profile  of  financial
institutions. The traditional opaqueness and lack of comparability in profit-and-loss and balance-sheet
statements in the financial sector can hinder a proper evaluation. By the same token, it can also lead to
overly  aggressive  profit  targets,  which  in  turn  can  induce  excessive  risk  taking.  The  opaqueness  of
financial  information  is  an  area  that  has  been  attracting  increasing  attention  recently,  not  least  by
accounting authorities and supervisors. It is one where the potential for improvements is substantial.
A  second  strategy  is  to  limit  those  forms  of  intervention  that  provide  official  protection  without
commensurate oversight, thereby reducing the incentives to act prudently (in  economists’ jargon,  to
limit moral hazard). Various forms of implicit or explicit public sector guarantees are obvious cases in
point. Besides their impact on risk taking by the beneficiaries, they also distort competition, thereby
having knock-on effects on the risk taking of competitors.
A  third  strategy  is  to  manage  financial  distress,  if  and  when  it  arises,  consistently  with  the  above
principles. Above all, this means taking swift action and proceeding vigorously with the restructuring
of the failing institutions, in a way that promotes the elimination of excess capacity and that pays due
regard to fair competition. Above all, shareholders and management must pay, and be seen to pay, the
price  when  things  go  wrong.  It  is  not  entirely  clear  whether,  to  date,  policies  in  all  of  continental
Europe have been fully consistent with this approach.
Finally, alongside market discipline, the authorities can strengthen official discipline, in the form of
improved  regulation  and  supervision  of  institutions.  One  question  hotly  debated  in  Europe  at  the
moment  is  the  appropriate  institutional  framework  for  regulation.  In  particular,  are  current
arrangements  defined  along  national  lines  consistent  with  a  single  currency  area?  This  issue  is
currently  being  addressed  by  the  group  of  “wise  men”,  headed  by  Alexandre  Lamfalussy.  Another
important  issue  is  the  degree  to  which  previously  separate  supervisory  agencies  should  be  merged.
Since  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  provide  contrasting  precedents  for  continental
Europe, here too there might be a lively debate.
Regardless  of  who  is  in  charge  of  supervision,  how  this  is  done  is  of  vital  importance.  From  this
perspective, the new minimum capital adequacy standards being developed by the Basel Committee
are  of  key  importance.  These  are  designed  to  improve  the  risk  sensitivity  of  minimum  capital
requirements. This  is  true  of  the  new standardised approach as  well as  of  the  internal-ratings  based
approach, for which initial proposals are under elaboration and which may include both a “foundation”
approach and more advanced approaches for banks able to meet tighter standards. But it is particularly
true of the two additional “pillars” of the new Capital Accord. These define the roles of supervisory
oversight and market discipline as ways to buttress and sensitise minimum capital standards.
Importantly, these new proposals are also being developed with a view to building in incentives for
banks to improve their own risk management practices. This is of particularly great importance since
history  provides  us  with  so  many  examples  of  lenders  acting  imprudently,  commonly  when  the
economy is expanding strongly. What needs to be learned is that credit risk rises, rather than falls, in
7
BIS Review 80/2000
the  cyclical  upswing,  even  if  these  risks  only  materialise  when  the  inevitable  downturn  in  activity
occurs.
This  takes  me  to  the  main  challenge  for  market  participants,  namely  to  raise  their  risk-adjusted
profitability on a sustainable basis. Rather than trying to add to the debate on the “profit” side of the
equation  and  the  corresponding  business  decisions,  I  will  elaborate  briefly  on  the  “risk-adjusted”
component.
In  recent  years,  a  succession  of  crises  has  raised  everyone’s  awareness  of  the  risks  involved  in
financial activities. In the wake of these crises, major strides have been made in the measurement and
management of risk. These improvements have been evident with respect to the various forms of risk,
such  as  market  and,  more  recently,  credit  risk,  and  in  the  way  risk  is  receiving  more  attention  in
internal capital allocation decisions. But, recognising the fact that financial crises are happening more
rather than less frequently around the world, the scope for further improvements remains enormous. It
is vital that this process gains momentum and extends its reach across institutions and countries. And
it  is  equally  important  that  the  steps  taken  are  not  just  a  passing  fashion  but  become  a  permanent
element of a new business culture.
 The  upshot  of  this  analysis  is  straightforward.  The  momentous  transformation  under  way  in  the
European financial industry holds the promise of unprecedented gains in efficiency and in the value of
services provided to society. At the same time, it raises a number of serious challenges for authorities
and  market  participants. To the  extent that  these  challenges  are  especially  severe  in  Europe,  by  the
same token, the opportunities and potential rewards are that much greater.
There is much that the authorities can and should do to facilitate a speedy and orderly restructuring
process  in  the  European  financial  industry.  Ultimately,  however,  the  key  to  lasting  success  for  the
banking industry is in the hands of market participants themselves. It lies in successfully marrying an
innovative  spirit  with  a  rigorous  risk  management  culture.  In  turn,  this  should  be  buttressed  by
heightened  awareness  of  the  pivotal  role  played  by  credit  standing  in  the  banking  business,  as  a
precondition for the lasting prosperity of the industry in the future.
BIS Review 80/2000
8
