The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Overview of recent
financial and economic developments in Iran
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Iran Invest
2000 Conference, held in London, on 28 September 2000.
 I  am  delighted  to be  able to take  part  in  this  conference,  and  particularly  pleased  to  be  sharing  the
platform this morning with Governor Mohsen Nourbakhsh of the Central Bank of Iran, Bank Markazi.
I first met Governor Nourbakhsh soon after he became Governor in 1994 - which was not an easy time
for Iran. I was immediately impressed not only by his command of the issues confronting him - which
was perhaps not surprising: it was his second period in office as Governor, having in the meantime
taken a vacation as Minister of Economic Affairs and Finance, and as Deputy to the President, with
responsibility  for  Economic  Affairs.  But  I  was  immediately  impressed  too  by  his  calm  and  always
reasoned  approach  and  by  his  reliability.  He  has  played  an  important  role  in  steering  his  country
through a difficult period to the more promising prospect that Iran faces today. Since our first meeting,
I  have  very  much  enjoyed the  opportunity  of  seeing  the  Governor  periodically  at  a  whole  series  of
international meetings, and it is a very great pleasure, Mohsen, to be able to join in welcoming  you
here to London this morning. I have been immensely interested in - and greatly encouraged by - what
you have had to tell us.
Perhaps I might add a few observations of my own - from my inevitably more distant perspective.
For much of the past two or three years the external environment facing Iran was a difficult one. The
slowdown in world economic growth in the wake of the global financial crisis and the associated fall
in  oil  prices - to  an  unsustainably  low  level - significantly  weakened  the  financial  positions  of  all
major  oil-exporting  countries.  Iran  was  no  exception. The  current  account  swung  from  a  surplus  of
2.2% of GDP in 1997/98 to a deficit of over 2%. And the fiscal position deteriorated to a deficit of
6.7% of GDP.
But Iran’s response to  worsening  economic  conditions  was  a  positive  one. The  authorities  began  to
formulate  a  medium-term  reform  strategy,  which  has  now  been  articulated  as  the  Third  Five  Year
Development  Plan.  Since  then,  the  combination  of  sound  economic  management  at  home,  coupled
with  continued  economic  expansion  in  the  industrial  countries  and  rising  oil  prices,  have  improved
Iran’s prospects considerably.
The  IMF  forecast  GDP  growth  of  3.4%  in  Iran  in  2000/01.  The  external  account  has  strengthened,
with a surplus of 4.7% of GDP recorded in 1999/2000. And the budgetary position swung from deficit
to a surplus of 1% of GDP in 1999/00. Foreign exchange reserves have risen by $2 billion to $6 billion
since  1998/99.  Although  inflation  remains  still  quite  high  at  around  20%,  broad  money  growth  has
shown  signs  of  moderating.  Debt  levels  are  also  now  below  the  average  for  emerging  market
economies.  Perhaps  above  all  else,  it  is  encouraging  that  the  authorities  have  not  rested  on  their
laurels,  but  have  instead  sought  to  take  advantage  of  this  recent  more  favourable  economic
environment to increase the momentum of reform. The overall macroeconomic prospect, therefore, is
a positive one.
The Third Five-Year Development Plan represents an ambitious step forward. It maps out a realistic
sequence  for  a  balanced  liberalisation  of  Iran’s  economy.  The  aim  of  increasing  growth  to  6%  per
annum, from an average of 2.5% between 1997 and 2000, should generate employment opportunities
for  the  growing  labour  force  and  help  to  raise  living  standards.  The  plan  aims  to  promote  growth
through privatisation and liberalisation, and to enhance stability by further encouraging diversification
of  the  economy.  Macroeconomic  policies  under  the  plan  are  aimed  at  fiscal  consolidation  to  help
reduce inflation, broadening the tax base (including the introduction of VAT), and unifying exchange
rates at a market-determined level. Exchange controls will be further loosened. And it is planned that
1
BIS Review 83/2000
price distortions due to state subsidies will also decline. These are ambitious and wide-ranging plans
and the key is now implementation.
The climate for business investment in Iran has steadily improved over the past decade, in particular
following the election of President Khatami in 1997, as the process of liberalisation has accelerated.
There has already been progress with privatisation, especially in the hydrocarbon industry. There are
plans  to  restructure  and  privatise  over  500  state  enterprises  during  the  next  five  years,  and  to
commercialise - or “autonomise” - Iran’s state-owned  banking  system.  Trade  and foreign  investment
are being encouraged by the extension of Iran’s free-trade zones. And new legislation is expected soon
to simplify and clarify the Law for the Encouragement and Protection of Foreign Investment. These
are all clearly positive steps.
Iran is, of course, OPEC’s second largest producer and has the second largest reserves of gas in the
world. It has benefited from the recent rise in oil prices and is playing a positive role in promoting the
stability of the oil market. President Khatami recently noted that OPEC may need to raise output in
proportion to the increase in global oil demand to stabilise prices.
The government has taken positive steps to encourage foreign investment in the petroleum sector. For
example, they have facilitated foreign participation in contracts to redevelop oil fields, and they have
also  signed  an  agreement  with  a  consortium  of  nine  leading  international  oil  and  gas  companies  to
study Iran’s potential as an exporter of gas.
The government is, moreover, actively seeking to cushion the economy from future fluctuations in the
oil price. Establishing an Oil Stabilisation Fund, which ensures that the government balance sheet is
strengthened  when  oil  price  movements  are  favourable,  should  help  insure  against  the  type  of  debt
servicing  problems  faced  by  many  emerging  market  economies  during  the  difficult  international
environment  of  1997-98.  Iran  was  able  to  maintain  an  excellent  debt  service  record  through  this
period, and prudent debt management policies should help preserve this record going forward. Total
external debt is expected to decline to around 10% of GDP this year, and short-term debt to only about
40%  of  reserves,  having  fallen  from  around  65%  in  1999/2000.  The  strong  external  position  has
encouraged the World Bank to approve loans of some $230 million this year. Importantly, it should
hold  Iran  in  good  stead  in  attracting  inflows  of  private  capital,  which  are  so  crucial  to  a  country’s
long-term growth prospects.
The  international financial  crises  of  1997-98  stemmed  largely  from  vulnerabilities  within  countries’
financial systems. In the aftermath of the crises, the official community has been assisting the financial
sectors in emerging  market economies through technical assistance and improved  surveillance. This
has been an area of notable success in the redesign of the international financial architecture.
A key step in this regard has been the joint IMF-World Bank initiative of Financial Sector Assessment
Programs, or FSAPs. The FSAP process is designed to identify and assess strengths and weaknesses in
financial systems from a best practice standpoint including: assessing financial institutions’ structure
and soundness; reviewing systemic risks in payment systems; examining the legal framework and the
system  of  official  oversight  and  prudential  regulation  and  supervision;  and  assessing  institutional
arrangements for crisis management, including financial safety nets. Iran is addressing these aspects of
the  financial  infrastructure  and,  in  formulating  and  implementing  their  reform  programme,  Iran  has
maintained  a  constructive  engagement  with  the  IFIs.  I  am  particularly  pleased  that  the  Bank  of
England will be involved with an IMF-World Bank led technical assistance team on financial sector
restructuring and supervisory and regulatory frameworks for banks in Iran during the coming year.
Another  key  element  of  efforts  to  strengthen  the  international  financial  architecture  has  been  the
development  and  implementation  of  a  range  of  international  standards  or  codes  of  good  practice.
These  codes  are  not  meant  to  lay  down  strict  or  inflexible  rules.  They  are  designed,  however,  to
promote best practices, while recognising  that  financial systems  are likely  to  differ  across  countries
and across time. The IMF  and the World  Bank,  working  together  with the relevant  standard-setting
bodies,  have  been  helping  economies  undertake  assessments  of  their  observance  of  some  of  these
standards.
BIS Review 83/2000
2
Iran is currently working towards the adoption of internationally accepted best practice standards in a
number of areas. The central bank is developing a new bank accounting framework, which represents
a  move  towards  international  accounting  standards,  while  taking  account  of  the  special  features  of
Islamic  finance.  The  authorities  are  also  developing  an  action  plan  for  implementing  supervision
reforms. These developments ought to be good news for prospective investors in Iran. They also help
illustrate that international best practice standards can be flexible enough to accommodate individual
country circumstances.
The  move  to  a  more  market-oriented  environment  brings  with  it  new  challenges.  For  example,
liberalising exchange controls and freeing the exchange rate to market forces brings risks as well as
opportunities.  A  sequenced  approach  to  capital  account  liberalisation  helps  mitigate  these  risks  and
that is the route Iran has pursued. But that is not to say reform has stalled.
Since  mid-1999,  the  central  bank  has  taken  important  steps  to  improve  and  simplify  the  foreign
exchange  market,  including  allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  depreciate  to  market  clearing  levels.  In
March 2000, requirements to surrender non-oil export receipts to the central bank were abolished. The
intention now is to introduce a direct, interbank foreign exchange market, and to eliminate an advance
import deposit requirement by March 2001. These will be important further steps in increasing Iran’s
exposure to international competition which in turn can contribute to its productive efficiency.
Exchange  rate  unification  and  the  partial  liberalisation  of  trade  and  exchange  controls  will  make
greater demands on the effectiveness of monetary policy. For example, monetary expansion may arise
from the phased reduction in banks’ reserve requirements. It will be important for the central bank to
develop effective monetary instruments to sterilise the monetary impact of these reforms, and support
the central bank’s target for inflation. The issuance of CDs, together with the partial liberalisation of
credit allocation, are all sensible and commendable steps. And I know that the central bank is actively
considering  additional  possibilities. These  measures  will  make  for  a  financial  system  in  Iran  that  is
more efficient, liquid and transparent - and thereby more attractive to potential market entrants.
Mr Chairman, economic progress in any one country is not just a question of that country’s national
interest,  it  is - in  today’s  increasingly  economically  and  financially  integrated  world - a  matter  of
collective, international interest. That is true both at the macro- and at the microeconomic level - the
level  of  individual  businesses  and  firms.  That’s  why  I  think  it  is  important  that  we  encourage  the
forces working for reform and liberalisation by engaging constructively with them. Iran has embarked
upon  an  ambitious,  but  realistically  measured,  programme  of  reform  and  liberalisation  through  the
Third  Five-Year  Development  Plan,  and  it  is  taking  advantage  of  the  present  more  favourable
conditions in the world economy to advance that programme. I wish you, Governor Nourbakhsh, and
the authorities in Iran all possible success in achieving your objectives in the interests of the Iranian
people and in the interest of us all.
3
BIS Review 83/2000
