Willem F Duisenberg: Why price stability?
Welcome  speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  first
ECB Central Banking Conference, held in Frankfurt, 2-3 November 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  Frankfurt  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  ECB  Central
Banking Conference entitled “Why price stability?”.
This new series of conferences that starts today and will be organised every second year is the ECB’s
contribution to a process of open interaction between economists concerned by central banking issues.
The conference series should serve as a vehicle for signalling the role of the ECB as a key player in
central banking, by bringing together researchers from leading academic and international institutions,
including  the  European  Parliament,  and economists  from  ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  in  the
ESCB, accession countries and also from non-European central banks. One of its main purposes is to
launch a process of exchanging views and information on topics that are highly relevant for the policy
objectives of the ECB. The topic chosen for this first conference - Why price stability? - is particularly
relevant  for  the  policy  objective  of  the  ECB.  This  is  because  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  is  a
fundamental obligation assigned to the ECB by the Maastricht Treaty. Moreover, by maintaining price
stability, monetary policy makes its best possible contribution to the achievement of a high level of
growth and employment in the long term.
An  important  feature  of  this  conference  series  is  that  it  welcomes  the  presence  of  the  press.
Participation by journalists in this type of conference should provide them with additional background
information  on  monetary  policy  issues.  This  should  serve  to  enhance  the  public’s  knowledge  of
policy-making  at  the  ECB,  as  well  as  to  further  consolidate  the  ECB’s  openness,  transparency  and
accountability.
Last,  but  not  least,  the  ECB  conference  series  should  make  a  contribution  to  economic  literature
through the publication of the conference proceedings in a book. It is also intended to publish even
more extensive proceedings on the ECB’s website.
Less than a year ago we organised, together with the Centre of Financial Studies at the University of
Frankfurt,  the  first  large,  open  conference  of  the  ECB  on  “Monetary  policy-making  under
uncertainty”. On that occasion, I had the opportunity to signal clearly our commitment to a continuous
and active exchange  of  information  between  the  ECB  and the academic  world. Today,  with  a track
record  of  almost  two  years  of  monetary  policy-making  at  the  ECB,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the
collaboration between the ECB and the academic world is becoming closer and more productive every
day.  In  addition  to  hosting  large,  open  conferences,  like  the  one  we  are  attending  today,  where
academics  and  policymakers  have  an  excellent  opportunity  to  enrich  each  other’s  views,  our
economists  participate  regularly  in  the  leading  academic  conferences  where  they  contribute  their
research and participate in highly relevant policy panels. In the summer of 1999, we started our very
active  Graduate  Research  Programme  through  which  graduate  students  spend  three  months  at  our
headquarters  pursuing  their  dissertation  and  interacting  with  our  economists.  Visitors  from  the
academic  world  come  on  a  regular  basis  to  discuss  their  latest  work,  to  present  surveys  of  what  is
happening  on  the  research  front  or  to  directly  collaborate  with  ECB  staff  as  co-authors  of  research
papers.
Overall, the solid bridges that link the ECB with universities and research centres play a key role in
the  continuous  upgrading  of  our  intellectual  capabilities  and  in  the  deepening  of  our  knowledge  of
relevant  subjects.  These  interactions  are  therefore  fundamental  for  the  fulfilment  of  our  strong
commitment  to  excellence  in  economic  analysis  and  research  at  the  ECB,  which  is  reflected  in  our
1
BIS Review 97/2000
series  of  Working  Papers  and  periodic  bulletins.  The  close  collaboration  between  the  ECB  and  the
academic  world  mirrors  what  is  occurring  more  broadly  between  academia  and  the  new
knowledge-based industries. It facilitates the continuous elaboration and improvement of a large set of
tools  that  are  of  utmost  importance  for  decision-making  at  the  ECB,  ranging  from  models  for
forecasting  and  policy  evaluation  to  analytical  frameworks  for  monitoring  monetary  and  credit
developments.
I wish to stress that such an exchange becomes particularly important and mutually beneficial in the
context of the European System of Central Banks. This is because we at the ECB face considerable
and historically unique challenges in carrying out our responsibilities. If, in general, a monetary policy
strategy that is successful in maintaining price stability is, in the words of Alan Blinder, “the result of
a  wise  combination  of  art  and  science”,  then  for  us,  in  the  context  of  the  large-scale  institutional
innovation brought about by EMU, both the art and the science of monetary policy have to perform at
their best.
Over  the  past  ten  years,  the  single  most  important  achievement  of  monetary  policy  has  been  the
attainment of price stability. Through an admirable and sustained effort of monetary discipline, central
banks  in  both  the  United  States  and  Europe  have  overcome  the  regrettable  “Great  Inflation”  of  the
1970s and the early 1980s. But, at the present juncture, the question we should be asking ourselves is
not so much “why have we returned to price stability?”, but rather “how did we lose it in the 1970s?”.
One element of the explanation that comes immediately to mind is the misconception that there is a
permanent trade-off between inflation and output. We are indebted to academic research for showing
that the attempts to exploit a trade-off between inflation and unemployment eventually  only  lead  to
higher  inflation.  It  thus  re-established  a  firm  basis  for  the  concept  of  the  long-term  neutrality  of
money.  Indeed,  this  is  a  perfect  example  of  an  academic  insight  that  has  become  a  deep-seated
principle of central banking.
I  have  mainly  spoken  to  you  about  the  important  input  that  economic  research  provides  in  central
banking. Let me briefly touch upon the other leg of this exchange, from policy to science, which is by
no  means  less  important  than  the  previous  one.  By  facing  the  challenge  of  decision-making  in  real
time and in the real world, policymakers continuously uncover a wealth of new intellectual problems
that  had  not  been  foreseen  by  science.  Moreover,  policymakers  have  a  better  knowledge  of  the
institutional  constraints  affecting  policy  and  are  therefore  able  to  transmit  a  sense  of  realism  to
economists who analyse monetary policy issues. An additional, less obvious, but very important aspect
of  this  exchange  is  that  policy-making  introduces  a  form  of  discipline  in  the  science  of  monetary
policy by placing a premium on analytical results that prove to be robust across different approaches.
A central bank needs to be very cautious about “jumping on the bandwagon” of any new but untested
paradigm that academic researchers, or other observers, may provide. Here I follow Friedrich Hayek
and “confess that I prefer true but imperfect knowledge, even if it leaves much undetermined and
unpredictable, to a pretence of exact knowledge that is likely to be false”.
Let us now engage in the fascinating and fruitful synergy between academics and central bankers. I
wish you a very interesting and stimulating discussion and I look forward to witnessing the results.
BIS Review 97/2000
2
