Donald T Brash: The fall of the New Zealand dollar - why has it happened, and
what does it mean?
Speech  by  Dr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  American
Chamber of Commerce, Auckland, on 5 October 2000.
 Introduction
Over the last few  weeks,  the  most common  questions  I  have  been  asked  at  public  meetings  up  and
down the country have concerned the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. Why has it fallen so steeply?
What  does  it  mean  for  New  Zealand’s  future?  Will  it  continue  to  fall  from  here?  Why  doesn’t
“somebody” - by which most people mean either the Government or the Reserve Bank - do something
about it? While some of these questions can not be answered with any degree of certainty, it may be
helpful to put a Reserve Bank perspective on them.
Why has the New Zealand dollar fallen so steeply?
First, a few facts. Between its peak of more than 71 US cents in November 1996 and its trough of just
over  40  US  cents  at  present,  the  New  Zealand  dollar  depreciated  by  some  44  per  cent  against  the
US dollar,  a  substantial  depreciation  over  less  than  four  years  in  anybody’s  language.  Measured
against  the  Reserve  Bank’s  trade-weighted  index  (TWI),  which  measures  the  New  Zealand  dollar
against a basket of five currencies, the fall was somewhat less dramatic, from 69 in late April 1997 to
around 47 at present, but that still represented a depreciation of 32 per cent. Whether measured against
the  US  dollar  or  against  the  TWI,  the  New  Zealand  dollar  is  currently  close  to  its  lowest  level  in
history.
Why has this happened? I think the first point to make is that, at its most recent cyclical peak in late
1996  or  early  1997  (depending  on  which  measure  is  used),  the  New  Zealand  dollar  was  almost
certainly over-valued. Inflationary pressures had been strong in 1995 and 1996, and monetary policy
needed to be firm in order to deal with those pressures. In part, this was reflected in an appreciation in
the exchange rate, to the point where exporters, and those competing with imports, were in many cases
under considerable pressure. In other words, some of the fall in the exchange rate over the last few
years has simply reversed the over-valuation of 1996 and early 1997.
But that still leaves a lot of the depreciation unexplained.
Once  upon a  time,  it  used  to  be  argued  that  what  drove  exchange  rates  was  differences  in  national
interest  rates,  and  the  strong  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  in  the  mid-nineties  was
substantially explained in these terms, as I have indicated. Our interest rates were well above those in
major  capital  markets,  and  this  attracted  foreign  savings  into  New  Zealand,  thus  pushing  up  the
exchange  rate.  But  in  recent  times  Japanese  interest  rates  have  been  well  below  those  in,  say,  the
United States, yet the Japanese  yen  has  been  one  of the  few  currencies to remain  reasonably  stable
against the US dollar. And over the last six months, central banks in several countries, including both
New Zealand and Australia, have seen their currencies fall despite increases in official interest rates
which have been broadly similar in magnitude to those in the United States. There is certainly more to
it than interest rate differentials.
Once  upon a  time,  it  used  to  be  argued  that  what  drove  exchange  rates  was  differences  in  national
economic growth rates, perhaps because of a perception that countries with relatively rapid economic
growth were more likely to attract investment capital, or to have to push up interest rates to control
inflation, both factors likely to encourage an appreciation in their exchange rates. But in recent times,
Australia’s  exchange  rate  has  fallen  despite  its  economic  growth  being  very  similar  to  that  in  the
1
BIS Review 86/2000
United States, whereas Japan’s exchange rate has not fallen despite Japanese growth falling well short
of America’s. There is certainly more to it than growth differentials.
Once upon a time, it used to be argued that what drove exchange rates was differences in balance of
payments positions, with countries having large current account deficits (like New Zealand) tending to
have weak exchange rates and countries having large current account surpluses (like Japan) tending to
have strong exchange rates. Well, Japan has certainly had a strong exchange rate and New Zealand has
certainly had a weak exchange rate  in  recent  times,  but  New  Zealand’s  exchange  rate  rose  strongly
through  the  mid-nineties  despite  our  relatively  substantial  current  account  deficit,  and  the  United
States, with a strong currency, currently has the largest current account deficit for many years. Indeed,
America’s current account deficit, while smaller than New Zealand’s relative to our respective GDPs,
is  now  larger  relative  to  America’s  exports  of  goods  and  services  than  is  New  Zealand’s  deficit
relative to our exports of goods and services. The countries of the European Monetary Union have a
net current account position which is very close to balance at present - neither surplus nor deficit - but
the euro has been depreciating more or less steadily since its inception at the beginning of 1999. There
is certainly more to it than current account deficits.
Once  upon  a  time,  it  used  to  be  argued  that  exchange  rate  movements  reflected  financial  market
perceptions  of  the  political  complexion  of  the  relevant  governments,  with  the  exchange  rates  of
countries with “left-wing” governments tending to depreciate and the exchange rates of countries with
“right-wing”  governments  tending  to  appreciate.  In  recent  months,  the  Australian  dollar  has
depreciated  a  little  less  than  has  the  New  Zealand  dollar,  and  since  Australia  has  a  right-of-centre
government and New Zealand a left-of-centre government that could be seen to lend some credibility
to this theory. But on the other hand, since last year’s election there has been no discernible increase in
the margin between yields on New Zealand government 10-year bonds on the one hand and yields on
10-year  Australian  government  bonds  and  10-year  US  Treasuries  on  the  other,  suggesting  that
financial markets in fact see no increase in the risk on New Zealand bonds as a result of the change in
government. There is certainly more to it than politics.
There are, of course, lots of other explanations offered for movements in the exchange rate, and it is
not my purpose here to offer a comprehensive list of those explanations. I suspect that a whole range
of factors explain the recent depreciation of the New Zealand dollar, including our large balance of
payments  deficit  (and  large  accumulation  of  external  liabilities  as  a  result  of  running  a  balance  of
payments deficit for almost three decades); a perception that New Zealand (like Australia) is an “old
economy”  where  things  are  made  or  grown,  rather than  a  “new  economy”  of  bright  ideas  and  high
productivity; the absence of any particular “reason” to buy  New  Zealand  dollar  assets  now that  our
interest rates are closely comparable to those in major capital markets; and some nervousness on the
part of financial markets (whether warranted or not) about the policy direction of the Government.
In part at least, the “fall of the New Zealand dollar” is really a story about the rise of the US dollar.
The US economy has been growing strongly, and the US equity market has risen very strongly over
the past decade. This has attracted into the US savings from all over the world. Not surprisingly, the
US dollar has risen as a result, not just against the New Zealand dollar but against a great many other
currencies also. Between the beginning of 1999 and the end of September this year, for example, the
Australian  dollar  and  British  pound  depreciated  by  about  12  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar,  the
Swedish and Norwegian currencies by about 16 per cent, the Swiss franc  by  about  21  per cent,  the
New Zealand dollar by about 23 per cent, and the euro by almost 25 per cent. Clearly, the fall in our
currency is not just the result of the New Zealand dollar being the currency of a small economy: the
currencies  of  much  larger  economies  have  also  fallen  significantly  against  the  US  dollar  in  recent
times.
And over and above all these fundamental factors, there is the possibility - indeed the probability - that
some of the depreciation simply reflects the dynamics of the foreign exchange markets: various forms
of  “reef-fish”  behaviour,  to  use  former  Prime  Minister  David  Lange’s  expression,  have  almost
certainly been at play.
In short, the facts make it clear that there is no single, simple, explanation for the fall in the value of
the New Zealand dollar over the last two or three years. It follows that exaggerated claims that the fall
BIS Review 86/2000
2
can be pinned on just one thing - whatever that one thing might be - are almost certainly wrong, and
are unhelpful in improving our understanding of the implications. At this time, we need cool heads and
rational thinking, not extravagant claims or counter-claims.
What effect will the fall in the exchange rate have on our economy?
Whether the depreciation in the New Zealand dollar has a relatively minor effect on the New Zealand
economy or a more substantial effect depends in part on whether the depreciation is in reality just the
other side of the strong appreciation of the US dollar - and so likely to be reversed reasonably quickly
if  the  factors  which  have  driven  US  dollar  strength  abate;  or  whether  it  is  in  some  sense  part  of  a
long-anticipated market reaction to New Zealand’s specific circumstances, such as our large balance
of payments deficit and very large accumulated foreign liabilities - and so likely to be more enduring.
Whatever the real explanation - and it seems to me very likely that there are aspects of both stories in
the present situation - the direct and fairly immediate effect of the fall in the exchange rate is that the
New Zealand dollar price of the goods and services which we import, and of the goods and services
which we export, will go up. (And this includes the New Zealand dollar price of things which could be
exported, such as milk and meat, because the prices of goods of this kind are also directly affected by
the depreciation of the exchange rate.)
These  price  rises  will  not  happen  instantaneously,  particularly  where  importers  and  exporters  have
covered their foreign exchange risk in the forward market. To the extent that that has happened, it will
take a little while for the New Zealand dollar prices of imports and exports to go up. But go up they
certainly will. (Not all of those price increases will reach consumers in full, however, if some of the
price increases are absorbed out of the margins of foreign exporters or local importers and distributors.
Moreover, a decline in the quality of some goods, difficult to measure accurately in the CPI, may also
mask effective price rises.)
The  effect  of  these  relative  price  changes  -  where  the  prices  of  imports,  import  substitutes,  and
exportable goods and services go up relative to the prices of things which can only be traded within
the  New  Zealand  economy  -  will  be  to  increase  the  income  of  those  of  us  producing  goods  and
services which are exportable, or which compete with imports, relative to the rest of us.
And  in  that  sense  the  lower  exchange  rate  can  be  seen  as  a  healthy  development.  It  is  the  floating
exchange  rate  at  work,  encouraging  the  production  of  goods  and  services  which  will  reduce  our
balance  of  payments  deficit  and  discouraging  the  consumption  of  goods  and  services  which  are
imported or could be exported. To the extent that the low exchange rate persists, and is not negated by
higher domestic inflation, this is likely to see stronger growth in exports of goods and services, slower
growth  in  imports  of  goods  and  services,  and  a  reduction  in  New  Zealand’s  balance  of  payments
deficit on current account.
And happily, unlike many of the countries which saw bank and corporate balance sheets devastated
when their exchange rates fell sharply during 1997-98, the fall in the New Zealand dollar has had only
minimal effect on bank and corporate balance sheets here. Yes, there are a few companies which wish
they had not taken out so much forward cover on their export receipts when the exchange  rate  was
higher. But these contracts represent “profits foregone”, not the kind of disasters which wiped out so
many banks and corporates in Indonesia and Thailand when their exchange rates fell. And the reason
for this is that, perhaps because New Zealand has had a freely floating exchange rate for more than
15 years now, banks and corporates in New Zealand tend not to borrow overseas in foreign currency
without hedging the exchange rate risk. Indeed, at the end of March last, the Government Statistician
estimates  that  some  97  per  cent  of  all  overseas  liabilities  owed  by  banks  and  corporates  in  New
Zealand were “hedged”, roughly one-third of it through some kind of natural hedge and the balance
hedged through financial markets.
So there appears to be little risk of the depreciation in the New Zealand dollar having any significant
adverse impact on the financial strength of the New Zealand financial system or corporate sector, and
of course the New Zealand government now has no net foreign-currency-denominated liabilities at all.
3
BIS Review 86/2000
But  there is one important  caveat  to  this  positive  story.  A  currency  depreciation  does  not  make  the
country better off, at least in the short term: it simply redistributes income, or at least the purchasing
power of income, from some New Zealanders to other New Zealanders. Some of us are made better
off by the depreciation; some of us are made worse off.
But if those of us who are made worse off by the depreciation - those of us, in other words, who face
higher prices for petrol, and milk, and meat, and clothing, and TV sets, and cars but get no “offset”
through producing higher-priced exports or import-substitutes - fight hard to retain our real income, by
pushing up our prices, fees, wages, and salaries, then of course the whole process becomes much more
painful.
And this is where the Reserve Bank is relevant. As I said in a speech in Kapiti early in August, the
Bank may be able to ignore the initial, direct, impact of a fall in the exchange rate on prices, but our
ability  to  do  that  “depends  on  whether  we  New  Zealanders  accept  that  the  direct  price  effects  of
exchange  rate  depreciation  are  not  matters  which  justify  our  seeking  compensation  through  higher
incomes. If we collectively seek such compensation, then the Bank is faced not with a one-off price
level adjustment but with the potential for ongoing upwards pressure on prices.”
And that not only has the potential to produce ongoing inflation, but at least for a time may frustrate
the very shift in relative incomes and prices which is required to reduce the current account deficit,
and which the depreciation would otherwise produce.
If the Bank were obliged to tighten monetary policy because of ongoing upwards pressure on prices,
the result would probably be at least a temporary increase in unemployment and a loss of output. On
the other hand, if the Bank failed to lean against that inflation, we would almost certainly see not only
the economic and social damage of the inflation itself but also a still lower exchange rate - and still a
need to tighten monetary policy, indeed by even more, to reign that inflation back in. There can be no
doubt that, if we see prices, and fees, and wages, and salaries beginning to suggest ongoing inflation,
as distinct from the first round effects of the depreciation, the Bank will tighten monetary policy.
Beyond  the  direct  price  effects  of  the  depreciation,  over  the  longer-term  the  depreciation  will,  if
sustained, encourage people and capital to move out of industries serving a primarily domestic market
(such as residential construction and retailing), and into industries producing goods and services for
export, or in competition with imports (such as agriculture, forestry, manufacturing, tourism, fishing,
horticulture, viticulture, software, and so on).
Thus, to the extent that the exchange rate depreciation reflects the need for a movement of resources
from so-called “non-tradable sectors” to “tradable sectors”, it is entirely healthy, is consistent with a
reduction  in  the  country’s  balance  of  payments  deficit,  and  may  well  lead  to  a  better  allocation  of
resources and thus a somewhat faster rate of economic growth in the  medium  term.  Even  so,  if  the
tradable sectors have a very strong demand for people and capital, at some point that has the potential
to lead to inflation unless the non-tradable sectors are simultaneously releasing people and capital. The
Reserve Bank again makes its best contribution to this process by ensuring that inflation is kept under
control, because it is the emergence of inflation which signals that the total demand pressures on the
country’s resources are beginning to exceed the country’s capacity to supply.
To sum up this point, the fall in the exchange rate has the potential to produce quite a major change in
the structure of the New Zealand economy, to the point where we may see a significant reduction in
the  size  of  current  account  deficits.  The  Reserve  Bank  best  ensures  that  that  happens,  however,  by
leaning against any attempts by those of us in non-tradable sectors to resist the fall in our real income
that  that  depreciation  inevitably  means  -  or  in  other  words,  by  leaning  against  any  “second-round”
inflationary pressures resulting from the depreciation.
Will the New Zealand dollar continue to fall from here?
Let me quickly say that I do not know the answer to this question. Nobody does. If you had asked me
three months ago whether the New Zealand dollar would reach 40 US cents, I would have replied that
BIS Review 86/2000
4
I thought that that was very unlikely. So clearly I can not rule out the possibility that the exchange rate
will fall further.
But I do nevertheless believe that  over  the  longer  term  we  will  see  some  strengthening  of  the  New
Zealand  dollar.  Work  we  are  doing  at  the  Reserve  Bank  using  a  variety  of  approaches  to  the
determination of New Zealand’s “equilibrium exchange rate” strongly suggests that the “equilibrium
exchange rate” is higher than the exchange rate we have today.
One major investment bank which specialises in the analysis of  currency  trends  has recently  cut its
forecast  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  exchange  rate  in  three  months’  time  from  52  US  cents  to
48 US cents,  a  reduction  certainly,  but  still  well  above  the  current  exchange  rate.1  Some  other
commentators are less bullish, but I know of none which is suggesting that the New Zealand dollar
should be lower on fundamental grounds.
And if the currently-low exchange rate does in fact produce the reduction in the balance of payments
deficit which seems likely, then in due course the confidence of both local and overseas investors in
New-Zealand-dollar-denominated assets will return, and some appreciation of the exchange rate with
it.
Why doesn’t “somebody” do something about the low exchange rate?
Well, rather than waiting for that return of confidence, or for a reduction in the extent to which the US
is dominating investors’ radar screens, is there anything which might be done to reverse the decline in
the exchange rate more quickly, if that were thought desirable? In principle, there are three things that
might be done to try to achieve this objective.
First, the Government or the Reserve Bank could try “jaw-boning” the dollar up. In other words, we
could  make  impassioned  statements  about  how  much  we  believe  the  New  Zealand  dollar  to  be
under-valued and how strongly we expect the exchange rate to rise. Alas, experience here and abroad
with  statements  of  this  kind,  at  least  when  taken  in  isolation,  suggests  that  they  typically  work  for
about 15 minutes.
Secondly, the Reserve Bank could tighten monetary policy by increasing interest rates. When interest
rates are increased in response to an increase in inflationary pressure, tightening monetary policy  is
seen as a sensible thing to be doing and therefore something which is likely to endure for at least a
time. But when interest rates are simply increased in response to a weak exchange rate, in the absence
of  inflationary  pressure,  financial  markets  recognise  that  higher  interest  rates  are  likely  to  be  a
temporary phenomenon, followed by lower interest rates. In this situation, not only may an increase in
interest  rates  not  help  to  support  the  exchange  rate,  it  may  actually  cause  a  further  decline  in  the
exchange rate.
Thirdly, the Reserve Bank could intervene directly in the foreign  exchange  market,  by  buying  New
Zealand dollars with some of the foreign exchange  reserves  which  we currently  hold.  Many  central
banks intervene in the market for their currency, and the New Zealand central bank is unusual, perhaps
unique, in not having done so in the more than 15 years since our currency was floated in March 1985.
We have never ruled out the  possibility  of  intervening  in the  market  for the  New  Zealand  dollar to
counteract  “disorderly  market  conditions”,  but  to  date  we  have  not  been  satisfied  that  “disorderly
market conditions” exist. Should we be intervening to reverse the “over-shooting” part of the recent
sharp depreciation? So far at least we have not been persuaded that such intervention would be likely
to have any large or lasting benefit. At best, it might knock the “tops and bottoms” off the exchange
rate cycle, or perhaps arrest a trend where those trading on that trend are the dominant influence on the
market. And offsetting those potentially modest gains, there would of course also be some real risks
and potential costs to New Zealand taxpayers associated with such intervention.
1 The Weekly Analyst, Goldman Sachs, 19 September 2000.
5
BIS Review 86/2000
In short, there appears to be no quick or easy course of action which could be reasonably assured of
reversing the decline in the New Zealand dollar, even if there were full agreement on the desirability
of that.
What about a currency union with Australia? Would this help? I dealt with some of the economic pros
and cons of currency union in a speech some four months ago,2 and I do not want to add to that at this
point. But it is important that nobody think that currency union is a silver bullet, a panacea either for
the current weakness in the exchange rate or for the performance of the economy more generally. The
Australian dollar is also close to its lowest level ever at present, so that a combined Australian-New
Zealand currency would almost certainly be weak at present also. And of course almost nobody on the
Australian  side  of  the  Tasman  is  talking  about  a  currency  union,  and  almost  nobody  on  the  New
Zealand side is talking about our simply adopting the Australian dollar. The likelihood of a currency
union any time soon therefore seems extremely low, whatever the merits and demerits of such a union.
No, there is no quick or easy way to reverse the recent decline in the New Zealand dollar. We need to
recognise that a significant part of the depreciation since early 1997 has simply been the reversal of an
over-valued currency at that time, and as such has been desirable. We need to recognise that another
significant part of the depreciation is simply a reflection of the strength of the US dollar, and as such
may  not  continue  indefinitely.  And  in  part  we  need  to  recognise  that  the  depreciation  is  a  market
adjustment to our longstanding tendency to spend beyond our means, borrowing the savings of other
countries to do so.
Our best course of action, indeed perhaps our only sensible course of action, is to continue doing the
things which will make us a prosperous economy - continue to run fiscal surpluses, continue to keep
inflation  low,  continue  to  improve  the  flexibility  of  the  economy,  continue  to  remove  regulatory
barriers  to  resource  mobility,  continue  to  improve  incentive  structures  so  that  investment  goes  into
those areas with the highest social and economic return, continue to ensure that governance structures
in the banking and corporate sectors encourage prudent behaviour, continue to improve the education
system, continue to welcome foreign investment, and do everything  possible  to  encourage  a  culture
which values initiative, innovation, hard work, saving and all the rest.
Sound  policies  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  economy  are  the  best  way  of  ensuring  that  the
exchange rate recovers over the medium term, and of course the best way of ensuring prosperity for all
New Zealanders as well. A prosperous New Zealand, with low inflation, will enjoy a strong currency
over the long term, and productivity growth to justify that strength.
2 The Pros and Cons of Currency Union: A Reserve Bank Perspective, a speech to the Auckland Rotary Club on 22 May
2000.
BIS Review 86/2000
6
