T T Mboweni: Economic growth, inflation and monetary policy
in South Africa
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the business conference
of the Bureau for Economic Research, held in Stellenbosch on 17 November 2000.
 Introduction
1.
It should by now be well-known that the mission of the South African Reserve Bank is to achieve and
maintain  stable  financial  conditions  in  our  country.  This  objective  is  spelled  out  in  both  the
Constitution of the Republic and in the South African Reserve Bank Act. In these acts it is recognised
that only by protecting the value of the currency  can  balanced  and sustainable  economic  growth  be
achieved. It is believed in the Bank, and indeed in most countries of the world, that the potential for
economic growth and creating job opportunities can only be fulfilled under stable financial conditions.
By achieving this primary objective the Reserve Bank will make its contribution to sustainable higher
economic growth in South Africa.
Some economists and other commentators on monetary policy in South Africa seem to think that the
Reserve Bank is applying an over-zealous monetary policy stance to achieve its primary objective of
price stability. They argue that the Bank is obsessed with inflation at the expense of economic growth
and job creation. At the current level of the inflation rate, this implies that an inflation rate of 8% is too
low to be treated as a serious concern. The Bank should therefore provide more liquidity to the money
market,  allow  the  interest  rate  on  repurchase  transactions  to  fall  and  in  this  way  encourage  the
economy to grow more rapidly. In the Bank we believe that it would be a big mistake to shift the goal
of monetary policy away from controlling inflation to promoting economic growth.
The determinants of economic growth
2.
Economic growth is basically determined by three factors, namely:
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
the quantity of capital and labour available in a country;
the quality of capital and labour; and
the ingenuity  of  people in  combining  the  available production resources in the  creation  of
goods and services.
Output will rise if more production resources are put to work, or where a given supply of labour and
capital  is  utilised  more  productively.  Nowhere  does  the  aggregate  stock  of  money  or  the  aggregate
price level form part of the determinants of any production model for sustained long-term economic
growth.
Government policies, including  monetary  policy,  affect the  growth  of  domestic output to  the  extent
that they affect the quantity and productivity of capital and labour. For example, government policies
that  restrict  commercial  activities  for  fear  that  these  activities  may  cause  undue  environmental  or
ecological damage, raise the cost of doing business and make firms less productive. Obviously there
may  be  good  reasons  to  have  such  policies,  but  they  can  harm  productive  activity  and  economic
growth.
Monetary  policy  is  only  one  element  of  overall  macroeconomic  policy,  and  can  only  affect  the
production  process  through  its  impact  on  interest  rates.  There  are  two  main  channels  of  monetary
policy. One is through the effect that interest rate changes have on the exchange rate of a currency, and
the other is through the effect that interest rate changes have on demand. Therefore monetary policy
has an impact on economic activity and growth through the workings of foreign and domestic markets
for goods and services.
1
BIS Review 103/2000
Economic growth involves the allocation of production factors to productive use and this allocation of
resources takes place in markets. In a modern economic system, markets for goods and services, and
for production factors, function more efficiently because of the existence of money as a medium of
exchange.  Without  such  a  medium  of  exchange,  barter  trade  would  take  place  and  most  modern
market  arrangements  would  simply  cease  to  exist.  Money  allows  markets  to  allocate  economic
resources to sectors of economic activity in a highly efficient and cost-effective way.
In a market economy, exchange values are expressed in terms of money prices which are determined
by  the  forces  of  supply  and  demand.  When  a  good  or  service  is  in  short  supply,  or  when  demand
increases relative to the supply of a good or service, the price will rise. This signals to suppliers that
they  must  shift  resources  in  response  to  the  change  in  relative  prices,  or  to  buyers  that  they  must
economise on their purchases. The productive allocation of resources needs clear signals about relative
price changes.
This  is  where  monetary  policy  really  comes  into  the  picture.  Sound  monetary  policy  makes  price
signals  clearer.  In  an  environment  of  overall  price  stability,  it  is  much  easier  to  detect  changes  in
relative prices. Bad monetary policy clouds the picture. When prices are always in a state of flux, it is
hard  to  make  out  whether  a  particular  price  change  is  signalling  a  change  in  relative  scarcity  or
whether it is simply part of an inflationary process where all prices keep on rising.
The  uncertainties  that  inflation  creates  make  the  problem  worse.  The  mere  possibility  of  inflation
creates uncertainty about the true meaning of changes in the prices of individual goods and services.
This uncertainty could lead to the misallocation of resources, which would reduce economic growth.
This problem is nowhere more serious than in the capital market. Inflation uncertainty raises the risk
premium that investors require and increases the cost of capital, thus lowering fixed capital formation.
Lower investment means lower future growth and less future income.
If producers and consumers feel confident that the average price level will remain stable, they can be
more  certain  that  price  changes  indicate  true  shifts  in  demand  and  supply.  Obviously  a  monetary
policy that maintains price stability can improve the efficient functioning of markets. This promotes
the full and productive employment of resources. As Alan Greenspan once stated, a monetary policy
that prevents inflation from being a factor in the decision making of businesses and consumers, is a
monetary policy that best promotes economic growth.
Empirical  evidence  shows  that  high  inflation  has  a  negative  correlation  with  economic  growth.  In
countries where inflation is high, economic growth is normally low. Many economists are therefore
convinced that inflation is undesirable and should be avoided at all costs. Recent economic research
has cast some doubt on this argument. In principle, there is likely to be a reversal somewhere in the
inverse  relationship  between  inflation  and  growth  as  there  are  no  grounds  for  believing  that
continuously declining prices, i.e. deflation, are good for growth.
Stanley Fischer of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) found that the inverse relationship would
hold, even at low rates of inflation. Another study by Barro confirmed this inverse relationship, but
found that it was relatively weak. Increasing inflation by 1% led to only a small reduction of less than
0.03%  in  growth,  according  to  Barro.  A  range  of  other  studies  found  no  effects  from  inflation  on
growth. Sarel, a researcher at the IMF, came to the conclusion that: “When inflation is low, it has no
significant negative effect on economic growth: the effect may even be positive. But when inflation is
high, it has a powerful negative effect on growth. The structural break is estimated to occur where the
average annual rate of inflation is 8%.”
Despite this uncertainty about the negative correlation between inflation and growth at inflation rates
below 8%, there is still no evidence of a positive correlation between inflation and growth over any
long  period  of  time.  In  any  case,  if  the  inflation rate is  close  to  8%,  it  still seems  wise  to  follow  a
policy countering a general increase in prices, because it could easily move to levels above 8% and
accelerate further.
In  South  Africa  the  1970s  were  a  decade  of  high  inflation  compared  with  the  1960s.  Inflation  had
averaged  2.6%  per  year  between  1960  and  1970.  In  1974  inflation  moved  to  higher  than  10%  and
averaged  10.2%  per  year  from  1970  to  1980.  If  inflation  was  good  for  growth,  one  would  have
BIS Review 103/2000
2
expected  faster  growth  in  the  1970s  than  in  the  1960s.  This  did  not  happen.  Quite  the  contrary
happened. Economic growth slowed down from 5.7% per year in the 1960s to 3.4% in the 1970s.
There were broadly similar slowdowns in growth and accelerations in inflation in other parts of the
world  during  the  1970s.  In  the  1980s  inflation  in  South  Africa  accelerated  to  14.6%  per  year,  and
growth fell back further to 1.5%. By contrast, most of the advanced countries brought inflation under
control and their economic performance generally started to improve. A striking example is the United
States, which now seems to be cruising along a path of strong and sustained economic growth with
low inflation. In South Africa inflation slowed down to about 7½% between 1993 and 1999. Although
there were many other factors conducive to higher economic growth over this period, it seems to be
more than pure coincidence that the growth in domestic production averaged 2½% per year.
Other major disadvantages of inflation
3.
Apart from the negative impact that inflation has on growth and wealth creation, inflation also affects
income distribution and worsens inequality in a number of ways. Inflation can have a direct impact on
income distribution where wage increases are below the inflation rate or where marginal tax rates are
not  adjusted  to  take  account  of  nominal  adjustments  in  wages.  Inflation  can  indirectly  also  affect
income distribution by slowing output growth and hence job opportunities. What is more, the rich can
invest their surplus income in assets such as real estate and tradeable securities, and in many instances
benefit from non-taxed inflation-induced capital gains. The  poor  are  usually  not  able  to  do  this and
may see their saving at banks being whittled away by high inflation.
A perhaps even more important argument against an artificial stimulation of the economy through the
creation  of  money,  lower  interest  rates  and  higher  inflation,  is  that  in  a  globalised  economic
environment  this  may  lead  to  the  withdrawal  of  foreign  capital.  If  non-residents  start  expecting  a
depreciation in a country’s currency, they will probably immediately react by withdrawing the funds
that they have invested in such a country. Foreign investors can do this easily now that world financial
markets  are  better  integrated.  If  large  amounts  of  capital  are  withdrawn  this  could  even  lead  to  an
exchange rate crisis with a sharp rise in inflation.
Inflation  has  many  other  disadvantages  which,  all  in  all,  can  only  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
central  bank  must  always  carefully  monitor  economic  developments  to  maintain  price  and  financial
stability. No country can afford to move out of line with the inflation rates in the rest of the world.
Monetary policy and business cycles
4.
If it is so obvious that excessive money creation does not contribute to sustained economic growth,
why do we hear from supposedly well-informed opinion makers that monetary policy is too tight and
that  it  is  putting  a  lid  on  real  economic  growth?  My  considered  view  is  that  some  of  these
commentators  often  expect  more  from  monetary  policy  than  it  can  deliver.  They  tend  to  confuse
short-term accelerations in output growth with long-term sustainable economic growth.
This confusion arises because monetary policy affects aggregate domestic spending, and under certain
circumstances a rise in spending can push output higher. Such an increase in output will show up in
growth in the short run that will be higher than the potential growth rate of the economy.
Such a short-term growth acceleration can be attained when there is an under-utilisation of resources.
If there is a great deal of slack in the economy, then increased spending can raise the level of output.
However, both the level and the growth rate of  production  are  limited  by  the  supply  and  quality  of
productive  resources.  If  the  employable  resources  are  of  poor  quality,  then  output  cannot  increase
unless  there  is  a  strong  increase  in  the  productivity  of  the  resources  already  being  used.  At  full
utilisation  of  productive  capacity,  and  here  one  recognises  that  in  our  modern  technology-driven
economy  some  resources  are  simply  not  employable  in  the  short  run,  higher  spending  will  lead  to
higher prices but no increase in output.
3
BIS Review 103/2000
Under some circumstances, faster monetary growth and lower interest rates can increase demand. This
in  turn  can  lead  to  higher  sales  and  output  with  little  change  in  prices.  Under  slightly  different
conditions,  increased  demand  leads  to  inflation  with  little  or  no  boost  in  output.  The  impact  that  a
change  in  monetary  policy  will  have  on  spending  and  production  is  uncertain  at  best.  Determining
whether such a change would affect production instead of inflation will depend to a large extent on the
stage of the business cycle.
Everyone  involved  in  economic  analysis  will  immediately  agree  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to
determine  the  business  cycle  stance.  The  Reserve  Bank  compiles  business  cycle  indicators  for  this
purpose, but usually it is only possible to determine where the economy is in the business cycle a long
time after the event because there is a delay in the compilation of statistics. Moreover, clear trends are
needed in information before deductions can be made about turning points in the business cycle.
Even  if  we  were  able  to  determine  accurately  the  business  cycle  stance  and  the  extent  that  the
production capacity of the economy is being used, it is still doubtful that monetary policy would be
useful in active business-cycle management. Changes in monetary policy instruments have a long and
variable  lag  before  they  have  an  effect  on  economic  conditions.  These  lags  and  the  fact  that  their
length  could  change  over  time  prevent  any  effective  fine-tuning  of  real  economic  activity.  To  be
effective, changes in monetary policy would require a forecast of the business cycle stance in the next
18 to 24 months. If it is difficult to determine the current business cycle stance, one can safely assume
that  it  is  even  more  difficult, if not impossible, to  forecast  accurately  whether there  will  be  surplus
production capacity or excessive demand conditions in the economy in two years’ time.
Monetary  policy  affects  prices  not  only  through  the  impact  of  changes  in  the  money  stock  on
aggregate  demand,  but  also  through  inflation  expectations.  A  major  advantage  of  a  medium  to
longer-term  monetary  policy  approach  is  the  credibility  that  it  gives  to  the  actions  of  the  monetary
authorities. By operating over a longer time frame, it creates a basis for its own success because of its
effects on inflation expectations. The active business-cycle management of monetary policy is usually
less credible.
Monetary policy and inflation
5.
So far I have indicated that low inflation can make a significant contribution to growth and prosperity
through its effects on resource allocation in a market-based economic  system.  This  conclusion  does
not mean much if monetary policy cannot achieve and maintain low inflation. Fortunately, evidence
and opinion largely agree on this issue.
One of the few topics that macroeconomists generally agree on is that inflation is first and foremost a
monetary  phenomenon.  Inflation  results  from  a  long-term  expansion  of  the  money  supply  which  is
greater than the economy’s ability to increase the production of goods and services. Furthermore, there
is  widespread  agreement  that  the  supply  of  money  is  determined  in  the  long  run  by  central  banks.
Thus, the South African Reserve Bank can regulate its own balance sheet and the growth in the money
supply, achieve low inflation and maintain it. In fact, the Bank is expected to do just that.
An important indicator that the Reserve Bank should have available in pursuing the objective of price
stability  is  estimates  of  the  stock  of  money  supply  over  time.  To  this  end,  the  Bank’s  Research
Department  meticulously  consolidates  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  at  the  end  of  each  month.  The
consolidated deposit liabilities of the banks, along with the value of notes and coin in circulation, are
summarised in the monetary aggregates labelled M1A, M1, M2 and M3.
In the past, the change in the broad monetary aggregate M3, relative to  a  pre-announced desired  or
guideline rate of change, was used for policy making. This approach to monetary policy making was
based on the assumption that there was a fairly stable short-run relationship between changes in M3
and changes in nominal aggregate spending. Unfortunately this relationship became less reliable over
time. As a result the Reserve Bank started to monitor a wider variety of economic indicators and, from
the beginning of this year, shifted to formal inflation targeting. At present, monetary policy decisions
are anchored directly to the achievement of a specified average inflation rate of between 3 and 6% in
2002.
BIS Review 103/2000
4
It is important to note that monetary policy decision making is not an exact science, and possibly never
will be, even with the most accurate macroeconomic measurements imaginable. This is why the Bank
cannot base a policy decision on the deviation of a rather uncertain inflation forecast from a targeted
future rate. But neither can policy decisions be a matter of sweeping, broad impressions based upon
anecdotal evidence and partial information. What the members of the Monetary Policy Committee of
the  Bank  do  is  to  make  the  best  professionally  informed  analysis  they  can  of  all  the  sources  of
information at their disposal, relating to every important market in the economy. Then they constantly
review and modify their judgements, in the light of new information as it becomes available.
Policy decisions are highly complex and the Monetary Policy Committee does not take them lightly.
Decisions  are  definitely  not  two-dimensional  and  take  far  more  factors  into  consideration  than  an
inflation and growth perspective. The committee uses a vast array of official economic statistics and
financial market data, and all the publicly available and some private surveys and commentaries, to
make a decision about the monetary policy stance. What is more, the Bank openly releases the facts as
they are available to us, as well as the analyses made by the Monetary Policy Committee and by the
research  staff,  regularly  through  the  statements  of  the  committee  and  in  the  publication  of  the
Quarterly  Bulletin  and  the  Annual  Economic  Report.  All  policy  decisions  are  nevertheless  always
taken with a view to achieving and maintaining financial stability.
Concluding remarks
6.
Some  commentators  have  rather  dated  views  that  monetary  policy  decisions  should  be  aimed  at
maximising economic growth in the short run. I believe that the primary role of monetary policy is to
preserve the purchasing value of the rand by keeping inflation low. This is also the mandate given to
the Bank. To achieve this mandate, a medium to long-term approach to monetary policy formulation is
followed in the form of inflation targets. Such a well-defined objective of monetary policy provides a
clear understanding of the objective of monetary policy so that our economy can operate efficiently.
This will promote a return to full employment and strong economic growth.
Price stability is an essential ingredient in the recipe for maximum sustainable economic growth, and it
is the only contribution that monetary policy can make. There is no more important task for the South
African Reserve Bank than pursuing a policy aimed at preserving the value of the rand.
5
BIS Review 103/2000
