European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and
Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at the  Press  Conference,  held  in
Frankfurt, on 5 October 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting
of the Governing Council of the ECB. The following decisions were taken today:
1. 
The minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem will be raised
by 0.25 percentage points to 4.75%, starting from the operation to be settled on 11 October
2000.
2. 
3. 
The interest rate on the marginal lending facility will be raised by 0.25 percentage points to
5.75%, with effect from 6 October 2000.
The interest rate on the deposit facility will be raised by 0.25 percentage points to  3.75%,
with effect from 6 October 2000.
Including today’s adjustment, since November 1999 we have raised ECB interest rates by a total of
225 basis points, with the objective of sustaining price stability in the euro area over the medium term.
Today’s  decisions  continue to  aim  at  ensuring  that  upward  pressures  on  consumer  prices  stemming
from  oil  prices  and  the  foreign  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  do  not  translate  into  more  permanent
inflationary  tendencies.  It  is  important to  address  these  risks  adequately  in  order  to  preserve  steady
GDP and employment growth in the medium term.
Let  me  explain  our  decisions  in  greater  detail  by  reporting  on  our  regular  examination  of  recent
monetary, financial and economic developments and their implications for monetary policy aiming to
maintain price stability in the medium term.
Starting with the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB, the three-month average of
annual M3 growth declined to 5.3% in the period from June to August 2000, from 5.5% in the period
from  May  to  July  2000.  As  had  been  indicated  earlier,  in  August  the  preparations  of
telecommunications  firms  to  transfer  the  funds  due  in  early  September  to  purchase  licences  in  the
German  UMTS  auction  appeared  to  have  a  temporary  upward  impact  on  M3  growth.  Taking  this
special  factor  into  account,  short-term  developments  in  monetary  aggregates  seem  to  be  more
moderate  than  the  August  data  would  suggest.  This  notwithstanding,  from  a  medium-term  point  of
view,  liquidity  conditions  continue  to  be  ample  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  is  based  on  the
protracted deviation of M3 growth from the reference value since the start of Stage Three of EMU,
coupled  with  the  still  relatively  high  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector.  Hence,  risks  to  price
stability stemming from monetary developments remain on the upside.
Turning  to  the  second  pillar,  we  had  a  thorough  discussion  on  the  main  factors  of  relevance  to  the
outlook for price stability at the current juncture.
One  important  factor  under  examination  was  the  price  of  oil,  which  reached  new  peaks  in
mid-September before falling to some extent more recently. Contrary to earlier expectations, energy
price  developments  did  not  moderate  but  rather  continued  to  put  considerable  upward  pressure  on
HICP inflation rates.
The  low  external  value of the  euro  has  heightened the risks  of  increases  in  import  prices  gradually
being passed on to consumer prices.
As you are aware, the recent movements in the exchange rate of the euro gave rise to concerns, which
the ECB shared with the governors and ministers of finance of all the G7 countries, that it might have
adverse implications for the world economy. In order to address these concerns, on 22 September, at
1
BIS Review 84/2000
the  ECB’s  initiative,  the  monetary  authorities  of  the  United  States, Japan, the  United  Kingdom  and
Canada joined the ECB in a concerted intervention in the foreign exchange markets. The ECB and its
partners will continue to monitor developments closely and to cooperate in foreign exchange markets
as appropriate.
Within  the  euro  area,  data  are  pointing  to  strong  real  GDP  growth  in  the  second  quarter  of  2000,
confirming our previous positive expectations for this year and for 2001. While the possibility cannot
be ruled out that the increase in oil prices as such may temporarily dampen growth dynamics over the
short  term,  the  forces  underlying  solid  growth in  the  medium  term  remain  in  place.  These  relate  to
external  demand,  which  is  supported  by  a  strong  world  economy,  as  well  as  to  domestic  demand,
which is supported by both continued favourable financing conditions and strong employment growth.
Today’s  decisions  should  contribute  to  maintaining  these  overall  prospects  by  preventing  the
emergence  of  expectations  for  inflation in the  medium  term.  In  fact,  when  monitoring  bond  market
developments  we  saw  our policy  confirmed  by  continued  expectations  of  lasting  price  stability  and
robust growth. We are committed to keeping this picture intact.
Monetary  policy  continuously  needs  to  ensure  that  current  inflation  rates  do  not  affect  inflation
expectations and thereby both price-setting and wage formation. It is particularly important that this
message be understood in an environment in which oil price and exchange rate developments may lead
to HICP inflation rates remaining above 2% for a more protracted period than earlier expected. We are
currently seeing the direct effects of such external developments on the HICP rate of inflation, with
2.3% in August and, most likely, a higher rate in September. Earlier expectations that the high annual
increase in energy prices would gradually moderate in the course of 2000, owing to a levelling-off or
even decline in energy prices, have not materialised thus far. Hence, it will be some time before HICP
inflation returns to rates below 2%. The action which we have taken today should be understood as a
means of maintaining confidence in price stability over the medium term.
As I said at our previous press conference, higher oil prices imply a loss of income for the economy as
a  whole.  In  a  market  economy,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  energy  is  to  be  reflected  in  relative  price
adjustments, so it should affect supply and demand in relation to both particular sources of energy as
well  as  other  goods  and  services.  It  will  be  important  for  social  partners  to  continue  to  act  as
responsibly as they have done in the recent past. Wage moderation has made an important contribution
to the progress in job creation and in reducing unemployment observed so far. A continuation of this
attitude  will  be  a  key  factor  in  contributing  to  non-inflationary  growth  at  a  robust  pace  and  should
ultimately result in higher employment and the preservation of real income growth for wage earners as
well as in sustainable conditions for companies.
The governments of the euro area countries can help the economy to adjust smoothly to the increase in
energy  prices  in  several  ways.  One  way  is  to  step  up  efforts  towards  structural  reform  aimed  at
enhancing  the  functioning  of  labour  and  product  markets.  This  will  increase  the  resilience  of  the
economy to adverse shocks, increase competition and ensure appropriate price-setting by companies.
Governments must avoid the mistakes of the past, when fiscal policies were relaxed in response to the
effects stemming from increases in energy prices. At the current juncture, fiscal policies should avoid
any procyclical bias and should aim at reaching sustainable fiscal positions in the medium term more
quickly.
BIS Review 84/2000
2
