Murray Sherwin: Institutional frameworks for inflation targeting
Speech by Mr Murray Sherwin, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Bank
of  Thailand  Symposium  “Practical  experiences  on  inflation  targeting”,  held  in  Bangkok,  on
20 October 2000.
 Introduction
Governor, distinguished guests, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen. It is always a pleasure to
find an opportunity to visit Thailand and this is no exception. Thank you, Governor, for the invitation.
It  is  also a  considerable  honour to  be  invited  to  address  this  symposium  on  the  subject  of  inflation
targeting.  The  subject  of  today’s  deliberations  is  an  important  one  and  I  applaud  the  Bank  of
Thailand’s decision to convene this public symposium to air the issues. That decision is  in  the  best
traditions of transparency which characterises inflation targeting central banks.
I  have  been  asked  to  discuss  institutional  frameworks  for  inflation  targeting.  Inflation  targeting  has
attracted  increasing  attention  around  the  world  over  recent  years.  We  have  seen  this  approach  to
monetary  policy  spread  from  the  small,  open,  OECD  economies  to  a  number  of  the  emerging
economies - in Eastern Europe, Latin America and now in Asia. The concept first emerged in my own
country, New Zealand, in the late 1980s. In our case, it gained a formal institutional structure with the
passage of a new charter for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in 1989.
Inflation targeting arose in New Zealand in an environment that will seem rather familiar to many of
our  Asian  friends  -  at  least  in  some  important  respects.  It  was  developed  in  a  very  small,  open
economy  that  was  adjusting  to  a  newly-opened  capital  account,  a  newly-floated  exchange  rate,  and
newly-deregulated  financial  markets.  It  was  developed  with  the  recognition  that  a  more  traditional
structure  for  monetary  policy,  perhaps  one  focused  on  targeting  particular  definitions  of  money
supply, was likely to prove inadequate in this newly deregulated and rapidly evolving environment.
While many other countries have now adopted inflation targeting, each country brings its own history,
traditions  and  institutions  to  these  decisions.  For  that  reason,  we  find  a  variety  of  institutional
structures are utilised.
My  comments  today  obviously  will  draw  heavily  on  the  New  Zealand  regime.  And  while  I  will
attempt to generalise the lessons we have learned, and to draw from the experience and structures of
other  inflation  targeting  central  banks,  it  is  important  to  highlight  up  front  that  there  are  few  fixed
points  for  the  architects  of  a  new  inflation  targeting  regime  to  fasten  on.  We  are  still  learning  and
adapting as we go. So too are other inflation targeting central banks.
Context
These are awkward times for small, open economies as they struggle to find monetary and financial
structures  that  will  facilitate  growth,  prosperity  and  stability  in  a  world  characterised  by  increasing
openness to trade and capital flows and, it seems, increasing volatility. The events of 1997 and 1998
demonstrated how rapidly stresses in one economy can be transmitted to others. They also underlined
just how important are strong institutions, strong balance sheets - in both the public and the private
sector - and strong risk management practices to ensuring robustness in the face of shocks.
Dr Grenville, our next speaker, will deal with the issues of inflation targeting in a world of volatile
capital flows. I see that as a key component of our discussions today because we know that we have to
be able to devise structures that enable us to live in such a world. The evolution towards more open
capital accounts and greater capital mobility is  being  driven  largely  by  technological  developments.
1
BIS Review 100/2000
Those  new  technologies  bring  us  all  enormous  advantages  and  are  fuelling  extraordinary  growth
internationally.
The  challenge  we  all  face  is  how  to  gain  the  advantages  of  the  new  technologies  without  being
swamped  by  their  other  consequences  -  such  as  the  enhanced  mobility  of  capital,  of  goods,  ideas,
skills, people and resources generally. Amongst other things, this requires us to find institutional and
policy  structures  that  enable  us  to  take  advantage  of  the  new  technologies  while  acquiring  the
flexibility to adapt rapidly and without undue stress to new developments and shocks.
The institutional structure employed for the conduct of monetary policy is just one of the factors that
policymakers  need  consider  in  thinking  about  these  issues.  Trade  policy,  prudential  regulation,
accounting and audit standards, legal structures and bankruptcy provisions - amongst other elements of
policy  -  are  all  very  important  and  should  not  be  overlooked  in  the  design  of  robust  institutional
frameworks. But today we are here to consider just monetary policy.
What is inflation targeting?
First, a couple of definitional points to help locate the discussion we will be engaging in over the rest
of the day. What is inflation targeting?
A substantial study of inflation targeting was published in 1999 by Ben Bernanke, Thomas Laubach,
Rick Mishkin and Adam Posen.1 In their book, they described it in the following way:
“Inflation targeting is a framework for monetary policy characterised by the public announcement of
official quantitative targets (or target ranges) for the inflation rate over one or more time horizons, and
by  explicit  acknowledgement  that  low,  stable  inflation  is  monetary  policy’s  primary  long-run  goal.
Among  other  important features of inflation  targeting  are  vigorous efforts to  communicate  with  the
public about the plans and objectives of the monetary authorities, and, in many cases, mechanisms that
strengthen the central bank’s accountability for attaining those objectives.”
In providing that definition, the authors of this study take some care to describe inflation targeting as a
framework  as  opposed  to  a  rule.  In  other  words,  inflation  targeting  fits  somewhere  between  the
extremes which feature in the “rules versus discretion” debate which raged in monetary policy circles
in earlier years. Inflation targeting is not “automatic” in the sense of a Friedman-like rule by which
growth in the money supply is governed in order to achieve the ultimate goal of price stability. But nor
does  inflation  targeting  allow  the  central  bank  full  discretion  to  take  decisions  in  any  ad  hoc  or
unconstrained  fashion.  Rather,  inflation  targeting  can  be  described  as  a  form  of  “constrained
discretion”.  To  quote  Bernanke  et  al  again,  “By  imposing  a  conceptual  structure  and  its  inherent
discipline  on  the  central  bank,  but  without  eliminating  all  flexibility,  inflation  targeting  combines
some of the advantages traditionally ascribed to rules with those ascribed to discretion.”
Of  course,  even  within  an  inflation  targeting  regime,  countries  can  choose  the  nature  or  extent  of
discretion they wish to leave with their central bankers. Such flexibility is one of the prime attractions
of the inflation targeting approach.
In  New  Zealand,  the  development  of  inflation  targeting  owed  a  lot  more  to  the  Harvard  Business
School than to the Chicago monetarists we are sometimes accused of following. The Reserve Bank of
New Zealand was just one of a number of state agencies in the process of undergoing reform in the
late-1980s,  and  the  guiding  principles  for  those  reforms  came  from  the  text  books  on  corporate
governance  rather  than  from  those  on  monetary  policy.  The  key  concerns  were  for  organisational
effectiveness, with state agencies generally required to:
• 
• 
provide for clear divisions of responsibility between the key decision makers;
establish clear objectives;
1 Bernanke et al, 1999
BIS Review 100/2000
2
   provide  for  clear  delegations  of  decision-making  power  which  are  aligned  with  the
established responsibilities;
specify clear accountabilities so that those given the authority to make decisions may be held
firmly accountable for the quality of their decisions; and
ensure transparency, so that all can see what decisions have been taken, by whom, against
what objectives, and for what reason.
Applying those principles to the central bank, we can see how the inflation targeting framework falls
out fairly naturally. In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand:
• 
• 
Also clear is the division of responsibility - it is the  Governor  who is  solely  charged  with
delivering the agreed inflation objective.
The objective is clear - we must deliver inflation outcomes of between 0 and 3%.
   To  that  end,  the  Governor  has  decision-making  authority  required  to  undertake  the  task
delegated  to  him  -  ministers  are  not  consulted  on  monetary  policy  matters  in  the  normal
course of events. Indeed, to preserve the independence of the central bank, ministers are not
informed  of  our  periodic  monetary  policy  decisions  until  just  ahead  of  the  public
announcement and well after the decisions have been formally committed.
Having assigned the Governor the responsibility and authority to make decisions in line with
the specified objective, we have a board of directors whose primary task is to monitor the
Governor’s performance and thereby to hold him accountable for the quality of his decisions.
Ultimately, the board could recommend the Governor’s dismissal should they feel that he is
not  diligently  or  competently  pursuing  the  objective  established  for  him  -  although,  of
course, there are intermediate courses of action available to the board before reaching such a
drastic conclusion.
And finally, our framework demands a high degree of transparency. For example, the formal
target for monetary policy is established in a published agreement. The Bank is obliged to
publish  formal  statements  laying  out  how  monetary  policy  has  evolved  and  why,  and
pointing  the  way  forward  for  future  decisions.  A  Select  Committee  of  the  Parliament
routinely  reviews  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  policy  in  a  public  hearing.  And  while  the  Act
provides  for  the  government  to  over-ride  the  agreed  policy  targets  agreement  in  certain
circumstances, it also requires that to be done in a public process.
Specific issues of institutional form
Let me deal with a selection of the more specific issues which emerge in the design of an inflation
targeting regime. This is necessarily just a small subset of the issues we could discuss, but hopefully I
can shed some perspectives on some of the more significant institutional choices.
An independent central bank?
Inflation  targeting  and  central  bank  independence  tend  to  go  hand  in  hand  although  it  is  certainly
possible to conceive of structures where that is not the case.
The case for central bank independence is well understood and well covered in the literature on time
inconsistency.  In  essence,  the  public,  and  particularly  its  elected  representatives,  are  likely  to  face
incentives which bias them in favour of tolerating the risk of increased inflation. That bias emerges as
a consequence of the long and variable lags associated with monetary policy decisions. The benefits of
long-run price stability lie in the future. The costs that may be associated with attaining or preserving
price  stability  are  borne  up  front.  And  faced  with  the  immediate  imperatives  of  political  life,  our
democratic representatives face pressures to defer the immediate investment in future price stability in
favour of the immediate benefits of lower interest rates and/or faster growth.
3
BIS Review 100/2000
An  independent  central  bank  specifically  charged  with  maintaining  price  stability,  effectively
empowered  and  resourced  to  do  the  job,  and  held  accountable  against  the  achievement  of  that
objective, is a fairly logical response to dealing with that inherent inflationary bias by institutionalising
a contrary bias in favour of long-run price stability.
A common and understandable concern about the concept of an independent central bank is that it is
inconsistent  with  the  traditions  of  democratic  parliamentary  structures.  We  normally  expect  the
authority  of  the  state  to  be  exercised  by  our  elected  representatives  rather  than  by  central  bank
bureaucrats.
So how can we overcome that inconsistency?
In our  case,  we  have  an  Act of  Parliament that  spells  out the  medium  term  objective  of  the  central
bank in language that is quite broad and uncontentious. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is obliged
to pursue “stability in the general level of prices”.
But what is meant by “stability in the general level of prices”? That is not defined in the Act. But the
Minister of Finance and the Governor are obliged to agree an operational target and to publish that in a
Policy  Targets  Agreement  (PTA)  covering  the  five-year  term  of  the  Governor.  In  effect,  this  is  the
Governor’s employment contract.2
We find this an important mechanism.  It confers a degree of democratic legitimacy on the inflation
target by openly committing the Minister and his government to the inflation target.
Just as importantly, the government can over-ride this agreement where it feels there is good reason -
perhaps in some situation of crisis or unusual shock. That is provided for. But there  are rules  to  be
complied with. The over-ride must be published and must be tabled in the Parliament for debate. Any
such over-ride can persist for no more than one year without again being subjected to Parliamentary
scrutiny.
As usual, there are alternative models  available.  In  our  case,  we  have  instrument  independence  -  in
other words, the central bank has wide discretion in how it goes about achieving its inflation target.
But  we  do  not  have  goal  independence  -  we  do  not  establish  for  ourselves  the  target  for  monetary
policy in the way, for instance, that the US Federal Reserve Board or the European Central Bank are
empowered to do.
We feel very comfortable with a structure that requires active government participation in establishing
the goal of monetary policy. Indeed, we believe it is an important provision reinforcing the legitimacy
of the central bank’s task. But it is clear that both models are viable and can operate effectively in their
particular circumstances.
Before  leaving  the  subject  of  central  bank  independence,  I  should  touch  on  one  other  important
question - the funding of the central bank. We, like other central banks, have traditionally generated
substantial profits through seignorage - issuing bank notes to the public and investing the proceeds in
government bonds. Under our old structures,  those profits  were applied to the administration  of  the
Bank at our own discretion with the residual surplus turned over to the government.
It was clear at an early stage of our reforms that such a comfortable arrangement was never going to
survive. But how to have an independent central bank while still imposing some reasonable degree of
external financial constraint? Clearly the usual governmental process of annual appropriations was not
suitable since this could provide a very direct route by which the independence of the Bank could be
quickly undermined.
2 Note that the RBNZ Act does not specifically oblige us to operate an inflation targeting regime. In principle, the PTA
could specify some other intermediate target, eg a monetary aggregate, nominal GDP or even, at a stretch, the exchange
rate. The significant constraint is that the intermediate target chosen must be consistent with some reasonable definition
of “stability in the general level of prices”.
BIS Review 100/2000
4
This dilemma has been resolved, satisfactorily in my view, by a five-year funding agreement in which
the Bank and the Minister agree on the quantum of funds that the Bank will be able to spend on its
own  operations.  Any  spending  over  that  cap  must  be  drawn  from  the  Bank’s  reserves,  and
under-spending of the agreed limit may be added to reserves.
Our  non-executive  directors  also  play  an  important  review  role  in  monitoring  the  efficiency  of  our
spending and internal management processes, just as they do in scrutinising the Governor’s monetary
policy decisions.
Decision-making structures
As  noted,  the  design  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Act  drew  heavily  on  the  principles  of
effective management. In that framework, it is not surprising that the Chief Executive - the Governor -
is  assigned  all  of  the  key  decision-making  powers  of  the  central  bank.  While  this  is  not  a  unique
provision, it is not that common. More often seen are arrangements  where  the  key  monetary  policy
powers are assigned to a board or a committee. The Federal Reserve  Board’s  Federal  Open  Market
Committee,  the  Bank  of  England’s  new  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  the  Swedish  Riksbank’s
Executive  Board  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia’s  Board  of  Directors  all  provide  alternative
structures.
In  the  New  Zealand  case,  the  single  decision-maker  model  reflected  a  concern  to  retain  clear
accountability  -  if  there  is  any  fault  to  be  found  with  the  decisions  of  the  central  bank,  there  is  no
doubt about whom is to be held responsible.
This  is  one  area  which  is  currently  under  review  in  New  Zealand.  Professor  Lars  Svensson  of
Stockholm  University  has  been  appointed  to  review  a  number  of  aspects  of  our  monetary  policy,
including  decision-making  and  governance  structures.  (I  should  note  that,  in  commissioning  this
review, the government has specifically ruled out any change to the independence of the central bank
or to the concept of a single, price stability target for monetary policy.)
In preparing its submission for the Svensson review, the non-executive directors of our board, who are
charged  with  monitoring  the  performance  of  the  Governor,  have  looked  at  whether  they  should
recommend the adoption of a committee-based decision making structure in place of the current single
decision-maker model.
The potentially negative features of a single decision-maker model include:
• 
• 
Exposure to single person risk.
Decision-making  may  be  captured  by  a  single  train  of  thinking  and  result  in  inferior
decisions.
  A  public  perception  may  develop  that  a  single  individual,  the  Governor,  has  excessive
power.  If  such  a  perception  were  to  develop,  the  “legitimacy”  of  the  central  bank’s
operational independence may come under question.
A single decision-maker may be insufficiently in touch with what is actually happening in
the  economy,  or  may  have  only  a  partial  view  of  developments,  thus  resulting  in  inferior
decisions.
After careful deliberation, our non-executive directors have chosen to recommend the retention of the
current  single  decision-maker  structure.  Their  reasoning  relates  primarily  to  a  preference  for  the
greater clarity of accountability inherent in the current structure. Also important was a sense that the
single  decision-maker  facilitates  greater  coherence  and  consistency  in  communication  of  monetary
policy issues than is likely with committee structures, and greater effectiveness in the management of
the  organisation.  Also,  they  felt  that  the  risks  of  the  current  structure  were  significantly  mitigated
within our framework by such provisions as:
• 
A rigorous process for appointing a Governor in which the Minister of Finance must make
the appointment from candidates nominated by the board.
5
BIS Review 100/2000
   Constraints on  the  Governor’s  decision-making  authority  which  are  inherent  in  the  RBNZ
Act and in the Policy Targets Agreement.
The monitoring of the Governor’s performance by the board to ensure that the Governor acts
in a collegial manner, and has proper regard for the wide range of advice and input which is
obtained from sources internal and external to the Bank.
The  transparency  provisions  which  ensure  a  close  external  scrutiny  of  the  Governor’s
decisions including, importantly, by financial markets.
Further,  the  non-executive  directors  have  recommended  some  changes  intended  to  strengthen  the
board’s scrutiny of the decision-making processes and thereby reduce further any risks inherent in the
single decision-maker model.
Another  consideration  which  emerged  during  the  consideration  of  alternative  decision-making
structures  related  to  concerns  about  potential  conflicts  of  interest  where  external  appointees  are
involved  in  monetary  policy  decision-making  and  the  limited  pool  of  available  expertise  and
experience suited for such a task in a small country like New Zealand.
Overall, I doubt that there are many  general principles or lessons from international experience that
can  be  applied  in  this  area.  In  many  cases,  it  seems  that  the  formal  differences  between  a  single
decision-maker  and  a  committee  structure  are  less  obvious  in  practice  than  they  are  on  paper.
Moreover, it seems that some of the more interesting approaches to committee structures, such as that
of the Bank of England and the Riksbank, are still evolving and settling down. For that reason it may
be too soon to draw firm conclusions about the preferred decision-making structures.
Single or multiple goals?
The New Zealand framework quite deliberately and explicitly directs monetary policy towards a single
objective  -  price  stability.  This  approach  stems  from  an  understanding  that,  in  the  medium-term,
monetary policy affects only the price level; it is not possible to engineer a higher trend rate of real
growth merely from monetary expansion.
The  charters  of  some  other  central  banks  are  broader,  typically  requiring  monetary  policy  to  place
some weight on other objectives of economic policy such as growth and employment.
In the New Zealand case, we felt that having a single price stability objective was helpful in providing
clarity of purpose in the earlier stages of a significant disinflationary process. It also supports a clear
accountability framework and fits with what we think monetary policy is able to achieve.
But this is not to say that we see no connection between monetary policy and real variables such as
growth and employment. On the contrary, maintenance of medium-term price stability we see as an
important part of the environment required in order for resources to be allocated to where they can best
be  used.  That,  of  course,  is  what  achieving  real  growth  and  maximum  employment  is  all  about.
Moreover, the way in which monetary policy is conducted in pursuit of price stability can also matter.
Just  as  price  stability  is  conducive  to  growth,  so  too  is  an  environment  of  “monetary  stability”  in
which interest and exchange rates are sufficiently stable to act as effective allocative mechanisms.
In our case, as inflation has settled at low levels, we have come to devote considerably more attention
to the nature of the trade-offs we may face in our day-to-day monetary policy strategies. In particular,
we have been looking more closely at issues relating to the variability of inflation, on the one hand,
and  the  variability  of  output,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate,  on  the  other  hand.  With  a  longer
track  record  of  successfully  maintaining  price  stability  comes  a  better  anchoring  of  the  public’s
expectations about future inflation risks. From that comes the possibility that we can be more relaxed
about short-term variations in inflation, particularly where looking through such short-term inflation
“noise” enables us to deliver a degree more stability in interest rates, the exchange rate and, possibly,
output.
BIS Review 100/2000
6
Again, in this area we find that the differences in practice between the New Zealand model, with the
single  goal  of  price  stability,  and  other  inflation  targeters  with  a  broader  mandate,  may  be  rather
smaller than a casual reading of the respective charters might suggest.
Conclusions
We  now  have  a  decade  of  experience  with  inflation  targeting  in  an  increasingly  diverse  range  of
countries  and  circumstances.  There  seems  little  doubt  that  inflation  targeting  is  proving  to  be  an
effective  framework  for  monetary  policy  within  these  diverse  settings.  It  seems  especially  well
adapted  to  small,  open  economies  with  flexible  exchange  rates  -  providing  the  essential  nominal
anchor for monetary policy at a time when some of the more familiar  guideposts  have  become  less
reliable.
The  core  characteristics  of  inflation  targeting  relate  to  the  public  announcement  of  a  target  for
inflation,  explicit  acknowledgement  that low,  stable inflation  is  monetary  policy’s  primary  long-run
goal, transparency about the objectives of policy and the rationale for monetary policy decisions, and
strengthened accountability for the achievement of the goals of policy.
The  institutional  framework  for  inflation  targeting  is  important  -  to  be  effective,  inflation  targeting
must  assist  in  shaping  decisions  and  behaviour.  Well-designed  institutional  structures  can  be
influential in shifting incentives and conditioning decision-making. But that does not mean that there
is  a  particular  formula  or  set  of  institutional  arrangements  that  can  readily  be  picked  up  and
transplanted.
No  doubt,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  bringing  its  own  perspectives  to  these  issues,  and  adapting  the
experience and practice of others to find structures that best suit local conditions.
I wish them well in that endeavour.
References
Bernanke, Ben S; Laubach, Thomas; Mishkin, Frederick S; Posen, Adam S 1999. “Inflation targeting.
Lessons from the international experience”. Princeton University Press.
Brash, Donald. 1999. “Inflation targeting: an alternative way of achieving price stability”. A speech
delivered on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of central banking in the Philippines. Reserve Bank
of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol 62 No 1.
King, Mervyn. 1999. “The MPC Two Years On”, Lecture delivered to Queen’s University, Belfast.
Reddell, Michael. 1999. “Origins and early development of the inflation target”. Reserve Bank of New
Zealand Bulletin, Vol 62 No 3.
Sherwin,  Murray.  1999.  “Inflation  targeting:  10  years  on”.  Paper  delivered  to  the  New  Zealand
Association  of  Economists  Conference  in  Rotorua.  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Bulletin,  Vol  62
No  3.
Sherwin,  Murray,  1999.  “Strategic  Choices  in  Inflation  Targeting:  The  New  Zealand  Experience”.
Paper delivered to an IMF and Central Bank of Brazil Seminar on inflation targeting.
Stevens, Glenn. 1999. “Six Years of Inflation Targeting”. Address to Economic Society of Australia.
Svensson,  Lars  E  O  1997.  “Inflation  forecast  targeting:  Implementing  and  monitoring  inflation
targets”. European Economic Review, Vol 41.
7
BIS Review 100/2000
