Willem F Duisenberg: Making monetary policy in a broad monetary union
“Jean Monnet” Lecture by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the
European Business School London on 12 October 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  very  grateful  to  the  European  Business  School  London  for  having  invited  me  to  deliver  the
annual Jean Monnet Lecture. This is a great honour because the occasion recalls the man who, perhaps
more than anybody else, devoted his life to making the European Union a reality. As President of a
very young European institution, the European Central Bank (ECB), I feel very close to his intellectual
legacy.
Since Jean Monnet’s times, the process of integration among European countries has advanced a great
deal,  and  very  much  in  the  direction  he  advocated.  Within  this  process,  the  creation  of  Monetary
Union,  with  an  independent  central  bank  at  its  heart,  represents  a  fundamental  step.  On  1 January
1999,  the  European  Central  Bank  assumed  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area - the
second  largest  economic  area  in  the  world  after  the  United  States.  Overnight,  the  euro  became  the
currency of almost 300 million people. I am deeply convinced that this crucial step has created a sound
foundation for attaining a substantially higher level of welfare in our economies.
Although the United Kingdom, our host country today, is not yet part of the single currency area, its
economy  and  the  11 - soon  to  be  12 - economies  that  have  adopted  the  euro  are  inextricably
interlinked, also through their membership of the European Union.
While remarkable success has been achieved, one should not forget that many challenges, as well as
opportunities,  lie  ahead.  These  challenges  cannot  be  met  and  these  opportunities  cannot  be  fully
exploited  without  building  and  enhancing - with  full  respect  for  national  and  regional  traditions - a
“European culture”. This is  all  the  more  true  of  institutions such as the  ECB,  which  assemble their
staff from all 15 EU countries in order to fulfil an important public mandate for a large part of Europe,
namely the euro area. Ever since the ECB was established, we have made every effort to develop a
spirit of cooperation and dedication towards a common goal among our staff, as well as  among  the
members of the Governing Council who hold the responsibility for final policy decisions.
In this sense, Jean Monnet’s words “... to make all men work together, to show them that, beyond their
divergences or over and above frontiers,  they  have  a  common  interest”  are a  universal  summons  to
action, to which we fully subscribe.
Let me now turn to the subject of my lecture, namely making monetary policy in a broad monetary
union.
The institutional context
I shall start my presentation with a few remarks on the institutional context underlying the conduct of
monetary policy in the euro area.
It  is  certainly  difficult  to  overemphasise  the  crucial  role  played  by  the  institutional  framework  in
determining economic results. The Treaty establishing the European Community (which I will refer to
hereafter as the “Treaty”) provides, in my view, a very solid foundation for the successful conduct of
monetary policy in the euro area. Let me briefly explain why.
First, the Treaty establishes a clear hierarchy of objectives for the single monetary policy, with price
stability  unambiguously  assigned  overriding  importance.  In  the  past,  central  banks  were  often  set
several, in many cases conflicting, objectives that could not possibly be met by using monetary policy
alone.  Quite  unsurprisingly,  this  poorly  designed  institutional  framework  often  led  to  a  mediocre
1
BIS Review 88/2000
overall  economic  outcome,  as  shown  by  the  regrettable  experience  of  high  inflation  in  the  1970s.
Today, there is widespread consensus that the maintenance of price stability is the appropriate goal for
monetary  policy.  It  is  by  focusing  on  maintaining  price  stability - and  thereby  allowing  the  relative
price mechanism to work efficiently and at the same time maintaining low risk premia in real interest
rates - that  monetary  policy  can  make  its  best  contribution  to  economic  welfare.  The  Treaty,  very
appropriately, reflects this broad consensus.
Second,  the  Treaty  has  made  the  ECB  one  of  the  most  independent  central  banks  in  the  world.
Institutional  independence  of  central  banks  is  a  crucial  precondition  for  successfully  pursuing  a
monetary  policy  oriented  towards  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  By  insulating  the  central  bank
against short-term political concerns and influences, it confers upon the central bank the credibility to
commit itself to taking all necessary decisions that best serve the achievement of its final goal. As a
large body of theory as well as historical experience show, credibility is a cornerstone of a successful
monetary policy. This has become conventional wisdom nowadays and rightly so. Credibility greatly
facilitates the conditions for, and enhances the effectiveness of, monetary policy. Once the public is
convinced of the central bank’s commitment to preserving price stability, they will act - for example,
in wage and price-setting - in a way that facilitates the achievement of this goal. A virtuous cycle is
created, which is conducive to creating an environment of stable prices in which economic activity can
flourish.
Third,  the  Treaty  clearly  recognises  that  assigning  an  important  public  policy  to  an  independent
institution has to be accompanied by transparent and accountable policy design and implementation.
Transparency  and  the  accountability  of  the  central  bank  serve  the  interests  of  democracy,  help  to
bolster  the  legitimacy  of  the  central  bank  and,  by  imposing  discipline  on  policymakers,  add  to  its
credibility. I shall return to these issues in the course of my presentation. For the time being, let me
just say that we attach crucial importance to both accountability and transparency in the pursuit of our
mandate and that the ECB follows best practice in both regards, in many respects going well beyond
the literal requirements of the Treaty.
Finally, let me mention the relevant issue of fiscal policy. In Stage Three of Economic and Monetary
Union,  budgetary  policy  ultimately  remains  the  competence  of  the  individual  Member  States.  This
unprecedented combination of a single monetary policy coexisting with many, distinct fiscal policies
has  led  some  critics  to  even  question  the  possibility  of  success  of  Monetary  Union.  This  is,  in  my
view, a wrong perception. What is crucial in the context of the single currency area is that participant
countries come to a common view on basic principles. The Treaty, supplemented by the Stability and
Growth Pact, reflects a broad agreement and provides for such basic principles in the field of fiscal
policy. In particular, it requires that countries in the EU, and especially those that have adopted the
euro, respect a common code of fiscal conduct that is expected to uphold discipline in the management
of government finances. By promoting sound government finances and thereby imposing limits on the
expansion  of  public  debt,  the  Treaty  fortifies  the  conditions  for  price  stability  and  for  strong,
sustainable economic growth in the euro area. This also adds to the credibility of Monetary Union and
of monetary policy within it.
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy
The institutional setup provided by the Treaty, therefore, ensures a very solid foundation for building
and maintaining a high level of credibility  for  the  ECB  and for the successful  conduct  of  monetary
policy in the euro area. In the end, however, it will be the central bank’s own performance that will
determine its credibility.
This naturally leads to the following question: how should price stability be maintained? This question
is addressed by the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, which was adopted by the Governing Council of
the  ECB  and  announced  in  October  1998.  The  strategy  provides  the  framework  for  conducting
monetary policy in the euro area.
First  and  foremost,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  provides  a  quantitative  definition  of  the
primary objective of monetary policy in the euro area, namely the maintenance of price stability. Price
BIS Review 88/2000
2
stability has been defined as an annual increase of below 2% in the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP) in the euro area. There are many advantages to adopting a clear, verifiable definition of
price stability. First, it serves as a guide for our monetary policy decisions. Moreover, it offers precise
guidance to inflation expectations, keeping them low and stable. Last but not least, it provides a clear
yardstick against which the public, its elected representatives and agents in the media can verify the
performance of the ECB, thus enabling them to hold the ECB accountable for its policy decisions.
But there is also another important point that is worth noting here, which touches on the essence of
monetary policymaking in a single currency area. The quantitative definition of our objective makes it
clear that our decisions are based only on developments in the euro area as a whole. In a monetary
union, monetary policy cannot be directed at contrasting inflationary (or disinflationary) pressures in
any  individual  country  per  se.  As  a  consequence,  each  country  has  to  conduct  its  own  appropriate
internal policies - whether fiscal or structural - in order to contain excessive internal price inflation. In
the  past,  many  problems  that  were  of  a  structural  nature  in  many  European  countries  were  simply
temporarily  hidden  by  movements  in  the  exchange  rates  within  the  area,  and  their  solution  was
postponed. This is no longer possible. Monetary Union, with an independent central bank devoted to
maintaining price stability at its core, clears the waters, so to speak, and unambiguously reveals the
source  of  problems.  This  in  turn,  I  am  sure,  stimulates  more  responsible  action  on  the  part  of
governments, social partners and other economic actors.
Coming  back  to  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  in  accordance  with  a  widespread  consensus  among
economists  and  central  banks  around  the  world,  we  recognise  that  monetary  policy  must  adopt  a
medium-term, forward-looking orientation. This follows from the well-known fact that there are lags
in the transmission of monetary policy impulses to the price level. Today’s monetary policy decisions
affect the price level only after a considerable period of time.
A  medium-term  orientation - ie  monetary  policy  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the
medium term - acknowledges the existence of short-term volatility in prices, resulting from the impact
of shocks that cannot be fully anticipated. Moreover, a medium-term perspective is important in order
to  permit  a  gradual  and  measured  response  to  unforeseen  economic  disturbances.  It  thereby  avoids
introducing  unnecessary  volatility  and  uncertainty  into  the  short-term  interest  rate  and  the  real
economy.
A forward-looking orientation requires that the central bank regularly evaluate the available economic
information in order to assess risks to future price stability. In order to impose some structure on this
potentially very large body of information, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy foresees two forms of
analysis. These two forms of analysis have been called the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy
strategy. Let me briefly explain what they are.
The first pillar of the strategy is a prominent role for money, reflecting the fundamentally monetary
origins  of  inflation.  In  contrast  to  other  countries  where  monetary  developments  in  recent  decades
have been quite erratic, available evidence in the euro area continues to point to a stable relationship
between  monetary  aggregates - in  particular  M3 - and  the  price  level.  Moreover,  M3  and  other
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  demonstrate  good  leading-indicator  properties  for  future  price
developments,  especially  at  medium-term  horizons.  On  the  basis  of  this  evidence,  the  first  pillar  is
often viewed as a “compass” for monetary policy, which offers guidance to the medium term.
The prominent role for money is signalled by the announcement of a reference value of 4½% for the
annual  growth  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  The  announcement  of  the  reference  value
represents a public commitment on the part of the ECB to thoroughly analyse and explain monetary
developments and their role in policy decisions.
However, it is important to emphasise that we do not interpret the reference value as an intermediate
target.  The  ECB  does  not  attempt  to  control  monetary  growth  at  a  specific  horizon.  Rather,  the
reference value represents an analytical tool, which constitutes a benchmark that can act as a starting
point  for  policy  discussion.  Moreover,  the  first  pillar  encompasses  a  broader  range  of  analyses  of
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  with  the  aim  of  extracting  information  regarding  future  price
developments.  In  short,  the  first  pillar  represents  a  view  of  the  world  within  which  monetary
developments determine the evolution of the price level over the medium term.
3
BIS Review 88/2000
While  inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon,  a  monetary  policy  aiming  to  maintain  price
stability  over  the  medium  term  must  clearly  evaluate  a  broader  range  of  variables.  In  order  to  take
appropriate  decisions,  the  ECB  needs  to  have  a  deep  understanding  of  the  prevailing  economic
situation and be aware of the nature and magnitude of the shocks that pose a threat to price stability.
The  second  pillar  of  the  strategy  evaluates  a  broad  range  of  mainly  non-monetary  indicators.  It
analyses the influence of a number of factors that can affect the outlook for price stability. Typically,
this analysis is centred on the effects of imbalances between supply and demand and/or cost pressures
in the goods and labour markets on pricing behaviour. It also takes into account a host of domestic and
external factors (including the effects of changes in indirect taxation, fluctuations in the exchange rate
and  international  commodity  prices).  Moreover, financial  market  indicators  and  asset  prices - which
might  provide  important  insights  into  the  main  channels  of  the  transmission  mechanism  and  reveal
information about market expectations - are regularly and thoroughly monitored.
Within  this  analysis,  macroeconomic  forecasting  exercises,  which  are  regularly  undertaken  in
collaboration  with  national  central  banks  in  the  euro  area,  play  an  important  role.  They  represent  a
very  convenient  analytical  tool.  A  forecast  enables  a  large  amount  of  economic  information  to  be
summarised and organised and a consistent picture of the future economic situation to be formed, in a
systematic  manner  respecting  basic  economic  relationships  and  accounting  identities.  In  the
Eurosystem, these forecasts are based on the staff’s technical expertise and represent one of several
inputs  into  the  decision-making  process.  They  do  not  embody  the  views  or  judgement  of  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The  Governing  Council  needs,  in  any  case,  to  make  an  overall
assessment of the risks to price stability using all available information, including that derived from
the analysis under the first pillar, but also taking into account forecasts produced by other institutions,
financial market expectations, as well as other important information not incorporated in the forecast.
Many of the elements of the strategy that I have just described are not new. A quantitative definition
of  the  ultimate  objective,  a  medium-term  and  forward-looking  orientation  and  a  full  information
approach to the analysis of economic data are all elements one can recognise in many of the strategies
pursued  by  the  most  successful  central  banks  around  the  world.  In  this  sense,  the  ECB  has  drawn
much from the strategies of its constituent national central banks, as well as from the experience of
other central banks outside the euro area.
At the same time, there are also new, distinctive features. The two-pillar presentation differs in some
respects  from  the  strategies  pursued  by  other  central  banks.  Not  surprisingly,  this  element  has
triggered discussion and also an occasional misunderstanding of the ECB’s policy framework.
For  example,  the  two  pillars  have  occasionally  been  misunderstood  as  implying  distinct,  possibly
conflicting “targets” for our monetary policy. From my description, however, it should be clear that
price  stability  is  the  only  “target”,  or  more  precisely,  the  primary  objective  of  our  policy.  The  two
pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy provide a framework for organising the large body of
economic information available to policymakers in a manner that helps the Governing Council of the
ECB  to  take  appropriate  policy  decisions  in  order  to  maintain  price  stability.  They  are  not  distinct
targets in themselves.
In  my  view,  a  diversified,  multi-pillar  framework  of  analysis  offers  great  advantages.  Let  me  try
briefly to explain what they are.
Monetary policy is always conducted in an uncertain environment. This reflects not only the inevitable
uncertainty  related  to  the  inherent  partial  predictability  of  economic  phenomena,  which  becomes
manifest  in  the  form  of  shocks  that  cannot  be  predicted  in  advance.  It  also  reflects  the  inevitably
imperfect measurement, interpretation and understanding of the available information on the economy.
Moreover, in the euro area, uncertainty is probably exacerbated by the regime shift associated with the
introduction of the euro. This implies a substantial structural and institutional change.
In such a situation, relying on a single indicator or on a single model of analysis entails considerable
risk. In an uncertain world, putting all one’s eggs into a single basket is never a good idea.
The two pillars of our strategy provide for a diversified approach by embodying and organising the
main approaches to assessing the risks to price stability, namely, on the one hand, an approach which
BIS Review 88/2000
4
assigns a crucial role  to  money  and,  on  the  other, a  wide  range  of  analyses  of the inflation  process
(focusing primarily on the effects of the interplay between supply and demand and/or cost pressures).
These two  main  approaches  are  themselves  a  reflection  of  a  substantial  lack  of  agreement  amongst
economists on what paradigm or  model best  represents  the functioning  of  a  monetary  economy.  As
yet, no single, unified and uncontroversial framework has been developed. The two-pillar structure of
the  strategy  helps  to  ensure  that  information  and  analysis  from  one  methodological  perspective  is
always  cross-checked  against  information  and  analysis  from  the  other  perspective.  This  provides
effective insurance against the uncertainties and complexities of the economic environment and helps
reduce the risks of policy errors, thereby enhancing the robustness of monetary policy decisions.
Quite naturally, there may be occasions on which the indications derived from the analysis under the
two pillars are different or even conflicting. However, this potential tension should not, in my view, be
considered a drawback of the strategy. On the contrary, it actually constitutes the essence of a robust
approach  to  monetary  policymaking.  Attempts  to  reconcile  results  yielded  by  different  approaches
stimulate deeper analysis and ultimately lead to a better understanding of the economic situation. This
is certainly something I can see from my experience at the ECB.
An assessment of the first two years of experience
Ladies and Gentlemen, after nearly two years of experience, I can assert that the introduction of the
single currency has been a resounding success in many respects. During its short period of existence,
the ECB can claim to have gained the confidence of investors in the sustained maintenance of price
stability in the euro area. The euro has firmly established itself as the second currency in world capital
markets.  Today,  we  have  a  unified  money  market  throughout  the  euro  area,  while  the  process  of
integration  of  our  capital  markets  is  proceeding.  The  preparations  for  the  introduction  of
euro-denominated notes and coins - which will make the euro a more tangible reality for the people in
the euro area - are progressing satisfactorily.
Since assuming responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area, the ECB has faced a
number of difficult challenges. After its first decision to lower its policy interest rates in April 1999,
the ECB has raised its policy rates seven consecutive times, starting in November 1999 through until
the last move one week ago. These decisions were taken to counteract the emergence of risks to price
stability in the euro area. The analyses conducted under both pillars of our strategy corroborated our
decisions.  The  analysis  under  the  second  pillar  indicated  that  external  shocks,  namely  the  strong
increase in oil prices and the depreciation of the euro, were increasingly putting pressure on prices. A
passing-through  to  consumer  prices  was  facilitated  by  the  faster  pace  of  economic  growth  that  was
progressively  materialising  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  the  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit
aggregates  under  the  first  pillar  of  the  strategy  was  also  signalling  the  existence  of  very  generous
liquidity conditions in the euro area. This also pointed to potential upside risks to price stability.
With respect to these monetary policy decisions, it is clearly too early, given the lags in the impact of
monetary policy actions on price developments, to provide a comprehensive assessment. Nevertheless,
there are clear indications that these decisions have indeed proved effective.
First,  throughout  1999  and  early  in  2000,  inflation  remained  at  low  levels.  Most  of  the  increase  in
consumer price inflation in recent months has been caused by a previously unanticipated rise in import
prices - due  mainly  to  the  substantial  oil  price  increase  and  the  exchange  rate  depreciation.  These
developments  could  not  have  been  offset  by  monetary  policy  in  the  short  run.  Inflation  excluding
energy prices is still at a low level in the euro area.
Second, the evolution both of external inflation forecasts and of inflation expectations, as derived from
the  analysis  of  long-term  interest  rates  (in  particular,  index-linked  bonds),  indicates  that  financial
markets and economists widely expect medium-term price developments in line with our definition of
price stability. Obviously, bond yields and many external forecasts incorporate expectations of future
policy changes and therefore offer a judgement on prospective monetary policy decisions, as well as
on decisions taken in 1999 and 2000. As such, they provide a positive assessment of the credibility of
the overall monetary framework.
5
BIS Review 88/2000
At  the  present  juncture,  it  is  crucial  that  the  recent  increases  in  import  prices  do  not  trigger  a
wage-price spiral, as has sometimes happened in the past. In the 1970s and 1980s, wage-price spirals
emerged  as  some  of  the  sectors  of  the  economy  made  uncoordinated  attempts  to  pass  through  the
effects of a negative terms-of-trade shock to other sectors. However, since this kind of shock, such as a
rise in oil prices, reduces overall domestic disposable income, any such attempt is doomed to fail in
the aggregate and only worsens the situation. I believe that the situation is different in many respects
today, not least because the ECB, with its clear commitment to the goal of price stability, provides a
coordinating mechanism for economic agents’ actions by assuring everybody that inflation will remain
under control. Nevertheless, the current situation does not make us complacent.
Moreover,  to  fully  exploit  the  potential  of  the  economy,  it  is  crucial  that  structural  reforms  in  the
labour and product markets in the euro area economies, which are fortunately on the agenda in many
countries, proceed at a faster speed. These will both increase the resilience of the economy to adverse
shocks and ensure that a higher pace of economic growth in an environment of price stability can be
attained. We will continue to remind all economic actors, for the areas under their responsibility, of
this necessity.
While the introduction of the euro has been a success and the performance of the ECB in taking the
appropriate  monetary  policy  decisions  has  not  been  seriously  questioned,  I  find  it  somewhat
disappointing to note how much of the media and public attention concentrates on developments in the
foreign  exchange  market.  In  my  view,  it  is  mistaken  to  evaluate  the  experience  so  far  by  primarily
looking at the developments in the external value of the euro. This tends to eclipse the overall bright
picture so far. When was inflation lower in the past, even with the recent tripling of oil prices? When
was economic growth in the euro area as high as it is at the moment? Did we not  make  significant
progress in fiscal consolidation over the past decade? Is not unemployment finally falling? Are we not
seeing  the  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe?  Europe  is  doing  better  than  even  Europeans
themselves  appear  to  perceive.  Above  all,  Monetary  Union  is  about  creating  the  conditions  for
long-lasting stability and prosperity in our countries and cannot be reduced to  a sort  of  race  among
major  currencies.  Historical  evidence  shows  that,  over  longer  horizons,  the  fundamentals  of  the
economy - such  as  domestic  price  stability,  the  competitiveness  of  its  products,  the  growth
performance - ultimately determine the external value of a currency. Based on this evidence, as I have
already said on other occasions, I am very confident that a strong potential for the euro exists.
Having said that, let me add that we view the possible negative impact of the excessive depreciation of
the  currency  on  the  prospects  for  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  with  concern.  Indeed,  the  recent
intervention in the foreign exchange markets has shown that we take this concern very seriously and
that we are ready to back up our words with deeds. Furthermore, since a common concern has arisen
about the potential implications of a low level of the euro for the world economy, the intervention has
shown the determination of the world’s major central banks to act jointly, when needed.
External presentation of monetary policy decisions
Overall,  it  can  be  said  that  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB  have  served  the  primary
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  well.  The  strategy  has  been  effective  with
respect  to  its  internal  role  of  guiding  the  ECB’s  policy  choices  during  a  period  of  considerable
uncertainty.
At the same time, we recognise that a high degree of common understanding between the central bank
and  the  public  at  large  is  in  our  best  interests  because,  by  reducing  uncertainty  and  bolstering
credibility, it facilitates the conduct of monetary policy.
This  naturally  brings  me  to  the  external,  presentational  role  of  the  strategy  and  to  the  issue  of
transparency in the presentation of policy decisions - an issue that has also received great attention in
recent years, and rightly so.
Clearly,  adopting  an  approach  to  monetary  policymaking,  which  is  relatively  more  complex  than
alternative,  simpler,  textbook  approaches  and  which  presents  some  new - and  therefore  unfamiliar -
elements, may come at some cost in terms of simplicity of communication with the public. However,
BIS Review 88/2000
6
in my opinion, transparency in monetary policymaking should be understood as the extent to which
the external presentation of the  decisions  corresponds  to  the  internal  decision-making  process.  As  a
party to both the internal decision-making process and the external presentation of our decisions, I can
assure you that there is a very close correspondence between the two. In this sense, the ECB has taken
the view that honesty should be placed at a premium in the presentation of monetary policy decisions
to the public. Discussions within the Governing Council centre around the analyses produced under
the two pillars of the strategy. Comparisons are drawn between the indications derived from the two
forms of analysis and an assessment of the risks to price stability is formed, which provides the basis
for  our  decisions.  Information  provided  to  the  public,  such  as  that  contained  in  my  Introductory
Statement to the press every month or in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, closely reflects the discussions
in  the  Governing  Council  and  the  organisation  of  the  decision-making  process,  as  embodied  in  our
strategy.
Adopting  simpler  communication  strategies,  which  do  not  correspond  to  the  way  we  organise  our
discussions and arrive at decisions, would not serve the interests of transparency. Conversely, adopting
a  simpler  strategy  with  the  sole  aim  of  simplifying  the  external  presentation  would  not  serve  the
purpose of taking appropriate monetary policy decisions.
The importance that the public and the media have attached to the role of exchange rate developments
in  monetary  policy  decision-making  is  disproportionate.  On  some  occasions,  our  monetary  policy
decisions  have  even  been  interpreted  as  a  reaction  to  concerns  about  the  exchange  rate  per  se.  A
monetary  policy  reaction  by  the  ECB  to  the  exchange  rate  always  reflects  a  concern  about  the
implications of the exchange rate for prospective risks to price stability.
As you will be aware, the  ECB is  considering  the publication  of  its  macroeconomic  forecasts. This
publication should provide an additional forward-looking element for the communication of economic
analysis. At the same time, the publication of forecasts will pose a number of additional challenges.
There is, for example, the danger that the public will concentrate on the forecast figures, rather than on
the  analysis,  and  expect  a  mechanical  reaction  of  monetary  policy  to  the  forecast.  However,  as  I
explained  when  describing  our  strategic  framework,  macroeconomic  forecasts  are  only  one - albeit
important - input  into  the  policy  process.  They  are  always  evaluated  in  the  context  of,  and  cross-
checked  against,  other  analyses,  including,  most  importantly,  the  analysis  conducted  under  the  first
pillar  of  our  strategy.  Moreover,  forecasts  do  not  embody  the  Governing  Council’s  views.  Indeed,
because the exercise of policy judgement remains the preserve of the Governing Council, one should
not  expect  developments  in  the  published  macroeconomic  forecast  to  mechanistically  feed  through
into policy decisions. The publication of forecasts by the ECB will have to reflect the important, but
limited role forecasts play in the monetary policy process.
Monetary  policy  cannot - and  should  not - be  reduced  to  some  simple,  time-invariant  policy  rule,
which links monetary policy decisions to a small number of indicators or a conditional forecast in a
mechanical fashion. Such monetary policy cannot be pursued in a world, which is uncertain, complex
and  constantly  evolving.  The  ECB  has  taken  the  view  that  the  uncertainty  and  complexities  in  the
structure of the economy should be openly and honestly reflected in its monetary policy strategy and,
therefore, in the presentation of policy decisions to the public. This is not only transparent, but will
also promote a more genuine understanding of monetary policy over time.
In conclusion, there is certainly scope to increase the degree of common understanding between the
ECB and the public at large. Clearly, a process of learning and familiarisation with the new regime is
required on both sides and there are indeed already indications that the situation is improving. We are
working hard to play our part in speeding up this learning process.
Conclusion
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now conclude by thanking the European Business School London once
again for having given me the opportunity to share these thoughts with you today.
Making monetary policy in a broad monetary union is a complex task. With my presentation, I hope I
have convinced you that the ECB has the credibility, the appropriate strategy, the technical expertise
7
BIS Review 88/2000
and the determination to successfully perform this task and fulfil its mandate. For my part, I have little
doubt that this is indeed the case.
BIS Review 88/2000
8
