I J Macfarlane: Recent influences on the exchange rate
Speech by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to CEDA Annual General
Meeting Dinner, held in Melbourne, on 9 November 2000.
 I am very pleased to have been asked to address CEDA’s Annual General Meeting for the third time in
Melbourne. When deciding on a topic for tonight, I realised that it would be very difficult to discuss
the  Australian  economy  without  spending  some  time  on  the  exchange  rate  and  the  various  reasons
advanced for its recent fall. So I have decided to plunge in and devote the whole speech to this topic.
Obviously, we have been doing a lot of thinking about it, and I will see if I can say something useful
about it in the 20 minutes I have available tonight.
What has happened?
The  exchange  rate  has  behaved  during  2000 in  a  way  that  noone  predicted. There  used  to  be  some
elements  of  predictability  for  the  Australian  dollar  in  that  its  broad  movements  could  usually  be
explained by changes in our terms of trade (or its close relative, commodity prices) and the difference
between domestic and foreign interest rates. The relationship was not close on a month-to-month or
quarter-to-quarter  basis,  but  it  could  explain  the  large  swings.  This  broad  relationship  is  shown  in
Diagram 1 which compares the predicted exchange rate and the actual exchange rate using an equation
which  has  been  used  in  the  Bank  over  the  years.  (By  the  way,  there  is  nothing  unique  about  this
equation as several of the large banks active in the foreign exchange market have also used a similar
formulation.) What Diagram 1 shows is that, on the basis of previous experience during the floating
rate period, we could have expected a rise in the exchange rate in 2000. Instead, we have seen a fall
and  the  gap  between  actual  and  predicted  is  over  three  standard  deviations -  the  largest  in  the  past
fifteen years. Something therefore has changed, at least for the present.
Diagram 1
Real Trade-Weighted Exchange Rate
Predicted*
Actual
1985-1999
average
1985
* Shaded area represents +/- one standard deviation from predicted value.
1988
1994
1991
1997
Index
125
115
105
95
85
Index
125
115
105
95
85
2000
Another way of making the same point is to say that the Australian dollar has never previously shown
a significant fall with economic conditions as they presently are. Over the course of 2000, we have had
a  strong  world economy,  improving  Australian  terms  of trade  (rising  commodity  prices),  a  buoyant
domestic  economy,  a  declining  current  account  deficit,  a  fiscal  surplus  and  rising  domestic  interest
rates. In the past, a significant fall in the Australian dollar has coincided with the opposite - a weak
domestic  economy  and  world  economy,  and  falling  commodity  prices.  It  has  also  usually  occurred
against a background where there has been widespread public criticism of fiscal and monetary policy
for being too expansionary. None of these elements is present on this occasion.
1
BIS Review 101/2000
The  comments  I  have  made  so  far  have  treated  the  year  as  a  single  development,  but  I  think  it  is
possible  to  distinguish  two  phases.  For  the  first  seven  months  or  so,  the  biggest  influence  on  the
exchange rate was the expectation of what was going to happen to Australian and US interest rates.
The predominant view was that the strong US economy would mean that US interest rates would rise
more than those in other countries (including Australia), and this contributed to a strong US dollar and
falling  Australian  dollar.  Any  suggestion  that  the  Australian  economy  was  weakening  (or  the  US
economy  strengthening)  led  to a  fall  in  the  Australian  dollar.  In  the  first  seven  months  of  the  year,
virtually all of the large movements in the Australian dollar could be explained this way. For example,
on two occasions, a weak monthly retail trade figure caused the Australian dollar to fall by more than
one US cent in a day. Our forthcoming Statement on Monetary Policy (due next Monday) examines
this in detail.
The irony of this situation was that this process actually involved a misinterpretation of the Australian
economy.  The  signs  of  weakness  that  were  seized  upon  were  anomalies;  the  underlying  economy
remained very strong, incipient inflationary pressures were starting to appear, and during this period
our interest rates were raised, as it turned out, more or less by the same amount as those in the United
States. Nevertheless, the misinterpretation prevailed and the currency fell. Over the six months from
late January, the Australian dollar fell by 11% against the US dollar and 8% in trade-weighted terms.
The second phase occurred from around mid-year, when it became widely expected by the market that
the US economy was going to have a soft landing, and that no further increases in US interest rates
were likely. As a result, the market’s expectation of future interest differentials moved in a direction
favourable to Australia. Had the foreign exchange market continued to behave as it did in the first half
of the year, the Australian dollar would have risen, but it did not. It steadied for a while, and then fell
appreciably from mid-August. It was this period that convinced a lot of people that some new factor
must be at work, which was overwhelming the normal determinants of the exchange rate. It was also
in this period that the alternative explanations were put forward most volubly.
The influences
Before getting on to some of the newer explanations for the currency’s movements, it is worth looking
at some more conventional explanations.
The first of these is the strength of the US dollar itself, which has been the biggest reason behind our
recent  experience.  This  has  affected  us  in  a  mechanical  sense  in  that  if  the  US  dollar  is  rising,  the
currency on the other side of the  bilateral  exchange  rate  must fall. We  have  been  part  of  this,  as  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Australian  dollar  has  fallen  more  against  the  US  dollar  than  in  trade-
weighted  terms.  There  has  also  been  an  indirect  effect  in  that  the  rising  US  dollar  has  affected  the
investment preferences of many market participants in an extrapolative way which I will discuss later.
The US dollar in 2000 has risen against the currencies of all other industrial countries, although its rise
against the Yen has been relatively small. These two currencies - the US dollar and the Yen - have
been the strongest currencies in 2000, and they happen to be our largest trading partners and so have
the largest weights in our trade-weighted index.
Interestingly, the newer explanations for currency movements are largely based on the assumption that
countries with strong currencies will have characteristics similar to the United States (see later). But
Japan  is  almost  the  opposite  to  the  United  States  -  weak  economy,  barely  positive  interest  rates,
massive fiscal deficit, trade surplus and an economic culture based on conventional manufacturing. I
do not wish to dwell on these differences, other than to note that they show the dangers of coming up
with a general explanation of exchange rate movements which turns out to be only applicable to one
country or one period of time.
The  second  explanation  relies  on  the  well-known  tendency  for  exchange  rates  to  be  driven  by
momentum. That is - once a trend has been established, for example, by the events in the first half of
BIS Review 101/2000
2
the year - it tends to continue and thereby to overshoot the level implied by fundamentals. There have
been many documented examples of this,1 and market participants often place weight  on  this  factor
when explaining movements in exchange rates. I have no doubt that this has been an important factor
over recent months, as it has been on several earlier occasions in our past. A related market rule of
thumb  that  has  appeared  this  year,  but  was  entirely  absent  last  year,  is  the  one  which  relates
movements in the Australian dollar to movements in the Euro. The good thing is that these trends and
rules  of  thumb  do  not  continue  indefinitely,  and  the  further  the  exchange  rate  departs  from
fundamentals, the more likely it is that some unforeseen event will come along to jolt the rate into a
new direction.
The  third  conventional  explanation  gives  prominence  to  Australia’s  external  position  -  the  current
account  deficit  and  the  accumulation  of  foreign  debt and  other  liabilities. This  explanation  emerges
whenever  the  Australian  dollar  is  falling,  and  then  goes  into  hibernation  whenever  it  is  rising.  The
problem  with  this  explanation  is  that  our  external  position  has  been  relatively  stable  over  the  past
decade or more, and so it is difficult to use it as the  explanation for  an  event  that  only  occurred  as
recently as this year. Over the past decade, the current account deficit has cycled around an average of
about 4½%  of  GDP,  and  our  foreign  debt  has  stayed  a little over  40%  of  GDP.  It  is  true  that  total
external liabilities to GDP has risen, but against this, the ratio of debt servicing to exports has halved
over the past decade, and the current account deficit itself has been declining during the period of the
falling  Australian  dollar.  I  think  it  is  very  difficult  to  make  the  case  that  our  external  position  has
recently deteriorated, or that it is the explanation for the falling Australian dollar in 2000.
While I am generally sceptical that this year’s events can be explained by a sudden focus on trends in
the  current  account  position,  it  may  be  more  promising  to  think  about  developments  from  the
perspective of capital flows.
If, for one reason or another, investors found Australia a relatively less attractive destination for their
funds, compared with some other destination - eg the United States - we would expect that this will
have implications for the exchange rate. Some will want to assert that this occurred because people
suddenly focused on Australia’s current account, but this seems unsatisfactory because the recipient of
the flows - the United States - is seeing its current account deficit expand to unprecedented size. In
fact, as a share of GDP, Australia’s current account deficit is well on the way to being smaller than its
US counterpart, yet the US dollar has been rising, and the Australian dollar falling. So to make sense
of what has been happening, it is necessary to think in terms of capital flows being driven by changes
in the perceived returns in the different countries. In the remainder of this talk, I would like to examine
this apparent shift in capital flows, and to think about whether it is temporary or permanent.
Attitudes of international investors
There are two reasons put forward for why overseas investors may now have a smaller appetite for
investing in Australian assets - the first applies to debt and the second to equity.
On Australian debt, whether at the short or long end or whether private or public, current interest rates
are now lower than formerly was the case. For a good part of the past two decades, Australian interest
rates were well above US rates, as we struggled to get Australian inflation back to a respectably low
rate.  Even  when  inflation  fell,  a  number  of  years  passed  before  the  fall  was  finally  reflected  in
inflationary expectations and interest rates. As a result, it was only over the past three or so years that
Australian interest rates lost their significant premium over US rates (Diagram 2).
1  For  example,  the  US  dollar  in  1989,  the  Japanese  Yen  in  1995,  in  a  strengthening  direction,  and  then  in  1998  in  a
weakening direction.
3
BIS Review 101/2000
Diagram 2
Ten Year Bond Yields
Australia
US
l
1993
1994
l
1995
l
1996
l
1997
l
1998
l
1999
l
2000
 10
8
6
4
2
 10
8
6
4
2
The  argument  essentially  says  that,  since  Australian  interest  bearing  securities  no  longer  contain  a
premium, investors’ appetite for them has declined, and so the demand for Australian dollars to buy
them has fallen. On the surface, this sounds plausible, but we should ask why have rates fallen. Surely
they  fell  because  Australian  debt  became  more  attractive  to  investors.  Whereas  in  1994  rates  of
300 basis  points  above  US  rates  were  required  to  get  investors  to  hold  our  bonds,  they  now  do  so
willingly at rates only slightly above US rates.
Clearly,  the  simple  form  of  this  argument  has  a  few  logical  gaps.  However,  there  does  seem  to  be
something at work here - perhaps due to  differing  appetites  for  Australian  bonds  on behalf  of local
compared with foreign investors - because there has been a reversal in recent years of the former high
levels  of  capital  inflow  into  Australian  bonds.  In  the  five  years  between  June  1992  and  June  1997,
these inflows averaged $4.3 billion per year, whereas over the past two years there have been outflows
of $5.2 billion per year.
The  second  argument,  namely  that  there  has  been  a  change  in  preference  by  equity  investors,  is  a
relatively  recent  one,  but  it  has  been  put  forward  very  forcefully.  It  essentially  says  that  equity
investment (direct and portfolio) is less attracted to Australia than formerly since we are viewed as an
“old economy” because we do not have a big enough exposure to the new growth areas, particularly
the  information  and  communications  technology  sector  (ICT).  The  contrast  is  drawn  between  the
United  States,  which  is  seen  as  the  “new  economy”,  and  other  countries,  including  Australia  and
Europe, which are seen as the “old economy”.
Let me say at the outset, there are two questions at issue - first, do a substantial number of providers of
capital think this way? - and second, is there economic substance to the contrast between the two types
of economy? There can be little doubt that the answer to the first question is in the affirmative - this
line of thinking is very  widespread  at present,  and  therefore  has  no  doubt been  an important  recent
influence  on  our  exchange  rate.2  The  answer  to  the  second  is,  in  my  view,  in  the  negative  -  the
differences between the two types of economy - “old” as applied to Australia and “new” as applied to
the  United  States  -  have  been  greatly  exaggerated  and  the  similarities  ignored.  This  is  important
because if there is not fundamental economic substance to the view, it will not last - it will be seen as a
phase through which capital markets passed. I would like to spend the remainder of my time tonight
explaining why I believe this is so.
The thing that stands out about the economic performance of Australia and the United States over the
past decade or the past few years is not the contrast, but the remarkable similarity. For an investor, the
most likely place to make money is where there is strong growth and a rapid increase in productivity.
The  United  States  is  justly  proud  of  its  performance  in  these  two  areas,  but  the  one  comparable
2  Net equity flows into Australia in 1999/2000 (only data for the first three quarters are available) appear to have been less
than in the two preceding years.
BIS Review 101/2000
4
country in the OECD area that can match it - in fact, exceed it - has been Australia. I have shown the
growth and productivity figures before, so I will not repeat them again, but will rely on a US source to
make my point.
An  article  in  the  US  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  October  Bulletin  sets  out  to  explain  the  remarkable
recent pick-up in US productivity and to contrast it with 16 other OECD countries. It is an excellent
and  thoroughly  researched  article  which  broadly  achieves  its  objectives,  but  it  keeps  finding  an
irritating exception.3 Whether it is growth of labour productivity, growth of multi-factor productivity
or the extent of capital deepening, Australia matches or exceeds the excellent US performance, rather
than sharing the lacklustre performance of the majority of other countries.
But  proponents  of  the  “new  economy”  view  would  reply  that  they  are  not  interested  in  the  whole
economy, they are interested primarily in the ICT part where the United States unquestionably is the
world  leader.  But  only  3.9%  of  the  US  workforce  is  employed  in  the  ICT  sector  (the  comparable
figure for Australia is 2.6%). Why you should make an assessment of a country by concentrating on
the  3.9%  and  ignoring  the  other  96.1%  is  a  question  I  cannot  answer.  On  a  similar  note,  the
willingness to adopt new technology is surely the key to improving productivity, and here there are a
number of indicators that place Australia very high in the world rankings. A recent OECD publication4
on this subject finds that, among the 27 or so OECD countries, Australia is:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Not  surprisingly,  we  do  not  match  the  United  States  in  most  of  these  measures,  but  we  are  almost
always in the top quartile or higher, suggesting that among OECD countries we should be regarded as
being towards the top end of the range in willingness to embrace new technology.
third best in secure web-servers for electronic commerce.
third highest in ICT expenditure as a percentage of GDP;
eighth highest in internet hosts per 1000 population;
third best in internet access cost;
sixth highest in PC penetration;
Again,  the  proponents  of  the  “new  economy”  view  find  this  reasoning  unconvincing.  They  tend  to
concentrate on the production of the ICT sector, and give Australia low marks for not  having  more
resources in this area. While there is no doubt that the very sophisticated fringe of ICT, as exemplified
by Silicon Valley, would be an asset to any country, most of the production side of ICT is much more
humdrum.  In  fact,  the  country  with  the  highest  share  of  GDP  derived  from  ICT  is  not  the  United
States; Korea and Hungary, for example, both have higher shares. The United States has outsourced a
good deal of the production to less sophisticated countries with lower cost structures, with the result
that the United States now has the largest deficit in trade in ICT of all countries.5 This, I think, helps
make the point that a policy of trying to direct resources into ICT, particularly its production at the
expense  of  other  aspects  of  the  economy,  could  be  self-defeating.  It  would  be  all  the  more
disappointing if such a policy were sold on the grounds that it would be a constructive response to the
current fall in the exchange rate.
Perhaps the biggest weakness with the “new economy” argument as an explanation of exchange rate
movements can be found in the recent behaviour of the US dollar and US investments. It is frequently
asserted  that  the  reason  the  US  dollar  is  rising  is  because  everyone  wants  to  buy  US  equities,
particularly tech stocks, because that is where the high returns are. In fact, anyone who followed this
approach this year would have been disappointed. Not only were they buying into something with an
already high price and low yield, they would have seen the prices fall noticeably over the year - the
3  C Gust and J Marquez, “Productivity developments abroad”, Federal Reserve Bulletin, October 2000.
4 
5 
“The knowledge-based economy: a set of facts and figures”, OECD, Paris, 2000.
“Measuring the ICT sector”, OECD, Paris, 2000.
5
BIS Review 101/2000
Dow  by  5%  and  the  NASDAQ  by  16%.  (In  Australia,  the  all-ordinaries  has  risen  over  the  same
period.) To the extent that the US investments made positive returns, it would have been only due to
the  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar  itself,  not  to  the  assets  purchased,  which  turns  the  underlying
reasoning on its head.
Conclusion
The Australian dollar has shown some big swings in both directions since it was floated in 1983. This
is the fourth time in that era that the Australian dollar has fallen by more than 10% in trade-weighted
terms  in  a  year.  On  each  of  the  earlier  occasions,  it  seemed  at  the  time  that  the  fall  would  go  on
forever, and there were plenty of people who had explanations to support its continuation. However,
on each occasion, it recovered and it will do so again this time.
The principal reason for the fall over recent months has been the rising US dollar, which has affected
us directly and indirectly. Another reason is to be found in the interaction between the early fall based
on  expectations  of  interest  differentials  plus  the  intrinsic  tendency  for  foreign  exchange  markets  to
continue  to  go  in  one  direction,  ie  to  overshoot,  and  to  come  up  with  explanations  to  justify  the
overshooting. Finally, over recent months, there has been a tendency for markets to judge countries
and  their  exchange  rates  by  the  “new  economy  model”.  Ironically,  this  is  exactly  the  period  when
US technology stocks have languished.
I  should  now  conclude  by  saying  something  about  the  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Monetary
policy  will  continue  to  be  conducted  according  to  the  medium-term  principles  contained  in  our
inflation-targeting approach. This means that the exchange rate will be taken into account, along with
the  other  variables  that  contribute  to  our  inflation  outlook  (where  this  is  appropriately  defined  to
exclude once-off factors such as petroleum prices and the GST). On the other hand, as can  be  seen
from our current behaviour, we have no intention of departing from our medium-term approach in an
ad hoc attempt to push up the exchange rate for its own sake.
The  period  ahead  will  contain  many  uncertainties,  both  here  and  abroad,  but  we  have  coped  with
uncertainty  before.  Over  the  past  year,  we  have  had  the  unusual  combination  of  strong  domestic
growth, a falling current account deficit and a declining exchange rate, all of which are conducive to
future  growth.  We  still  have  to  ensure  that  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  stays  on  track  -
which  means  making  sure  that  several  temporary  factors  have  only  a  “once-off”  effect  and  are  not
reflected in the ongoing inflation rate. If we succeed in doing that, we will be in a good position to
continue the expansion we have had since 1991.
BIS Review 101/2000
6
