Benoît Cœuré: Opening remarks at the ECB workshop on “Markets for 
inflation protection: recent developments, modelling tools and policy 
implications” 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at 
inflation  protection:  recent 
developments, modelling tools and policy implications”, Frankfurt am Main, 30 August 2012. 
the  ECB  workshop  on  “Markets 
for 
 I  wish  to  thank  Søren  Autrup  and  Magdalena  Grothe  for  their  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  on  behalf  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank to this topical workshop on “Markets for inflation protection: recent 
developments,  modelling  tools  and  policy  implications”.  This  event  aims  to  encourage  a 
sharing of views among central bankers, treasuries, investment banks and researchers from 
academia. I am very pleased to see such a broad collaborative effort being made to better 
understand developments in markets for inflation protection.  
In my remarks today, I will first give a short overview of the current size of these markets in 
the euro area. I’m also going to summarise how the European Central Bank uses information 
extracted  from  inflation-linked  products  for  its  day-to-day  analysis  and  assessment  of 
monetary policy. In the final part, in view of the difficult and volatile market conditions we are 
currently facing, I will refer to the challenges for central banks in using information coming 
from markets for inflation protection. 
Looking  back  at  the  early  times  of  the  inflation  protection  market  in  the  early  2000s,  it  is 
impressive how it has developed in terms of the size, liquidity and diversity of both issuers 
and  investors.  It  has  also  become  “mainstream”  in  the  sense  that  some  of  the  original 
controversies  surrounding  it  no  longer  exist.  Indeed,  central  banks  no  longer  consider  the 
existence  of  a  market for  inflation  protection  as  a  sign  of  mistrust  in  their  ability  to  deliver 
price stability. Quite the contrary, they see it as completing the universe of financial securities 
and  thereby  expanding  risk  sharing  in  the  economy  and  contributing  to  economic  stability. 
These  developments  show  that  financial  innovation  can  in  fact  provide  benefits  for  the 
society, provided that it is well designed and supervised. This has not always been the case 
in the past, however. But it does not mean that it cannot be the case for the future. 
Inflation-linked bonds now constitute an important segment of the sovereign bonds issued by 
France, Italy and Germany (see slide 2). The outstanding amount in these three euro area 
countries  combined  has  reached  €350  billion  so  far  in  2012  and  the  market  is  well 
established. Apart from products linked to national CPI indices, a large part of these markets 
consist of bonds linked to the euro area HICP, which we use at the ECB for our analyses of 
inflation expectations. 
Apart  from  the  inflation  bond  market,  there  is  a  growing  swap  market  (see  slide  3).  The 
inflation-linked  swap  market  has  gained  liquidity  and,  for  us  policy-makers,  it  is  another 
source  of  signals  about  inflation  expectations  and  it  helps  us  to  understand  their  term 
structure. Finally, an interesting, but still developing market is the market for inflation options. 
It potentially can deliver signals on the probabilities of various inflation outcomes, as priced 
by  investors,  but  the  liquidity  and  segmentation  of  inflation  options  remain  a  significant 
challenge. 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  on  how  we  use  signals  extracted  from  markets  for  inflation 
protection  for  our  daily  analysis  (see  slide  4).  The  ECB  monitors  inflation  expectations  by 
using surveys and implied signals from swap and bond markets. Market-based indicators are 
more volatile than survey-based indicators. In part, the volatility is related to noise due to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
market  turbulence  experienced  in  recent  years.  However,  movements  in  market-based 
measures provide information on inflation expectations beyond what is contained in survey 
information. In particular, monitoring developments in inflation risk premia can help to assess 
inflation concerns among market participants. 
Looking  at  the  developments  in  market-based  measures  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  in  the  euro  area  during  the  crisis,  inflation  expectations  seem  to  be 
well-anchored in spite of market turbulence and uncertainties regarding future developments 
(see  slide  5).  As  the  chart  shows,  the  anchoring  is  confirmed  by  stable  survey-based 
measures as well. 
Comparing  euro  area  data  with  that  of  the  United  States  and  United  Kingdom,  inflation 
expectations  in  the  euro  area  derived  from  inflation-linked  markets  seem  to  have  been 
relatively stable during the financial crisis, in fact more stable than for the other two currency 
areas (see slide 6). For the euro area in particular, inflation expectations have remained very 
well  anchored  following  the  non-standard  liquidity  provision  measures  undertaken  by  the 
ECB.  The  anchoring  of  expectations  at  relatively  low  levels  probably  reflects  continued 
negative output gaps in the euro area as well as confidence that the ECB will be able and 
willing to drain liquidity if and when necessary to control inflation. In a nutshell, it is evidence 
that the euro area financial crisis has not eroded trust in the euro as a currency. 
However, central banks are currently facing important challenges in using information from 
markets for inflation protection to support monetary policy decisions (see slide 7). During the 
crisis, and especially after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, inflation-linked markets were 
characterised  by  high  volatility  and  low  market  liquidity,  which  made  it  very  difficult  for 
policy-makers  to  infer  signals  about  the  level  of  inflation  expectations,  as  perceived  by 
market participants. Also, they have not escaped the trend towards fragmentation which has 
been a common feature of euro area capital markets throughout this crisis. 
During the euro area sovereign bond market crisis, and especially in the second half of 2011, 
country-specific  developments  were  increasingly  apparent.  In  particular,  the  rising  yield 
spread  between  French  and  German  bonds  meant  that  the  euro  area  real  yield  curve 
estimated on French and German bonds became biased. The technical solution was to split 
the estimation of the real yield curve into the country-specific yield curves before aggregating 
back to a euro area real yield curve. I believe our colleagues will present this new approach 
in more detail during the workshop. 
Finally, regarding the markets for inflation options, we still need to understand better to what 
extent we can trust the signals extracted from these markets as being accurate information 
on  the  inflation  and  deflation  tail  risks  perceived  by  investors. We  need  to  understand  the 
impact of particularly large players in the options market on shorter-term price developments 
and need to find ways to assess the maturity of these markets. Our goal should be to be able 
to routinely extract probability density functions for inflation expectations based on a robust 
methodology, as we already do for short-term interest rates or stock indices. This would be 
particularly  useful  to  inform  our  policy  making  process  in  a  world  where  risk  management 
plays a key role in policy decisions. 
Having briefly sketched out our analysis and concerns, I would like to stress that the ECB 
has a strong interest in the developments in markets for inflation protection. They provide us 
with tools for monitoring inflation expectations in the euro area for various horizons at a high 
frequency. Such tools are unique and that is why we need to make sure that we interpret the 
information  from  inflation  markets  correctly  and  understand  the  broader  context  of  the 
observed developments.  
I trust this workshop will give you a good opportunity to reflect on these issues. I would like to 
wish you some interesting and productive discussions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
