Philip Lowe: Bank regulation and the future of banking 
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  
41st Australian Conference of Economists, Melbourne, 11 July 2012. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  be  part  of  this  panel  on  Bank  Regulation  and  the  Future  of 
Banking.  
As  you  know,  the  world  of  bank  regulation  has  seen  a  lot  of  activity  in  recent  years.  This 
activity has coincided with a rethinking of the role of financial institutions in our societies. It 
has also coincided with market-based pressures to change the way that financial institutions 
manage their risks.  
Many of the regulatory changes are quite complex and my fellow panellists – John Laker and 
Steven Münchenberg  –  are  better  placed  than  me  to  discuss  the  details.  Instead,  what  I 
would  like  to  do  is  to  talk  first  about  some  of  the  implications  of  these  changes  for  the 
financial  system,  including  the  consequences  of  making  financial  intermediation  more 
expensive. I would then like to highlight a few of the broad regulatory issues that we are likely 
to confront over the years ahead.  
The increased cost of financial intermediation 
First, the higher cost of financial intermediation.  
Prior to the financial crisis, credit spreads were low, leverage was easily available, financial 
institutions had become highly interconnected and large maturity mismatches were common. 
You might remember, it was the time of the “Great Moderation” – many financial assets were 
priced for perfection and many financial institutions had based their business models on the 
assumption that little would go wrong.  
For a while, everything looked to be working out quite well; financial institutions were highly 
profitable and global growth was strong. But in reality, risk was being underpriced and there 
was too much leverage, and little was done to address the building vulnerabilities.  
The result has been that the citizens of many advanced economies have paid a heavy price. 
There  has  also  been  a  serious  erosion  of  trust  in  the  financial  sector  globally,  with  the 
banking industry suffering considerable “brand damage”. Quite rightly, many people question 
how global banks, with their sophisticated risk models and their highly paid staff, could have 
managed  risks  so  poorly.  Fortunately,  in  contrast  to  these  global  developments,  the 
Australian  banks  have  fared  considerably  better.  But  because finance  is  a  global  industry, 
some of the consequences of the events abroad are being felt here as well.  
In  the  wake  of  this  experience,  it  is  not  surprising  that  regulators  and,  to  some  extent  the 
financial institutions themselves, have sought to address the various problems. Capital ratios 
are being increased, and the quality of capital is being improved. Maturity transformation is 
being reduced. And banks are holding more liquid assets. These changes are occurring not 
just  because  of  new  regulations,  but  also  because  they  are  being  demanded  by  the 
marketplace.  
Together,  these  various  changes  are  increasing  the  cost  of  financial  intermediation 
conducted  across the  balance  sheets  of  banks.  In  effect,  the  choice  that  our societies  are 
making –  partly  through  our  regulators –  is  to  pay  more  for  financial  intermediation  and, 
perhaps, to have less of it. The benefit that we hope to receive from paying this higher price 
is a safer and a more stable financial system.  
This choice has a number of related implications, and I would like to mention just a couple of 
these.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The first concerns lending spreads and the return on bank equity.  
In particular, loan rates are likely to be higher relative to short-term money market rates than 
would otherwise have been the case; in effect, some of the incidence of the higher cost of 
financial intermediation falls on the borrowers. In addition, if banks are safer, then, all else 
constant, some of the incidence of high cost of financial intermediation should also fall on the 
owners of bank equity who should be willing to accept lower returns. But, of course, the story 
does  not  stop  here.  Lower  returns  on  equity  are  likely  to  increase  the  incentive  for  bank 
management to take on new risks in an attempt to regain earlier rates of return. Lower rates 
of  return  may  also  lead  to  renewed  efforts  at  cost  cutting.  This  could  have  some  positive 
effects,  but  if  it  were  to  involve  cuts  to  the  risk-management  function,  cost  cutting  could 
create new risks. And finally, to the extent that investors realise that credit and other risks are 
higher  than  they  had  previously  thought,  they  might  want  more  compensation  for  holding 
bank equity despite the efforts to make banks safer.  
These  various  effects  are  quite  complicated  and  they  will  take  time  to  play  out.  The  one 
change that we have already seen very clearly is a rise in loan rates relative to the cash rate. 
For  example,  during  the  10  years  prior  to  2007,  outstanding  variable  mortgage  rates 
averaged 150 basis points above the cash rate. Today, this difference is around 270 basis 
points.  
This increase is due partly to the global loss of trust in financial institutions, which has led to 
all banks paying more for funds in capital markets. It is also due to the strong competition for 
deposits  domestically,  with  banks  prepared  to  pay  large  premiums  for  liabilities  that  are 
called  “deposits”  rather  than  “wholesale  funding”.  It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  a  similar 
dynamic is also occurring in a number of other countries where there is strong demand for 
deposits, including the United Kingdom, Sweden and New Zealand. In Australia, while public 
attention  has  clearly  focused  on  the  widening  spread  between  the  mortgage  rate  and  the 
cash rate, there has been much less attention paid to the fact that reductions in the cash rate 
have not been passed through fully into deposit rates. Only a few years back, depositors did 
well to be paid an interest rate close to the cash rate on their at-call deposits, and not long 
before  that  they  were  paid  well  below  the  cash  rate.  In  stark  contrast,  today  there  are  a 
number of deposit products that pay about 2 percentage points above the cash rate.  
In effect, what we are seeing as a result of both market and regulatory developments is an 
increase in most interest rates in the economy relative to the cash rate. This is something 
that the Reserve Bank has spoken about at length and it has been an important factor in the 
setting  of  monetary  policy  over  recent  years.  In  particular,  this  increase  in  interest  rates 
relative to the cash rate has been offset by the Bank setting a lower cash rate than would 
otherwise have been the case. While it is difficult to be too precise, the cash rate today is in 
the order of 1½ percentage points lower than it  would have been  in the absence of these 
developments.  
A second broad implication of the increase in the cost of financial intermediation is that there 
is likely to be less of it, particularly across the balance sheets of banks. This effect is being 
compounded by a reduced appetite for debt by the private non-financial sector.  
One area where banks are likely to find it more difficult than in the past is in lending to large 
businesses. Given the current pricing, many large businesses can raise funds more cheaply 
in capital markets than banks can, even where the credit rating of the business is lower than 
the  bank.  In  part,  this  reflects  the  brand  damage  done  to  banking  which  is  unlikely  to  be 
repaired any time soon. With banks paying more for funds, and being subject to a range of 
regulatory requirements, they are likely to find it hard to intermediate between savers and the 
large borrowers that can go directly to the savers. This will, no doubt, provide opportunities 
for some banks as they help businesses connect directly with these savers, but other banks 
will need to focus even more on lending to households and small and medium businesses. 
These structural changes will bear close watching over the years ahead.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Some regulatory issues 
I would now like to turn to the related topic of the future direction of financial regulation. This 
is obviously a very broad topic, but there are three issues that I would like to touch on. These 
are: the importance of system-wide supervision; the regulation of innovation in the financial 
system; and the interconnections between financial institutions.  
First, the importance of supervision.  
One of the clearest lessons from financial history is that the financial sector has an uncanny 
ability of finding ways of connecting savers with borrowers. When obstacles are put in the 
way, detours are often found. New forms of financing pop up. New institutions develop. New 
products come into play. We saw numerous examples of this in Australia in earlier decades, 
and there are many overseas examples as well, some of which are quite recent.  
This intrinsic flexibility of finance is one reason why the international regulatory community is 
spending  a  lot  of  time  thinking  about  so-called  “shadow  banking”.  There  is  a  legitimate 
concern that current efforts to tighten regulation will push activities off banks’ balance sheets, 
in  time  creating  new  risks  to  the  global  financial  system.  While  tighter  rules  were  clearly 
needed in some areas, we need to remain aware of the limitations of rules alone.  
Looking back over the global experience of recent years, it seems that in some jurisdictions 
rules  have  been  viewed  as  a  substitute  for  supervision.  This  has  been  a  mistake.  The 
preservation  of financial  stability  cannot  be  achieved  by  rules  alone.  It requires  active  and 
competent supervision.  
Importantly, a good supervisor needs a whole-of-system focus. The supervisor needs to think 
about  the  consequences  of  institutions  following  similar  strategies.  It  needs  to  examine 
closely  the  interconnections  between  financial  institutions,  including  those  outside  the 
formally  regulated  sector.  It  needs  to  examine  developments  in  aggregate  credit  growth, 
construction activity and asset prices, and how these aggregates are distributed across the 
country. And it needs an understanding of how the competitive dynamics in the system are 
changing. And then having thought about these issues, the supervisor must be willing, and 
able,  to  act  and  constrain  activities  that  pose  unacceptable  risks  to  the  financial  system. 
Judgement, not rules, is the key here.  
On this score, Australia has been well served by APRA’s approach to supervision, which has 
had an industry-wide focus. APRA has been supported in doing this by the Reserve Bank 
and by the Council of Financial Regulators which has regular discussions about system-wide 
developments. It is important that as the new rules are agreed and implemented, this strong 
focus on system-wide supervision is retained.  
The second issue – and one that has probably not received the attention that it deserves – is 
how regulation should deal with financial innovation.  
Over  many  decades,  our  societies  have  benefited  greatly  from  innovation  in  the  financial 
system.  Financial  innovation  has  delivered  lower  cost  and  more  flexible  loans  and  better 
deposit products. It has provided new and more efficient ways of managing risk. And it has 
helped our economies to grow and our living standards to rise.  
But financial innovation can also have a dark side. This is particularly so where it is driven by 
distorted  remuneration  structures  within  financial  institutions,  or  by  regulatory,  tax  or 
accounting  considerations.  Problems  can  also  arise  where  the  new  products  are  not  well 
understood by those who develop and sell them, or by those who buy and trade them.  
Over recent times, much of the innovation that we have seen has been driven by advances 
in finance theory and computing power, which have allowed institutions to slice up risk into 
smaller and smaller pieces and allowed each of those pieces to be separately priced. One 
supposed benefit of this was that financial products could be engineered to closely match the 
risk appetite of each investor. But much of the financial engineering was very complicated 
and its net benefit to society is debateable. Many of the products were not well understood, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  many  of  the  underlying  assumptions  used  in  pricing  turned  out  to  be  wrong.  Even 
sophisticated financial  institutions  with  all  their  resources  did  not  understand the  risks  at a 
microeconomic  and  system-wide  level.  As  a  result,  they  took  more  risk  than  they  realised 
and created vulnerabilities for the entire global financial system.  
Recently,  a  number  of  commentators  have  turned  their  attention  to  how  society  might 
improve the risk-return trade-off from financial innovation, in particular the question of how 
we obtain the benefits that innovation can deliver while reducing the risks. Doing this is not 
easy,  but  a  common  thread  to  a  number  of  the  proposals  is  for  greater  public  sector 
oversight of areas where innovation is occurring.  
There are considerable challenges here, but it is useful to think about how this might be done 
in practice. I suspect that the answer is not more rules, for it is difficult to write rules for new 
products,  especially  if  we  do  not  know  what  those  new  products  will  be,  and  the  rules 
themselves can breed distortions. But to return to my earlier theme, one concrete approach 
is for supervisors and central banks to pay very close attention to areas where innovation is 
occurring:  to  make  sure  that  they  understand  what  is  going  on  and  to  test,  and  to  probe, 
institutions about their management of risks in new areas and new products. And ultimately 
supervisors need to be prepared to take action to limit certain types of activities, or to slow 
their growth, if the risks are not well understood or not well managed.  
The third issue is the interconnections between financial institutions.  
These  institutions,  by  their  very  nature,  are  often  highly  interconnected:  they  hold  one 
another’s liabilities and they trade with one another extensively in financial markets. These 
interconnections are an important part of a well-functioning financial system and they have 
tended to increase over time as finance has become more important to economies and more 
globalised.  However,  these  interconnections  bring  risks,  and  addressing  these  risks  has 
been an important element of the global regulatory reform work over recent times.  
There are a number of dimensions to this work. These include moves requiring foreign banks 
to  set  up  subsidiaries,  rather  than  branches,  and  efforts  to  increase  margining  in  financial 
markets. But the one dimension that I would like to talk a little about is the greater use of 
central counterparties. These counterparties replace bilateral connections  with connections 
to a central entity whose job it is to manage risk. By doing so, they hold out the promise of a 
more stable financial system.  
There are, however, some complications, so in pursuing these benefits we need to proceed 
with care.  
While  a  central  counterparty  reduces  bilateral  exposures,  it  does  create  a  single  point  of 
failure – if the central counterparty fails every participant is affected. This means that the risk-
management  practices  of  the  central  counterparty  are  very  important,  and  designing  and 
implementing  the  appropriate  regulatory  arrangements  is  an  ongoing  task.  So  too  is 
understanding  the  implications  of  any  increase  of  demand  for  collateral  assets  that  might 
arise due to greater use of central counterparties.  
Another complication is that it is typically quite costly for every participant in financial markets 
to become a member of a central counterparty. This means that some participants need to 
use  the  services  of  another  institution  that  is  a  member  of  a  central  counterparty.  If many 
participants  use  the  same  intermediary  institution,  then  an  extensive  set  of  new  bilateral 
interconnections  will  have  been  created  and  this  introduces  new  risks  that  need  to  be 
managed. Indeed, since there are economies of scale in the provision of these intermediary 
services, there is a clear potential for concentration.  
A third complication is that there is not a single central counterparty and not all dealings in 
financial instruments will go through a central counterparty. The issue of how various central 
counterparties relate to one another, and compete with one another, is important. So too is 
understanding how the bilateral exposures between institutions change when some types of 
transactions go through a central counterparty and others do not.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These are difficult issues and it is important to get the details right. I encourage you all to 
think about them and to remain actively involved in the debates.  
Conclusion 
Finally, it is worth repeating that the Australian banks have fared better than many of their 
international  peers  over  recent  years.  This  is  partly  because  of  the  strong  economic 
outcomes in Australia as well as APRA’s approach to regulation and supervision. But it also 
reflects the Australian banks’ higher lending standards than in some other parts of the world 
and  their  relatively  limited  exposure  to  innovative,  and  ultimately  quite  risky,  financial 
products.  
While Australia did not have a financial crisis, the North Atlantic crisis is having a significant 
impact  on  our  financial  system.  This  is  occurring  through  the  tightening  of  regulation  and 
though developments in the marketplace. Many of these changes are positive and, over time, 
they should enhance the safety and resilience of our financial system. But as these changes 
take place, all those interested in finance need to do their best to understand the impact on 
the cost and availability of finance. And we should not lose sight of the importance of system-
wide  supervision,  including  understanding  the  innovations  in  both  the  Australian  and  the 
global financial systems.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
