Loi M Bakani: Effective compliance, risk mitigation and control  
Speech by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the Institute of 
Banking and Business Management (IBBM) seminar on “Risk management”, Port Moresby, 
4 July 2012. 
 Regulation and prudential supervision of banks 
The Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) has regulatory and Supervisory powers and duties 
over  commercial  banks  under  the  Central  Banking  Act  2000  (CBA)  and  the  Banks  and 
Financial  Institutions  Act  2000  (BFIA).  Prudential  supervision  is  conducted  through  on-site 
inspections  and  off-site  monitoring  and  involves  licensing  and  policy  work  as  well  as 
enforcement  and  compliance.  The  BFIA  gives  powers  to  the  BPNG  to  issue  prudential 
standards or directives on matters relating to the supervision of banks. The Central Bank is 
also  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the  Superannuation  and  Life  Insurance  industries, 
savings  and  loan  societies  and  micro-banks.  In  short,  we  supervise  almost  the  whole 
financial  system,  except  for  the  general  insurance  industry.  My  presentation  however  will 
focus only on the deposit taking institutions.  
Risk based supervision  
In  recent  years,  BPNG  has  shifted  away  from  the  traditional  rule  based  approach  to 
regulation  and  supervision,  and  has  adopted  a  risk-based  approach,  which  is  more  risk 
focused. The Bank recognises that supervisory practice is not a one size fits all approach; 
instead institutions should be regulated and supervised based on their systemic importance. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  considers  that  regulation  should  be  proportional  to  the  systemic 
importance  of  the  financial  institution.  For  instance,  savings  and  loans  societies  and 
micro-banks are tier III institutions that play a key role in providing financial services for the 
unbanked  population.  As  the  risks  undertaken  by  these  institutions  are  high,  they  should 
have significant corporate governance, capital adequacy, liquidity, operations and credit risk 
issues.  
The Bank has taken a deliberate approach to providing an advocacy and promotional role in 
working together with these institutions to promote the growth of financial intermediation in 
the monetisation of the economy that in turn ensures financial system stability and promotes 
economic growth.  
Risk and risk management  
Risks  are  inter-dependent  and  events  affecting  one  area  of  risk  can  give  rise  to  other 
categories of risk. From a regulators perspective, the most important thing is to understand 
the risks forced by the banks and to ensure that the risks are properly assessed, effectively 
controlled  and  managed.  The  risk  profile  of  a  bank  changes  every  time  a  new  business 
venture is undertaken.  
Risk Management is a discipline at the core of every bank and encompasses all the activities 
that  affect  its  risk  profile.  Banks  in  PNG  can  introduce  risks  into  their  operations  through 
imprudent management practices. These include credit, operations and market risks.  
It is pleasing to note that banks in PNG are risk aware and have put in place necessary risk 
mitigation  controls  depending  on  their  respective  risk  appetite.  Banks  have  generally 
achieved the various stages of defining, implementing and enforcing some risk framework to 
ensure that it is commensurate with the scope and complexity of its operations.  
I will now briefly touch on key risk areas that BPNG focuses on in its reviews of the banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Capital risk  
BPNG  emphasizes  that  it  is  the  responsibility  of  an  institution’s  Board  and  senior 
management to ensure that the capital resources are appropriate to the size, business mix 
and  complexity  of  the  institution’s  business.  Accordingly,  the  institution must  have  suitable 
systems  in  place  to  identify,  manage  and  monitor  the  risks  associated  with  its  business 
activities, and to hold a level of capital that is commensurate with its overall risk profile.  
In controlling capital risk in the banking system, BPNG has put in place requirements in the 
form of the Capital Adequacy prudential standard. The standard incorporates the minimum 
Capital Requirements as stated under the BASEL 1 Accord.  
BPNG has set the minimum capital ratios of an institution at 6% (leverage ratio), 8% (Tier 1 
Risk Based Capital) and 12% (Total Risk Based Capital). Institutions are expected to have 
adequate  buffers  above  the  BPNG  minimum  capital  ratio.  This  may  range  from  several 
percentage points for the smaller unsophisticated institutions to small margins for the larger 
institutions with sophisticated capital management systems.  
Excessive  leverage  by  banks  is  widely  believed  to  have  contributed  to  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. To address this, the international community has proposed the adoption of a 
non-risk-based  capital  measure,  the  leverage  ratio,  as  an  additional  prudential  tool  to 
complement  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirements.  Its  adoption  can  reduce  the  risk  of 
excessive leverage building up in individual entities and in the financial system as a whole.  
It is pleasing to note that BPNG is one step ahead as the Leverage Ratio forms part of our 
minimum capital requirements.  
Adherence to these minimum standards has been a norm by the banking system and BPNG 
has not experienced any adverse effects regarding capital run by the regulated institutions.  
As  at  end  of  March  2012,  the  banks maintained  adequate  capital  levels  despite  a general 
decrease in their indicator ratios. Total capital to Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) increased to 
30.2 percent as at end of March 2012 from 28.0 percent at the end of December 2011. Total 
Capital as a percent of total assets increased to 12.3 percent from 11.2, while Tier 1 Capital 
to RWA increased to 23.2 percent from 20.2 percent over the same period.  
Board and management risk  
BPNG emphasizes that the Board is ultimately responsible for employing the right persons in 
management positions and ensuring that the business functions and their risks are managed 
in  line  with  Board  expectations  and  in  such  a  way  that  also  serves  the  interest  of 
stakeholders. Much can be gained by understanding the key players in charge of running the 
operations, their roles and responsibilities and who they report to.  
The Senior and Business Line Management structure should be sufficiently resourced. The 
number  of  senior  positions  should  be  commensurate  with  the  responsibility  and  be 
proportionate  to  the  size  and  risk  profile  of  the  institution,  taking  into  account  outsourced 
functions. This is often a problematic area for smaller institutions that may find it difficult to 
attract sufficiently skilled personnel for management role.  
There should be regular review of the overall management structure to ensure the structure 
continues to reflect the dynamic needs of the regulated institution, for example, management 
requirements may shift over time due to changes in risk profile.  
The  general  criterion  for  the  selection  of  management  team  includes  the  following  but  not 
limited to:  
1. 
2. 
The “Fit and Proper” Test;  
Conflict of Interest must be avoided especially when one person is performing two 
roles;  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3. 
4. 
Key Persons Risk must be avoided; and  
Remuneration  must  be  clearly  defined  to  control  the  high  turnover  rate  in 
management.  
Apart from the ongoing minor issues that the BPNG has with the Boards and management of 
the  regulated  institutions  which  can  be  corrected  in  the  normal  course  of  business,  the 
notable issues that require supervisory action have been addressed in the strictest manner, 
consistent with the prudential standards to mitigate any risk on the financial system.  
Governance risk  
The Board and senior management of the supervised banks are expected to promote and 
demonstrate an organisational culture that expects integrity from all employees in conducting 
the  institution’s  business  and  a  sound  and  prudent  approach  to  risk  identification  and 
management.  
The  Board  has  primary  responsibility  for  the  management  of risks faced  by  the  institution. 
This  includes  involvement  of  the  Board  in  the  development  of  the  Risk  Management 
Framework (RMF) and how the Board is provided with the assurance that the RMF is being 
followed.  
The RMF is not one discrete policy, strategy or document. Rather it comprises the totality of 
all  of  the  structures,  policies,  strategies  and  procedures  that  exist  in  relation  to  risk 
management.  
The  RMFs  should  provide  the  Board  and  BPNG  with  reasonable  assurance  that  an 
institution’s  business  is  appropriately  controlled,  and  that  its  risks  are  being  prudently  and 
soundly managed.  
BPNG  emphasis  that  the  responsibility  of  an  institution’s  Board  and  management  is  to 
ensure that the institution meets prudential and statutory requirements and has management 
practices to limit risks to prudent levels. BPNG has noted that the current risk governance 
practice by each regulated institution is satisfactory. For example, it is noted that the role of 
the Board in risk management has now evolved from pure oversight to active participation in 
defining risk appetite, and approving the broad risk parameters for the organization.  
Strategy and planning risk  
BPNG assess the strategy and planning process of the supervised institution’s strategic risks 
and its approach to business planning and strategy implementation.  
• 
The institution’s strategic positioning is generally assessed based on, but not limited 
to:  
the market that the institution operates in;  
its competitors and their competitive advantage;  
the number of competitors in that space;  
cost management (margins);  
maturity of the industry, homogenous nature of the industry; and  
diversification of the business and geographic footprint.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
BPNG assess the bank’s key value proposition - where the bank is adding value and the key 
drivers  of  its  business  -  in  order  to  understand  where  the  bank  is  positioning  itself 
strategically.  This  should  also  give  some  indication  of  the  viability  of  the  bank.  BPNG  can 
consider  whether  the  bank  is  capable  of  achieving  its  objectives  (based  on  market 
conditions, its historical performance, leadership and culture, etc).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
From  BPNG’s  perspective,  it  appears  that  the  banks’  strategies  are  based  on  the  risk 
tolerance of their sizes and product mix as well as their target market.  
Liquidity risk  
One  of  BPNG’s  objectives  is  to  ensure  that  all  banks  have  sufficient  liquidity  to  meet 
obligations as they fall due across a wide range of operating circumstances. Institutions are 
particularly  vulnerable  to  sudden  and  unexpected  demand  for  funds,  which  may  have 
significant implications for other institutions and for the financial system as a whole.  
The onus is on the Board to ensure that they are apprised for key liquidity risk issues arising 
within the bank and that these are well understood and addressed in a timely manner. It is 
their responsibility to understand the nature, complexities and level of liquidity risk assumed 
by the bank, including the tools used to manage liquidity risk through the establishment of a 
prudent  liquidity  management  framework.  The  liquidity  management  framework  involves 
policies (approved by the Board), systems, reporting and other processes which should be 
documented in the liquidity policy.  
Currently the banks are very liquid. The ratio of liquid assets to total deposits increased to 
73.9 percent as at March 2012 compared to 73.2 percent in December 2011. Total loans to 
total deposits decreased to 46.9 percent at end-March 2012 from 48.3 percent in December 
2011.  The  ratios  indicate  that  the  system  is  sound  as  there  are  sufficient  liquid  assets  to 
continue lending activities, pay customer withdrawals and meet short-term obligations in the 
normal  course  of  business.  As  the  system  is  highly  liquid  the  BPNG  cash  reserve 
requirement (CRR) is at 8.0 percent.  
Operational risk  
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  recognizes  that  the  exact  approach  for 
operational risk management chosen by an individual bank will depend on a range of factors, 
including  its  size,  sophistication,  nature  and  complexity  of  its  activities.  Whatever  these 
differences  are,  clear  strategies  and  oversight  by  the  Board  of  Directors  and  senior 
management,  a  strong  internal  control  culture  (including  clear  lines  of  responsibility  and 
segregation  of  duties),  effective  internal  reporting,  and  contingency  planning  are  all  crucial 
elements of an effective operational risk management framework for banks. Operational risk 
is  a  term  that  has  a  variety  of  meanings  within  the  industry,  and  therefore  for  internal 
purposes, banks may choose to adopt their own definitions of operational risk. Whatever the 
exact definition, a clear understanding by banks of what is meant by operational risk is critical 
to  the  effective  management  and  control  of  this  risk  category.  It  is  also  important  that  the 
definition considers the full range of material operational risks facing the bank and captures 
the most significant causes of severe operational losses.  
BPNG  through  its  on-site  supervision  is  satisfied  that  individual  institutions  are  managing 
operational risk at a satisfactory level.  
Credit risk  
The  primary  concern  for  BPNG  under  credit  risk  is  non  performing  loans  (NPLs).  An 
institution will always have some “bad” loans.  
It is the responsibility of the Board to ensure that it puts in place a Credit Risk Management 
Framework (CRMF). The CRMF for an institution is the totality of the policies, procedures, 
systems,  models,  methodologies,  and  delegations  that  govern  the  way  credit  risk  is 
managed. All these processes put together, can be described as the credit risk ‘architecture’ 
of  the  institution.  For  the  PNG  banks,  credit  risk  is  mostly  associated  with  their  lending 
transactions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BPNG has in place a prudential standard on asset quality which is titled Asset Classification, 
Provisioning and Suspension of Interest. This standard is intended to ensure that: (i) loans 
and advances are regularly evaluated using an objective grading system that is consistent 
with regulatory standards; (ii) the accounting treatment for accrued but uncollected interest 
on  non-performing  assets  is  consistent  with  international  accounting  standards  and 
regulatory  reporting requirements;  and  (iii)  timely  and  appropriate  provisions  and  write-offs 
are made to the loan loss provisions account in order to accurately reflect the condition and 
operations of the bank. It is also intended to promote well-reasoned, effective work-out plans 
for problem assets, and effective internal controls to manage the level of such assets.  
As at end June 2011, Asset Quality of the banks was maintained at satisfactory levels. NPLs 
to  total  assets  marginally  decreased  to  1.0  percent  as  at  end-June  2011  compared  to 
1.1 percent  at  end-March  2011.  Provision 
to 
188.8 percent from 121.0 percent over the same period, while NPLs to total loans increased 
to 5.5 percent from 2.4 percent.  
to  NPLs  decreased 
losses 
loan 
for 
Market risk  
Institutions must put in place a market risk management framework that should outline the 
policy  and  process  on  measuring,  monitoring,  managing  liquidity,  interest  rate,  foreign 
exchange and equity as well as commodity risk.  
BPNG has in place a prudential standard for foreign exchange risk called Foreign Currency 
Exposure  Limit.  This  standard  is  intended  to:  1)  assure  that  the  potential  risk  of  loss  to  a 
bank’s  capital  base  is  within  prudential  limits;  2)  promote  maximum  availability  of  foreign 
exchange  at  competitive  rates;  and  3)  allow  banks  to  conduct  business  in  a  profitable  yet 
prudent manner.  
Apart  from  minor  issues  with  the  banks  regarding  adherence  to  the  requirements  of  the 
prudential  standard,  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  the  banks  are  managing  market  risk 
adequately.  
Challenges in risk regulation and compliance in banks  
In summary, and as mentioned in each of the risk areas, the following are the challenges we 
face at BPNG regarding supervision of risks and compliance by banks:  
• 
• 
The financial market is thin and therefore raising capital domestically is not easy;  
Funding  is  based  on  domestic  deposits  and  there  is  limited  wholesale  or  external 
funding. The absence of an effective secondary market for government securities, 
coupled  with  deposit  funding  that  has  some  concentrations  and  a  limited  retail 
component, requires banks to manage their liquidity more stringently;  
Technological  innovations  giving  rise  to  new  products  poses  challenges  in 
understanding how they work and impact on the financial system;  
High security and fraud risk (and cost) exist in this country where violence and crime 
are  a  real  problem  (frequent  challenges  from  armed  robbery,  internal  fraud,  civil 
commotion,  and  other  security  and  corruption  related  risks  are  reported).  Utilities 
services are unreliable and robust contingency planning against business disruption 
is essential; and  
With the private sector credit growth and the development of the LNG project, there 
are  possibilities  that  new  products  will  be  introduced  into  the  foreign  exchange 
market to cater for the needs of customers, 
especially  businesses  involved  directly  or  indirectly  with  the  LNG  project.  BPNG 
would need to step up in regulating this emerging market.  
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
BPNG is prepared to deal with these challenges to ensure that our supervision results in a 
sound and prudently managed financial system in PNG as experienced to date.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
