Charles L Evans: Monetary policy communications and forward 
guidance 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
International Research Forum on Monetary Policy Seventh Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 
16 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you,  Chris,  for  that  generous  introduction.  And  thanks  to  Matt,  Günter,  Chris  and 
Thomas for organizing such a great conference. I always enjoy being able to step back into 
the research world for a while – as things are going these days, it falls in the category of rest 
and  relaxation!  But  another  reason  I  enjoy  doing  so  is  that  I,  like  most  modern  central 
bankers  around  the  world,  feel  strongly  about  guiding  policy  with  good  theoretical  and 
empirical  economics.  As  you  will  see  by  my  comments  tonight,  these  linkages  have  been 
especially helpful in dealing with the difficult circumstances policymakers find themselves in 
today. Of course, these views will be my own, and not necessarily those of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
I left graduate school in the late 1980s. U.S. monetary policy rates were around 9 percent. At 
the  time,  this  restrictive  stance  was  aimed  at  lowering  inflation,  which  was  running  about 
4 percent, though there was active public debate about how hard policy should press to bring 
inflation down. It never crossed my mind back then that one day I would be working on the 
problem  of  how  to  provide  monetary  accommodation  in  an  economy  with  massive 
unemployment, very low inflation (perhaps even too low) and a policy rate stuck at the zero 
lower  bound.  With  the  exception  of  scholars  of  the  Great  Depression,  back  in  the  1980s 
today’s policy challenges were not on anyone’s radar screen. 
Of  course,  that  changed  with  the  developments  in  Japan  during  the  1990s.  More 
macroeconomists began thinking about liquidity traps and the monetary policy tools to help 
escape from them. These analyses gained momentum following Paul Krugman’s Brookings 
paper in 1998.1 They focused both on the use of the central bank’s balance sheet to provide 
accommodation and on communication about policy goals and forward guidance about the 
path  for  policy  instruments.  Much  of  this  latter  work  was  done  within  the  New  Keynesian 
paradigm, since communications are central to the policy transmission mechanism in those 
models.2 For obvious reasons, such research has come back into vogue today. 
The  nonstandard  policies  emphasized  by  these  lines  of  research  have  been  important 
elements  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  toolkit  over  the  past  four  years.  The  Federal  Reserve 
engaged  in  two  waves  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  (March  2009  and  November  2010), 
and, more recently, extended the maturity of the assets on our books (September 2011). In 
August 2011, we added a particular type of forward guidance to our policy, first saying we 
would  likely  keep  rates  low  until  mid-2013  and  then,  in  January,  indicating  that  sub-par 
economic performance would likely warrant exceptionally low rates until at least late 2014. 
Working to complement these efforts and to improve FOMC communications more generally, 
we also added two major communications initiatives: A statement of our monetary goals and 
long-run strategies, and publication of FOMC participants’ projections for the federal funds 
rate. 
                                                 
1  Krugman (1998). 
2  See, for example, Bernanke, Reinhart and Sack (2004) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
further  monetary  accommodation 
I  have  strongly  supported  each  of  these  developments,  believing  that  they  improved 
transparency  and  also  provided  welcome 
the 
U.S. economy. However, as I have been talking about in public for some time, I think there 
are  additional  tools  we  could  use  to  deliver  more  effective  policy  accommodation.  In 
particular, I would like to see our forward guidance take a different form – one that explicitly 
ties  liftoff  in  the  funds  rate  to  observable  economic  outcomes  (You  can  think  of  this  as  a 
Ulysses-type  forward  guidance:  We  tie  ourselves  to  the  mast  to  avoid  the  siren  calls  of 
premature tightening.) As I will talk about shortly, I believe such policy could provide more 
clarity about our attitudes toward providing monetary accommodation – and would be more 
in line with a structure I would have preferred to have seen in our August 2011 and January 
2012 actions. This policy also can be structured in a way that would represent a balanced 
risk-management approach to achieving the dual goals of maximum employment and stable 
prices that the United States Congress has mandated to the Federal Reserve. 
for 
Communications enhancements 
First, though, I’d like to discuss the Fed’s latest initiatives to enhance communications. As an 
accountable central bank in a democratic society, the Federal Reserve has an obligation to 
clearly  articulate  what  it  is  trying  to  achieve  with  monetary  policy.  I  believe  that  our  latest 
communications efforts are an important step in further increasing such accountability to the 
public, as they reaffirm our commitment to both legs of the dual mandate and describe the 
ways in which we will seek to achieve those objectives.  
The framework statement 
Let’s  start  with  the  framework  statement  of  our  policy  goals  and  long-run  strategy.  The 
framework  clarifies  how  the  FOMC  interprets  our  statutory  responsibilities  for  facilitating 
maximum employment and price stability in terms of measurable and achievable economic 
goals that we aim for over the longer run. We say that the Committee sees a rate of inflation 
of 2 percent over the long run as being consistent with the price stability leg. There are two 
important ingredients: Our explicit inflation objective is 2 percent, and this is to be achieved 
over  the  long  run.  As  recently  as  2005,  many  FOMC  participants  preferred  to  describe  a 
range of inflation outcomes as being consistent with our inflation mandate instead of stating it 
as a single number.3 Our current statement narrows our objective to 2 percent. It also sees 
this as an average that we aim to achieve over the long run, in recognition of the obvious 
realism  that  inflation  may  deviate  from  this  goal  from  time  to  time  owing  to  economic 
challenges,  conflicts  in  achieving  the  dual  mandate  objectives  and  difficulties  in  the  policy 
transmission channels. 
The statement also notes that maximum employment is largely determined by nonmonetary 
factors, which are difficult to measure and may change over time. Hence, we cannot and do 
not specify a fixed, time-invariant goal for it. But FOMC participants can provide their current 
assessments of goal variables related to the achievement of maximum employment. We do 
so  using  the  central  tendency  of  FOMC  participants’  projections  for  the  rate  that 
unemployment  would  converge  to  in  the  absence  of  further  shocks  to the  economy.  As  of 
January 2012, this rate is 5-1/4 to 6 percent. 
The  statement  also  indicates  that  policy  will  seek  to  mitigate  deviations  in  inflation  and 
unemployment from these longer-run goals, and addresses the weighting of relevant costs 
and benefits when trying to close these gaps. Namely, if the policy prescriptions for achieving 
the  inflation  and  unemployment  goals  are  in  conflict,  we  will  take  a  balanced  approach 
promoting the return to each, taking into account the size of the deviations and the relative 
                                                 
3  See FOMC (2005). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
speeds at which convergence can be expected. As we all know in this audience, there is an 
enormous literature related to characterizing the monetary policy loss function for a central 
bank  with  a  dual  mandate  –  such  as  work  by  John  Taylor,  Lars  Svensson  and  Michael 
Woodford.4 For me, our Federal Reserve dual mandate responsibilities are well captured by 
a  quadratic  loss  function  that  equally  weights  squared  deviations  of  inflation  and 
unemployment from their period goal values. In the U.S. today, that would be 2 percent for 
inflation and 5-1/4 to 6 percent for unemployment given today’s structural challenges in the 
labor market.5  
Just about every  major central bank around the world publishes something akin to such a 
framework  statement.  In  one  way,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  different  because,  unlike  other 
countries, we have a dual mandate, and so our framework explicitly addresses goals for both 
inflation  and  the  real  side  of  the  economy.  But  just  about  every  bank  with  a  single  price 
stability mandate also says that it will avoid undue disruptions to the real side of the economy 
when  pursing  its  inflation  goal.  Indeed,  some  are  quite  clear  about  following  a  flexible 
inflation targeting strategy. 
Policy projections 
What  about  the  policy  projections?  The  forecasts  for  growth,  the  unemployment  rate,  and 
inflation  that  FOMC  participants  have  been  submitting  since  1979  have  always  been 
conditioned  on  each  participant’s  views  of  the  future  path  of  policy  most  likely  to  foster 
outcomes  consistent  with  our  dual  mandate  responsibilities  –  what  we  refer  to  as  the 
appropriate  path  for  policy.  As  of  last  January,  our  quarterly  Summary  of  Economic 
Projections (SEP) now include the projected paths for the federal funds rate and qualitative 
information about the balance sheet that make up these views. 
I  believe  this  move  significantly  enhances  policy  accountability.  For  example,  suppose 
inflation were running higher than we would like, and the economic projections in the SEP 
showed it coming down over the next couple of years. In the absence of policy projections, 
the public would not know whether the FOMC thought inflation would simply come down on 
its  own  or  whether  it  thought  that  a  monetary  tightening  would  be  required  to  reduce 
inflationary pressures. The inclusion of participants’ policy projections will help communicate 
such judgments. 
Furthermore, households and businesses will be able to make better informed decisions if 
they have a clearer notion of future policy rates; the potential for reduced uncertainty could 
also  lower  the  risk  premium  embedded  in  longer-term  interest  rates.  Now,  clearly,  our 
forecasts  of  what  rates  are  going  to  be  three  years  from  now  will  often  be  wrong  –  and 
sometimes  by  a  good  deal.  Some  say  this  means  our  projections  are  worthless,  or,  even 
worse,  will cause  people  to  underweight  interest  rate  risk  in  making  economic  decisions.  I 
disagree. The accuracy of the early forecasts we write down is not so important as how the 
public can observe the forecasts change over time. As the economy is hit by shocks or the 
data come in contrary to expectations, we will change our forecasts for both the economic 
variables  and  the  policy  rate.  As  we  do,  households  and  businesses  will  be  able  to  learn 
more about the monetary policy reaction function. And it is this knowledge that will help them 
make better informed decisions. 
Another criticism we heard on the day the projections were published was that they seemed 
to be inconsistent with the FOMC policy statement released a couple of hours earlier. The 
                                                 
4  Taylor (1979), Svensson (1997) and Woodford (2003). 
5  Note  a  weight  of  1  on  the  unemployment  rate  is  equivalent  to  a  weight  of  about  ¼  on  the  output  gap.  Of 
course, policymakers could debate the relative  weights to put on inflation and the real-side goal variable in 
their loss function. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
statement  indicated  that  the  Committee  thought  economic  conditions  are  likely  to  warrant 
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014, but six of the 
17 policy projections showed that the funds rate would be 1-1/2 percent or higher at the end 
of that year. Well, by the next day, the markets had figured it out; the projections are made 
by all FOMC participants, while the statement reflects the policy views agreed upon at the 
meeting  by  the  voting  members  of  the  Committee.  We  all  come  into  the  meeting  with  our 
projections, but we then do have a real meeting: All of the participants exchange ideas and 
argue points of views, and then the voters on the Committee come to a consensus and make 
a collective policy decision. The information regarding the federal funds rate in the SEP does 
not substitute for this formal decision of the voting members of the FOMC. 
That  said,  the  diversity  of  views  is  a  fact  of  life.  Policymakers  may  well  have  differing 
judgments  on  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  the  particular  economic 
circumstances  of  the  moment.  These  communications  initiatives  cannot  eliminate  these 
differences of opinion. But they further discipline the parameters of our discussions, clarify 
the judgments that underlie our policy decisions and enhance transparency and the public’s 
ability to evaluate current monetary policy with alternative approaches. 
Forward guidance and policy commitment in an explicit state-contingent policy 
The macroeconomic environment 
The new policy tools can also complement the kinds of accommodative policies I have been 
advocating for some time. The U.S. is now more than two and a half years into its modest 
and  uneven  recovery  from  the  Great  Recession.  Real  gross  domestic  product  growth  has 
averaged just 2-1/2 percent. The unemployment rate is 8-1/4 percent – well above the rate 
anyone on the FOMC sees as being consistent with our longer-run goal; in my view, this is a 
substantially  higher  rate  than  one  might  attribute  to  supply-side  factors,  such  as  extended 
unemployment  insurance  and  a  heightened  degree  of  mismatch  in  labor  markets. 
Realistically,  this  is  a  2-1/4  to  3  percentage  point  deviation  from  our  current  maximum 
employment objective. Because this occurred with nominal interest rates stuck at the zero 
lower bound since December 2008, I believe it’s hard to say that we are not in a liquidity trap. 
Recently, the U.S. data have been more encouraging, with the labor market improving and 
private  demand  showing  a  little  more  traction.  Without  a  doubt,  these  are  welcome 
developments. But even the more optimistic forecasts see output increasing only moderately 
above its potential growth rates; no one has an expectation for a surge in activity that would 
quickly close resource gaps. 
At the same time, the outlook for inflation is subdued, with most FOMC participants’ forecasts 
for increases in total personal consumption expenditures prices averaging roughly between 
1-1/2 and 2 percent over the next three years. Furthermore, private sector long-run inflation 
expectations are quite well anchored. 
As  we  know  from  the  work  of  Michael  Woodford  and  Gauti  Eggertsson,  Ivan  Werning, 
Paul Krugman6 and  others,  the  optimal  policy  response  to  a  liquidity  trap  may  involve  a 
commitment to keep policy rates quite low for a period of time after the real equilibrium rate 
has risen enough so that the zero lower bound is no longer binding. This is a strong form of 
forward guidance akin to Ulysses tying himself to the mast to avoid changing his mind upon 
hearing  the  siren’s  seductive  music.  Of  course,  in  the  real  world,  we  cannot  observe  the 
equilibrium real rate, and so we cannot directly implement such a policy. We can capture the 
spirit of these recommendations, however, by committing to keep policy rates exceptionally 
                                                 
6  Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Werning (2011) and Krugman (1998). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
low  until  certain  observable  economic  triggers  are  met  that  would  be  consistent  with  the 
economy being well past the liquidity trap. 
At the same time, some worry that the output gap and overall resource slack is small. I don’t 
subscribe to this view. But what if it were true? What kind of new information might we learn 
that would change our views about the magnitude of resource slack? Well, in the 1970s, we 
learned 
full  out 
accommodative monetary policies will lead to unacceptably high inflation. So, in designing a 
policy to close resource gaps, I am going to take a careful look at the evolution of inflation 
and inflationary expectations to tell me if I am wrong about my assessment of the real-side 
shortfalls we need to fill. 
that  underestimating  resource  slack  and  running 
the  hard  way 
An explicit state-contingent policy 
Let me outline how this approach might work in practice. The Fed could sharpen its forward 
guidance by pledging to keep policy rates near zero until one of two events occurs. The first 
event would be if the unemployment rate moved below a 7 percent threshold. Reductions in 
the unemployment rate below this  level would  represent good progress toward the natural 
rate of unemployment; depending upon the state of inflation expectations, it might be time to 
lessen policy accommodation.7  
The  second  event  that  would  commit  us  to  raise  rates  would  be  if  inflation  rises  above  a 
particular threshold that is clearly unacceptable. This trigger would be a safeguard against 
the possibility that our  assessments of economic conditions and resource slack are wrong 
and  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  is  higher  than  7  percent.  If  this  were  so,  our 
experience from the 1970s suggests that a continuation of the low-rate policy would generate 
a  further  unexpected  increase  in  inflation;  by  adjusting  policy  according  to  this  trigger,  the 
Fed would begin exiting from what would now evidently be excessive policy accommodation. 
We would not have the desired reductions in unemployment, but then again, there wouldn’t 
be anything that monetary policy could do about it. 
I  would  argue  that  this  inflation-safeguard  threshold  needs  to  be  well  above  our  current 
2 percent  inflation  objective.  This  is  consistent  with  the  theoretical  work  showing  that 
extraction from a liquidity trap requires the central bank, if necessary, to allow inflation to run 
higher than its target over the medium term. My preferred inflation threshold is a forecast of 
3 percent  over  the  medium  term.  For  a  central  bank  like  the  Federal  Reserve  that  has  a 
statutory dual mandate, this seems like a risk that we should be willing to accept. We would 
suffer some net policy loss if the gains in employment did not occur. But we certainly have 
experienced inflation rates near 3 percent in the recent past and have weathered them well. 
Such an experience would not be anything close to the debilitating higher inflation rates we 
saw  in  the  1970s  or  1980s.  And  3  percent  isn’t  high  enough  to  unhinge  long-run  inflation 
expectations. Indeed, I think our new framework commitment to a 2 percent long-run inflation 
goal would help anchor inflation expectations if we undertook this policy strategy. 
Let me also emphasize that under this policy proposal, inflation reaching 3 percent is only a 
risk  –  and  not  a  certainty.  Indeed,  simulations  of  standard  models  suggest  that  inflation  is 
likely to remain below 3 percent even under a policy of extended monetary accommodation. 
Why I prefer the state-contingent policy to calendar-date guidance 
I voted for the mid-2013 guidance we put forward last August and supported the extension to 
late 2014 made in January because I felt these actions would provide a greater degree of 
accommodation than markets were pricing in at the time. But I think a 7/3 threshold policy 
                                                 
7  Note that if inflation had fallen to 1 percent (below our 2 percent objective) while unemployment improved to 
7 percent, it would be against both our employment and price stability objectives to tighten at that point. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
would more clearly convey a commitment to the degree of accommodation I think we need. 
There  has  been  much  talk  about  the  economic  conditionality  underlying  our  calendar-year 
guidance  –  the  phrase  in  our  FOMC  statement  that  says  the  Committee  “anticipates  that 
economic conditions … are likely to warrant” that precedes the late 2014 forward-guidance 
date.  But  those  conditions  have  not  been  spelled  out.  Suppose  as  we  move  through  next 
year that our projections for 2014 have an unemployment rate above 7 percent and inflation 
close to 2 percent. Some might argue then that the economic conditionality in the statement 
has  been  met  and  we  should  begin  to  remove  accommodation.  To  me,  in  the  absence  of 
some new compelling evidence about the natural rate of unemployment or an unhinging of 
inflation expectations, this would represent an unwarranted tightening of policy. (Indeed, the 
mere chance that this may occur may be diminishing the degree of accommodation in place 
today.) The economic thresholds I am proposing put a higher and more predictable standard 
on the removal of accommodation.  
Conclusion 
I would like to conclude by noting that I have undoubtedly generated some discomfort in the 
room tonight by saying that even with the large degree of accommodation already in place, 
monetary policy can and should take additional steps to facilitate a more robust economic 
expansion. 
Central bankers naturally worry about such statements. We think back to the 1970s, when 
our failure to appreciate the changing structure of the economy led to over-stimulative policy 
and eventually to stagflation. It’s in our DNA to have these concerns; and they remind us of 
the need to continually do our best to calibrate important markers such as the natural rate of 
unemployment, keep close tabs on inflation expectations and have our eyes open for early 
warning signs of financial instability. 
But I believe a greater risk today is that we buy too quickly into thinking that the equilibrium 
rate  of  unemployment  has  jumped  2  or  3  percentage  points  or  that  long-run  inflation 
expectations  have  become  so  fragile  that  they  are  on  the  verge  of  spiking  well  above 
2 percent. I just don’t see the evidence out there supporting this view. But if we do buy into it, 
then  we’ll  end  up  following  overly  restrictive  policies  that  could  unnecessarily  risk 
condemning the U.S. economy to a lost decade – or even more. And the costs of taking this 
route would be unacceptable. 
References 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  Vincent  R.  Reinhart  and  Brian  P.  Sack,  2004,  “Monetary  policy 
alternatives  at  the  zero  bound:  An  empirical  assessment(external),”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 1–78, available by subscription. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, 2003, “The zero bound on interest rates and 
optimal  monetary  policy(external-pdf),”  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Vol.  34, 
No. s1, pp. 139–211. 
Federal Open Market Committee, 2005, Meeting transcript(external-pdf), February 1–2. 
Krugman,  Paul  R.,  1998,  “It’s  baaack:  Japan’s  slump  and  the  return  of  the  liquidity  trap,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 137–206. 
Svensson, Lars E. O., 1997, “Optimal inflation targets, ‘conservative’ central banks and linear 
inflation targets,” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 1, March, pp. 98–114. 
Taylor,  John  B.,  1979,  “Estimation  and  control  of  a  macroeconomic  model  with  rational 
expectations,” Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 5, September, pp. 1267–1286. 
Woodford,  Michael,  2003,  Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  Monetary  Policy,  Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Werning,  Ivan,  2011,  “Managing  a  liquidity  trap:  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  (external),” 
National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper, No. 17344, August. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
