Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Ensuring strong anchors in our banking 
system 
Speech  by  DPM  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the 39th Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) Annual Dinner, Singapore, 
28 June 2012. 
 Mr. Piyush Gupta, Chairman of the ABS, 
Council Members,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am happy to be here this evening to join you at the 39th ABS Annual Dinner.  
The continuing lessons from the crisis  
Four years after Lehman Brothers collapsed, the global financial crisis is still with us. Its new 
epicenter,  as  we  all  know,  is  in  Europe.  The  combination  of  weak  banking  systems  and 
overstretched government balance sheets in several European economies has proved toxic. 
It has led to a loss of confidence and unsustainably high borrowing costs, not just for Greece 
but  for  a  few  other  larger  Eurozone  economies.  It  has  also  resulted  in  the  virtual 
disappearance  of  the  unsecured  interbank  market,  which  is  the  lifeblood  of  any  financial 
system.  
Each major crisis yields lessons for all countries, and there will be many lessons arising from 
the crisis in Europe. In several European economies, as in the US, entitlement spending by 
government  has  outrun  future  revenues,  and  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  borrow  away  the 
problem.  
But there are major lessons too in banking, and the main ones are in fact the old lessons. 
Spain,  the  current  focus  of  attention  in  the  markets,  is  a  case  in  point.  Its  government 
finances were in fact in better shape than in many other advanced countries. But troubles 
had been accumulating in its banking system, caused especially by small and medium sized 
banks having made excessive loans to a property sector that has now crashed – a familiar 
problem repeated almost in cycles, across a range of countries. The result is a cutback in 
credit, a deeper recession, greater strain on government finances both as revenues decline 
and  the  government  is  forced  to  bail  out  banks,  and  worsening  bank  balance  sheets  as 
banking assets lose further value and borrowing costs increase. We are therefore seeing a 
vicious cycle of economic decline and a loss of confidence.  
The situation is not unique to Spain. The specifics of the balance sheet problems vary from 
country to country, but a self-reinforcing cycle of feedbacks between falling economic activity 
and  weak  bank  and  sovereign  balance  sheets  is  now  taking  place  in  several  countries  in 
Europe. It is complicated by an increasing fragmentation in politics, which makes the journey 
to a credible and lasting solution in the Eurozone all the more complex and challenging in the 
years to come.  
The problems in the Eurozone and the US underline the absolute necessity for consistently 
sound  banking  practices  and  governance  by  banks.  The  crisis  also  provides  lessons  for 
regulators and the supervision of banks. The IMF has found that regulatory intervention in 
Spain lacked timeliness and effectiveness, even though the problems in banking had been 
identified early on. Regulators must be prepared to take early and decisive corrective actions 
to forestall a build-up of risks in individual banks and the banking system as a whole.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Further,  contagion  amongst  banks  is  a  fact  of  life.  Financial  systems  can  be  severely 
stressed by their weakest points, even if it involves a single bank or a group of small banks. 
The Northern Rock episode in the UK was an example in the earlier phase of this crisis. The 
Spanish  cajas  or regional  savings  banks  are  now  another. The  largest Spanish  banks  are 
widely acknowledged to be  well capitalised, to have lower exposure to the property sector 
and  to  have  well  diversified  earnings  internationally.  But  until  the  troubles  in  the  cajas  are 
resolved,  even  sound  Spanish  banks  are  being  penalised  by  higher  funding  costs,  and 
citizens and tax payers too are exposed. Confidence is therefore about banking systems, not 
just about individual banks. This is all the more why regulators have to be vigilant in spotting 
weaknesses and requiring corrective actions, both across a system and in individual banks. 
The weakest point matters.  
International regulatory reforms 
The global financial crisis has prompted a major review of international regulatory standards. 
We  have  achieved  much,  with  the  new  rules  developed  through  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board – new rules on the quantity and quality 
of  capital  and  liquidity  and  the  ongoing  work  to  strengthen  cross-border  supervision  and 
resolution frameworks for global banks.  
The Basel Committee has proposed several reforms to minimise the risk of failure of global 
systemically  important banks (“G-SIBs”), and to minimise the impact if any of them should 
fail.  It  is  also  recognised  that  some  banks  are  systemically  important  within  their  own 
domestic  markets  even  if  they  are  not  internationally  active  to  the  same  extent  as  the 
G-SIBs. The failure  of  these  domestic  systemically important  banks (“D-SIBs”)  can  have a 
major impact on an economy, and indeed unpredictable consequences for a broader region. 
Bankia  for  example,  is  not  a  G-SIB.  The  Basel  Committee  has  recommended  higher  loss 
absorbency  requirements for G-SIBs,  and  is  studying  an  appropriate  regulatory  framework 
for D-SIBs. MAS is very much part of that discussion.  
However, in order to keep to the spirit and intent of the new measures, sensible judgement 
will  be  the  key  to  implementing  the  new  rules.  Sensible  implementation  requires  national 
regulators  to  take  into  account  the  impact  of  their  actions  on  economic  growth  and 
international finance even as they exercise national discretion to address prudential issues in 
their banking system. There are two risks of a broader nature that we have to keep clearly in 
focus  in  international  discussions,  so  that  what  we  do  now  to  strengthen  our  respective 
national  systems  does  not  lead  to  new  problems  and  vulnerabilities  internationally,  further 
down the road.  
First, we have to ensure that the cumulation of enhanced capital and other requirements on 
global banks do not impede them from playing their critical roles in global finance. The global 
banks  play  a  major  role  as  providers  of  liquidity  in  home,  host  and  international  markets. 
Even in emerging markets, debt and equity market liquidity often relies on active participation 
by  global  banks.  Enhanced  regulatory  requirements  should  therefore  be  targeted,  risk 
appropriate, and applied in a non-discriminatory way on banks posing the same level of risk, 
be they domestic or global banks.  
The safety buffers for global banks, which clearly needs to be enhanced, cannot therefore 
rest too heavily on premiums in up-front capital, liquidity and other regulatory requirements. 
We should strengthen supervision and crisis resolution capabilities to complement and avoid 
an  over-reliance  on  regulation.  Strengthen  continuous  supervision  rather 
than  rely 
excessively  on  upfront  regulatory  requirements.  Effective  international  coordination  among 
supervisors requires more open and transparent sharing of information between home and 
host supervisors – home supervisors will  want to be  well  informed about the requirements 
imposed on significant overseas subsidiaries, and host supervisors need to be kept apprised 
of  developments  at  the  parent  bank.  Cross-border  supervisory  colleges  and  crisis 
management groups are therefore critical, and they have to be strengthened to ensure that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
national policy measures are globally consistent and mutually supportive. So that is the first 
risk,  of  going  too  far  with  respect  to  global  banks  such  that  the  global  financial  system  is 
impaired.  
The  second  risk  is  that  of  the  fragmenting  or  balkanising  finance.  We  are  already  seeing 
signs of this, and most especially in the wake of the European crisis. Deleveraging by some 
international  banks  is  leading  to  a  pull-back  into  home  markets.  But  some  regulatory 
responses, not just market responses, may reinforce this pull-back, by restricting the flow of 
capital and liquidity outside home markets. Not only will this ring-fencing of national systems 
weaken international banking and trade, it may introduce new risks to financial stability when 
global banks are not able to deploy liquidity from one part of the banking group to other parts 
in need. Better international co-ordination in the implementation of rules is therefore needed 
to  ensure  that  they  serve  their  intended  national  objectives  without  weakening  the  global 
system as a whole and introducing new vulnerabilities.  
A sound financial system anchored by a core of strong local banks 
Just as we derive lessons from troubled banking systems, it is worth looking too at those that 
have  not  run  into  problems.  It  is  notable  that  among  the  jurisdictions  with  systemically 
important financial centres, Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, and Singapore have held up well 
during the global financial crisis. A little remarkably, the top ten banks in Bloomberg’s latest 
annual  ranking  of  the  world’s  strongest  banks  included  four  Canadian  banks,  the  three 
Singapore local banks and two Hong Kong banks. There is no room for complacency – the 
financial  crisis  has  shown  how  volatile  financial  markets  can  be  and the  speed  with  which 
contagion can spread. Banks have to be constantly vigilant against the build up of risks and 
maintain strong buffers against contingencies.  
But let’s look at these four banking systems for a moment, – Canada, Australia, Hong Kong 
and Singapore. They share two characteristics in common.  
(i) They are anchored by a handful of banks with a significant share of the domestic market.  
(ii) These “anchor” banks are closely supervised and regulated.  
Several economies, including some in emerging countries, which had completely opened up 
their banking systems and left themselves without local anchors, have now found themselves 
to be vulnerable. Banking systems need strong anchor players, who are well regulated and 
diligently supervised, and are able to take the long-view, enabling their interests to be closely 
aligned  with  that  of  the  economy.  In  a  crisis  too,  strong  anchor  banks  may  be  needed  to 
acquire  distressed  financial  institutions  whose  failure  could  otherwise  have  a  systemic 
impact.  
But having anchors with a substantial share of the domestic market is not sufficient to ensure 
resilience. Without adequate competition, they will earn what the economists call oligopolistic 
rent,  rather  than  serve  the  needs  of  an  economy  by  innovating  and  introducing  efficient 
services. Anchor banks have to be competitive.  
This  is  why  we  have  progressively  opened  up  Singapore’s  domestic  banking  sector  since 
1999.  We  have  allowed  greater  competition,  particularly  in  wholesale  banking  where  local 
players are not protected, and increasingly in retail banking too. It has involved some risks. 
We took a risk. But the result is now widely acknowledged to be stronger and more dynamic 
local  banks,  with  much  improved  systems  of  management,  risk  controls,  technology  and 
expertise. Banking liberalisation provided the spur for our local banks to raise their game and 
compete with some of the world’s largest banks while maintaining high prudential standards 
and they have done well.  
We  had  previously  announced  the  Government’s  policy  of  maintaining  the  local  banks’ 
market share at no less than 50% of total resident deposits. This remains our position. We 
are committed to having strong local banks at the core of the banking system. In a very real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
way, our three strong local banks also give Singapore the confidence to continue opening up 
the banking sector to foreign competition.  
Encouraging foreign banks to deepen their Singapore roots  
A  diverse  international  presence  and  global  connectivity  must  remain  key  strengths  of 
Singapore’s financial centre. We host many international banks, who conduct an increasing 
share of their activities out of their Singapore offices. Some banks have moved their global 
heads  of  business  to  Singapore,  or  hubbed  specific  business  lines  or  IT  operations  in 
Singapore.  Consumers  and  corporate  customers  have  benefited  from  the  wider  range  of 
products and services, offered at competitive rates.  
The  majority  of  foreign  banks  in  Singapore  operate  as  branches,  taking  advantage  of  the 
cost efficiencies arising from branching within an international bank. We continue to support 
the use of branches for the vast majority of banks in Singapore, which are in the wholesale 
and investment banking businesses.  
Additional measures may be appropriate for retail banks that are important to the domestic 
market. At the individual depositor level, additional safeguards such as a deposit insurance 
scheme (which we already have in place in Singapore) and local incorporation will provide 
better  protection  for  depositors  from  problems  emanating  from  other  parts  of  the  banking 
group.  
Local  incorporation  can also  bring  benefits  to  a bank,  especially  where  it  has  a  significant 
retail presence. Liquidity rules under Basel III will require long-term stable sources of funding 
to comprise a larger share of a bank’s total funding. Competition for deposits is expected to 
intensify,  and  banks  that  can  attract  stable  funding  will  gain  an  advantage.  Local 
incorporation can therefore demonstrate a bank’s long-term commitment to depositors and 
other  stakeholders  in  a  world  of  possibly  permanent  heightened  volatility  and  uncertainty. 
Beyond local incorporation, encouraging strong international banks to sink deeper roots in a 
domestic economy will allow them to play a greater role in contributing to financial resilience. 
Let me elaborate on this important objective of encouraging strong international banks to sink 
deeper roots in a national economy.  
One  of  the  key  features  of  our  banking  liberalisation  has  been  the  Qualifying  Full  Bank 
(“QFB”)  privileges  that  have  been  granted  to  foreign  banks.  The  number  of  QFBs  has 
increased from the initial four in 1999 to six in 2001 and eight today. QFBs have also been 
allowed more places of business from 10 in 1999 to 25 today.  
MAS will continue to liberalise the domestic banking sector in a progressive and calibrated 
manner.  We  will  allow  greater  foreign  bank  participation  in  Singapore’s  domestic  financial 
system  in  a  way  that  strengthens  financial  stability  and  that  encourages  foreign  banks  to 
deepen their roots in Singapore. MAS will make several refinements to the QFB programme:  
(i)  We  will  require  existing  QFBs  that  are  important  to  the  domestic  market  to  locally 
incorporate  their  retail  operations.  The  key  objective  for  requiring  local  incorporation  is  to 
strengthen depositor protection. One indicator of importance to the domestic market will be 
the share of domestic deposits. MAS is also evaluating other factors that may be relevant to 
individual  QFBs  and  will  consult  them  on  the  criteria  for  requiring  local  incorporation.  Not 
every QFB needs to be locally incorporated.  
(ii) A very small number of QFBs may become significantly rooted in Singapore over time. 
For these significantly rooted QFBs, MAS  will consider granting an additional 25 places of 
business, of which up to 10 may be branches, as part of an overall package negotiated with 
the  home  countries  of  these  QFBs  which  are  free  trade  agreement  (“FTA”)  partners  with 
Singapore.  This  will  bring  the  total  to  50  places  of  business  for  such  QFBs.  Being 
significantly rooted entails both additional privileges as well as responsibilities to contribute to 
the stability of the Singapore financial system.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A significantly rooted bank will be determined by both qualitative and quantitative attributes. 
For example, whether –  
(a) the bank is locally incorporated with majority Singaporean/PR Board representation, and 
what types of businesses are conducted by the locally incorporated entity;  
(b) Singapore is one of the major markets for the bank group, constituting a substantial part 
of group profits and assets;  
(c) major business lines and key decision makers are headquartered in Singapore; and  
(d) the bank serves a comprehensive spectrum of the local community in Singapore.  
A  bank  that  demonstrates  these  and  other  characteristics  can  be  considered  significantly 
rooted.  
(iii)  MAS  will  consider  awarding  new  QFBs  only  under  FTAs  where  there  are  substantial 
benefits to Singapore. New QFBs that are granted under future FTA offers will have to first 
locally incorporate before they may establish up to 25 places of business.  
This evolution of our QFB scheme, and it is an evolution, should ensure that our local banks 
continue to have majority share of domestic deposits, while banks awarded QFB privileges 
can  build  a  deeper  presence.  Given  the  size  and  maturity  of  Singapore’s  domestic  retail 
banking  market,  we  have  to  calibrate  our  moves  to  ensure  that  greater  foreign  bank 
participation  does  not result  in  a  fragmented  and  inefficient  market,  but  instead  leads  to  a 
more  robust  and  competitive  system.  Banks  with  a  meaningful  market  share  will  be  in  a 
better  position  to reap  the  benefits  of  scale from  a  more  extensive  network, to  respond to 
customers’ changing needs and at reasonable cost, and to be better rooted in Singapore to 
contribute to our financial stability and growth.  
Taken  together,  this  latest  phase  in  our  banking  liberalisation  and  the  refinements  we  are 
making in regulation and supervision together with our international counterparts, will ensure 
that Singapore remains both a vibrant global financial centre and one of the rocks of stability 
in global finance.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
