G Padmanabhan: Evolving customer friendly payment systems in India – 
a continuing agenda 
Inaugural address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  launch  of  Mobile  Banking  services  by  Tamilnad  Mercantile  Bank  Ltd,  Chennai, 
9 January 2012. 
 Assistance  rendered  by  S/Shri  G.Srinivas,  K.Sivaraman,  Saswat  Mahapatra  and  Smt.  Radha  Somakumar  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr Jaganathan, distinguished guests, officers and staff of TMB and ladies and gentlemen. It 
is my pleasure to be amongst you on this occasion of the launch of mobile banking service 
by  TMB.  TMB  which  has  a  history  of  90  years  of  banking  has  come  a  long  way  from 
4 branches in 1947 to 258 branches as on date. 
I am pleased to note that TMB has been in the forefront in embracing modern technology 
providing  value  added  services  to  its  three  million  customers.  The  Bank  has  launched 
various  technology  driven  products  such  as  Internet  Banking,  SMS  Banking  and  other 
electronic payments like RTGS / NEFT etc. Launching of mobile banking service would be 
another feather to the bouquet of products being offered by TMB to its customers. 
Given  that  payment  systems  are  continuously  evolving,  it  is  necessary  that  all  the 
stakeholders including the regulators are continuously engaged in gearing up to provide safe, 
efficient, robust, accessible and affordable payment services to our citizens. The challenge 
therefore, is to understand the various issues and the subtle nuances of this ever evolving 
payments landscape and devise appropriate strategies – in short we should continue to stay 
ahead of the curve. Have we as an industry been able to achieve this? I have accordingly 
focused my thoughts on some issues in payment systems which I think need our collective 
attention. 
Innovations in payment systems – create a need or deliver a need? 
Innovations in payment systems especially electronic payment methods have and are being 
attempted  keeping  in  mind  the  potential  benefits  in  terms  of  more  choices,  reduced 
processing costs, increased revenue and overall social benefits. However, not all innovations 
in  electronic  payments  have  been  successful.  The  success  or  failure  of  an  innovation  in 
payment  system  would  depend  on  the  critical  mass  or  what  is  generally  known  as  the 
network effect achieved which should be large enough to support its cost in the long run and 
generate adequate returns. 
Introduction  of  innovations  in  payment  system  often  poses  the  classical  “chicken  or  egg 
dilemma”.  Unless  there  is  product  innovation,  the  customers  would  not  have  a  choice  of 
products. And unless the customers express a need there is no incentive to introduce new 
innovative  payment  products.  However,  it  does  not  mean  that  every  innovation  would  be 
embraced by the public, providing the innovation with a critical mass and sustainability that 
would make it a standard practice. 
It is often the case that the success of innovation depends on factors such as: (i) how eager 
are  the  consumers  to  use  the  new  technology  –  this  has  definite  relation  to  the  feeling  of 
“safety” (ii) the “ease” factor – the perception in the mind of the customer on the easy to use 
factor;  (iii)  the  associated  cost  vis-a-vis  existing  products;  (iv)  the  convenience  in  terms  of 
using the product “any time”, “any where”. 
Given the above, it must be said that introduction of new and innovative payment systems is 
a  long-haul as  these  have  an  associated large  cost  and long  gestation  periods  to achieve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
“network” effects. As in any new entrepreneurial venture, there is an element of financial risk 
associated with new payment systems, as it may not achieve the desired public acceptability 
of the new product. 
The  last  few  years  have  seen  the  unveiling  of  a  plethora  of  innovative  retail  payment 
products  (both  paper  and  electronic)  in  the  market,  driven  primarily  by  technological 
developments,  consumer  demands  and  changing  habits  and  complimented  by  policy 
initiatives/interventions  of/by  public  authorities.  If  we  review  our  own  payments  system 
landscape,  the  introduction  of  new  payment  products  and  methods  during  the  previous 
decades  could  be  termed  as  supply  driven  such  as  MICR  technology,  electronic  payment 
systems viz. ECS, EFT, NEFT, NFS, CTS, various type of plastic cards etc. These supply 
driven  innovations  for  both  paper-based  and  electronic  payments  have  gained  wide 
acceptance  over  a  period  of  time.  All  these  innovations  and  new  payment  methods  have 
been driven by the regulator. The products were rolled out and banks were encouraged to 
make  use  of  these  products  to  render  better,  faster,  safer  and  secure  services  to  their 
customers. All these payment products have stood the test of time and have been success 
stories.  This  illustration  proves  that  the  supply  driven  approach  used  by  the  regulator  has 
resulted in providing the Indian consumer with new payment systems and products. 
Is it therefore the case that only the above approach would result in consumers using new 
payment  products  and  not  otherwise?  The  answer  to  this  again  is  perhaps  not  very  clear. 
While it would be true that in the case of an emerging market country like India, the regulator 
has to be pro-active and induce supply driven innovations in payment products to bring in 
safety  and  efficiency,  the  same  may  not  hold  true  in  the  case  of  other  countries.  Such  a 
regulatory stance as taken by Reserve Bank of India is largely determined by the mandate 
which the statute provides it with.  
However,  there  have  been  instances  where  supply  driven  innovations  have  not  been  so 
successful. For example, one of the banks in India experimented with “tap and pay” payment 
product  using  “Near  Field  Communication”  technology.  The  response  received  was 
reportedly  not  encouraging  enough  for  launching  the  product.  However  this  technology  is 
again making its appearance and is likely to be available on a larger scale. 
It is not always easy to classify an innovative payment product as either being supply driven 
or demand driven. For example, it would be difficult to determine whether mobile banking is 
purely  supply  driven  (in  terms  of  enhancing  the  capacity  of  the  chip  in  the  mobile  to 
undertake banking functions as well) or is it demand driven by the customers who would see 
this  particular  service  as  a  “value  added  service”,  (along  with  ringtone  downloads  for 
example)  that  has  prompted  banks,  payment  service  providers  and  telcos  to  provide  this 
service.  Is  it  because  of  the  technology  capability  to  transmit  financial  information  in  an 
efficient  and  secure  manner  that  has  made  banks  consider  development  of  mobile  based 
applications  for  banking  or  is  it  the  ubiquitous  character  of  the  mobile  phone  and  its 
affordability  that  has  heralded  m-banking  as  the  next-generation  innovation?  There  is  no 
clear  answer.  But  what  is  evident  is  that  mobile  banking  as  an  innovative  and  inclusive 
payment method which delivers and fulfills a social need is here to stay. 
Is mobile the most appropriate delivery channel for banking services? 
As  a  logical  corollary,  should  then  one  conclude  that  the  mobile  device  is  the  most 
appropriate delivery channel for financial services? If the test of safety, security, soundness, 
efficiency, accessibility and authorized operations has to be positive, then I think the mobile 
phone has the capability of providing these services and empowering the common man to 
conduct his/her payment transactions any time and from anywhere. 
The Reserve Bank recognised the potential of the mobile phone as a channel for conduct of 
financial services quite some time back and the first measure to regulate this area was taken 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  October,  2008.  The  Reserve  Bank  consciously  opted  for  a  bank-led  model  of  mobile 
banking and the reasons are well known. 
In our endeavour to enable enhancements in mobile banking both in terms of the nature of 
services offered and the value of transactions to be permitted under mobile banking, we have 
been  in  constant  dialogue  with  the  stake  holders  and  intervened  to  liberalise  the  mobile 
banking  guidelines  in  a  phased  manner  the  –  latest  being  the  removal  of  the  cap  of 
Rs 50,000/-. Remittance from a bank account for cash pay out to the beneficiary through the 
medium  of  mobile  at  an  ATM/BC  outlet  has  also  been  facilitated  with  the  remitting  bank 
obtaining the beneficiary details. The Interbank Mobile Payment  Services (IMPS)  operated 
by the NPCI with the approval of the Reserve Bank has enhanced the efficiency of mobile 
banking  by  enabling  real  time  transfer  of  funds  between  bank  accounts  and  providing  a 
centralised interbank settlement service for mobile banking transactions. 
Data  reveals  that  as  at  the  end  of  July,  2011  the  total  wireless  subscriber  base  was 
858 million, which included 292 million subscriptions in the rural areas. As against this only 
55  percent  of  the  people  of  India  have  deposit  accounts.  It  is  evident  that  mobile  phones 
have reached more households than basic banking services. 
Given  this  scenario,  should  banks  not  embrace  this  new  technology  at  a  more  sustained 
pace and provide mobile banking services to their customers? 
Let  me  provide  you  with  some  facts  and  figures  on  this  issue.  RBI  has  so  far  authorised 
52 banks  for  providing  mobile  banking  services,  out  of  which  44  banks  have  commenced 
offering  these  services.  Transactions  in  mobile  banking  have  been  showing  an  uptrend. 
During  October  2011  more  than  22.45  lakh  transactions  for  close  to  Rs.  161  crore  were 
transacted. In terms of both volume and value of transactions on a month-on-month basis the 
growth  has  been  a  little  over  9  percent.  A  little  over  96  lakh  bank  customers  have  so  far 
registered for mobile banking service. These numbers while looking impressive are not really 
heartening  if  we  juxtapose  them  with  the  data  on  the  number  of  bank  accounts  and  the 
mobile subscriber base. They seem like a drop in the ocean! What this means is that banks 
have  not  really  made  a  significant  penetration  even  amongst  their  existing  customers  to 
extend mobile banking services. 
In  this  connection,  the  question  that  begs  an  explanation  is,  as  to  why  despite  enabling 
collaboration between banks and mobile service providers, this collaborative model is yet to 
gather  steam?  Are  there  any  insurmountable  challenges  inhibiting  this  partnership?  If  yes, 
what are they? 
I am aware that some of the issues that come up in this regard relate to (i) who owns the 
customer? and (ii) who controls the transactions? Has there been any worthwhile attempt to 
resolve them in a mature way? Or like sulking infants is each one trying to wear out the other 
including  the  regulator?  Let  me  say  that  if  the  latter  is  true,  it  can  be  a  painfully  long  and 
expensive process benefitting none and does not help in our efforts to achieve true financial 
inclusion. Therefore I would urge upon the banks and MSPs to get their acts together. On 
behalf of RBI let me assure you, once again, that we stand committed to the success of this 
collaboration and would remove all genuine obstacles!  
Responsibilities of banks and customers – a balancing act 
Let me raise the issue of consumer protection and responsibilities of banks and customers in 
the  event  of  fraudulent/unauthorised  payments  in  the  customer’s  account  and  where  we 
stand when compared to other countries. Let me recount a conversation narrated to me by a 
friend  between  a  customer  and  his  bank  in  US.  The  bank  informed  the  customer  that 
unauthorised  transactions  were  being  suspected  in  his  credit  card  account.  The  customer 
retorted that the transactions were taking place in bank’s books and not in his account as he 
had  not  carried  out  those  transactions  as  the  card  was  very  much  in  his  custody.  The 
customer further added that the bank is responsible for ensuring that fraudulent transactions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are not carried out when the card is in the possession of the customer. If the same question 
were  posed  by  a  bank  customer  in  India,  what  would  be  the  response  of  the  card-issuing 
bank here? 
As you may be aware major credit card issuers in US have adopted zero liability policies or 
limited liability policies to protect the costumers from fraudulent or unauthorised transactions 
in their credit cards. Zero liability policies go beyond the requirements of federal law, which 
limit individuals’ out-of-pocket expenses to $50 if a credit card is lost or stolen and then used 
fraudulently.  Zero  liability  protection  increases  the  costumer’s  confidence  in  credit  card 
transactions. 
But in India the liability often shifts to the customers. Generally the credit card issuers are not 
liable for fraudulent transactions unless the customer reports the unauthorised transactions 
immediately. So the shift in liability from customers to banks comes into effect only after the 
customer informs the bank. Banks argues that they take adequate steps to ensure safety of 
card  transactions,  and  the  least  they  expect  from  the  customer  is  to  report  the  card  loss 
immediately. This is understandable and logical. 
But the logical consequence of this would be that where a customer has adhered to all the 
risk measures prescribed by the bank, but yet unauthorised transactions have taken place in 
his account, should the responsibility then not be with the card issuing bank? This being the 
case, is the time now ripe for us to implement a zero liability policy? I leave it to the industry 
to debate and discuss the issue. 
Therefore, the continuing message for us is that improving safety, security and efficiency in 
payment system requires coordinated and cooperative efforts from all stakeholders. Together 
we  have  achieved  significant  milestones  be  it  2FA  for  card  not  present  transactions  or 
SMS/E-mail alerts for card transactions etc. However, I regret to note the areas where banks 
are not meeting the requirements. 
Take the example of the National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) system. NEFT is a pan-
India one-to-one funds transfer platform enabling near-real-time settlement of funds, is the 
major retail electronic payment system. The feature of positive confirmation to the remitter 
either through SMS/e-mail – unique I might add, is one of its main attractions! However, a 
large  number  of  customer  complaints  are  received  regarding  non-receipt  of  confirmation 
SMS/e-mail.  The  beneficiary  banks  which  are  required  to  send  confirmation  messages 
(N-10 messages) to the originating banks are either not sending such N-10 messages at all 
or  they  are  only  sending  them  partially.  Such  behaviour  patterns  have  resulted  in  many 
customer complaints and impacted the overall systemic efficiency of NEFT. 
With regard to alternate/electronic payment channels, the following issues have been flagged 
to us: 
ATM  “out  of  order”  board  being  utilised  as  a  “cash  management  tool”  particularly  by 
outsourced  entities  in  places  like  University  campuses  which  record  heavy  footfalls.  If  you 
chose to ignore the sign you are often in for a pleasant experience of ATM actually working!  
On site ATMs following the same opening and closing timings as the attached branch!  
Similarly  there  are  several  complaints  regarding  inordinate  delays  in  crediting  customer 
accounts  and  very  poor  or  nil  response  from  Customer  Facilitation  Centres.  In  many 
instances  customer  accounts  are  credited  only  after  RBI  takes  up  the  matter  directly  with 
banks. Instances of banks not paying any penalty for delay in crediting customer accounts 
have come to our notice. In one instance, the bank at fault insisted that they would pay the 
penal  interest  to  the  customer  only  if  RBI  writes  to  them  advising  them  to  do  so!!  Such 
aberrations need to be rectified at the earliest. 
At the same time, we also have to contend with a set of people who try to defraud the same 
system using uniquely Indian approaches – forcibly holding on to a few pieces of notes in 
ATM  machines  that  has  cash  retraction  system  –  (i.e.  cash  getting  sucked  back  by  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
machine,  if  not  removed  within  a  specified  time,  often  seconds),  and  then  claiming  non 
receipt of cash. We have now agreed to the proposal of NPCI to remove this functionality 
from all machines after a pilot proved extremely effective in curbing such misuse. Of course 
due notice will be given to all customers. So remember hereafter if you are careless to walk 
away from an ATM forgetting to collect your cash, it is lottery for the next user!  
Pricing payment products 
Let me flag a related customer service issue – pricing of payment products which has been 
engaging our attention. One of the dilemmas that a central bank like RBI faces is whether it 
should play an active role in pricing of payment products. The banks may argue that pricing 
should be market driven and left to the banks. The public may expect the regulator to ensure 
a fair pricing structure. The difficulty for the regulator is in balancing the expectations. RBI as 
a policy does not usually intervene in pricing of payment products and expects the banks to 
self regulate and ensure a fair price structure. 
However,  our  intervention  becomes  necessary  when  the  industry  behaves  in  a  manner 
where  the  public  policy  objectives  of  affordability  and  accessibility  to  modern  electronic 
payments  are  not  being  served.  Our  intervention  is  necessary  when  customers  shy  away 
from using payment products on account of arbitrary fixation of charges. The rationalisation 
of service charges for paper and electronic products by the Reserve Bank was accordingly 
an attempt in this direction. 
Notwithstanding the above, anomalies in pricing structure continue to be present. There have 
been instances where the fees for intra-bank fund transfers have been higher than inter-bank 
fund  transfers  using  NEFT  and  RTGS.  The  dichotomy  is  more  baffling  when  on one  hand 
banks  encourage  their  customers  to  use  net-banking  and  other  new  channels  but  on  the 
other  hand  discourage  them  by  pricing  the  intra-bank  charges  higher  than  the  inter-bank 
charges.  Banks  have  also  found  innovative  means  for  levying  additional  fees  such  as 
charging additional fees for cheques collected under speed clearing. 
The banks should introspect on their pricing strategies for payment products especially so in 
a technology driven system keeping the objective of affordability and accessibility in mind. 
The pricing should be commensurate with the cost of conducting the transactions. The very 
purpose  of  technology  proliferation  in  payment  system  is  cost  reduction,  increased 
convenience,  service  improvements,  and  risk  mitigation,  etc.  Banks  must  find  ways  of 
distributing the benefits of technology to the customers in terms of reduced transaction costs.  
I  would  like  to  pose  a  few  thoughts  on  pricing  to  the  industry.  How  can  banks  help  their 
customers and themselves in influencing the payment system behaviour of the customers by 
adopting  an  appropriate  pricing  structure?  Should  the  pricing  structure  of  banks  not 
encourage usage of use of electronic products over paper based products? Is there a need 
for differential pricing (interchange fee) for credit card and debit card transactions? 
Access criteria – to be liberal or not to be? 
RBI  has  recently  reviewed  and  revised  access  criteria  norms  for  centralised  payment 
systems viz. RTGS, NEFT and NECS. These have been revised based on the objectives of: 
(i) strengthening  the  risk  management  framework  of  payment  systems  by  ensuring  that 
financially  sound  entities  gain  access  to  systemically  important  payment  systems;  and 
(ii) facilitate  wider  reach  and  access  to  payment  systems  by  suitably  adjusting  the  entry 
norms and thereby complimenting the financial inclusion endeavours of the Government and 
the Reserve Bank. 
Post  revision  of  access  criteria  guidelines,  we  have  been  receiving  a  large  number  of 
applications from banks for access to payment systems. We have till date accorded approval 
to 17 banks for membership to centralised payment systems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
There are two issues which I would like to highlight in this context. First, should we consider 
a  bank’s  technological  capability  in  the  form  of  a  CBS  as  the  sole  criterion  for  providing 
membership to payment systems? The answer to this is that while technological capability 
would be one of the determinants to access centralised payment systems, it cannot be the 
sole criterion for providing membership. Financial soundness along with regulatory comfort 
are other essential parameters for gaining access to payment systems. This is necessary to 
ensure the safety, security and efficiency of payment and settlement systems which are the 
bedrock of financial stability. 
Secondly, the banks seeking membership should have necessarily carried out a cost benefit 
analysis while seeking access to centralised payment systems. A bank wishing to become a 
member  of  RTGS  and  NEFT  should  undertake  a  proper  cost-benefit  exercise,  and  should 
have  a  proper  business  case  for  joining  these  systems.  Considering  the  fact  that  the 
expenditure  for  putting  in  place  RTGS  and  NEFT  infrastructure  would  be  in  the  range  of 
Rs.1 crore to Rs.1.5 crore and Rs. 20–40 lakhs respectively, the need for a proper business 
case cannot be over-emphasised. Suffice to say, if the volume of transactions is very low, the 
per transaction cost especially in RTGS would be very high, rendering the whole proposition 
uneconomical and unviable to the entity and to its customers as well. 
Given this, smaller banks could explore options such as indirect participation. Illustratively, 
RRBs have been permitted to participate in NEFT through the Sponsor bank route. Is there a 
need  to  extend  the  contours  of  this  policy  to  Urban  Co-operative  Banks  is  something  the 
Reserve Bank will examine. 
Payment processing capabilities – the evolving challenges 
Given the emphasis of the Government and the banking industry to extend financial services 
to  all  segments  of  Indian  society,  the  usage  of  electronic  payment  products  is  bound  to 
increase. There is a discernible move in this direction as seen by the rise in the total value of 
cashless  payments  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  registering  an  increase  from  13.9  percent  in 
2008–09 to 14.3 percent in 2009–10. 
This rise in volumes in electronic payment systems is primarily stemming from that segment 
of population that has a bank account. But, given the continued emphasis on shifting cash 
transactions  to  non-cash  modes;  ongoing  financial  inclusion  initiatives  (64  million  new 
accounts  opened)  and  the  efforts  of  the  Government  to  transfer  all  social  benefits 
electronically to the citizens, the volume of transactions in the electronic payment systems 
would grow manifold. The enormity of the numbers that we are looking at can be gauged if 
the present subsidy schemes of the Government are brought into electronic payment modes. 
From  the  data  available  with  us,  the  present  government  subsidies  amounting  to 
Rs.2.97 lakhs  crore  would  alone  translate  into  approximately  3810  million  transactions  per 
year. This would in turn add 12 to15 million transactions to the payment systems over and 
above the transactions already being processed on a daily basis. 
RBI  is  seized  of  this  challenge  and  is  already  contemplating  measures  to  strengthen  the 
payment  system  infrastructure  at  the  processing  sites.  However,  this  alone  would  not  be 
sufficient  unless  and  otherwise  banks  are  in  readiness  to  handle  the  increased  volume  of 
transactions. Banks could argue that a good percentage of such transactions could be intra-
bank would not be part of inter-bank payment systems. However, irrespective of the nature of 
transactions  such  transactions  would  ultimately  hit  the  Core  Banking  Solution  (CBS) 
implemented in banks. Anecdotal evidence indicates that banks are already stretched with 
their  processing  capabilities  of  their  CBS  systems.  The  incremental  spurt  in  transactions 
would further add to the processing load and would raise questions on the CBS of banks’ in 
handling such volumes. Any bottlenecks at banks’ end would also undermine the capability 
of the banking system to handle the future payment transactions and may prove a dampener 
in our efforts to migrate more payments into the electronic modes. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  we  have  come  a  long  way  in  putting  in  place  a  safe,  sound  and  efficient 
payment  systems  in  India.  The  challenge  is  to  make  them  accessible,  affordable  and 
inclusive. It is the social responsibility of everyone, who has the resources and the power, to 
contribute  to  the  success  of  financial  inclusion.  While  we  have  the  guidelines  to  M-power 
financial services, it is necessary for us, the RBI, banks and the MSPs in particular, to take 
this forward in a cruising mode by convincing the common man not only on the power of the 
Mobile  Phone  for  doing  financial  transactions  but  also  the  safety  and  security  aspects  of 
mobile banking, to provide a level of comfort. I believe there are success stories of mobile 
banking  in  states  like  Bihar,  thanks  to  the  combined  efforts  of  all  stakeholders  which  has 
enabled not only financial inclusion but made less literate people mobile banking-savvy. This 
needs to be emulated through adequate publicity and education to achieve M-powerment in 
a significant way. 
I would like to laud the contribution of banks in popularising the non-cash mode of payments. 
Banks  in  recent  years  have  introduced  plethora  of  new  payment  products  which  have 
resulted in significant growth in electronic transactions. But as indicated by me, the payment 
systems issues are a continuing agenda and we all need to contribute to achieving the twin 
goals  of  financial  inclusion  and  provision  of  speedy,  efficient,  robust,  accessible  and 
affordable modern payment methods. 
I once again congratulate TMB for launching mobile banking services for their customers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
