Ardian Fullani: Building a sound and efficient Albanian banking system 
Opening address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop on 
“A  sound  and  efficient  Albanian  banking  system;  activities  and  results  achieved  under  the 
EU-funded Twinning Project”, Tirana, 04 June 2012. 
 Dear participants,  
The  development  strategy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  provides,  inter  alia,  for  the  swift 
approximation of the institutional, legal and operational framework with the best standards of 
European Union (EU) central banks, in view of the country’s major priority, i.e. accession into 
the EU.  
The Bank of Albania has been engaged in an EU-funded Twinning Project for strengthening 
the  institutional  capacities,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  banking  supervision,  statistics, 
payment systems and the implementation of monetary policy, capitalising on the extensive 
experience and outstanding professionalism of Bank of Italy and Bank of France experts.  
This project had set challenging objectives, which had to be achieved within a relatively short 
time.  Its  success  depended  on  the  commitment  and  professionalism  of  participating 
institutions, and on their capability to implement a true cooperation. 
Today,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  address  this  important  event,  which  marks  the  successful 
completion of the twinning project after about 18 months of intensive joint work. I would like 
to thank all the experts that have been working for this project at the Bank of Italy and Bank 
of  France,  for  their  commitment  and  professionalism.  I  would  like  to  also  thank  the 
representatives  of  the  EU  Delegation  to  Albania  for  their  support  as  they  monitored  the 
project.  
The twinning project was implemented in 6 modules as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordination of the European integration process was implemented with the Bank of France 
and  consisted  in  developing  and  mastering  the  required  instruments  for  coordinating  the 
European  integration  process  with  a  view  to  preparing  meetings  at  European  level  and 
coordinating  Albania’s  accession  process  in  the  EU.  The  Bank  of  France  provided  its 
experience  in  organising  meetings  at  European  level  and  administering  the  process  of 
approximating the banking legislation with the acquis communautaire.  
Financial literacy was implemented with the Bank of Italy and consisted in drafting a financial 
education  strategy  for  the  public.  Under  this  module,  our  research  drew  on  the  European 
experience and was adapted to Albania’s needs. In addition, we established a standard for 
conducting surveys and questionnaires to assess the public’s awareness and knowledge on 
financial literacy and the effectiveness of educational activities.  
Thanks  to  this  project,  we  have  a  modern  infrastructure  for  compiling  macroeconomic 
statistics at the Bank of Albania, in particular regarding the balance of payments.  
Coordination of European integration process  
Financial literacy  
Supervision and financial stability  
Payment systems  
Statistics  
Inter-bank market  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  payment  systems  regulatory  framework  was  reviewed  with  a  view  to  amend  and  fully 
align it with the relevant EU directives and practices.  
Further  development  of  the  inter-bank  market  was  another  important  component  of  the 
project, given its significance in enhancing the monetary policy transmission mechanism to 
the economy.  
The supervision philosophy started to change in January 2010 with the establishment of a 
new  dynamic  structure  oriented  towards  risk  identification  and  management.  Therefore,  in 
addition  to  human  resources  capacity  building  for  its  eventual  application,  best  European 
standards had to be identified and acquired in detail. The precious experience of the Bank of 
Italy,  one  of  the  most  prestigious  institutions  in  Europe,  helped  the  Albanian  supervision 
process conform to the best European models. 
I would like now to highlight several key developments: 
First,  we  have  migrated  from  the  actual  CAMELS  evaluation  system  towards  another 
evaluation model based on a wider spectrum of individual risks, as envisaged in Basel II and 
Basel  III  standards.  That  was  the  most  intensive  process  of  this  project,  which  required 
maximum engagement of Bank of Albania’s experts throughout these 18 months. Eventually, 
we produced a new supervision manual with European principles and methodology, broken 
down  by  risks  and  individual  evaluation  systems.  Bank  evaluation  improved  as  qualitative 
criteria were taken into account in addition to quantitative data. 
Second, the Regulation “On capital adequacy ratio” has been revised in accordance with the 
BASEL  II  and  Capital  Adequacy  Directive.  The  revision  is  followed  by  introduction  of  the 
standard  method  for  credit  and  market  risks  and  the  simple  and  standard  method  for 
operational risk. Given its significance, the draft-text of the Regulation is being consulted with 
the banking industry. 
Third,  to  increase  our  prudence  towards  the  financial  system  stability,  we  adopted  new 
techniques  for  a  more  comprehensive  systemic  risk  assessment,  enriched  stress  test 
exercises  with  the  “bottom  up”  approach  and  improved  models  for  the  indirect  credit  risk 
assessment.  
The twinning project concentrated most of its resources on supervision and financial stability. 
In  addition  to  constant  motivation  for  improving  the  regulatory  framework,  supervision 
activities  and  risk  administration,  this  priority  becomes  even  more  necessary  given  added 
challenges related to specific developments over the past years.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  undertaken  a  number  of  actions  to  face  and  overcome  these 
challenges. 
For the fourth consecutive year, the Albanian economy has been under the influence of the 
global  economic  and  financial  crisis.  Its  latest  stage,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its 
interrelation with the balance sheets of the financial system have placed us on the frontline. 
Our two main trading and financial partner countries, Greece and Italy, have been severely 
hit by the crisis. Against this unfavourable landscape, the Albanian economy has grown and 
has maintained its financial soundness.  
Private agents have an overall sound financial position, relatively low debt levels and positive 
savings rates. In contrast to other countries in the region, the Albanian financial system has 
continued to lend to the economy, although at slower pace and somewhat tighter terms.  
Building  on  an  appropriate  and  flexible  regulatory  framework,  this  response  has  been 
determinant to encourage the restructuring of the economy and guide it towards profitable 
sectors.  Looking  ahead,  according  to  the  Bank  of  Albania,  the  main  risks  to  economic 
stability pertain to economic growth. 
A  number  of  signals  from  the  real  and  financial  sectors  show  that  the  contraction  of 
consumers’ balance sheets and slowdown of investments, used so far by economic agents 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as  buffers  to  the  crisis,  may  imperil  the  mid-term  prospect  of  economic  growth.  The 
propensity to save and defer investments may affect the competitive advantages and growth 
potential  of  our  economy.  Deleveraging,  mostly  driven  by  regulatory  requirements  that  are 
not  related  to  the  performance  of  the  economy,  may  undermine  the  existing  financing 
channels, which have been so far an important component for growth. 
According to the Bank of Albania, the current situation requires higher attention and courage 
by all economic agents to make the right decisions for development and in response to the 
challenges arising from the external environment. 
In  a  more  general  setting,  the  Bank  of  Albania  believes  that  implementation  of  right 
macroeconomic policies by harmonising the monetary and fiscal policies, is a prerequisite for 
the  country’s  sustainable  and  long-term  development.  They  should  have  two  main 
components:  support  growth  and  sustainable  development  for  the  country’s  economy  and 
boost long-term development through encouraging structural reforms.  
In  Bank  of  Albania’s  view,  our  economy  is  flexible  and  the  infrastructure  of  core  services, 
financial  services  and  regulatory  framework  is  constantly  improving.  The  labour  force  is 
competitive,  in  terms  of  cost,  and  increasingly  qualified.  Nonetheless,  competitiveness 
indicators for the Albanian economy reveal that there is a lot more to be done in this regard, 
to face competition both in the region and globally. 
The Bank of Albania is committed to maintaining monetary and financial stability through: 
a)  A  prudent  monetary  policy.  We  have  ensured  price  stability,  complied  with  the  inflation 
target and anchored long-term expectations of the economy.  
This move has increased the space for harmonising better the short-term stimulation with the 
long-term stability of the economy. In response to shocks, we have progressively eased the 
monetary policy since 2009. This approach has brought the key interest rates to their record 
low  to  boost  consumption  and  investments.  The  depreciation  of  the  nominal  and  real 
exchange  rate  has  provided  another  incentive  for  the  Albanian  economy,  encouraging 
exports and discouraging imports.  
We have continuously adjusted our monetary operations to guarantee an increasing supply 
of liquidity against an expanded collateral base with longer maturity terms. Given the current 
situation of the Albanian economy, we believe that macroeconomic policies should continue 
to be stimulating even in the future. The need for stimulating economic policies is conditioned 
first by the fact that the Albanian economy is operating below its potential, as the demand 
may not guarantee a complete utilisation of capacities. Second, it is enabled by short and 
medium-term controlled risks to economic stability.  
In  the  context  of  harmonisation  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
supported  the  increasing  orientation  of  the  fiscal  policy  towards  debt  consolidation.  We 
remain ready to respond within a short time to any consolidating initiative of the public sector. 
Our easing measures will remain within the legal framework of Bank of Albania’s instruments 
and in line with the consolidated philosophy of central banks action. 
The monetary policy may prove successful only if its transmission mechanism is functional. 
In  this  context,  the  banking  system  plays  a  key  role,  as  the  first  actor  of  the  transmission 
mechanism. 
b) A prudent supervisory and regulatory policy. This policy maintains sound balance sheets 
of  the  financial  system  and  the  private  sector.  Thanks  to  the  timely  measures  to  manage 
credit, capital and liquidity risks, the Albanian economy has successfully withstood the shock 
from global financial markets and has now a consolidated financial stability and a banking 
system that is able to credit and support the Albanian economy.  
Maintaining banking sector stability is one of the two main priorities of the Bank of Albania. I 
take  this  opportunity  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  banking  industry  executives,  to  engage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
maximally to act in full compliance with the legal and regulatory framework and respect the 
standards for sound management of banking activities.  
Our  objective  remains  unchanged;  maintaining  and  strengthening  public  confidence  in  the 
banking sector. To this end, the banking system should:  
 
 
 
Verify constantly the compliance and strengthen the internal audit systems.  
Empower capacities for risk assessment and management.  
Maintain adequate capital and liquidity levels. Thus, the system should monitor daily 
the performance of liabilities of a bank, in order to create and maintain the required 
liquid assets for these liabilities.  
Factor expected developments in capital requirements. Injection of additional capital 
by shareholders should consider the establishment of a security “zone” in the capital 
value,  against  unexpected  developments.  Therefore,  the  banks  should  cautiously 
interpret the requests to distribute dividends.  
 Credit  quality  remains  the  main  concern  of  the  banking  sector.  The  increase  in  non-
performing  loans  intensifies  the  banking  stress  and  reduces  the  contribution  to  financial 
intermediation  and  economic  growth.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  monitored  this  situation 
closely, focusing on:  
 
Accurate  identification  of  the  problem,  through  inspection  and  verification  of 
procedures for assessing the credit quality and category;  
Relevant contingency funds provided at the required amount and time;  
Encouragement to banks to address the issue by taking strict initiatives for collateral 
execution.  
 In  our  view,  this  is  the  only  way  to  identify  and  tackle  the  problem  on  time,  prevent  its 
spillover and reduce uncertainties for the future.  
The banking industry has intensified its requests for the revision of the supervisory regulatory 
framework, so as to soften it in relation to the handling of non-performing loans. The Bank of 
Albania is open to consider valid and realistic proposals by the banking industry, as long as 
they  do  not  weaken  the  capacity  of  the  banking  sector  in  a  situation  with  unclear 
developments.  
Focusing  more  concretely  on  some  recent  opinions,  we  see  the  request  for  lower 
provisioning values as inappropriate, since we are dealing with an unrealistic improvement of 
the position of capitalising the operations.  
I  take  the  opportunity  to  clarify  the  public  opinion  that  in  this  regard,  the  rates  we  have 
applied are in accordance with the experiences of other countries; in some cases, they are 
lower.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  holds  that  the  current  regulatory  framework  creates  the  necessary 
space for the banking system to assist good clients, who may be facing temporary difficulties 
in  the  current  situation.  This  assistance  may  come  in  various  forms,  including  appropriate 
restructuring for parties. The Bank of Albania will consider the possibilities and forms so that 
this process becomes more stimulating for the bank as well.  
As regards the collateral value for reducing the risk-bearing asset value, the Bank of Albania 
upholds  that  concentration  of  collateral  as  immovable  property  and  difficulties  in  executing 
collateral and recovering the value for the loss loan void this initiative from the beginning.  
Improvements to the legal and regulatory framework, as identified by the joint working groups 
with  the  banking  industry,  need  to  be  implemented  correctly,  so  that  collateral  earns  its 
optimum value.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the end, the banking industry should prove that it is active in tackling non-performing loans 
and releasing resources into the balance sheet to further support the activity. This is the best 
form to test the real possibilities, which may later be supported by amendments to prudential 
regulatory  framework.  Our  common  goal  is  to  stop  progression  of  the  value  of  non-
performing loans and improve the situation gradually. Some banks, thanks to their prudent 
and steady efforts over the past three years in relations with their clients, have managed to 
significantly  reduce  the  non-performing  loans  share.  They  have  continued  lending  to  the 
economy at good levels. Organisation and management of their work is an example for other 
banks. 
The  current  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  comprehensive  and  in  line  with  the  best 
international  standards,  although  it  may  require  ongoing  improvement.  Our  consolidated 
opinion,  however,  is  that  all  the  stakeholders  need  to  exhaust  all  the  available  tools  and 
gradually make further steps in the legal and institutional framework. More specifically, the 
banking industry and the business community need to work more closely. I believe there is 
more space for better understanding and more fruitful cooperation. The business community 
and the banking system should leave their trenches and cooperate in concrete terms to face 
future challenges.  
The  banking  system  is  ready  to  increase  its  support  to  the  economy  with  loans.  This  was 
confirmed  to  me  in  a  meeting  I  had  with  the  management  of  the  largest  five  banks. 
Personally, I urged the banking system for a more active approach to lending.  
This  is  a  real  challenge  and  many  institutions  and  groups  of  interest  are  involved  in  it. 
Therefore,  I  would  like  to  invite  all  other  stakeholders  to  be  open-minded  and  very 
cooperative to boost lending to the economy.  
First, I would suggest to the business community to be more creative, transparent and formal 
in its operation. It should comply with all obligations arising from the contractual relations with 
the  banking  system.  This  should  be  broadly  understood  and  accepted.  A  correction  is 
necessary  in  the  economy,  first  of  all  implying  a  rebalancing  of  prices.  There  may  be  no 
reduction  in  non-performing  loans,  increase  in  lending  to  the  economy,  improvement  in 
business  and  bank  balance  sheets,  unless  collaterals  are  executed  and,  subsequently,  fix 
asset prices are corrected. This process would release huge financial resources that would 
be a vital serum of fresh money injected back into the economy. With this fresh money we 
must  encourage  the  creation  of  new  and  effective  initiatives  that  yield  swift  return  on 
investment.  
One  of  the  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  is  that  any  new  healthy  money  should  go  to  a 
healthy business initiative. We need to encourage highly productive sectors of the economy. 
This is the only way to ensure revitalisation of the economy and make it a dignified European 
partner. 
Second,  I  would  like  to  encourage  the  banking  system  to  be  more  dynamic,  by  looking 
continuously  for  worth-funding  opportunities.  Offer  reliable  funding  packages  by  assigning 
priority  to  economic  health  of  the  country,  which  would,  in  turn,  guarantee  the  long-term 
success of your business. Do the utmost to increase the lobbying authority and capacity with 
the  Albanian  executive,  parliament  and  judiciary.  Intensify  your  contacts  with  business 
associations and analyse every claim or request, case by case, even if it comes from a single 
business. Take a public stance in any case so that speculations and abuse are reduced to 
maximum. Engage all your financial, human and media arsenal for a more solid anchoring of 
your expectations with the public. Turn the public into your most powerful anchor.  
Third, I would like to call for the Albanian executive to increase the confidence in and support 
to  the  banking  system,  especially  as  regards  finalising  legal  amendments  on  collateral 
execution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Cooperation between public institutions and the banking system may be fruitful also in terms 
of  introducing  specific  development  programmes  and  providing  financial  and  concession 
support to sectors, branches, important operators, including foreign investors.  
Fourth, I would consider as vital a broad-based consensus of the entire political spectrum for 
supporting the Bank of Albania’s efforts and moves to maintain the country’s macro-financial 
stability.  We  remain  open  to  explain  continuously,  transparently  and  responsibly  our  past, 
present  and  future  decision-making.  We  remain  firm  in  our  position  that  a  central  bank  is 
successful and enjoys the trust of the public when it makes independent, far-sighted and fully 
transparent  decisions.  In  these  moments,  the  unquestionable  guarantee  that  the  Bank  of 
Albania gives to the public for the country’s macro-financial stability is paramount.  
Fifth,  I  would  like  to  encourage  the  Albanian  and  international  media  to  uphold  the  good 
tradition of accurate and real-time transmission of economic and financial developments in 
Albania, including the activity of the Bank of Albania and the financial sector, which occupy a 
significant place.  
Last but not least, I would like the Albanian public to continue to be discreet and have full 
confidence  in  the  financial  architecture  we  have  built.  We  commend  its  added  prudence, 
which is reflected in its propensity to increase savings. Therefore, household balance sheets 
remain positive, an indicator that sends positive signals for a potentially growing consumption 
in the near and distant future. I take this opportunity to reiterate that optimism shapes our 
present and our future.  
The time has come for the consumers’ sentiment to start its take off. This would create the 
desired  chain  reaction  for  accelerating  money  velocity  and  circulation  of  goods  in  the 
economy, making the economy recover to its pre-crisis parameters.  
On my behalf and on behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to thank the Bank of Italy and 
the  Bank  of  France  for  the  assistance  and  partnership  during  the  twinning  project.  At  the 
completion  of  this  project,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  upgraded  the  organisational  and 
operational  framework  of  its  main  departments  and  has  approached  to  its  European 
counterparties.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
