William C Dudley: The economic and fiscal challenges facing Europe 
Testimony  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  Monetary  Policy  and 
Technology,  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  United  States  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 27 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
Chairman Paul, Ranking Member Clay, and members of the Subcommittee, my name is Bill 
Dudley, and I am President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. It is an honor to testify 
today about the economic and fiscal challenges facing Europe, and the Federal Reserve’s 
efforts  to  support  financial  stability  in  the  United  States.  Financial  stability  enables 
U.S. businesses  and  households  to  maintain  their  access  to  credit  and  ensures  sustained 
economic  growth.  This  is  why  promoting  financial  stability  is  an  important  objective  of  the 
Federal Reserve, and other central banks around the world. 
Let  me  preface  these  remarks  by  stating  that  the  views  expressed  in  my  written  and  oral 
testimony  are  solely  my  own  and  do  not 
the 
Federal Reserve Board,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  any  other  part  of 
the Federal Reserve System. Additionally, because I am precluded by law from discussing 
confidential supervisory information, I will not be able to speak about the financial condition 
or regulatory treatment or rating of any individual financial institution. 
The U.S. economy is currently expanding at a moderate pace, and strains in global financial 
markets, although having eased recently, continue to pose significant downside risks to the 
economic outlook. Because developments in Europe will have an important bearing on the 
prospects  for  growth  and  jobs  here  in  the  U.S.,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  monitoring  the 
situation  there  closely.  This  is  also  why  we  have  taken  special  steps  in  recent  months, 
together with other central banks, to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. 
represent  official  views  of 
Europe 
The economic situation in Europe has been unsettled for the better part of two years, with 
pressure  on  sovereign  debt  markets  and  local  banking  systems.  High  debts,  large  deficits 
and slow growth in several European countries have called into question the sustainability of 
the  entire  euro  area.  The  resulting  strains  in  European  markets  have  affected  the 
U.S. economy. 
The  euro  area  has  the  capacity,  including  the  fiscal  capacity,  to  overcome  its  challenges. 
However, the politics are very difficult, both because the problem has many dimensions, and 
because many different countries and institutions in the euro area have to coordinate their 
actions in order to achieve a coherent and effective policy response. 
Europe’s  leadership  has  affirmed  its  commitment  to  the  European  Union  and  its  single 
currency union on numerous occasions. And the leadership is working harder than ever to 
achieve  greater  coordination  in  areas  such  as  fiscal  policy.  A  more  robust  and  resilient 
European  Union  would  be  a  welcome  development  for  the  United  States.  Three  recent 
developments are especially encouraging in that regard. 
First,  liquidity  concerns  have  eased  significantly  following  the  European  Central  Bank’s 
(ECB) long-term refinancing operations in  December and February. Through this program, 
the ECB provides three-year loans to European banks at low rates, accepting a wide array of 
collateral  in  return.  Hundreds  of  banks  accessed  the  program  in  each  operation,  and  the 
ECB  lent  nearly  €1  trillion  in  total.  As  a  result,  the  cost  of  funding  throughout  Europe  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
declined since the program began, the euro has stabilized, and the sovereign bond market 
has  improved.  Changes  in  the  ECB’s  collateral  rules  and  reserve  requirements  have  also 
had a positive impact. 
Second,  earlier  this  month,  the  Greek  government  worked  with  European  leaders  and  its 
largest creditors to restructure the bulk of its €206 billion of outstanding privately-held bonds. 
This not only reduced Greece’s total indebtedness, it helped calm persistent worries that a 
disorderly Greek default could become the trigger for a global economic crisis. Shortly after 
the  debt  restructuring,  the  EU  approved  a  €130  billion  aid  package  for  Greece.  Together, 
these measures will provide key support to Greek leaders as they pursue the difficult fiscal 
reforms that are essential over the long term. 
Third, leaders in most euro area countries have approved a new treaty designed to increase 
fiscal coordination. The new rules already appear to be making a difference. Both Spain and 
Italy recently completed 2012 budgets that move their deficits closer to EU targets. Further, 
Spain and Italy took their fiscal actions in close consultation with finance ministers from other 
countries  in  the  euro  area,  demonstrating  a  healthy  ability  to  work  together.  While  difficult 
work  still  lies  ahead,  countries  in  the  euro  area  have  made  meaningful  progress  toward 
achieving long-term fiscal sustainability. 
Looking  to  the  future,  the  difficult  work  that  remains  also  presents  special  risks  –  both  for 
Europe and the United States. If Europe fails to chart an effective course forward, this could 
have a number of negative implications here. In particular, there are three areas of potential 
risk that I would like to highlight for the Subcommittee today. 
First, if economic conditions in Europe were to weaken significantly, demand for U.S. exports 
would decrease. This would hurt domestic growth and have a negative impact on U.S. jobs. 
It is important to recognize that the euro area is the world’s second largest economy after the 
U.S.  and  an  important  trading  partner  for  us.  Also,  Europe  is  a  significant  investor  in  the 
U.S. economy, and vice versa. Thus, what happens in Europe has significant implications for 
our economy. 
Second,  deterioration  in  the  European  economy  could  put  pressure  on  the  U.S.  banking 
system. As the recent round of stress tests revealed, U.S. banks are much more robust and 
resilient than they were a few years ago. They have bolstered their capital significantly, built 
up  their  loan  loss  reserves  and  have  significantly  larger  liquidity  buffers.  The  direct  net 
exposures of U.S. banks to the so-called “peripheral” European countries are actually quite 
modest. The good news in the United States means that we are better able to handle bad 
news from Europe. 
With  that  said,  the  exposures  of  U.S.  banks  climb  sharply  when  one  also  considers  their 
exposures  to  the  core  European  countries  and  to  the  overall  European  banking  system. 
U.S. money  market  mutual  funds,  in  particular,  have  significant  European  holdings.  This 
means that if the crisis were to broaden further and intensify, it would put pressure on the 
capital and liquidity buffers of U.S. banks and other financial institutions. 
Third, severe stresses in European financial markets would disrupt financial markets here, 
which could harm the real economy. Stress in the financial markets causes banks to more 
carefully  husband  their  balance  sheets.  When  that  phenomenon  occurs,  the  availability  of 
credit to U.S. households and businesses becomes constrained. Such conditions could also 
cause equity prices to fall, impairing the value of Americans’ pension and 401(k) holdings. 
This  would  damage  the  U.S.  recovery  and  result  in  slower  output  growth  and  less  job 
creation. At a time when U.S. unemployment is very high, this is a particularly unacceptable 
outcome. In the extreme, U.S. financial markets could become so impaired that the flow of 
credit to households and businesses would dry up. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
U.S. dollar swaps 
In today’s globally integrated economy, banks headquartered abroad play an important role 
in  providing  credit  and  other  financial  services  in  the  United  States.  About  $1  trillion  in 
worldwide dollar financing comes from foreign banks, $700 billion in the form of loans within 
the  U.S.  For  these  banks  to  provide  U.S.  dollar  loans,  they  have  to  maintain  access  to 
U.S. dollar funding. At a time when it is already hard enough for American families and firms 
to get the credit they need, we have a strong interest in making sure that these banks can 
continue to be active in the U.S. dollar markets. 
Banks  headquartered  outside  the  U.S.  make  extensive  use  of  dollars  in  their  financing 
activities.  In  part,  this  results  from  the  fact  that  the  U.S.  dollar  is  the  world’s  number  one 
currency  –  a  status  that  brings  with  it  many  benefits  for  our  country.  It  is  in  our  national 
interest to make sure that non-U.S. banks remain able to access the U.S. dollar funding they 
need  to  continue  financing  their  U.S.  dollar  assets.  If  access  to  dollar  funding  were  to 
become severely impaired, this could necessitate the abrupt, forced sales of dollar assets by 
these  banks,  which  could  seriously  disrupt  U.S.  markets  and  adversely  affect  American 
businesses, consumers and jobs. 
One  way  we  can  help  to  support  the  availability  of  dollar  funding,  and  ensure  that  credit 
continues to flow to American households and businesses, is by engaging in currency swaps 
with  other  central  banks.  Such  swaps  are  a  policy  tool  the  Federal  Reserve  has  used  to 
support dollar liquidity for nearly fifty years. Most recently, the Federal Reserve established 
dollar  swap  lines  with  major  central  banks  during  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008,  and 
reactivated them in May 2010. Last November, the FOMC, cooperating with five other central 
banks, reduced the rate being charged on these swaps to increase usage. 
The swaps are intended to create a credible backstop to support – but not supplant – private 
markets. Banks with surplus dollars are more likely to lend to banks in need of dollars if they 
know that the borrowing bank will be able to obtain the dollars it needs to repay the loan, if 
necessary, from its central bank. 
Ultimately,  these  dollar  swaps  are  designed  to  support  financial  stability,  and  avoid  an 
unnecessary tightening in financial conditions, so that economic activity and job creation in 
the  United  States  can  continue  to  recover.  Our  principal  aim  is  to  protect  U.S.  banks, 
businesses  and  consumers  from  adverse  economic  trends  abroad.  I  am  pleased  that  the 
swaps seem to be working. In conjunction with the ECB’s long-term refinancing operations, 
the swaps have helped European banks avoid the significant liquidity pressures we feared a 
few months ago and have reduced the risk that they would need to sell off their U.S. dollar 
assets abruptly. 
Conclusion 
In sum, I am hopeful that Europe can effectively address its current fiscal challenges. The 
Federal Reserve is actively and carefully assessing this situation and the potential impact on 
the  U.S.  economy.  At  this  time,  although  I  do  not  anticipate  further  efforts  by  the  Federal 
Reserve  to  address  the  potential  spillover  effects  of  Europe  on  the  United  States,  we  will 
continue to monitor the situation closely. 
Thank you for your invitation to testify today, and I look forward to answering your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
