Michael Gondwe: Collective bargaining 
Remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of 
the Zambia Union of Financial and Allied Workers (ZUFIAW) Negotiations Forum – Phase 1, 
Lusaka, 20 March 2012. 
   The ZUFIAW President, Mr Cephas Mukuka  
The  General  Secretary  of  the  Zambia  Union  of  Financial  Institutions  and  Allied 
Workers (ZUFIAW), Mrs Joyce Nonde Simukoko  
The  Executive  Secretary  of  Federation  of  Free  Trade  Union  in  Zambia,  Mr  Lyson 
Mando  
The Representative from the International Labour Organisation  
Workshop Facilitators  
Distinguished Participants  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
 
 
 
I wish to welcome you all to this important Workshop, on Collective Bargaining, organized 
by the Zambia Union of Financial and Allied Workers (ZUFIAW). Let me take this opportunity 
to  commend  ZUFIAW  for  taking  the  initiative  to  organise  this  Forum,  which  is  intended  to 
facilitate exchange of information and views on aspects of effective collective bargaining.  
Mr President, as you are aware, in spite of the recent global economic crisis, our country 
has  continued  to  enjoy  relative  macroeconomic  stability,  with  favourable  prospects  for  the 
future.  
As a result of consistent implementation of appropriate macroeconomic policies:  
i. 
The country has registered positive real GDP growth averaging 6.5% annually since 
2007. This is a necessary condition for poverty reduction efforts;  
Inflation and exchange rates developments have also been favourable. Inflation has 
fallen to single digit, while the exchange rate has remained relatively stable. In 2011 
inflation closed at 7.2% from 7.9% in 2010. In February 2012, inflation was recorded 
at 6.0%;  
The 
commencement of liberal economic and financial policies in the early 1990s; and  
Equally, positive developments have been registered in the payment systems.  
financial  sector  has  also 
tremendous  growth  since 
iv. 
I must caution though that sustaining macroeconomic stability remains a key challenge in the 
face of a weak global economic outlook and limited domestic resources. It is important that 
we  all  keep  an  eye  on  economic  developments  with  a  view  to  striking  a  balance  between 
wealth  redistribution  on  one  hand  and  sustaining  the  required  investment  and  economic 
growth on the other.  
Ladies and gentlemen, in the recent past, we have witnessed a number of work stoppages 
as  workers  press  for  increased  remuneration.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  urge  the  Union 
leadership  to  be  wary  of  sparking  a  wage  price  spiral  because  this  may  cause  a  rise  in 
inflation. As you may be aware, high inflation is detrimental to our economy because of the 
following reasons:  
i. 
Makes Planning difficult for economic agents;  
ii. 
iii. 
recorded 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Companies  and  consumers  are  unable  to  draw  up  effective  investment  and 
expenditure plans;  
Government  is  also  unable  to  make  good  projections  of  revenue  collections  and 
thus unable to effectively plan its current and capital expenditures;  
Relative prices are distorted leading to inefficient allocation of resources;  
High Cost of Investment as interest rates skyrocket;  
Savings propensity is low as savers are discouraged by negative real interest rates;  
In an inflationary economy, interest rates are high and borrowing for investment is 
inhibited, which leads to:  
 
 
 
Limited access by productive (private) sectors to investment funds;  
Low investment, output and employment; and  
Lesser impact on the social sectors.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as you share thoughts in this workshop, allow me to underscore the 
importance,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Zambia  attach  to  capacity  building  programmes  for  all 
employees in the financial sector. I am reliably informed that during the workshop you will 
cover a number of important topics including the following:  
i. 
Analysing  the  framework  for  collective  bargaining  and  exploring  new  trends  in 
collective bargaining;  
Enhancing negotiation skills and knowledge base of Union Officials; and  
Developing a pool of professional union negotiators in ZUFIAW.  
ii. 
iii. 
I am fully aware that some of the topics that you will be discussing during this Forum may not 
be  entirely  new  to  you,  but  I  firmly  believe  that  they  may  be  necessary  for  purposes  of 
reinforcing what you already know. I therefore, urge you all to take keen interest in all the 
deliberations if you are to realise the full benefit of the workshop.  
Mr President, no company can sustainably grow if it does not provide mechanisms by which 
employees  can  influence  their  working  lives.  Labour  is  more  than  a  commodity.  Unlike 
non-living factors of production, such as, machinery and raw materials, the work of human 
beings raises questions about the impact of work and work relations.  
As you review your collective agreement frameworks, I wish to remind you that there are a lot 
of  common  interests  and  important  interdependencies  between  employers  and  employees 
despite the apparent conflicting interests. For instance firms need workers and workers need 
jobs.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  there  can  be  no  true  bargaining  without  prudent  and  effective 
leadership on either side of the table. This kind of leadership is required for us to achieve our 
collective objectives. We are desirous of seeing a Union leadership, which is well-informed 
and constantly upgrading their leadership skills for the attainment of organisational goals and 
workers welfare.  
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  once  again  implore  you  to  actively  participate  and  take  a  keen 
interest  in  the  deliberations  of  this  Forum.  It  is  my  expectation  that  you  will  have  an 
opportunity  to  carry  out  an  appraisal  of  your  individual  and  collective  skills  and  how  they 
impact upon the job market and workers welfare in the financial sector.  
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentleman, I declare this Forum officially open.  
I Thank You 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
