Jörg Asmussen: Building trust in a world of unknown unknowns – 
central bank communication between markets and politics in the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the European Communication Summit 2012, Brussels, 6 July 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It has been said that “there have been three great inventions since the beginning of time: fire, 
the wheel, and central banking”1. Central banking has become my business since January 
this  year,  but  I  feel  I  am  getting  my  fair  share  of  the  other  two  as  well:  being  behind  the 
steering wheel of the ECB during this crisis turned out to be in the line of fire.  
You invited a central banker to speak at this year’s European Communication Summit. Thank 
you for giving me the opportunity to share some thoughts with you on a very relevant topic: 
central bank communication in the crisis. 
Communication is an essential and powerful policy tool of central banks. This is because the 
physical “product” of a modern central bank is something with little intrinsic worth. The euros 
in  our  pockets  are,  after  all,  only  pieces  of  printed  paper.  Their  value  lies  in  the  shared 
conviction that this so-called fiat money can be used as a means of exchange, as a unit of 
account and above all as a store of value. “All money is a matter of belief ”2. 
This belief stands and falls with the credibility and trustworthiness of the central bank. This, in 
turn, rests on its words and deeds.  
Maintaining  this  trust  is  an  enormous  responsibility.  Consistent  communication  and  policy 
action can create confidence and popular support. By contrast, miscommunication and policy 
mistakes can create excessive volatility in markets. In extreme cases, the currency itself may 
be at risk. And with it the value of the peoples’ savings. 
It was not always obvious that central banks and communication should be mentioned in the 
same  sentence.  Central  banks  used  to  be  secretive  places.  They  used  to  surprise  the 
markets  with  their  policy  moves.  They  used  a  language  that  made  the  oracle  of  Delphi 
appear positively accessible: Alan Greenspan is on record as saying: “If I seem unduly clear 
to you, you must have misunderstood what I said ”3.  
Those days are over. Central bank communication has become a very dynamic discipline. By 
deliberately  steering  expectations  in  financial  markets  with  their  communication,  central 
banks let the markets do part of the job of transmitting their policy signals.  
The  crisis  was  a  game-changer  in  the  communication  of  central  banks,  and  of  economic 
policy makers more generally. In this world of unknown unknowns, and rapid shifts market 
sentiment, our task has become much more complex. The new challenges can be captured 
by the following three themes, or fault lines: 
• 
• 
• 
I will address each of those in turn. 
First: market communication versus political communication; 
Second: transmitting the message versus facing the discourse 
Third: arguing with counterfactuals and navigating the short versus the long term 
                                                
1  Will Rogers, cited by Paul Samuelson 
2  Adam Smith 
3  Wall Street Journal 22/09/1987 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Market communication vs political communication 
1. 
In  the  “old”  days,  central  bank  communication  was  focused  on  a  specific  target  audience: 
financial  markets,  specialised  financial  media,  interested  academic  circles.  It  was  an 
“insiders’ community”, speaking an expert language.  
Anyone who listened to speeches of central bankers on the economic outlook and the course 
of  monetary  policy  knows  what  I  mean:  they  were  deliberately  unexciting,  technical  and 
repetitive.  But  this  type  of  communication  inspired  confidence:  there  was  a  consistent 
message and a steady hand at the tiller. 
The importance of the consistency of the messages across time, countries and media outlets 
remains. But the context has changed fundamentally. During this crisis, central bankers and 
policy-makers are faced with a potentially explosive interplay between markets and politics. 
Messages that are necessary and legitimate in public debates can be completely unsuited for 
market communication and exacerbate tensions. 
Let  me  explain.  In  spring  2010,  Angela  Merkel  addressed  the  German  Bundestag  to 
persuade lawmakers to approve the financial assistance programme for Greece. She had to 
engage  in  a  profoundly  political  discourse.  She  employed  all  tools  of  rhetoric.  And  she 
justified her appeal by declaring that “the future of the euro is at stake”. This was legitimate.  
However,  in  financial  markets  across  the  globe,  that  very  same  message  popped  up  on 
traders’ screens as a one-liner: “Merkel questions survival of single currency”. If you were a 
trader, what would you do? The rest is history.  
One  and  the  same  message  is  received  very  differently  by  different  audiences.  But  those 
audiences cannot be separated easily. “Political” communication and the processing of this 
information  in  nervous  and  fragile  markets  has  been  a  major  factor  that  exacerbated  and 
propagated the crisis. 
We still do not have an answer how best to bridge this gap: on the one hand, we must not 
suffocate open debate in our democracies. We cannot muzzle the public discourse to impose 
conformity  with  the  needs  of  nervous  markets.  At  the  same  time,  undisciplined  and 
irresponsible communication has real, costs.  
Maybe one way forward would be to emphasise that markets should listen to the right kind of 
statements. If it concerns the euro area as a whole, it is the voices of the supranational level 
that should count. 
Markets should also concentrate on what is actually being said by policy-makers, rather than 
how  this  is  being  interpreted  by  analysts,  commentators  and  the  media.  The  constant 
extrapolation of what current policy decisions “could” or “are likely” to imply under extreme 
scenarios  sows  the  seeds  of  volatility.  The  focus  on  what  might  happen  in  case  of 
catastrophic tail-events diverts attention from already achieved or agreed policy action.  
A  second  aspect  of  the  “brave  new  world”  of  communication  is  the  urgent  need  to 
communicate  beyond  the  specialist  “insider’s  circle”.  Central  banks  have  to  actively 
communicate with the broader public, for three reasons:  
• 
First, what used to be obscure and complex issue for monetary policy specialists are 
now  mainstream  news.  Two  years  ago,  few  people  had  heard  of  central  bank 
operations  or  intra-Eurosystem  payment  flows.  These  days,  television  talk  shows 
debate  the  ECB’s  long-term  refinancing  operations  or  TARGET2-balances.  The 
people  have  a  legitimate  interest  and  a  right  to  get  information  and  explanation 
directly from us, rather than via intermediaries.  
Second, in all of this, we are faced with the inevitable tendency to reduce complexity 
and simplify the message. This is what the media are supposed to do: “First simplify, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
 then exaggerate! ”4. Simplification is, of course, legitimate – and also needed. But 
exaggeration is not. It risks skewing perceptions and distorting the true picture of the 
situation.  Take,  for  instance,  the  situation  in  Ireland  or  Portugal.  This  requires 
comprehensive  and  in-depth  understanding  –  an  analyst’s  two-pager  often  cannot 
do  justice  to  this  complexity.  By  sharing  and  explaining  its  own  assessment,  the 
central bank can contribute to a more balanced debate. 
Third,  during  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  undertaken  extraordinary  measures.  It  has 
provided 1 trillion euro in liquidity to the banking system. It contributes to the design 
of  adjustment  programmes for  countries receiving  EU-IMF  assistance.  It  is  part of 
the  Troika  going  on  country  missions.  It  offers  advice  on  the  future  evolution  of 
Europe.  Some  criticise  us  for  this,  some  claim  that  we  go  beyond  our  mandate. 
Those criticisms must not go unanswered.  
 Adding complexity to an already complex situation is the fact that the ECB communicates in 
a multi-lingual, multicultural context. One and the same message, even if translated perfectly 
into the 23 official EU languages, may cause very different public and market reactions. 
But extraordinary actions call for extraordinary efforts to explain them. This brings me to my 
second point: 
Transmitting the message versus facing the discourse 
2. 
In  the  past,  central  bank  communication  was  mainly  a  one-way  street.  The  central  bank 
transmits  its  messages.  As  independent  institutions,  they  were  –  and  continue  to  be  – 
prohibited from yielding to outside influence. And rightfully so. The first President of the ECB, 
Wim  Duisenberg,  summed  it  up  very  neatly:  “I  hear,  but  I  do  not  listen  ”5.  The  academic 
debate about central bank communication focused on transparency: Whether central banks 
were too closed and provided too little information. 
The globalisation of information, the rise of the internet and the new “prominence” of central 
bank action create a new context: whatever the central bank does is subject to a worldwide 
market assessment and media commentary. 
In blogs and internet comments, via Twitter, on TV channels and in traditional print media, 
central  banks  are  faced  with  a  barrage  of  outside  opinion  that  has  a  powerful  impact  on 
public discourse. Professors, Nobel Prize winners, analysts, chief economists, innumerable 
experts, any individual posting comments on the internet: they all present their analysis and 
opinion.  
In  many  cases,  there  is  thoughtful  analysis.  In  some  cases,  opinionated  polemics.  But  in 
almost all cases, they know better. The concepts they use, the solutions they propose and 
the policy actions they call for – all this shapes the public discourse, and one way or another 
also influences policy-makers.  
The  difference  is  that  commentators  do  not  need  to  assume  the  responsibility  for  the 
recommended actions. Policy-makers have to.  
Let me give you an example: last year, a debate was raging about the size of the European 
financial assistance facilities, the so-called “Eurozone firewall”. None of the very substantial 
amounts seemed to be enough: the 500 billion euro that were already on the table, and used 
to only a very small extent, were decried as insufficient. One trillion euro at least, if not two 
trillion or more, were seen as necessary.  
                                                
4 
5  ECB press conference 11/04/2001 
Instruction of an editor of The Economist to his newly recruited reporters 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One  idea  pushed  forcefully  by  the  “international  expert  opinion”  was  to  “leverage”  existing 
funds,  by  offering  incentives  to  private  and  public  entities  to  provide  additional  funds.  And 
indeed,  throngs  of  European  officials  worked  night  and  day  to  devise  and  agree  on  two 
options  to  leverage  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF).  Today  the  two 
instruments  are  there.  They  could  work.  Will  they  ever  be  used?  The  caravan  of  the 
“commentariat” had already moved on. No-one speaks about leveraging the EFSF anymore. 
In fact, the actual investors in EFSF bonds were put off by the leveraging options, because it 
made the EFSF structure more risky and less understandable.  
The searchlight of attention of the markets and the commentary shifts fast. Yesterday it was 
the  firewalls.  Then  it  was  growth.  Today  it  is  Spain.  For  sure,  all  of  these  issues  require 
action. But designing and agreeing on responses takes time. No wonder that policy-makers 
are criticised for constantly being “behind the curve”.  
Markets  want  to  see  immediate  and  forceful  action  from  Europe’s  politicians.  And  their 
criticism of the slowness of the European crisis response is in part justified. But democratic 
politics  takes  time.  It  is  open,  noisy,  and  messy.  We  cannot  do  “crisis  management  by 
Politburo”. We need effective communication and a proper public debate. This is especially 
true for the envisaged next steps towards deeper integration in Eurozone. 
Why  am  I  telling  you  this?  Because  it  sheds  light  on  the  nexus  between  a  new  class  of 
opinion formers, financial markets and policy outcomes. 
For the euro area and the ECB, the situation is even more peculiar, because the influential 
“commentariat” comes predominantly from outside the euro area. The big English-language 
newspapers, the news agencies and wire services that shape opinions in the economic and 
financial  sphere  on  the  Continent  are  all  writing  from  outside  the  euro  area.  There  is,  of 
course,  nothing  wrong  with  friendly  outside  advice.  And  I  certainly  do  not  wish  to  come 
across as whining and complaining. 
But  it  simply  remains  a  fact:  the  analysis,  discourse  and  policy  prescriptions  that  are 
propagated come from the outside. Maybe inevitably, they come with a certain disinterested 
detachment. As if the outside “spectators” are not affected by what is happening.  
And they come with a dangerously narrow and  exclusive perspective on the economics of 
the  monetary  union.  But  if  the  profound  political  commitment  of  Eurozone  countries  to  the 
historical project of “ever closer union” is neglected, the assessment remains superficial and 
partial. And the suggested policy responses may be biased or naïve. 
Why does it matter? Because the discourse influences some of the most important financial 
markets for the Eurozone. If expectations that have been built up are not fulfilled, if alleged 
certainties  do  not  materialise,  if  actions  from  politicians  or  central  bankers  are  not 
forthcoming as anticipated by the “market consensus”, the reaction can be grave: volatility, 
contagion, all the way to complete market dysfunction. The systemic impact can be major, 
driving financial institutions, as well as sovereign borrowers into real difficulties.  
The  result  is  a  situation  where  policy-makers  –  including  the  central  bank  –  may  feel 
compelled to react to market developments with ever more powerful responses, in order to 
contain the a systemic risk and avoid a meltdown. 
What  is  the  lesson?  Central  banks  have  to  face  up  to  the  public  and  market  discourse  – 
especially because they are independent. We have to participate in this debate. We have to 
take on the critics, understand their points, and argue our case. We have to listen, explain, 
and convince.  
Naturally,  we  will  ultimately  do  what  we  judge  to  be  the  correct  cause  of  action,  in  full 
independence  and  in  line  with  our  mandate.  Actions  speak  louder  than  words.  Especially 
when they are timely, measured and effective. This is what creates confidence. 
Precisely for that reason, financial markets, as well as politicians, have been looking to the 
ECB as a kind of “saviour of last resort”. This creates maybe an even bigger communication 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
challenge: we must explain what the limits of our powers and mandate are. The ECB cannot 
compensate for what others – notably political authorities – fail to do. There is no substitute 
for  good  policies.  Saying  this  is  not  always  popular.  But  “to  be  trusted  is  a  greater 
compliment than being loved ”6. 
When market pundits forecast the “inevitable”, they insinuate a degree of certainty about the 
future  which  is  simply  not  there.  This  brings  me  to  my  last  point  –  how  to  deal  with 
uncertainty, with a world of unknown unknowns. And how to communicate when everyone 
asks “what if”. 
Arguing with counterfactuals and navigating the short versus the long term 
3. 
During this crisis, the ECB has taken a number of non-standard measures. They were, by 
definition, out of the ordinary. But they were motivated by the need to prevent a catastrophe. 
What we did, we justified with respect to an intangible counter-factual. With respect to history 
that did not happen. Doing so can be extraordinarily difficult.  
Let me give you an example. Back in November 2011, we were faced with acute tensions in 
financial markets; entire market segments had become dysfunctional. The danger of a credit 
crunch was real. There was an anticipation of an inevitable catastrophe. You may remember 
the headlines: “The euro has a 50% chance of making it to Christmas”7, or “Ten days to save 
the eurozone”8.  
The  announcement  of  our  long-term refinancing  operations  was  a  sentiment  changer. The 
feared severe credit crunch has not materialised. The euro is still here – and here to stay. 
But the question “what if the ECB had not acted” remains unanswered. There is no evidence 
what  would have happened in such a counterfactual. This makes justifying our action with 
reference to such a counterfactual an uphill struggle.  
The  uncertainty  embedded  in  the  “what  if”  question  is  exacerbated  by  the  discontinuity 
between the short term and the longer term in the interaction between markets and policy-
makers. Let me explain. 
Markets mainly focus on the immediate future; on the emergency measures to fight the crisis: 
here, a central bank can be very effective. The ECB can change the market situation within 
minutes, by adjusting its interest rate, market interventions if needed, adapting its collateral 
rules, or simply communicating its assessment. This creates certainty, for now. 
However,  for  the  longer-term,  considerable  uncertainty  remains:  short-term  fixes  do  not 
change the structural features of European economies and markets. Those depend on the 
countries’ economic policies, which take time to design and implement. Firm commitments 
from governments can help reduce this uncertainty, but can never eliminate it.  
The 
term  creates  a 
fundamental 
communication challenge for the ECB. If short-term crisis fighting is successful, for instance 
through  ECB  actions,  some  of the  longer term challenges  might  never  be  addressed. The 
immediate pressure subsides, and incentives for governments weaken. More than once did 
we witness this during this crisis.  
By contrast, if the fire-fighting in the short-term does not succeed, there may not be a longer 
term to think about.  
the  short  term  and 
trade-off  between 
long 
the 
                                                
6  George MacDonald, 19th century Scottish writer 
7  Jacques Attali 26/11/2011 
8  REUTERS, 30/11/2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Our communication is walking a tightrope: markets need reassurance that the ECB will do 
what is within its power and mandate to guarantee that the euro will not to fail. At the same 
time, governments need to have the right incentives to tackle the longer-term challenges. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The crisis was a game changer in the communication of central banks. Navigating between 
markets and politics has shifted the goalposts of the ECB’s communication. We are facing up 
to this new environment and its challenges. We are engaging more. We are explaining more.  
The  changed  environment,  including  the  spread  of  new  media,  might  actually  be  an 
opportunity  in  this  respect.  That  said,  I  would  not  expect  every  member  of  the  ECB 
Governing Council to open a twitter account soon or to accept you as friends on Facebook. 
Let  me  close  with  a  word  of  caution.  The  ECB  has  gained  stature  during  this  crisis.  The 
people and the markets look to the ECB for solutions. But there should be no illusion that the 
ECB can single-handedly ensure a plain sailing for our economies and the markets. There 
are limits of what we can do, and what we know. “Central banks do not have divine wisdom. 
They try to do the best analysis they can and must be prepared to stand or fall by the quality 
of that analysis”9. 
Rest assured that we will continue to do this, and to fulfil our mandate. Not least to make 
sure that central banking remains up there in the list of the three greatest inventions.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
                                                
9  Eddie George, former Governor of the Bank of England 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
