Bojan Marković: Strategic management in overcoming the economic and 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Bojan  Marković,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  17th 
International  Scientific  Conference  on  “Strategic  management  in  overcoming  the  economic 
and financial crisis”, Palić, 20 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before answering the question which strategy should Serbia follow in order to overcome the 
economic and financial crisis, allow me to remind you of the message put forward repeatedly 
by  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  in  recent  years  –  it  is  better  to  have  low  but  sustainable, 
rather than high and unsustainable economic growth rates.  
In  the  decade  preceding  the  crisis  we  tried  to  compensate  for  a  substantial  decline  in 
economic activity of the 1990s. Between 2001 and 2008 average annual GDP growth rate 
was 5.4%. But the structure of economic growth, was far from conducive to its stability and 
sustainability because it implied excessive reliance on consumption and speedy expansion of 
services, while the production of tradeables, in industry and agriculture in particular, lagged 
substantially behind. Since most types of fiscal revenues came from sources linked to higher 
consumption – such as VAT or import tax duties – an apparent and temporary fiscal balance 
was  attained.  These  sources  of  growth  were  also  politically  popular  as  rising  consumption 
created an impression of a lasting rise in the living standard. Nevertheless, faster growth in 
consumption  relative  to  production  led  to  the  rising  foreign  trade  deficit,  which  in  2008 
culminated with a record high current account deficit in excess of 20% of GDP. The fragile 
balance  was  sustained  by  privatisation  receipts  and  cross-border  borrowing  by  the  private 
sector, but this was not destined to last long. 
The  outbreak  of  the  global  economic  crisis  lessened  Serbia’s  capacity  to  attract  foreign 
capital  and  made  it  obvious  sooner  that  the  consumption-led  growth,  is  unsustainable.  It 
became clear that Serbia had to adopt a different, sustainable model of growth which implied 
a shift from imports and consumption towards exports and investment. Such a model should 
help  remove  external  imbalance,  which  is  one  of  the  two  key  factors  focused  by  foreign 
investors,  economic  analysts,  and  credit  rating  agencies  when  assessing  macroeconomic 
sustainability.  
External balance 
Since 2009, the current account deficit adjusted sharply. After the record high of 21.6% in 
2008, it fell to 7.2% in 2009 and 7.6% of GDP in 2010. Slashing the current account deficit to 
that  extent,  required  increasing  net  exports  and  investment  and  cutting  down  real 
consumption. The largest positive contribution to GDP growth in 2009 and 2010 was indeed 
that of net exports (9.3 pp and 2.5 pp, respectively), while the contribution of investment in 
2011  was  3.5  pp.  According  to  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  estimates,  real  consumption 
subsided by 3.4% in 2009 and by 1.8% in 2010. Scaling down real consumption was painful 
for  our  households,  but  at  the  same  time  necessary  for  achieving  sustainable  economic 
growth. One of the key measures for reducing consumption was the freeze on pensions and 
nominal public sector wages in 2009 and 2010. Allow me to remind you that some countries, 
such as Romania and the Baltic states, had to base their adjustment not on the freeze, but 
on a significant cut in nominal wages. In Serbia, the process of reducing consumption was 
aided  by  the  flexible  exchange  rate,  which  lowered  real  wages  and  other  income  through 
nominal depreciation and higher import prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 
Is  every  current  account  deficit  a  bad  signal?  Not  necessarily.  If  caused  by  a  temporary 
growth  in  imports  of  equipment  and  intermediate  goods  prompted  by  higher  investment  in 
export-oriented  industries,  a  temporary  increase  in  the  current  account  deficit  might  be 
desirable.  By  contrast  to  a  consumption-led  deficit,  this,  let’s  call  it,  “good”  deficit  ensures 
higher productivity, production and exports, better investment climate, and a stable inflow of 
foreign direct investment over the medium run. In Serbia, for instance, the current account 
deficit  rose  to  9.7%  of  GDP  in  2011,  but  mostly  as  a  result  of  increased  investment  in 
export-oriented  industries,  indicated  by  the  48%  growth  in  imports  of  equipment  that  year. 
According to the National Bank of Serbia’s estimates, completion of the investment cycle and 
the expected growth in exports will lead to a reduction in the share of current account deficit 
share in GDP as early as of 2012. 
In practice, there are three basic mechanisms for eliminating the current account deficit: 
Structural changes to encourage the tradeables, rather than the services sector. 
1. 
2. 
Income-  or  expenditure-related  fiscal  policy  measures  to  stimulate  production  and 
savings, and discourage consumption. 
Depreciation of the dinar. 
3. 
Implementing  structural  changes  to  improve  the  business  environment  for  export-oriented 
and  import-substituting  sectors  is  the  best  possible  way  forward  that  will  strengthen 
medium-term  productivity  and  competitiveness  of  the  Serbian  economy  and  gradually 
remove  the  current  account  deficit.  Fiscal  policy,  may  contribute  on  the  side  of  revenue 
through tax recomposition, which stimulates production and discourages consumption – for 
instance, by raising the VAT rate, while at the same time lowering wage taxes. On the side of 
expenditure,  fiscal  policy  may  contribute  to  the  medium-term  narrowing  of  the  current 
account deficit by shifting the budget from transfers and consumption towards investments 
that target export-oriented and import-substituting sectors.  
The  more  effective  the  use  of  these  two  mechanisms,  the  lesser  the  need  for  adjustment 
through depreciation of the dinar. In fact, I am convinced that efficient structural measures 
aided  by  fiscal  policy  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to  fully  eliminate  our  current  account 
deficit, with no medium-term adjustment of the exchange rate whatsoever. 
Fiscal balance 
While the composition of fiscal revenues and expenditures represents a potent tool for the 
reduction  of  external  imbalances  in  Serbia,  the  balance  between  fiscal  revenues  and 
expenditures  represents  another  key  factor  for  the  assessment  of  credit  rating  and  the 
country  risk  premium.  Recent  fiscal  problems  experienced  by  some  eurozone  members, 
which contributed to the second wave of the crisis, have further heightened the significance 
of fiscal balance and public debt levels in the assessment of macroeconomic sustainability of 
many economies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Though  the  share  of  public  debt  in  GDP  in  Serbia  is  lower  than  in  many  other  European 
countries, it has reached the prudent limit of 45% as laid down by the fiscal rule (as defined 
by the Law on the Budget System) and this created the need for valid fiscal consolidation. 
Fiscal consolidation may induce a decline in demand in the short run, but has advantages in 
terms of improving economic activity and growth over the medium run. High fiscal deficit and 
growing  public  debt  boost  the  country  risk,  which  increases  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  the 
Serbian state, corporates, banks and households alike, and discourages the inflow of foreign 
capital.  Together,  this  results  in  lower  economic  growth  and  lower  living  standard  in  the 
medium and long run. 
 Fiscal or monetary stimuli 
Fiscal  consolidation  and  implementation  of  a  responsible  fiscal  policy  would  create  more 
scope  for  the  counter-cyclical  impact  of  monetary  policy,  i.e.  its  capacity  to  support  the 
economic recovery and contribute to faster recovery at a lower level of real interest rates.  
In the initial wave of the crisis many countries, including Serbia, implemented expansionary 
fiscal  policy  to  stimulate  economic  activity.  But  in  this  phase  of  the  crisis  relying  on  fiscal 
expansion  would  be  rather  risky  due  to  the  limited  room  for  its  financing  and  the  fact  that 
foreign  investors,  credit  rating  agencies  and  international  financial  institutions,  such  as  the 
IMF, are particularly sensitive to high deficits and growing public debts. One should bear in 
mind that the scope for using fiscal stimuli is rather limited in countries with high levels of 
foreign debt since increasing public consumption leads to a further increase in foreign debt 
and higher cost of borrowing. Serbia’s foreign debt is already relatively high – almost 80% of 
GDP and any further increase in fiscal deficit would only lead to its further rise.  
It is probably more opportune in such circumstances to consolidate fiscal policy and thereby 
open up the room for a more efficient implementation of the monetary policy on the way to 
recovery. 
Allow me to reiterate – fiscal and external imbalances are often connected and, represent the 
key factors for the assessment of macroeconomic sustainability and the risk premium of any 
country.  Therefore,  any  valid  strategy  of  recovery,  i.e.  exit  from  the  economic  and  fiscal 
crisis, must take into account the effect of such growth on the external and fiscal balance of 
the country. Only growth which leads to the achievement and maintenance of external and 
fiscal balance in the medium and long run is sustainable growth. Only this growth can lead to 
a  sustained  decrease  in  Serbia’s  risk  premium  and  hence  cheaper  credits  for  the  Serbian 
state, corporates, banks and households. And that is precisely why it is better to have low but 
sustainable rather than high and unsustainable growth rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  argument  that  Serbia  should  persevere  on  the  path  of  investment  and  export-led 
economic  growth  and  that  the  key  role  in  its  achievement  should  be  played  by  structural 
reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  was  also  suggested  by  Standard&Poor’s  in  its  official 
statement in March 2011 when Serbia’s credit rating was improved from BB- to BB: 
“The  increase  of  Serbia’s  credit  rating  reflects  the  agency’s  belief  that  the 
implementation of economic policy in Serbia has improved and that the country 
has  gained  a  new  momentum  when  it  comes  to  fiscal  consolidation,  structural 
reforms and economic rebalance.” 
The National Bank of Serbia, on its part, shall continue to strive towards stabilising inflation at 
a  low  level  and  preserving  a  healthy  financial  system,  which,  I  am  utterly  convinced, 
represents the best way to help the economy in current circumstances and contribute to the 
creation of an environment conducive to business and investment. The more effective fiscal 
consolidation  and  structural  changes  are,  the  more  easily  will  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia 
achieve its objectives with less monetary policy restrictiveness. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
