Paul Fisher: Liquidity support from the Bank of England – the Discount 
Window Facility 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the 
National Asset-Liability Management global conference, London, 29 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of England’s market operations are designed to allow the use of its balance sheet 
to deliver on its two core purposes of monetary and financial stability. Specifically, they allow 
us to perform three important tasks. First, to implement in the market the decisions of the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) on Bank Rate and, since March 2009, on the quantity of 
asset  purchases  financed  by  the  issuance  of  central  bank  reserves  (better  known  as 
Quantitative  Easing  or  QE).  Second,  they  enable  us  to  provide  liquidity  insurance  to  the 
banking system and hence reduce the cost of any unexpected disruptions to the commercial 
banks’ payment services to the UK economy. Third, they provide the bedrock for the Bank’s 
market intelligence work, which feeds in to both core purposes. 
Over the past three years or so, I have used opportunities such as this to set out the policy 
objectives and rationale underpinning the Bank’s various market operations.1 Today, I want 
to fill in some pieces of the jigsaw puzzle by discussing in detail two of the new operations 
which  provide  liquidity  insurance:  the  Discount  Window  Facility  (DWF)  and  the  recently-
announced Extended Collateral Term Repo Facility (ECTR). In order to do that, I first want to 
summarise  the  principles  governing  the  Bank’s  provision  of  liquidity  insurance,  and  how 
those have contributed to a complete overhaul of the Bank’s operations since the start of the 
financial crisis in 2007. 
Principles for providing liquidity insurance 
In  order  to  understand  our  liquidity  insurance  facilities,  it  is  helpful  first  to  think  about  why 
they are necessary at all – and that relates to what it is that commercial banks do.2 In their 
simplest  form,  banks  provide  customers  with  a  variety  of  basic  financial  services:  an 
on-demand source of bank notes; deposit and savings accounts; payment services; and they 
supply credit, to both businesses and households. 
These are critical services for the efficient functioning of the UK economy – done well they 
make us all better off. But providing them generates a necessary degree of risk. The most 
obvious is credit risk – if you lend someone money, you might not get it back. That risk does 
not  justify  support  from  the  central  bank  –  the  consequences  of  bad  commercial  lending 
decisions should be borne by banks’ management and the shareholders, and not by the UK 
taxpayer. 
Banks also bear liquidity risk, which might crystallise for reasons beyond their control. For 
example, bank liabilities typically comprise a large amount of on-demand customer deposits, 
and their assets tend to comprise longer-term loans to households and firms. This maturity 
mismatch between assets and liabilities is an essential part of the banking business model 
and  large  unexpected  shocks  can  leave  even  well-run  banks  short  of  liquidity.  And  the 
degree of spill-over to the system as a whole is particularly elevated in the banking system. 
                                                 
1   See  Fisher 
(2010), 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2010/speech450.pdf. 
In this speech, references to commercial banks should be taken to include building societies. 
2 
“Managing  Liquidity 
in 
the  System:  The  Bank’s  Liquidity 
Insurance  Operations”, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
By way of contrast, if a car manufacturer fails, people will buy other cars. If a bank fails, it can 
cause a loss of confidence and hence a run on other banks. 
Commercial  banks  can  self-insure  against  liquidity  risk  by  holding  buffers  of  liquid  assets 
which they can readily exchange for cash in the  money markets. It is obvious in hindsight 
that the banks’ collective holdings of liquid assets prior to 2007 were insufficient to cope with 
the ensuing crisis and that they should hold more – although precisely how much more is still 
being debated in international regulatory circles. Nonetheless, liquid asset buffers can only 
go  so  far  –  one  can  always  conceive  some  event  which  renders  a  bank’s  self  insurance 
buffer insufficient. Such scenarios could range from short-term IT malfunctions which prevent 
payments being received, through to full-blown global financial crises. That is why the central 
bank needs to stand ready as lender of last resort. 
As the monopoly supplier of central bank money, which is the most liquid asset of all, the 
central  bank  is  able  to  provide  liquidity,  either  bilaterally  (in  the  event  of  an  idiosyncratic 
shock), or to the banking system as a whole (in the event of a market-wide shock). In doing 
so, there are some important constraints. 
Support  from  the  central  bank  is  not  available  to  prop  up  a  failing  institution.  The  Bank  of 
England  will  only  lend  to  those  commercial  banks  that  are,  in  its  judgment,  solvent  and 
viable. This is for two related public policy objectives. First, the central bank needs to guard 
against  moral  hazard  –  that  is,  our  policies  should  not  undermine  the  commercial  banks’ 
responsibilities to manage their own liquidity prudently. If commercial banks know that we will 
always  bail  them  out,  then  they  may  take  too  much  risk:  the  bank’s  shareholders  and 
management might seek to profit from the extra gains arising from risky lending whilst relying 
on the authorities when the risks crystallise. Second, and in consequence, the central bank 
needs to protect its own balance sheet (and hence public money) against the risk of loss. As 
a  result,  central  bank  lending  should  be  collateralised,  and  subject  to  haircuts  which  are 
prudently calibrated to be sufficient if the counterparty was to default. 
In  a  crisis,  it  can  be  difficult  to  judge  whether  a  bank  really  does  have  just  a  temporary 
liquidity problem or an underlying solvency problem. There is no shying away from the fact 
that difficult judgements have to be made about when and whether the central bank should 
offer actual liquidity support. 
Before  the  recent  crisis,  there  was  only  limited  publication  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
possible  liquidity  support.  An  approach  of  “constructive  ambiguity”  was  adopted  by  many 
central banks, to guard against moral hazard. But in the events that occurred, that approach 
limited the extent to which central banks – and market participants – could act quickly within 
an appropriate risk management framework. 
Drawing on the lessons of the crisis, the Bank’s approach to providing liquidity insurance has 
evolved  radically  since  2007.  During  that  period,  the  Bank  has  reviewed  the  use  of  its 
balance sheet, and implemented a series of public and transparent reforms to its facilities. 
Many of the proposals were set out in a consultation document published in October 20083 
and  the  resulting  work  programme  has  led  to  an  almost  complete  overhaul  of  the  Bank’s 
Sterling Monetary Framework (SMF).4 
The  new  Framework  includes  arrangements  for  implementing  monetary  policy  as  well  as 
permanent  facilities  for  providing  liquidity  support  to  the  banking  system.  The  latter 
arrangements  include  the  Bank’s  overnight  Operational  Standing  Facilities  (OSFs,  which 
offer  overnight  liquidity  against  high  quality  collateral  in  the  event  of  frictional  payment 
                                                 
3 
“The  Development  of 
Documents/money/publications/condococt08.pdf. 
the  Bank  of  England’s  Market  Operations”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/ 
4   That  new  system  is  described  in  a  revised  “Red  Book”  published  at  the  end  of  2010,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
markets/Pages/sterlingoperations/redbook.aspx. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
shocks), its regular Indexed Long Term Repo auctions (ILTRs, which offer a pre-determined, 
fixed quantity of central bank reserves, for a period of 3 or 6 months, against a wide range of 
eligible  collateral),5  the  Discount  Window  Facility  (DWF)  and  most  recently  the  Extended 
Collateral  Term  Repo  (ECTR)  facility.  The  rest  of  my  talk  today  is  focused  on  the  policies 
underpinning these latter two facilities. 
Designing the Discount Window Facility 
The Bank’s DWF, which was introduced in October 2008, is an on-demand facility, designed 
to provide bilateral short-term liquidity support in the face of either idiosyncratic or system-
wide shocks. Eligible counterparties, who have applied for and been granted access to the 
DWF,  can  apply  to  borrow  at  any  time,  obviating  the  need  to  wait  until  the  Bank’s  next 
scheduled market-wide operation. 
The  design  of  the  Bank’s  DWF  was  shaped,  in  part,  by  lessons  learnt  from  the  Special 
Liquidity  Scheme  (SLS).  The  SLS  was  a  temporary  scheme,  introduced  in  April  2008  to 
alleviate  the  extreme  pressure  on  the  UK  banking  system.  It  was  designed  to  provide  a 
significant,  one-off,  long-term  liquidity  upgrade  against  legacy  assets  that  had  become 
illiquid. Under the scheme, the Bank lent £185bn of Treasury bills, for up to three years, in 
exchange  for  high  quality  but  illiquid  assets  created  before  the  end  of  2007  –  mostly 
securitised mortgages and covered bonds.6 
Like  the  SLS,  DWF  drawings  are  typically  structured  as  a  liquidity  upgrade  –  exchanging 
borrowers’ illiquid collateral for UK Government securities (gilts in the case of the DWF). The 
Bank is willing to accept a very wide range of collateral in the Discount Window – a much 
wider set than that which is normally eligible in the Bank’s regular open market operations. 
The Bank’s published documentation sets out four categories of eligible collateral (Level A to 
Level D). The contents of each are determined by the market liquidity of each eligible asset 
class. The least liquid collateral set includes own-name securities or pools of loans: that is 
where a borrowing bank itself has originated, or has some other close financial links to, the 
assets comprising the collateral. 
Other features of the DWF are very different from those underpinning the SLS. First, DWF 
borrowings typically have a term of 30-days.7 The DWF is intended to act as a bridge in the 
event of a liquidity shock. For a relatively mild shock that might support a counterparty to the 
next  regular  ILTR,8  or  to  planned  debt  issuance.  For  greater  shocks,  the  solution  might 
require more fundamental changes in the firm’s balance sheet (e.g. asset disposals). 
In any case, before it will agree to lend in the Discount Window, the Bank of England will 
need to be convinced that there is a credible path to a point where access is no longer 
required.  Crucially,  the  DWF  is  only  intended  to  provide  short-term  liquidity  support  to 
banks – and is not intended to be used as a replacement for funding, which can only be 
sourced in a sustained way from private markets. And it is vital to stress that the DWF is not 
a  100%  committed  facility.  At  the  point  of  application,  the  Bank  will  make  a  fresh, 
independent assessment of whether it deems the counterparty to be solvent and viable. 
To guard against moral hazard, the DWF charges fees which make it unattractive in normal 
times,  but  which  would  be  more  attractive  under  stressed  market  conditions.  Because  the 
                                                 
5   For  more 
information,  see  Fisher 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech487.pdf. 
(2011), 
“Recent  developments 
in 
the  sterling  monetary 
framework”, 
6   For  more  information  see  John,  Roberts  and  Weeken  (2012),  “The  Bank  of  England’s  Special  Liquidity  Scheme”,  in  the 
Bank’s Spring 2012 Quarterly Bulletin. 
7   Currently the Bank also offers at its discretion the option of a drawing of up to 364-days, for an additional fee. 
8   Although counterparties are not guaranteed an allocation in these auctions, they are able to bid up for liquidity, increasing 
their chances of being allocated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
DWF is structured as a liquidity upgrade, the fees charged are linked to the type and liquidity 
of collateral delivered. The more illiquid the collateral, the greater the value of the upgrade, 
and  hence  the  higher  the  fee.  In  addition,  as  part  of  the  Bank’s  desire  to  ensure  that 
commercial banks are adequately incentivised to seek their own liquidity insurance, the cost 
of borrowing increases with the size of the draw. The resulting matrix of fees is summarised 
in Table 1. 
     Table 1 
Fee table for DWF drawings of gilts 
Fees (bps)                                                              Collateral Type 
% of sterling 
eligible liabilities 
0-10% 
10-20% 
20-30% 
>30% 
    Level A                    Level B                     Level C                     Level D 
(e.g. high quality       (e.g. liquid and            (e.g. illiquid           (e.g. own-name 
sovereign debt)          high quality               transferable            securitisations 
mortgage and         securitised loans          and covered 
corporate bonds)       and mortgages)      bonds, and loans) 
50                            75                            125                            200 
75                           125                           200                            300 
100                          175                           275                            400 
At the Bank’s discretion 
 
There is one further important point to make regarding the policy decisions underpinning the 
design  of  the  DWF.  It  relates  to  the  challenges  associated  with  providing  liquidity  support 
while  not  compromising  the  Bank  of  England’s  ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy.  To 
implement interest rate decisions, the Bank must, through its market operations, adjust the 
supply  of  central  bank  money  in  response  to  changes  in  the  demand  for  banknotes  and 
reserves,  given  the  MPC’s  policy  rate  (Bank  Rate).  During  periods  of stress  there  may  be 
large  shifts  in  the  demand  for  reserves  and  so  the  Bank’s  market  operations  need  to  be 
designed to meet both our monetary policy and financial stability objectives without conflict. 
In  normal  times,  Bank  Rate  is  set  within  a  reserves  averaging  framework,  in  which 
commercial banks choose their own targets for reserves balances held at the Bank but are 
then required to meet those targets on average over the  monthly  maintenance period and 
are  remunerated  at  Bank  Rate.  The  Bank  of  England  supplies  just  enough  cash  to  the 
system  so  that  banks  can  collectively  meet  their  targets,  and  a  combination  of  the 
Operational  Standing  Facilities  and  the  inter-bank  market  should  guide  short-term  market 
interest rates towards Bank Rate. This framework relies on the Bank ensuring the amount of 
sterling cash in the system is in line with that demanded, given Bank Rate. 
The liquidity swap structure of the DWF does not involve an extra injection of cash and so 
helps to avoid any direct impact on the setting of Bank Rate. The Bank may, however, decide 
in exceptional circumstances, to lend cash instead. That might be required if, for example, 
the  gilt  repo  market  was  not  functioning  properly,  or  the  size  of  the  required  draw  is 
sufficiently large that the Bank deemed it unlikely that the counterparty will be able to repo 
the  gilts  without  causing  undue  volatility  in  the  markets.  In  such  circumstances  either  the 
Bank would need to relax the tolerances around banks’ reserves targets to accommodate the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extra cash in the system, or drain the excess cash, which it can do by one of several means. 
In either case, the Bank would not compromise its capacity to set Bank Rate or  purchase 
assets. 
Since the start of the Bank’s asset purchase programme in March 2009, this interaction has 
not been binding. Because quantitative easing directly injected more cash into the economy, 
forcing the commercial banks to hold more reserves than they would otherwise have chosen 
to, the reserves averaging system was suspended and all central bank reserves have since 
been  remunerated  at  Bank  Rate.  But  when  reserves  averaging  is  re-introduced  in  due 
course, we will need to be conscious of the potential interaction between liquidity support and 
monetary policy operations. The framework is designed so that both policy objectives can be 
achieved at the same time.9 
Recent policy initiatives/issues 
Pre-positioning 
a) 
Since the DWF was put on a permanent and transparent footing in late 2008, the Bank has 
been  working  on  a  number  of  initiatives  to  develop  the  facility  further.  One  important 
expansion has been the Bank of England’s capacity to assess and lend against portfolios of 
loans (e.g. mortgages) as well as securities.10 There are a number of benefits to having this 
capacity. Portfolios of loans can be easier for the Bank to assess from a risk perspective, as 
they  do  not  embed  the  complex  structures  sometimes  present  in  securitised  assets.  And 
securitising  loans  into  asset  backed  securities  –  such  as  RMBS  –  is  both  complex  and 
expensive  for  the  firms,  and  generally  only  available  to  those  large  enough  to  have  an 
existing  securitisation  programme.  The  ability  to  accept  raw  loan  collateral  means  that 
smaller  counterparties,  without  securitisation  platforms,  are  not  disadvantaged  when 
positioning collateral at the DWF. Since financial instability can start with smaller banks just 
as easily as larger ones, expanding the universe of possible Discount Window counterparties 
could lead to significant financial stability benefits. 
Alongside the expansion of eligible collateral to loan portfolios, we have been encouraging 
banks  to  “pre-position”  their  collateral.  Pre-positioning  involves  the  commercial  banks 
identifying, and the Bank of England assessing, various types of collateral ex ante, so that it 
need  not  be  assessed  at  short  notice  in  the  event  of  a  sudden  and  unexpected  need  to 
borrow at the Discount Window. Assessing varied pools of illiquid collateral can be extremely 
complex  and  time  consuming.  The  Bank  may  not  be  able  to  lend  much,  if  at  all,  against 
collateral where it has not had time to conduct sufficient due diligence. As a result, it is vital 
that  such  collateral  is  pre-positioned  well  ahead  of  any  need  to  draw.  One  of  the  benefits 
from having a more public and transparent facility is that such due diligence is much easier to 
carry out. 
The pre-positioning drive has gathered pace in the last year or so – there is now over £265bn 
of collateral pre-positioned for use in the DWF. After applying appropriate haircuts to each 
piece of collateral pre-positioned, this means the Bank could, subject to solvency and viability 
assessments  and  repayment  plans,  lend  around  £160bn  in  the  DWF  without  the 
complications  of  further  detailed  collateral  checks.11  Although  not  a  substitute  for  firms 
                                                 
9   Further  details  on  how  central  banks  can  use  their  money  market  operations  to  implement  monetary  policy  and  provide 
liquidity  support  to  banks  are  set  out  in  Clews,  Salmon  and  Weeken  (2010),  “The  Bank’s  money  market  framework”, 
available in the Bank’s Winter 2010 Quarterly Bulletin. 
10   Further details are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/marketnotice100719.pdf. 
11   That is around 10% of annual nominal UK GDP in 2011 – slightly higher than that in the United States, where the lendable 
value  of  collateral  pledged  by  all  depository  institutions  in  the  Discount  Window  (around  $1.3trn  in  January  2012)  is 
equivalent to around 8.5% of nominal US GDP in 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
building up their own holdings of high quality liquid assets to a more satisfactory level, that 
represents  a  very  substantial  “war  chest”  of  potential  liquidity  in  the  event  of  significant 
adverse shocks. There is limited cost to the counterparty of pre-positioning, as collateral can 
be withdrawn on demand for use in other operations or market transactions. The extent of 
pre-positioning varies across firms, however, and we hope to continue to both sign up new 
counterparties  and  encourage  firms  to  increase  further  the  quantity  of  pre-positioned 
collateral over time. 
Addressing perceptions of stigma 
b) 
The latest data, published in the Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin this week, show that there was no 
borrowing under the DWF between its introduction in late 2008 and 30th September 2011. In 
part, that is likely to reflect the fact that the UK banking system (in aggregate) has not been 
short of sterling liquidity over this period – the Bank has injected large amounts of liquidity 
through a variety of operations including both the SLS and expanded LTR operations. And 
since early 2009 asset purchases under the MPC’s QE programme have mechanically led to 
a large increase in the stock of central bank reserves. Of course more reserves in total do 
not ensure an appropriate distribution of liquidity across individual banks – but it does help. 
Some people have suggested that lack of use of the DWF may reflect concerns about stigma 
attached to such support facilities. Stigma might arise from counterparty concerns that their 
use  of  the  DWF  would  be  detected,  coupled  with  a  perception  by  others  that  only  weak 
institutions would ever use a bilateral, on-demand facility. In fact, as we have made clear, the 
DWF is not there to support a failing firm – when borrowing from the DWF, firms must have 
convinced the Bank of their ability to repay. 
Addressing the stigma issue is extremely complex and has potentially affected a number of 
central  bank  operations  internationally.  One  way  of  addressing  perceptions  of  stigma  is 
through  appropriate  policies  on  disclosure.  While  headline  results  of  the  Bank’s  auctions, 
such as total bids and total amount allotted, are published immediately at their conclusion, 
we  publish  only  the  average  daily  amount  outstanding  in  the  DWF  over  the  quarter, 
aggregated  across  firms,  and  even  that  with  a  one-quarter  lag.  The  intention  is  that  DWF 
drawings will not be disclosed until after they have terminated. Moreover, where structured 
as a liquidity upgrade, DWF borrowings would not be visible on the Bank’s balance sheet, 
reducing the risk that any drawing is unintentionally revealed. 
Another  possibility  is  that  counterparties  are  concerned  about  being  “spotted”  using  DWF-
sourced gilts in the repo markets. For the majority of cases, however, I think there are simple 
ways to alleviate these concerns – for example by encouraging banks to set up multiple repo 
counterparty  relationships  and  rotate  their  regular  gilt  repo  business  amongst  them.  That 
would deliver wider business and financial stability benefits, even in the absence of the DWF. 
Indeed, the FSA requires banks to test their repo capacity by lending out gilts from their liquid 
asset buffers. 
Ultimately we expect a counterparty would draw on the DWF if it had to, despite any stigma 
concerns.  The  risk  is  that  the  perception  of  stigma  might  delay  an  application  to  borrow, 
making  a  firm’s  liquidity  position  more  perilous.  The  solution  to  this  problem  requires  the 
Bank  to  work  closely  with  both  the  supervisors  and  the  commercial  banks  themselves,  to 
ensure appropriate timing of any use. 
Extended collateral term repo facility (ECTR) 
c) 
The most recent policy development in our liquidity insurance tools has been the addition of 
the  ECTR  facility  in  December  2011.  Although  it  is  a  contingent  facility,  the  ECTR  is  a 
permanent part of the Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework. 
The design of the ECTR shares elements of both the ILTRs and the DWF. Like the ILTRs, it 
is  a  competitive  auction,  designed  to  provide  reserves  to  the  banking  system  as  a  whole. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Participants submit quantities they would like to borrow and a price (expressed as a spread 
to  Bank  Rate,  subject  to  a  minimum  of  125bps)  that  they  would  be  willing  to  pay.  The 
disclosure  policy  (total  amount  bid  for/allocated)  is  also  very  similar  to  the  ILTR,  which 
together  with  the  market-wide  nature  of  the  operation,  should  help  alleviate  any  perceived 
stigma associated with the facility. 
The ECTR’s collateral arrangements, however, are similar to the DWF – borrowings can be 
backed  by  the  full  range  of  eligible  collateral, so  long  as  it  has  been  pre-positioned  in  the 
Discount Window beforehand. 
The purpose of the ECTR is to make liquidity available against the least liquid collateral, to 
the market as a whole, and would be offered only if there was likely to be multiple take up. (If 
only a single firm needed support they could be directed to the DWF.) Consistent with all the 
Bank’s facilities, only firms judged to be solvent and viable would be eligible to participate. 
Subject to that, all counterparties that have access to DWF would be eligible to participate in 
any ECTR operations. 
Although the facility has been announced, the Bank has not yet offered any operations under 
the ECTR. That reflects our judgment that market conditions have not yet been consistent 
with  a  likely  demand  for  its  use.  The  Bank  would  revisit  this  decision  in  the  event  of  any 
marked deterioration in market conditions. 
Conclusion 
In  this  speech  today,  I  have  set  out  some  of  the  principles  behind  the  Bank  of  England’s 
revised,  permanent  and  public  facilities  for  providing  liquidity  insurance  to  the  banking 
system. We expect banks to self-insure for most of their liquidity needs – and while there has 
been encouraging progress to date, more is needed on that front. But if necessary, the Bank 
of  England  stands  ready  to  provide  support  to  solvent  and  viable  institutions,  against 
sufficiently good collateral, for an appropriate fee. It is important that commercial banks pre-
position  their  collateral  so  that  due  diligence  can  be  performed  and  the  maximum  benefit 
achieved.  The  new  Sterling  Monetary  Framework,  which  has  been  reformed  almost  in  its 
entirety since 2007, reflects our experience during the crisis and lessons from some of the 
temporary measures that had to be put in place. Doubtless the Framework will continue to 
evolve in future, but the provision of such published facilities should help to make the system 
more resilient in the years to come. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
