Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Brief overview on the Central Bank of Nigeria’s 
proposed currency restructuring exercise 
Speech by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the press 
briefing  on 
“Project  Cure”,  Lagos, 
23 August 2012. 
the  proposed  currency 
restructuring  exercise 
 PROTOCOL 
Gentlemen  of  the  Press,  I  welcome  you  to  the  briefing  on  the  currency  restructuring 
exercise being implemented by the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN). 
Before I proceed, I would like to use this opportunity to express our gratitude to you all for 
the  support  you  have  given  to  the  Bank  thus  far,  by  helping  in  disseminating  information 
about  our  policies,  programmes  and  activities. I  urge  you  to  continue along this path of 
fruitful collaboration and support in the interest of our economy. 
I  am  delighted  to  brief  you  today  on  the  CBN’s  proposed  currency  restructuring  exercise, 
which  we  have  code-named  “PROJECT  CURE”.  As  you  all  know,  one  of  the  core 
mandates  of  the  CBN,  like  monetary  authorities  across  the  world,  is  the  issuance  and 
management of the legal  tender currency. This  implies  that the  CBN is  responsible for  the 
entire  process  of  currency  production  and  it  includes  the  following  elements:  design, 
production, storage, distribution and the disposal of unfit banknotes. An important component 
of  our  responsibility  is  ensuring  an  optimal  currency  structure  in terms  of  efficiency,  cost 
effectiveness  and  balanced  mix  of  various  denominations.  It  entails  the  CBN  being 
responsive to the changing needs of the economy and keeping pace with evolving trends in 
contemporary currency technology-world. 
In  addition,  in  line  with  international  best  practices,  monetary  authorities  are  required  to 
review their  nations’ currencies  at intervals of between  five  (5)  and  eight (8)  years. This is 
done  in  order  to  address,  among  other  factors,  inevitable  weaknesses  and  challenges 
identified in the circulating banknotes and coins. These factors usually arise from innovations 
in technology, aesthetics, security considerations and so on. 
In  the  case  of  Nigeria’s  currency,  the  following  table  clearly  shows  the  period  some 
denominations have been circulating without any major review: 
S/N 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Denomination 
N10
 
N20
 
N50
 
N1,00
 
Date Restructured 
December 1999 
November 2000 
April 2001 
October 2005 
No. of years 
1
 
1
 
1
 
7 
In  Nigeria,  the  last  comprehensive  review  of  the  currency  was  carried  out  in  2005.  It 
resulted  in  the  introduction  of  the  N20  polymer  banknote followed  by  the  varnishing  of the 
N5,  N10  and  N50  paper  banknotes  in  2007.  These  lower  denomination  notes  were 
eventually converted into polymer banknotes in 2009. 
As  a  first  step  towards  this  routine  exercise,  the  CBN  carried  out  a  review  of  the  existing 
currency series in 2010. The exercise threw up several revelations and challenges such as 
the following: 
• 
Public  apathy  towards  the  usage  of  the  50K,  N1  and  N2  coins,  introduced  in 
February, 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The  varnished  lower  denomination  banknotes failed  to  adequately meet expected 
longevity. 
Significant difficulties associated with the processing and destruction (briquetting) of 
the  polymer  banknotes.  It  is  important  to  add  that  this  situation  has  largely 
constrained  the  realisation  of  the  benefits  expected  from  polymer banknotes over 
paper notes. 
The  tactile feature for the visually  impaired on the polymer notes has not been as 
effective as desired. 
In  the  light  of  the  observed  challenges,  the  CBN  conducted  several  stakeholders’  fora in 
2011 on currency restructuring to gauge public and independent perspectives on the existing 
banknotes  and  coin  series. The  issues  raised  and  the  subsequent  findings  and decisions 
were summarised as follows: 
• 
Due to inflationary pressures, the CBN should coin lower denominations of currency 
up  to  N100.  The  relevant  denominations  in  this  category  are  N5,  N10, N20, N50 
and N100; 
Need to encourage the usage of coins; and 
Enhancement of the quality of banknotes. 
The  CBN  should 
to  discourage 
dollarization,  reduce  the  volume  of  banknotes  as  well  as  the  overall  cost  of 
currency management. 
introduce  higher  denomination  banknotes 
 Gentlemen  of  the  Press,  we  are  now  about  to  embark  on  another  comprehensive 
review  of  our  national  currency  structure.  The  impending  review  exercise  is  aimed  at 
achieving the following objectives: 
(i) 
Upgrading the design of the entire existing range of currency denominations in order 
to enhance the quality and integrity of the banknotes; 
Incorporating a more effective feature for the visually challenged; 
Introducing new security features on the redesigned banknotes. The intention here 
is to enable us take ownership and control of the new features on the series and 
eliminate payment of royalties on patented security features; 
Achieving  an  optimal  currency  structure  that  will  ensure  cost  effectiveness  and 
balanced mix and utilization of all the currency denominations; 
Introducing new series of coins that would be generally acceptable for purposes of 
transaction; and 
Reducing  the  cost  of  production,  distribution  and  disposal  of  banknotes  by 
introducing  a  higher  bill  that  would  reduce  the  volume  and  cost  of  notes  in 
circulation. The savings would be channeled to provide incentives for the usage and 
acceptance of coins. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
As  a  means  of  realising  the  above  objectives,  several  entities  have  collaborated  to 
redesign  the  new  currency  series.  These  include  the  Currency  Operations  Department, 
Nigerian  Security  Printing  and  Minting  Company  (NSPM)  Plc,  along  with  competent 
international consultants. 
On  the  28th  of  November,  2011,  the  CBN  Board  considered  and  approved  the  new 
currency  series. It  subsequently  sought  and  on  the  19th of  December,  2011  obtained the 
approval of  His  Excellency,  the  President,  Dr.  Goodluck  Ebele  Jonathan,  GCFR. Under 
the  new  structure,  the  existing  denominations  of  N50,  N100,  N200,  N500  and N1,000 
will be redesigned with added new security features. It is our pleasure to inform you  that  a 
new  high  currency  denomination  will  also  be  introduced.  It  is  the  N5,000  note.  In  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
same  vein,  the  lower  banknote  denominations  of  N5,  N10  and  N20  will  be  coined. 
Consequently, the Naira  currency  structure will  now  be twelve (12); these are six (6) coins 
and six (6) banknote denominations. The details are as follows: 
Coins 
50K 
N1 
N2 
N5 
N10 
N20 
Banknotes 
N50 
N100 
N200 
N500 
N1,000 
N5,000 
less  policy  as 
it  would  substantially 
Presently,  efforts  are  being  put  in  place  to  ensure  that  the  redesigned  N50  and  the  new 
N5,000 banknotes should be launched early in 2013. 
It  has  been  argued  that  the  introduction  of  a  higher  denomination  banknote  could exert 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  inflation  in  Nigeria  is  a 
monetary  phenomenon.  Secondly,  in  some  countries  such  as  Singapore,  Germany and 
Japan the highest denominations are 10,000 SGD, €500 and Yen10,000 respectively. These 
denominations  have  relatively  high  dollar  equivalent.  The  levels  of inflation are, however, 
low at 2.8, 1.1, and–0.7 as at 2010. 
Furthermore,  we  believe  that  the  introduction  of  a  higher  bill  would  complement  the 
Bank’s  cash 
the  volume  of 
currency-in-circulation particularly in the long term. 
To  encourage  the  usage  of  coins  the  CBN  would  liaise  with  relevant  MDAs,  DMBs,  road 
transport  workers,  market  operators,  small  businesses,  supermarkets,  vendors,  etc  to 
create  avenues  for  the  usage  of  the  coins.  We  would  ensure  that  coin  collection  is 
convenient and the infrastructure readily assessable. 
Please  note  that the  introduction  of  the  new  currency  series  will  be  a  gradual  process, as 
the  banknotes  will  circulate  simultaneously  with  the  old  series  until  they  are  fully 
withdrawn  from  circulation. Therefore, there  would  be  no  urgent  need  for  exchange  of the 
old  for  the  new  banknotes  by  the  general  public  for  as  long  as  the  old  banknotes are in 
circulation, they will remain legal tender. 
Gentlemen of the Press, this is an overview of our currency restructuring exercise, known as 
“PROJECT  CURE”.  I  request  that  you  join  us  in  our  effort  to  provide  our  country  with  a 
befitting currency structure that will be an effective facilitator of economic activities. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
reduce 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
