Anand Sinha: Perspectives on risk and governance 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Risk & 
Governance Summit, organized by the Indian School of Business, Hyderabad and Deloitte, 
Mumbai, 23 August 2012. 
 Inputs  provided  by  Ms.  Ranjana  Sahajwala,  Ms.  Anupam  Sonal  and  Jayakumar  Yarasi  are  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Mr. P R Ramesh, Chairman, Deloitte, Dr. Vikram Kuriyan, Director of the Investment Centre, 
Indian School of Business, Ms. Usha Thorat and Mr. V S Das, my erstwhile colleagues from 
Reserve Bank and other delegates. It is a pleasure for me to interact with you all, today at 
this Summit. 
The  theme  of  the  Summit  revolves  around  risk  and  governance,  the  two  terms  which  are 
being  looked  at  by  policy  makers  with  renewed  interest  and  a  fresh  perspective  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  I  intend  to  talk  briefly  on  both  risk  and  governance 
from a conceptual perspective before deliberating on the regulatory changes (Basel III) and 
conclude with a brief overview of the Indian perspective. 
Risk is almost God like in qualities. It is omnipresent. You find risk everywhere ranging from 
simple things such as walking (you run the risk of tripping and falling) or talking (you run a 
risk of saying something inappropriate or getting misquoted) to more serious things such as 
flying  airplanes,  launching  satellites  or  conducting  surgeries.  Unmanaged  risk  can  prove 
disastrous and the recent global crisis is a continuing testimony of this fact. 
Risk has a long history, perhaps as long as human history, and so does risk management. 
Reflecting on risks and risk management as it would have prevailed in the early ages, I am 
reminded of a beautiful quote which goes this way: “Every day in Africa a gazelle wakes up. 
It knows it must run faster than the fastest lion or it will be killed. Every morning a lion wakes 
up. It knows that it must outrun the slowest gazelle or it will starve to death. It does not matter 
whether  you  are  a  lion  or  a  gazelle.  When  the  sun  comes  up,  you  better  be  running.” 
Understanding the risks and learning to manage them has been the mantra for survival in 
any  age  or  in  any  realm  of  life.  In  fact,  managing  risks,  I  would  say,  is  one  of  the  critical 
attributes  of  human  beings  which  differentiated  them  from  the  others  and  helped  in  their 
survival and development. 
While risk is prevalent everywhere, I would focus my discussion on the financial world where 
there have been many attempts to quantify and manage risks in a major way. And there have 
also been major disasters. 
Risk & risk management in financial world 
II.  
Many times in the past, financial risks have resulted in major blowouts wiping out billions of 
dollars of wealth from the system and pushing people and economies into bankruptcy. Stock 
market crash of 1987, Asian crisis of 1997, dotcom bust of 2000 and the latest and still fresh 
crisis  of  2007  are  some  of  the  notable  examples  of  risks  going  out  of  control  and  are 
reminders of the potential impact of mis-management of risk. 
Several factors, both macroeconomic and regulatory and supervisory have led to the crisis of 
2007,  of  such  large  dimensions.  However,  in  the  ultimate  analysis,  risk  measurement  and 
management  tools  and  methodologies  have  proved  to  be  grossly  inadequate  despite 
tremendous development and sophistication brought about in risk modelling. 
The  gross  under-estimation  of  risk  resulted  in  high  leverage  during  the  period  of  great 
moderation. This, combined with over-reliance on short term wholesale funding, resulted in a 
downward spiral in asset prices once stress developed in the sub-prime mortgage market in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the US, dragging down the economies of the US and the rest of the world. The effect of the 
crisis  has  been  severe  and  prolonged  and  it  is  difficult  even  to  estimate  when  the  world 
economy would likely be back to “normal”. Clearly there was failure of corporate governance 
in not putting in place adequate systems to mitigate risk. 
The crisis triggered an intense interest in the nature of quantitative financial models and their 
inability  to  predict  the  disasters.  It  is  obvious  that  the  risk  models  in  use  were  highly 
inadequate. Most of the losses occurred in the trading books where the crystallized losses 
during  the  crisis  were  several  times  more  than  what  the  Value  at  Risk  (VaR)  models 
predicted. Moreover, there was a serious flaw in the conceptual framework, inasmuch as risk 
management was focussed almost exclusively on individual banks and financial institutions 
under  the  misplaced  notion  that  individually  strong financial  entities  would  ensure  a  sound 
and  strong  financial  system.  This  misplaced  notion  is  known  as  the  fallacy  of  composition 
and  it  resulted  in  the  systemic  risks  not  being  accorded  the  much  needed  serious 
consideration.  There  was  thus  no  framework  to  address  systemic  risk  i.e.,  issues  of 
procyclicality and inter-connectedness in the financial system. 
It is, therefore, important to analyse the limitations of the quantitative models. For market risk 
the VaR model is widely used as it is simple and its mathematics is tractable. VaR models 
have  regulatory  approval  from  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and 
therefore from national regulators. This model works on two primary assumptions. 
i. 
Normality – that is, asset values are assumed to follow a normal distribution. This is 
supposed  to  be  an  approximation  to  reality  as  indeed  models  are  by  definition 
abstractions  from  reality.  However,  in  certain  periods,  particularly  periods  of  high 
stress, the normality assumption is an unsustainable abstraction from reality. 
VaR models are not causal but statistical in nature and, therefore, they use the past 
data to predict the asset values in future.  
ii. 
Even for credit risk, the Vasicek model is typically used to determine the capital requirements 
under the Internal Ratings Based (IRB) Basel framework. In this model too, it is assumed that 
the underlying risk factors and, hence, portfolio losses are normally distributed. 
Under the normal distribution, the probability of occurrence of events farther removed from 
the mean outcome (more than 3 standard deviations or sigma) fall rapidly. For example, the 
probability of a 5-sigma loss on any given day would mean that such an occurrence should 
happen  once  in  about  14,000  years  (assuming  250  trading  days  in  a  year)  that  is  much 
longer than the period of time that has elapsed since civilisation evolved.1 During the crisis 
however,  the Wall  Street  Journal  (2007)  reported  that  events  that  models  predicted  would 
happen only once in 10,000 years, happened everyday for 3 days. David Viniyar, Goldman 
Sachs’ Chief Financial Officer was quoted in Financial Times (2007) saying “We were seeing 
things  that  were  25-standard  deviation  moves,  several  days  in  a  row.  There  have  been 
issues  in  some  of  the  other  quantitative  space.  But  nothing  like  what  we  saw  last  week.”2 
Such large sigma movements have happened earlier also. During the European Exchange 
Rate Mechanism debacle in 1992, 50 sigma moves in interest rates were witnessed, while 
1987’s Black Monday was a 20 sigma event. During summer 1998 upheavals that eventually 
brought  down  the  Long  Term  Capital  Management  (LTCM),  15-plus  sigma  deviations 
became  the  norm.3  It  is  thus  clear  that  the  assumption  of  normality  in  the  probability 
distribution does not correspond to reality, particularly, in highly stressed situations.  
                                                
1   Dowd, Kevin and Hutchinson, Martin, “Alchemists of Loss”, Times Group Books. 
2   Danielsson, Jon, “Blame the Model”, Journal of Financial Stability 4 (2008). 
3   Triana, Pablo (2009), “Lecturing Birds on Flying”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The underlying assumption behind normal distribution is that it represents a collective view of 
markets by a large number of participants who act rationally and largely independently, and 
their behavior is stable across time zones, which enables the past data to predict the future. 
On a closer examination, this assumption is highly inaccurate because the economic agents 
react to news and information and suffer irrational behavior bias when the news is either very 
good  or  very  pessimistic.  In  fact,  their  behavior  is  conditioned  by  “disaster  myopia”  and, 
hence, when pessimism takes a grip, they act in a herd, driving down the asset prices very 
sharply resulting in fat tails in the distribution: that is, the losses are much higher than what 
the VaR model would predict. In a financial crisis it is the large swings in correlation that are 
of key importance and using a model that does not allow for such changes is of limited use. 
CDOs are the classic example of the failure of risk modelling during the crisis as the models 
failed to take into account the correlated defaults once the stress in the subprime mortgage 
segment set in. It is due to this psychology and the burden of debt carried from the boom 
period that growth has not picked up in the advanced economies despite all the stimulus. It 
has been our experience too that after the onset of the crisis when the monetary and macro 
prudential measures were eased sharply, it did not lead to any significant credit offtake.  
As  regards  the  past  being  a  good  indicator  of  the  future,  the  assumption  is  highly  flawed. 
With  the  rapid  development  of  technology,  increased  integration  of  markets  and  entry  of 
sophisticated  players,  the  present  and  the  future  are  much  different  from  the  past  and  it 
would be very naïve to predict the future based on the past data. Pablo Triana in his book 
“Lecturing Birds on Flying” very succinctly argues that when LTCM tried predicting the future 
with  its  sophisticated  models,  it  went  awfully  wrong  in  not  realizing  that  a  LTCM-less  past 
could not be a reliable guide to an LTCM-dominated present. 
Besides the above two issues with VaR models, the data horizon is also an issue. As regards 
market risk for which high frequency data is available, reliance on a short time horizon from 
the past becomes misleading as it may fail to capture the stress period data. Even if such 
data  could  be  captured  as  is  now  required  to  be  done  under  the  modified  market  risk 
framework  of  BCBS  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  future  would  be 
predictable  with  significantly  enhanced  accuracy  because  it  is  very  difficult  to  predict  and 
model the human behavior. In credit risk modelling, there is an additional issue of paucity of 
enough default data. 
Too  much  faith  and  undue  reliance  on  risk  models,  despite  all  the  inherent  weaknesses 
which have been in evidence, has been the undoing in risk management. The recent episode 
of JP Morgan derivative losses in their Chief Investment Office (CIO) is another reminder of 
the  fallibility  of  the  risk  models,  and  of  their  inability  to  accurately  estimate  the  risks 
associated with the complex derivative products as well as of the failure of risk governance. It 
is an irony that the trades undertaken to hedge the bank’s risks and protect it from losses, 
themselves led to losses. Reportedly, the new VaR model employed by the firm, which had 
been able to navigate the crisis quite well, was at least partially responsible for the mishap. It 
is clear that we have been dazzled by the sophisticated mathematics and made the mistake 
of equating sophistication with quality. The mistake has been in elevating quantitative finance 
to the status of physics – it is stated that economists suffer from physics envy. There are very 
fundamental  differences  between  physics  and  quantitative  finance.  Physics  deals  with  the 
laws  of  nature  governing  the  universe.  The  objects  have  unique  physical  attributes  (i.e. 
position,  velocity,  temperature,  etc.)  and  the  universe  evolves  according  to  the  immutable 
laws of nature. Any observation or measurement of physical attributes does not change them 
or even if it does, it does so in a predictable way so that the true value of the attribute before 
measurement can be known with complete accuracy. The physics of the microscopic world 
(quantum  mechanics)  is  far  too  complex  and  there  are  no  settled  views  on  the  nature  of 
reality. Even then, the microscopic world evolves according to defined laws in a deterministic 
way. However, during measurement interactions the results are not deterministic but follow a 
probability distribution which, however, is stable. On the other hand, in finance, there is no 
such  law  of  financial  markets.  The  “values”  of  assets  are  not  inherent  attributes  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
financial  instruments  and  the  economic  agents  are  not  outside  observers  of  the  financial 
system. In fact, it is the human mind, its ambitions, drive, competitiveness, caprice and greed 
which drive the actions of the economic agents and it is these actions which determine the 
value of the financial instruments. Thus, unlike in physics, in finance, it is the observers who 
provide value to the financial instruments. There is no unique value: it is determined by the 
collective  psychology  of  economic  agents  and  hence  such  valuations  tend  to  be  on  the 
extreme when there is a collective feeling of euphoria or pessimism. Financial risk modelling, 
therefore,  is far more  complex  than  modelling  in  physics.  As  Pablo  Triana  mentions  in  his 
book,4  “There  are  no  immutable  laws when  it  comes to the  values  of  financial  assets…  In 
finance there is no truth. A new reality is created every minute through the unpredictability of 
utility seeking humans.”  
The above discussions point to the need for a paradigm change in risk modelling. There has 
been rightly an increasing emphasis on stress testing and scenario analysis to supplement 
the risk model outputs so as to factor in the risks arising from rare but plausible events and 
prepare  the  financial  institutions  to  survive  these.  While  this  is  an  improvement  from  the 
“micro” perspective, modelling systemic risk is that much harder because these are created 
endogenously  within  the  system  as  a  result  of  the  responses  of  participating  economic 
agents.  This  gap  could  potentially  be  filled  up  by  the  systemic  regulators  set  up  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  crisis:  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  in  India, 
Financial System Oversight Council (FSOC) in the USA, Financial Policy Committee (FPC) in 
the UK and European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in Europe etc. International efforts are on 
to widen and deepen the financial data available to systemic risk regulators. These data can 
possibly be combined using behavioural rules of economic and financial system and balance 
sheet constraints to build models of systemic risk.5 These are very early days for systemic 
risk modelling and with time considerable improvement would happen. In the meantime, from 
a regulatory perspective, additional capital requirements and resolution mechanisms to deal 
with  Systemically 
Institutions  (SIFIs)  and  countercyclical  capital 
requirements  to  deal  with  procyclicality  issues  have  been  devised.  The  move  for  the 
migration of Over the Counter (OTC) derivatives to Central Counter Party (CCP) set up is 
designed  for  reducing  the  systemic  risk  arising  out  of  interconnectedness  in  the  financial 
markets.  
Despite all the criticisms and deficiencies, quantitative models still have a very important role 
to play in risk management. They provide a very good starting point but should be treated as 
a supplement to decision making. Primarily, qualitative judgement, experience and common 
sense should be the guiding factors in dealing with risk. This becomes all the more important 
if it is realised that there are risks beyond those that are measured by risk models. These 
are: uncertainties (i.e. unknown risks which can be identified but cannot be measured, such 
as  reputation  risk)  and  unknowable  risk  (the  existence  of  the  risk  is  not  predictable,  such 
as 9/11). While it is hard to devise defences against unknowable risks, the best way to deal 
with  uncertainty  is  to  be  aware  of  its  existence  and  of  the  inability  to  quantify  it  and  act 
accordingly  –  may  be  take  preventive  action.  The  Senior  Supervisors’  Group’s  Report 
“Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence” (March 
2008) confirms that the financial institutions which survived the crisis better were those who 
had,  among  others,  informative  and  responsive  risk  measurement  and  management 
reporting  and  practices.  The  blend  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis  provided  a  high 
level of insight and consistent communication to management of evolving conditions enabling 
the firm to respond effectively to emerging opportunities and risks. It is clear that such firms 
did not rely exclusively on the quantitative risk models. 
Important  Financial 
                                                
4   Triana, Pablo (2009), “Lecturing Birds on Flying”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
5   Haldane, Andrew G (2012), “Tails of the Unexpected”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This brings us to the question of the role of regulators/ supervisors in ensuring sound risk 
management systems. It is apparent that they have to ensure that the risk models used by 
banks  are  robust.  The  implementation  of  Advanced  Approaches  to  Basel  II  casts  this 
responsibility on regulators before approving use of internal models by banks. Inevitably, this 
means that regulators set minimum standards for risk modelling and in a way become “risk 
modellors  of  the  last  resort”.6  This  brings  about  uniformity  in  risk  management  while, 
arguably,  heterogeneity  would  be  more  desirable  because  uniform  approach  to  risk 
management  can  accentuate  market  movements  by  increasing  correlation  in  the  financial 
system  which  may  result  in  larger  systemic  risk.  At  the  moment,  however,  there  does  not 
seem to be any solution to this dilemma.  
Regulators  also  have  a  significant  role  to  play  in  containing  the  downside  of  competitive 
pressures. With sharp focus on short term performance i.e. quarterly, half yearly or annual, 
there  is  intense  competitive  pressure  on  banks  which  leads  to  their  indulging  in  risky 
behavior (may be even by manipulating the risk models) despite being fully aware of the risks 
they  are  undertaking  and  it  is  as  if  the  banks  secretly  wish  that the regulators  step-in  and 
prohibit overtly risky activities. I quote from the book “On the Brink” by Paulson who was the 
Treasury Secretary in US when the crisis erupted. The setting is a dinner on June 26, 2007 
(just  before  the  beginning  of the financial  storm),  attended  by  Mr  Paulson  himself  and the 
heads of some of Wall Street’s biggest firms: 
“All (i.e. all the CEOs) were concerned with excessive risk taking in the markets and appalled 
by the erosion of underwriting standards. The bankers complained about all the covenant-lite 
and  bridge  loans  they  felt  compelled  by  competitive  pressure  to  make.  I  remember  Jamie 
Dimon, the JPMorgan Chairman and CEO, saying that such loans did not make sense. Steve 
Schwarzman, the CEO of Blackstone, a dominant private-equity firm, acknowledged he had 
been  getting  attractive  terms  and  added  that  he  was  not  in  the  business  of  turning  down 
attractive money. 
Chuck  Prince,  the  Citigroup  CEO,  asked  whether,  given  the  competitive  pressures,  there 
wasn’t a role for regulators to tamp down some of the riskier practices. Basically he asked: 
Isn’t there something you can do to order us not to take all these risks?” 
Not long after, I remember, Prince was quoted as saying: “As long as the music is playing, 
you have to get up and dance.”  
The recent LIBOR scandal is a case in point. The realisation that LIBOR, the mother of all 
indexes,  which  was  held  sacrosanct  till  the  other  day  and  was  used  for  pricing  of  about 
$ 800 trillion worth of financial instruments (reportedly 11 times the GDPs of all nations on 
earth), could be rigged is a shock to many. The episode highlights the ill effects of excessive 
competition and the need for regulatory oversight (i.e. oversight of the rate setting process in 
this case). 
Now let me focus on governance issues in the context of risk management 
Corporate and risk governance issues 
III.  
History is replete  with instances to prove that poor corporate governance, especially  weak 
risk  governance  systems,  have  been  the  major  causes  of  financial  crises  over  and  over 
again. The global financial crisis and the attendant lessons from the excessive risk taking by 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  poor  Board  and  senior  management  oversight, 
inadequate  understanding  of  the  risk  build-up  and  irrational  compensation  packages  have 
once again catapulted the corporate and risk governance issues to the forefront. 
                                                
6   Danielsson, Jon, “Blame the Model”, Journal of Financial Stability 4 (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Risk governance can be explainedas a component within the overall corporate governance 
framework  and  defined  as  an  integrated  framework  laid  out  to  provide  guidance  for 
comprehensive  assessment  and  management  of  risks.  An  effective  risk  governance 
framework  ensures  that  the  firm  is  able  to  achieve  its  stated  goals  within  the  chosen  risk 
appetite framework.  
Why risk governance is important in banks  
IV.  
Banks are very special. In their role as intermediaries, they perform a very critical function of 
risk transformation which results in warehousing of risks by banks. Further, banks’ business 
model  of  accepting  deposits for  lending,  leads  to  significant  leverage  (a  leverage  of  about 
18 times of banks, during 1995–2010, against the leverage of 3 times of non-financial firms7). 
Liquidity risks can be very critical even for well capitalised banks, a lesson the global crisis 
has emphatically demonstrated.  
The  banking  business  has  become  far  more  sophisticated  and  complex.  Risk  too,  has 
increased  in  proportion  to  this  sophistication  and  complexity.  The  risk  taking  behaviour  of 
banks  has  high  potential  for  contributing  to  and  amplifying  systemic  risk  and  consequent 
contagion.  This  can  have  severe  repercussions  for  financial  and  economic  fragility  as 
witnessed during and in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. 
Given their unique business model and also the special role played in the financial system, 
sound  internal governance for  banks  is  essential,  requiring  Boards to focus  even  more  on 
assessing,  managing,  and  mitigating  risk.  Banks  operate  on  the  foundation  of  public 
confidence and any small breach in that confidence can lead a run on the bank and to an 
eventual failure. 
Lessons from the global financial crisis in governance failure  
V.  
The global crisis has taught that no financial institution can be resistant to all possible crises 
and no quantitative model can fully capture all the risks. This realisation has prompted the 
focus to shift to strengthening of the risk governance by strengthening the risk culture, risk 
awareness  and  appreciation. Governance  has  been  brought  to  the  centre  stage  and  there 
are many initiatives under way to plug the gaps and loop-holes in the governance framework 
that  presumably  amplified  the  financial  crisis.  The  Senior  Supervisors’  Report,  Group  of 
30 Report,  Walker’s  Report  etc.,  are  some  of  the  initiatives  in  this  direction.  The  Basel 
Committee has also issued a revised framework for corporate governance in banks in 2010. 
Highlighting  the  role  played  by  gaps  in  governance  framework  in  precipitating  the  global 
crisis,  the  Senior  Supervisors’  Group  in  its  report  –  “Risk  Management  Lessons  from  the 
Global Banking Crisis of 2008” observed that “despite firms’ recent progress in improving risk 
management  practices,  underlying  weaknesses 
incentive  structures, 
information  technology  infrastructure  and  internal  controls  require  substantial  work  to 
address”. The Report brings out that the Board of Directors and the Top Management in the 
affected  institutions failed  to  recognise  and  initiate  corrective  action  on  both  the  excessive 
build-up  of  risks  in  the  individual  institutions  or  their  contribution  to  the  risk,  and  the 
disproportionate level of leverage in the system. There was a general disconnect between 
the risks being taken by the banks / other financial institutions and those that their Boards of 
directors perceived them to be taking.  
Robust  governance  systems  differentiated  successful  firms  from  others  during  the  crisis. 
Organisations with good risk governance systems were able to respond with more flexibility8 
in  governance, 
                                                
7   Caruana, Jaime (2012), “Shareholder Value and Stability in Banking; Is there a Conflict?” 
8   Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  “Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  tide  over  the  crisis. While  no  financial  institution  appears  to  have  fully  anticipated  the 
magnitude of the crisis, the way in which institutions were able to respond – and to influence 
their outcomes – depended, in large part, on the strength and configuration of their internal 
risk governance  structure.  The  Boards  of the  institutions  better  able  to weather  the  storm, 
generally  received  timelier,  more  complete,  and  enterprise-wide  risk  information,  enabling 
them to make critical decisions to curtail risk earlier – before asset values plummeted and 
market-based sources of funding became inaccessible.9 
The Group of Thirty (G30) report “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institutions”, too 
brings  out  that  management  teams,  boards  of  directors,  regulators  and  supervisors,  and 
shareholders all failed, in their respective roles, to prudently govern and oversee systemically 
important financial institutions. 
Governance failures leading to the global financial crisis are largely being explained to the 
weaknesses in board level oversight. The Boards were not actively involved in setting of the 
risk  appetite  for  the  firms.  Incomplete  risk  information  to  the  Boards  hampered  both  the 
complete understanding / appreciation of the firm wide risk profile of the institution and the 
effective decision making in this regard at the board level leading to a sense of complacency 
regarding the risk management frameworks in place. Also, there was a fundamental lack of 
expertise  among  the  directors,  especially  the  independent  directors,  to  understand  or 
respond to the risks in the desired manner. 
Governance  practices  suffered  from  similar  weaknesses  at  the  senior  management  level. 
Senior management failed to adopt and integrate the necessary systems to identify, manage, 
and  report risk.10  There  were  lacunae  observed  also  in  the  MIS  in  capturing  the  level  and 
nature of  aggregate  risk  arising  in  rapidly  evolving  balance  sheets.  Further, risks  were  not 
properly priced which resulted in improper allocation of capital, inadequate preparation for tail 
risk events eventually leading to the precipitation of the crisis.  
Another  area  of  imbalance  was  the  risk  reward  and  remuneration  framework.  The 
compensation packages encouraged risk taking behaviour with short term profit objective as 
the immediate goal at the expense of the long-term financial health of the organization. The 
compensation  structures  did  not  factor  in  appropriate  safeguards  to  check  or  mitigate  the 
adverse consequences or losses that could materialise in the long run from the imprudent or 
excessive risk taking and jeopardize the safety and soundness of the organization.  
The crisis also highlighted the absence of enterprise wide risk decision making process. The 
risk  management  framework  was  based  on  silos  rather  than  the  enterprise  level,  thus 
missing  on  the  comprehensive  enterprise  wide  picture  including  an  understanding  of  the 
interplay of risks across the organisation. As the overall picture of the risks was not available 
with the Boards or the Top Management, the consequent controls and mitigating measures 
also turned out to be inadequate and ineffective which hindered effective risk management. 
Building a robust risk governance framework – the way forward 
VI.  
There is an enhanced realisation that the risk governance demands a holistic approach and 
that  risk  appreciation  should  start  at  the  top.  A  strengthened  management  information 
system  (MIS)  supported  by  robust  information  technology  platform  is  a  necessary  pre-
condition  for  enhancing  Board  efficiency  in  oversight  and  decision  making.  Similarly, 
augmented skill sets and experience at the level of independent directors would go a long 
way in enhancing the Board capacity. Strong MIS facilitate risk reporting to the boards in an 
                                                
9   The World Bank and International Finance Corporation (2010), “Bank Governance: Lessons from the Financial 
Crisis”, Note Number 13. 
10   The World Bank and International Finance Corporation (2010), “Bank Governance: Lessons from the Financial 
Crisis”, Note Number 13. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
effective  and  comprehensive  manner,  which  in  turn  enhances  transparency  and  causes 
informed decision taking. Robust information technology systems are a necessary condition 
for supporting the MIS framework as the quality of risk information that the Boards and the 
top management receive depends largely on the quality and robustness of the information 
technology systems.11  
In addition to prescribing the risk appetite for the institution, the board also needs to lay down 
appropriate risk strategy and ensure that this is institutionalised throughout the organization. 
This  would  entail,  aligning  risk  management  processes  with  the  overall  business  strategy, 
clearly defining the roles and responsibilities down the hierarchy, establishing accountability 
and  reinforcing  change  with  communication  and  training.  The  Board  and  the  senior 
management oversight must be supplemented with effective leadership by the Chairman and 
the  chief  executive  officer  (CEO),  and  informed  non-executive  directors.  The  Boards  must 
get much more intimately involved in risk matters and have a firmer understanding of the key 
risks faced by the business.  
Effective risk governance also demands that each director is aware of the breadth of risks 
faced by the bank. Directors add value to the Board when they have financial expertise, are 
aware  of  risk  fundamentals  and  techniques,  and  are  able  to  manage  dynamics  with 
executives. 
Board  level  risk  committees  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  the  overall  risk  governance 
framework. Apart from monitoring the firm’s strategic-risk profile on an on-going basis, such 
committees would also be responsible for defining the firm’s overall risk appetite; approving 
major  transactions  above  a  firm’s  risk  threshold,  and;  establishing  limit  structures  and  risk 
policies for use within individual businesses. 
Presence  of  a  Chief  Risk  Officer  (CRO)  is  expected  to  strengthen  the  risk  management 
framework.  However,  independence  of  the  CRO,  with  necessary  stature  to  influence 
decisions,  would  be  a  critical  element  in  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  the  post  in  risk 
management  process  as  also  the  strategic  risk  management  related  decisions.  The  CRO 
must  report  directly  to  the  CEO  and  the  Board  and  be  responsible  for  all  risks,  risk 
management  and  control  functions.  Another  important  requirement  is  integrating  risk  with 
business strategy and compensation. Risk – and return on risk – need to be core component 
of  any  performance  measure,  and  should  be  explicitly  factored  into  incentive  and 
compensation  schemes.  Compensation  must  be  formally  aligned  with  actual  performance, 
such as through adding more rigorous risk-based measures to scorecards. This would also 
involve moving to longer vesting periods, and increasing deferred compensation.  
The fragmented organisation of risk data into separate silos slows down risk management 
process and hinders the capability to respond to new regulatory requirements. The financial 
crisis  has  pushed  both  supervisors  and  market  players  to  move  towards  an  integrated 
approach  to  risk  data  that  brings  down  the  silos  in  organisation.  Only  by  integrating  data 
models, processes and methodologies can a bank achieve higher performance in terms of 
data quality.  
The  risk management  systems  must  take  into  account  technical  limitations  of  risk  models, 
such as Value at Risk (VaR). Stress testing and scenario analysis need to be established as 
truly effective management tools and should be integrated and standardized across business 
lines, types of risk and asset classes. 
                                                
11   Group of Thirty, “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institution”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Redesigning of regulations impact 
VII.  
A large scale overhaul of the regulatory framework has been undertaken to plug the gaps in 
regulation observed during the crisis and also to make the financial system more resilient. 
The new set of regulations, popularly called Basel III, seeks to address both firm specific and 
broader systemic risk. The measures relate to enhancing the quality and quantity of capital, 
liquidity  risk  management,  valuation  practices,  dealing  with  procyclicality  issues  and  with 
systemically  important  banks  including  enhanced  resolution  mechanism  for  systemically 
important banking groups. It also covers compensation policy, stress testing, disclosures to 
enhance transparency, and reducing systemic risk in the financial markets by encouraging 
OTC derivatives to move to central clearing and settlement mechanism, etc. 
The  new  regulations  enhance  the  requirement of  equity  capital  substantially.  Compared  to 
the  requirement  of  a  minimum  of  2  per  cent  equity  capital  as  percentage  of  risk  weighted 
assets, the new dispensation under Basel III stipulates 7 per cent equity capital, inclusive of 
capital  conservation  buffer  of  2.5  per  cent.  In  addition  there  is  a  requirement  of 
countercyclical capital buffers which will be required to be built up under certain conditions as 
also of additional capital requirement for Global Systemically Important Financial Institutions 
(GSIFIs). Higher equity capital is envisaged to contain risks in the financial system and make 
it more resilient. Along with the higher capital requirements, the new regulatory framework 
also widened the risk coverage especially those related to capital market activities; trading 
book,  securitisation  products,  counterparty  credit  risk  on  OTC  derivatives  and  repos.  All 
these would result in a substantially larger capital requirement for the banking sector.  
Internationally, and particularly in the Emerging Market Economies (EMEs), there has been 
concern over the feasibility of mobilising such large amount of capital and the impact such 
enhanced  capital  requirements  could  have  on  the  output  growth  and  also  on  banks’ 
profitability. Let me touch upon these two important issues here. 
The macroeconomic impact of capital regulation could flow from the possibility that given the 
higher costs of mobilizing capital, banks may either increase the interest rates on lending or 
ration 
involving  nearly 
100 simulations, however, indicate that bringing the global common equity capital ratio to a 
level that would meet the agreed minimum and the capital conservation buffer (i.e. raise it by 
1.3 per cent) would result in a maximum decline in GDP, relative to baseline forecasts, of 
0.22%, which would occur after 35 quarters. In terms of growth rates, annual growth would 
be 0.03 percentage points (or 3 basis points) below its baseline level during this time. This is 
then  followed  by  a  recovery  in  GDP  towards  the  baseline  growth  path.  The  estimated 
maximum  GDP  impact  per  percentage  point  of  higher  capital  is  0.17%  during  these 
35 quarters.  This  trade  off  between  growth  and  financial  stability  is  considered  to  be 
affordable.  The  reason  why  Basel  III  is  to  be  implemented  over  a  long  period  (January  1, 
2013 to December 31, 2018) is to minimise the impact on growth and the simulations seem 
to support the time frame for implementation. 
As regards the impact on profitability of banks, there is no denying the fact that the higher 
capital requirements would impact banks’ profitability by increasing the costs. There will be 
shift in the banks’ capital structure with a greater emphasis on equity than before, resulting in 
higher  cost  of  capital.  Ideally,  going  by  the  Modigliani-Miller  theory,  the  shift  in  the  capital 
structure should not impact the cost of funds. An increase in the proportion of equity, which 
will always be more expensive than debt, would be exactly offset by a decrease in the costs 
per unit of both debt and equity in recognition of the lower risk of insolvency. But that is under 
idealized conditions. In real world, where there are differential tax treatments between debt 
and equity and also explicit and implicit guarantees on deposits, debt financing is considered 
cheaper  compared  to  equity  financing.  Therefore,  there  is  reluctance  to  modify  the  capital 
structure by reducing leverage. 
The  argument,  therefore,  is  that  the  higher  capital  requirements  would  have  an  adverse 
impact on banks’ profitability and dissuade investors from banking stocks. From a long term 
lending.  The  studies  conducted  by  BIS 
the  quantum  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
perspective,  the  arguments  are  misplaced.  One  should  not  look  at  the  returns  on  a 
standalone basis. It is the risk adjusted return that depicts a more realistic picture and is what 
drives the investor expectations. Better capitalised banks should be able to raise both debt 
and equity capital at lower cost due to the reduced risk. 
Higher  leverage,  while  it  may  give  excessive  profits  in  the  short  term,  does  not  lead  to 
sustainable profitability. A recent study by BIS12 indicated that during periods that comprise 
the worst 20% of stock market performance, banks do worse than most other sectors. The 
study  also  suggests  that  despite  banks  being  about  six  times  more  leveraged  than  non-
financial firms, the average return on equity in banking has not been greatly different from 
that of others. The return on equity for banks at 12.2 % in the study sample compares not 
very differently from 11.7% of non-financial firms during the period 1995–2009. This is due to 
the fact that the excess returns of banks during good times are more than off-set by the lower 
than average returns during crisis period due to high leverage. This is to say that the profits 
that were earned during good times at the cost of higher risk are actually the risk premia and 
should have been treated as expected losses and not current income that was distributable. 
Reducing leverage, by increasing the equity capital is, therefore, not likely to cause adverse 
impact in the long run, on investor sentiment once these perspectives set in. 
Reserve bank’s approach to risk management: 
VIII.  
Before  concluding  let  me  briefly  touch  upon  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  towards  risk 
management. Even at the height of belief in the self correcting nature of free markets, which 
has  now  been  debunked  in  the  aftermath  of  crisis,  Reserve  Bank  maintained  a  stance  of 
conscious  gradualism  in  fostering  innovation  and  permitting  sophisticated  products  in  the 
markets.  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  is  more  guided  by  the  imperatives  of  ensuring  that 
finance remains linked to the real sector and does not derive dynamics of its own. Given the 
nature  of  our  economy  with  wide  disparities  in  the  income  levels,  education  and 
sophistication and the pressing need for ensuring inclusive growth, the market development 
strategy  has  been  carefully  calibrated  so  as  to  avert  any  excesses  which  could  lead  to 
market failures. New products were introduced taking into account the preparedness of the 
financial markets in particular and the economy in general. The products are initially made 
open to a select set of well regulated participants and only after the products are stabilised 
and fine tuned, other participants are permitted. Only regulated entities such as banks have 
been  permitted  market making  in  derivate  markets  while  others  are  permitted to  use  such 
products for only hedging risks on their balance sheet and not for punting. The opening up of 
markets,  thus,  has  followed  a  gradualist  strategy.  This  has  kept  us  in  good  stead  with  no 
major market seizure even during the height of global financial crisis. In recognition of the 
precautionary  approach  to  the  regulation  of  the  derivative  market  in  facilitating  financial 
innovation  in  a  responsible  manner,  Reserve  Bank  has  been  awarded  the  2012  Dufrenoy 
Prize for responsible innovation. 
Even  in  the  context  of  prudential  regulation  of  financial  system,  Reserve  Bank  adopted  a 
considered approach of limiting the systemic risk originating from both the procyclicality as 
well as interconnectedness dimensions. The countercyclical measures were adopted as back 
as  2004  when  specific  sectors  were  observed  to  be  heating  up.  The  risk  weights  and 
provisioning  ratios  were  increased  for  sensitive  sectors  such  as  capital  market,  housing, 
commercial real estate during the period when the boom was building up. The ratios were 
brought down post Oct 2008 when the economy started slowing down on the back of global 
turmoil.  Such  macroprudential  approach,  which  was  not  widely  prevalent  then,  saved  the 
domestic economy from the adverse shocks during the height of the crisis. Several measures 
have also been taken to reduce the inter-connectedness among banks on the one hand and 
                                                
12   Caruana, Jaime (2012), “Shareholder Value and Stability in Banking; Is there a Conflict?” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
between  banks  and  NBFCs  on  the  other,  and  limits  have  been  placed  on  exposures  to 
sensitive sectors to address the cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk. 
In  the  implementation  of  Basel  III  guidelines  also,  we  have  adopted  a  cautious  approach 
inasmuch as the minimum capital requirement has been kept at 1 percentage point higher 
than  that  stipulated  under  Basel  III  to  address  the  possible  inadequacies  in  the  capital 
allocation process and also the model risks in banks. The implementation schedule is also 
marginally  advanced  by  9  months,  to  be  complied  by  March  31,  2018  against  the  Basel 
requirement of January 01, 2019.  
Having deliberated on Reserve Banks’ approach towards risk management, I would now like 
to touch upon some of the contemporary issues in the context of Basel III implementation in 
India as well as some other issues. 
Why implement capital regulations? 
There is an argument that why an emerging economy like ours which neither was a direct 
cause  nor  the  direct  victim  of  the  global  crisis,  should  adopt  onerous  regulation  such  as 
Basel III which could, potentially, have a negative impact on output growth. The rationale for 
adopting  these  standards  are  two  fold:  One,  we  cannot  remain  non-complaint  with 
international standards especially when Indian banks are venturing abroad and our markets 
are  opened  for  international  participants.  Two,  even  while  our  financial  system  is  much 
simpler and does not have much of the features which led to the crisis, we are vulnerable to 
the  contagion  from  global  economy  as  we  are  witnessing  today  and  higher  defences  built 
under Basel III will provide our financial system the much needed resilience. 
Issues with liquidity  
Basel III requires a high level of liquidity to be maintained through a pool of unencumbered 
liquid assets. While Indian banks maintain a large pool of liquid assets in compliance with the 
Statutory Liquidity Ratio, they may not technically qualify as liquid assets under Basel III as 
these  are  not  freely  available  to  banks  for  liquidity  purposes.  Requiring  banks  to  maintain 
liquid  assets  over  and  above  the  SLR  could  put  them  in  a  competitively  disadvantageous 
position. We are, therefore, considering as to what extent the SLR can be reckoned towards 
Basel III requirements for holding liquid assets. 
Countercyclical capital 
While the idea of maintaining countercyclical capital to withstand the impact of vagaries of 
business cycles is theoretically appealing, its implementation has certain issues. The metric 
“Credit to GDP ratio” used by  BCBS framework may not be suitable  in  the Indian context, 
given our traditionally low Credit to GDP ratio and the structural changes that our economy is 
experiencing  on  the  back  of  financial  inclusion  and  relatively  high  growth.  The  sectoral 
approach  that  we  had  adopted  in  the  past  (i.e.  altering  the  risk  weights  and  provisioning 
requirement for sectors witnessing very high growth) seems more suitable. Deviations from 
the Basel framework are permissible in the “comply or explain” framework. The risk, however 
is that markets may interpret such deviation as non-compliance. Communication, therefore, 
during  peer  group  review  by  Basel  Committee  as  well  as  with  markets  assumes  great 
significance. 
Leverage ratio 
Basel III prescribes a leverage ratio (ratio of Tier I capital to book value of assets including 
off-balance sheet items) as backstop arrangement to supplement the capital adequacy ratio. 
Our view has been that since, for Indian banks, the SLR requirements are substantial and 
carry  little  risks,  these  should  be  kept  out  of  the  leverage  ratio.  However,  this  was  not 
accepted  by  BCBS.  But  the  comforting  news  is  that  the  leverage  ratio  of  Indian  banks  is 
modest  compared  to  the  levels  being  contemplated.  Additionally,  since  under  Basel  III 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
liquidity framework, all banks will have to maintain liquid assets, the perceived competitive 
disadvantage of Indian banks would get addressed substantially. 
Implementation challenges in Basel II advanced approaches (skills, technology) 
While all commercial banks in India have adopted standardised approaches under Basel II 
by March 2009, the implementation of advanced approaches is under various stages. As the 
advanced approaches are technology intensive and also require highly skilled workforce, it is 
going to be challenging for banks going forward. Availability of data for building and testing 
advanced models and for building scenarios would be another serious challenge. 
Compensation policy  
Perverse  incentives  fostered  by  irrational  compensation  policies  were  one  of  the  causes 
attributed  to  the  outbreak  of  global  financial  crisis.  The  compensation  policies  encouraged 
employees to increase short term profit without adequate recognition of risks and long-term 
consequences  that  their  activities  posed  to  the  organisation.  To  address  these  concerns, 
Reserve  Bank  issued  guidelines  on  compensation  practices  for  private  and  foreign  banks, 
based on the international initiatives. 
Corporate governance 
To  strengthen  the  corporate  governance  and  bolster  risk  management  practices  in  banks, 
various capacity building measures in the form of trainings and workshops are held by RBI. 
In order to leverage on the Core Banking Solution (CBS) platform built by commercial banks 
and address, inter alia, potential operational risks arising out of technology adoption in the 
banking sector, Reserve Bank released an IT Vision Document for 2011–17 emphasising the 
need for risk controls, risk mitigation systems, fraud detection and prevention and business 
continuity  plans  (BCP).  The  establishment  of  the  Centre for  Advanced  Financial  Research 
and  Learning  (CAFRAL)  should  boost  the  capacity  building  efforts  as  well  as  promote 
research in regulation and supervision – an area in which India has to do a lot of catching up. 
Financial stability reviews and reports 
To  create  awareness  of  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  system  and  to  initiate  prompt  corrective 
action, Reserve Bank periodically brings out Financial Stability Reports and reviews sharing 
the  results  of  its  macroprudential  surveillance.  These  reports  have  become  very  crucial  in 
assessing the systemic risk build up especially in the light of the fast changing global and 
domestic scenario. 
Dynamic provisioning 
Building  of  countercyclical  provisions  is  prudential  measure  which  goes  a  long  way  in 
strengthening  the  resilience  against  the  cyclical  shocks.  BCBS  is  working  on  an  expected 
loss-based countercyclical provisioning methodology in consultation with IASB which is likely 
to take time. In India, banks have a stock of floating provisions which we have not permitted 
to  be  used,  except  under  a  situation  of  systemic  stress. While  the  floating  provisions  may 
serve the purpose of countercyclical provision, a framework is necessary for allowing its use. 
As an interim measure, we have developed a methodology based on the Spanish dynamic 
provisioning system which has been put up for public comments. 
Securitisation 
In the light of the lessons learnt from the global crisis the securitisation guidelines have been 
extensively redesigned to dissuade the “originate to distribute” model and to build the “skin in 
the game” by prescribing Minimum Holding Period (MHP) prior to securitisation and Minimum 
Retention Requirement (MRR) after securitisation. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) 
One of the prominent lessons taught by the crisis is to have a systemic view of risk and to be 
in  readiness  to  take  corrective  action  as  and  when  required,  which  calls  for  a  close 
coordination  among  different  regulators.  In  order  to  have  a  formalised  coordination 
mechanism, a Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) under the Chairmanship 
of  the  Finance  Minister  has  been  constituted.  A  sub-committee  of  FSDC  under  the 
chairmanship  of  the  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  ensures  coordination  amongst  the 
regulators during normal times. 
Setting up of holding companies 
At present, most of the financial groups in India are led by banks and organised under the 
Bank Subsidiary model. This model, however, puts the onus on the parent bank for corporate 
governance,  performance  and  capital  requirement  of  the  subsidiaries.  Besides,  the  parent 
carries  very  substantial  reputational  risk.  The  Working  Group  on  “Introduction  of  Holding 
Company  structure  in  India  for  banks”  has  recommended  migration  of  major  financial 
conglomerates to the holding company structure to address these limitations to some extent. 
Necessary legal amendments will have to be put in place for facilitating such migration.  
Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) 
Sound  and  unambiguous  legislative  framework  is  a  prerequisite  for  an  efficient  regulatory 
system.  At  present,  in  India,  there  are  about  60  Acts  and  multiple  rules  and  regulations, 
many  of  which  are  archaic  and  the  large  number  of  amendments  have  made  the  laws 
ambiguous and complex. Government of India has constituted a Financial Sector Legislative 
Reforms Commission (FSLRC) to rewrite and streamline the financial sector laws, rules and 
regulations to bring them in harmony with India’s fast growing financial sector. 
Concluding thoughts 
IX.  
I  have  presented  my  random  thoughts  on  the  issues  of  risk  and  governance.  I  have  also 
attempted  to  provide  you  the  flavour  of  regulatory  response  to  the  crisis,  and  the  issues 
surrounding implementation of Basel III both from the international and Indian perspectives. 
Risk and governance are still evolving concepts and I am sure deliberations such as these 
would provide valuable inputs for policy formulation. I congratulate ISB and Deloitte for their 
initiative of organising this Summit and wish the deliberations all success. 
Thank you 
References: 
Caruana, Jaime (2012), “Shareholder Value and Stability in Banking; Is there a Conflict?” 
Danielsson, Jon, “Blame the Model”, Journal of Financial Stability 4 (2008) 
Derman, Emanuel (2011), “Models Behaving Badly”, Free Press  
Diebold, Francis X, Doherty, Neil A, Herring, Richard J (2010), “The Known, the Unknown 
and the Unknowable in Financial Risk Management”, Princeton University Press 
Dowd, Kevin and Hutchinson, Martin, “Alchemists of Loss”, Times Group Books  
Group of Thirty, “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institution”  
Haldane, Andrew G (2012), “Tails of the Unexpected” 
Institute of International Finance (2009), “Risk Models and Statistical Measures of Risk”  
Mohan,  Rakesh  (  2007),  “India’s  Financial  Sector  Reforms  –  Fostering  Growth  while 
Containing Risk” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Paulson, Henry M (2010), “On the Brink”, Business Plus, Hachette Book Group.  
Rebonato, Riccardo (2007), “Plight of the Fortune Teller”, Princeton University Press 
Senior Supervisors Group (2008), “Observations on Risk Management Practices during the 
Recent Market Turbulence” 
--------- (2009), “Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008” 
The World Bank and International Finance Corporation (2010), “Bank Governance: Lessons 
from the Financial Crisis”, Note Number 13. 
Triana, Pablo (2009), “Lecturing Birds on Flying”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
