Ignazio Visco: Economic and policy interconnections in the current 
crisis 
Keynote speech by Dr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the “Consiglio per le 
Relazioni fra Italia e Stati Uniti”, Venice, 9 June 2012. 
 1. The current crisis is a clear demonstration that in an increasingly interconnected 
global  economy  even  local  events  can  easily  take  on  systemic,  international 
importance.  The  crisis  in  the  euro  area  originated  in  the  financial  debacle  of  2007–2008, 
which  was  triggered  by  financial  imbalances,  regulatory  failures  and  excessive  risk-taking, 
mainly in the United States. Financial globalization has brought substantial benefits, such as 
more  efficient  intermediation  of  savings  and  risk-pooling,  but  it  has  also  made  the  global 
system more vulnerable. 
The sovereign debt strains in the euro area reflect the impact of the financial crisis on some 
countries’ banking systems and public finances as well as pre-existing vulnerabilities, which 
for Italy consisted in slow growth and high public debt. Tensions were fuelled not only by the 
deteriorating outlook for the global economy but also by the worsening of Greece’s financial 
situation  and  the  fears  of  contagion  triggered  by  the  announcement  of  the  private  sector 
involvement in the reduction of the country’s public debt. 
2. If the euro area were viewed as a single country, it would appear as a sound and 
balanced economy. The external accounts are in balance. The public sector deficit and debt 
this  year  are  forecast to  be  just  over  3  and  90  percent  of GDP,  respectively.  Households’ 
gross financial wealth is three times their annual disposable income, while their debt is equal 
to that income; aggregate corporate financial debt is equal to one year’s output. Italy’s figures 
are not far from the European average, and as regards the financial position of households 
and firms they are better. The external current account deficit is around 3 percent of GDP. 
The public debt is 120 percent of GDP but should begin to decline in 2013. In the absence of 
a European political union, the vulnerabilities of individual countries are magnified. Without 
the design and implementation of appropriate governance arrangements, monetary union is 
difficult to sustain. 
3.  Due  to  euro  area’s  openness  and  financial  interconnections,  the  crisis  can  have 
world-wide  repercussions.  The  area  is  more  open  than  other  advanced  economies.  Its 
trade  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  increased  noticeably,  owing  in  particular  to  growing 
exchanges  with  new  EU  member  states  and  the  emerging  economies.  In  2011,  euro-area 
exports  and  imports  accounted  for  49  percent  of  GDP,  up  from  32  percent  in  1999;  the 
corresponding figure for both the US and Japan is 29 percent. The area’s financial assets 
and  liabilities  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  world  amounted  to  184  and  196  percent  of  GDP, 
respectively, up from 92 and 99 percent in 1999. In the US the corresponding figures in 2010 
were 140 and 157 percent. 
Italy is very open to foreign trade. Trade with countries outside the euro area is worth about 
34 percent of Italian GDP and 6 percent of euro-area GDP. Including exchanges with the rest 
of the euro area, Italy’s openness is even more pronounced, the total value of foreign trade 
equalling 59 percent of GDP. The share of manufacturing exports in GDP is high compared 
to other advanced countries. In 2009 about 90,000 manufacturing firms – a fifth of all Italian 
manufacturers  –  sold  part  of  their  output  abroad.  Many  are  able  to  reach  distant,  difficult 
markets like China: this is the case for 8,600 Italian industrial firms, against 6,300 German 
firms and 4,200 French firms. In 2011, Italy’s foreign financial assets and liabilities amounted 
to 119 and 140 percent of GDP, respectively, up from 92 and 97 percent in 1999. 
4.  The  crisis  risks  leading  to  re-nationalization  of  financial  portfolios.  The  perceived 
risks are amplified by the uncertainty over the resolution of events that are in many respects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
unprecedented. The key is careful and timely analysis of each national economy and of the 
actors  within  them.  The  opportunities  offered  by  financial  diversification  in  a  global 
environment are potentially intact. Ongoing reform efforts in the euro-area countries aim at 
preserving their attractiveness for financial diversification. 
 5.  The  crisis  has  highlighted  the  weaknesses  of  EU  and  especially  euro-area 
governance.  First,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  failed  to  provide  sufficient  incentives  to 
correct  fiscal  imbalances.  Second,  budgetary  discipline  alone  could  not  avert  the  financial 
tensions generated by  macroeconomic imbalances. Third, the EU lacked a mechanism for 
managing systemic crises. 
EMU  governance  hinged  on  fiscal  rules  and  a  no-bail-out  clause. The  rules  were  deemed 
necessary because “the constraints imposed by market forces might either be too slow and 
weak or too sudden and disruptive” (Delors Committee, 1989). Economic convergence was 
expected to follow almost automatically from competitive pressures. But the fiscal rules were 
not fully enforced, macroeconomic imbalances mounted and markets behaved as expected: 
in spite of the no-bail-out clause, for years sovereign risks were underestimated; then they 
were overestimated. 
The crisis also made clear the close linkage between sovereign risk and bank risk. Before 
the crisis there was substantial convergence of interbank interest rates in the euro area and 
a significant reduction in the home bias of investors’ portfolios. Greater financial integration 
favoured  uniform  monetary  policy  transmission across the  area. The  crisis  changed things 
dramatically. In the countries most severely affected by the sovereign debt crisis interbank 
rates increased to very high levels and wholesale bank funding became extremely difficult. 
Italian banks’ net fundraising from non-residents, on foreign interbank markets and by way of 
bond  issues,  shrank  by  more  than  €100  billion  in  the  last  five  months  of  2011.  The  huge 
volume of bank bonds maturing in 2012 and the difficulties that banks were encountering in 
accessing  capital  markets  prompted  fears  that  they  might  be  forced  to  dump  assets, 
triggering  a  potentially  systemic  negative  spiral  between  declining  asset  prices,  tighter 
lending  standards  and  deteriorating  economic  conditions,  which  would  jeopardize  financial 
and  price  stability.  Indeed,  in  the  final  part  of  2011  the  Eurosystem  Bank  Lending  Survey 
signalled a sizeable tightening of lending conditions. There was the concrete risk of a ruinous 
credit crunch. 
6.  Policymakers  responded  in  three  ways:  reform  of  European  economic  governance; 
ambitious programmes of fiscal consolidation and structural reform in member countries; and 
decisive actions by the Eurosystem to stabilize financial markets and preserve the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. 
7.  First,  the  reform  of  the  treaties  and  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  reflects 
recognition of the shortcomings of European governance. The first step was the creation 
of financial support mechanisms (the European Financial Stability Facility and the European 
Stability  Mechanism), which permit the mobilization of substantial resources. The so-called 
“six-pack” and the “fiscal compact” reinforced the fiscal rules and strengthened enforcement 
mechanisms. Multilateral surveillance was extended to macroeconomic imbalances. 
The  effort,  though  significant,  is  not  complete.  The  fiscal  compact  awaits  national 
ratifications. Proposals to further strengthen multilateral surveillance are still being discussed 
by  the  EU  Commission,  the  Council  and  the  Parliament.  Financial  assistance  to  states  in 
difficulty must be made operationally effective. It must be possible to intervene promptly in 
the  securities markets  and  directly  in  favour  of banks,  with  flexible  procedures  that  do  not 
penalize countries that respect the rules of the Union. The progress of troubled countries in 
financial restructuring and structural reform must be accompanied by the undertaking of the 
European authorities to orient the markets’ assessments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  necessary  to  resist  the  re-nationalization  of  financial  systems. 
Measures taken from a purely national standpoint could severely hamper the working of the 
euro area. We need to speed up the transition to a uniform system of financial sector rules 
and  oversight.  This  should  be  accompanied  by  common  guarantee  and  insurance 
mechanisms  that  can  reassure  savers  and  investors  and  prevent  flights  of  capital.  Rapid 
progress  in  setting  up  a  European  fund  for  the  resolution  of  banking  crises  would  help  to 
dispel uncertainty. 
8.  Second,  consolidation  measures  were  implemented  in  a  number  of  euro-area 
countries to restore the markets’ confidence in fiscal sustainability. To varying degree 
these interventions were accompanied by structural reforms to increase potential growth and 
avert a downward spiral of deeper recession and deteriorating public finances. In the case of 
Italy, action on the public budget has been rapid and decisive. Structural reform has met with 
more resistance, but some important results have nevertheless been achieved. 
Current forecasts put Italy’s budget deficit for 2012 below the 3 percent ceiling; next year the 
budget should be near structural balance and the public debt-to-GDP ratio should begin to 
fall,  thanks  in  part  to  the  completion  of  the  pension  reform.  There  is  a  large  and  growing 
primary surplus; current expenditure net of interest payments has been falling in real terms 
for two years now. However, the recent fiscal consolidation consisted chiefly of tax increases. 
This burden can be sustained only temporarily. A stronger and more incisive fight against tax 
evasion  and  the  implementation  of  spending  cuts  are  the  indispensable  premises  for  the 
necessary  reduction  of  tax  rates.  If  expenditure  savings  are  targeted  to  removing 
inefficiencies and if they are equitable, they will not hamper growth but should stimulate it. 
On the structural front, in Italy more has been done since the summer of 2011 than during 
the previous decade. Work has begun on a vast scale with reforms to remedy the structural 
deficiencies that are holding the Italian economy back. Measures have been adopted in such 
crucial  areas  as  competition  and  regulation,  business  environment,  civil  justice  and 
infrastructure development. The reform of labour market regulation and the social safety net 
now  in  course  of  approval  by  Parliament  aims  at  attenuating  labour  market  dualism  by 
altering the relative economic advantage of temporary over permanent contracts for firms; it 
also broadens the social safety net by widening unemployment insurance coverage. 
Competition-enhancing measures have been introduced in a good number of sectors. Some 
entail  significant  changes  in  the  regulatory  environment,  whereas  others  have  significantly 
less  potential  efficacy.  Procedures 
for  business  start-ups  have  been  streamlined, 
authorizations and ex-ante controls reduced. The administrative burdens placed on firms by 
environmental, labour, public procurement and privacy regulations have been reduced. As to 
the civil justice system, a geographical reorganization of the courts is under way to achieve 
economies  of  scale,  while  incentives  for  productivity  have  been  introduced.  Specialized 
courts  have  been  instituted  for  some  kinds  of  dispute  involving  firms.  To  promote 
infrastructure, administrative procedures have been simplified and measures taken to attract 
private investment. 
The actual impact of all these structural measures on the Italian economy will depend greatly 
on  their  full  and  effective  implementation.  It  will  take  time  for  the  effects  to  materialize. 
Systematic ex-post quantitative economic impact assessments are essential if the purposes 
of the reforms are to be realized. 
10.  The  process  of  removing  the  obstacles  to  economic  activity  must  be  continued 
and  strengthened.  Undue  restrictions  to  market  competition  have  to  be  eliminated.  The 
public  sector  requires  sweeping  modernization  based  on  the  evaluation  of  single  units’ 
performance,  reorganization,  and  further  streamlining  of  regulations  and  administrative 
procedures. The fight against corruption and crime must be at the top of the agenda, also to 
minimize the costs that these two factors impose on the economy as they certainly form a 
significant obstacle to the efficient allocation of resources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Together with the fragmented nature of Italian industry, uncertainty over the enforcement of 
contracts (due to the slowness of civil justice), corruption and public sector inefficiency are 
taking a toll on foreign direct investment in Italy. In the last ten years FDI inflows (1.1 percent 
of  GDP)  have  been  much  lower  than  those  to  France  (2.5  percent)  or  to  the  euro-area 
countries  as  a  group  (2.3  percent).  Reforms  to  make  Italy’s  economic  environment  more 
favourable to both domestic and foreign investment are needed to ensure the utilization of 
untapped human resources, especially young people and women, and to realize the growth 
potential of our southern regions. 
11. Third, the Governing Council of the ECB reacted promptly with bold measures to 
counter the instability that emerged in the last part of 2011. The Council lowered official 
rates twice (to 1.0 percent), lengthened the duration of its full-allotment fixed-rate longer-term 
refinancing  operations  to  three  years,  halved  the  compulsory  reserve  coefficient  and 
expanded the range of assets eligible as collateral in refinancing operations. 
The two three-year LTROs carried out in December and February resulted in a net injection 
of  liquidity  of  some  €500  billion,  which  compensated  for  the  shortfall  in  banks’  wholesale 
fundraising,  averting  the  risk  of  a  severe  credit  restriction  and  restoring  more  uniform 
monetary policy transmission. The abundant supply of liquidity and the greater availability of 
collateral  strengthened  investors’  confidence  in  banks’  ability  to  meet  their  funding  needs, 
and market indicators improved. In Italy 112 banks participated in the operations, receiving a 
total of €140 billion on a net basis. Italian banks now have the resources to accommodate a 
recovery  in  the  demand for  credit,  but the  effects  on  actual  credit growth  will  emerge  only 
gradually,  reflecting  the  usual  lags.  Much  will  depend  on  the  evolution  of  economic 
conditions,  which  will  affect  credit  demand  and  banks’  assessment  of  borrowers’ 
creditworthiness. 
 12.  The  European  and  global  economic  outlook  and  financial  market  conditions  are 
daunting.  Uncertainty  is  very  great.  With  the  political  deadlock  in  Greece  and  severe 
difficulties in the Spanish banking sector, tensions have re-emerged and sovereign spreads 
widened once again. The signs of faltering growth have intensified outside Europe as well, 
both in the advanced and the emerging economies. A new global economic slowdown would 
pose  additional  risks  to  already  fragile  financial  systems  and  threaten  the  sustainability  of 
public debts, in Europe and elsewhere. 
13.  At  this 
juncture,  support  from  monetary  policy,  both  conventional  and 
unconvential, remains essential. This week the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed 
its determination to provide all the necessary liquidity to the banking system and to preserve 
the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. In particular, our refinancing 
operations will continue to be conducted as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment 
for as long as necessary, and in any case at least through the rest of this year. 
At the same time it is crucial to observe that the Eurosystem’s non-standard measures are 
temporary; they constitute a bridge that has yet to be crossed. A complete exit from the crisis 
will be achieved only if all actors properly shoulder their responsibilities.  
14. The commitments of the G20 to boost growth must be pursued consistently. In the 
emerging economies, where there still is some fiscal and monetary leeway, policies should 
be  geared  to  preventing  an  excessive  slowdown.  For  the  United  States,  it  is  essential  to 
avoid  the  risk  of  a  sharp  fiscal  tightening,  such  as  would  be  produced  in  2013  by  the 
legislated automatic spending cuts and the expiry of earlier tax reductions. 
In Europe, the reform process must be reinforced at supranational and national level, in order 
to foster growth and correct both public and private structural imbalances. In particular, the 
reform of economic governance must be accelerated, in order to break the linkage between 
sovereign risk and bank risk. This will require courageous moves towards fiscal and financial 
union.  Amendments  to  national  constitutions  may  be  necessary  to  shift  some  elements  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sovereignty to the supranational level. The common resources made available by any such 
form  of  union  should  be  complemented  by  cogent  rules  and  powers  of  control  and 
intervention. 
For  Italy,  the  emergency  is  not  over.  Structural  reforms,  if  seen  within  a  consistent  and 
comprehensive strategic framework, can provide the basis for a surge in confidence in our 
potential  for  sustained  economic  growth.  Preserving  and  sustaining  fiscal  responsibility  is 
essential, even if at the cost of some short-run difficulties.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
