Seppo Honkapohja: How did the crisis challenge the central banking as 
we knew it? What should (not) change? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Seppo  Honkapohja,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
Conference  on  “Financial  and  macroeconomic  stability:  challenges  ahead”,  Istanbul,  
4–5 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
The  on-going  financial  crisis  brought  about  realizations  of  “tail  risks”,  which  has  forced  a 
serious rethink on several dimensions of central banking. The most obvious challenge is the 
greatly increased importance of financial stability objective that has come about as a result of 
the banking and financial market problems during the crisis. It is evident that financial stability 
objectives will also have a bearing on the conduct of monetary policy. 
There has been a fair amount of new research on the interrelations between financial stability 
and  monetary  policy  and  significant  research  effort  is  ongoing  in  this  area.  As  the  next 
speaker in the panel is an expert in the financial stability area, I will not focus on these issues 
in  my  remarks.  Instead  I  will  take  up  three  other  consequences  of  the  crisis  and  their 
influence  on  the  practices  of  central  banking.  In  my  opinion  these  areas  are  important  for 
both macroeconomic policy and research. 
1. 
The  Great  Recession  of  2008–2009  was  combated  with  the  use  of  some  strong 
monetary policy measures, together with fiscal stimulus policies. Some new forms of 
monetary  policy  have  been  used.  What  do  we  know  about  their  effects  and 
effectiveness? Is there a need to keep these new policies in the tool kit of central 
banks in the longer term? 
The  recession  has  been  followed  by  sluggish  recovery  in  many  advanced  market 
economies.  The  current  situation  is  placing  a  very  large  role  for  monetary  policy. 
This is straining the usual boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy.  
The fiscal deficits led to rapidly rising levels of public debt, which are now a huge 
concern.  Though  the  levels  of  public  debt  were  rising  in  many  advanced  market 
economies  before  the  crisis,  the  Great  Recession  accelerated  the  public  debt 
problems. The high public debts are a concern more generally and not just in the 
euro  area.  These  debt  problems  are  likely  to  pose  a  challenge  for  defining  the 
proper domains of fiscal and monetary policies in the coming years.  
2. 
3. 
Monetary policies to combat the crisis 
II. 
When  the  crisis  became  acute  the  initial  response  of  most  central  banks  took  the  form  of 
rapidly  executed  reduction  in  the  policy  interest  rate.  When  the  policy  rates  reached  an 
effective lower bound, central banks had to resort to unconventional policies. Though details 
of these policies differ, one can classify them in two main types. 
The  first  type  of  unconventional  policies  consists  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  and/or 
extensive  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks.  Both  types  of  policies  have  resulted  in  significant 
increases in the central bank balance sheet. The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England 
have  both  purchased  large  quantities  of  government  bonds  to  influence  the  economy. 
Liquidity  provision  to  banks  has  been  the  primary  unconventional  policy  response  by  the 
ECB and also some other central banks, for example, by the Bank of Sweden. 
What  do  we  know  about  the  effectiveness  of  these  policies  in  countering  a  recession? 
According  to  various  studies  the  effects  of  these  policies  on  the  real  economy  have  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
favorable  –  at  least  in  a  qualitative  sense.  The  basic  mechanism  of  central  bank’s  asset 
purchases  or  liquidity  provision  is  that  these  operations  reduce  excess  returns  in  private 
intermediation which have become high as a result of disruptions due to the financial crisis.1 
By  influencing  long-term  interest  rates  and  asset  prices,  these  policies  seem  to  have 
contributed positively to real GDP growth and, as a by-product, to inflation. The latter effect 
has been useful as there have been and continue to be concerns about deflation.  
One  consequence  of  the  asset  purchase/  liquidity  policies  has  been  the  decline  in 
intermediation activity in the money and bond markets. Central banks have in effect become 
“market makers” to a non-trivial degree. This role is not natural for a central bank as it is a 
much  bigger  presence  than  what  central  banks  have  in  normal  times.  It  could  be  that  the 
markets get addicted by the low rates and a new market maker. It should also be noted that 
quantitative easing and liquidity provision policies are likely to impact financial markets and 
asset risks in some unfavorable ways. A variety of possible problems have been mentioned 
and further research would seem to be warranted to assess the significance of these effects.  
The  second  type  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  is  usually  called  “forward guidance”, 
the idea being that the central bank makes public announcements about its policy interest 
rate  plans  for  the  future.  The  announcements  have  effects  on  longer-term  market  interest 
rates  via  expectations  and  the  term  structure.  If  financial  markets  and  monetary  policy 
transmission function well, then forward guidance may well be preferable to the use of asset 
purchases by central bank. 
The forms of forward guidance differ among central banks. The Federal Reserve and Bank of 
Canada  make  announcements  about  future  intentions.  Some  central  banks,  for  example 
Bank  of  Norway  and  Bank  of  Sweden,  go  further  and  show  projections  of  intended  policy 
rates  into  the  future  with  the  aim  of  enhancing  credibility  and  transparency  of  monetary 
policy. Studies of forward guidance suggest that the practices do influence markets rates in 
the desired ways, though there are also cases – notably in Sweden – where market rates do 
not seem to align well with the announced policy intentions. 
There is by now a fair amount of empirical experience with unconventional monetary policies 
and there are several studies of their impact on the economy. Further studies are, however, 
warranted as unconventional policies are likely to stay in the tool kit of monetary policy and 
they may well be needed at times in the future. To this end I must note that the crisis is far 
from over and interest rates may stay at very low levels for several more years. This is so 
even  if  plans  for  exit  from  the  low-rate  regime  are  occasionally  discussed.  We  must  also 
recall the Japanese experience. Bank of Japan has kept the interest rates very low and has 
at times engaged in unconventional policies during the past fifteen years or so. 
Remarks on exit from current stagnation 
III. 
I  next  want  to  make  other  remarks  about  the  regime  of  effective  lower  bound  for  interest 
rates  and  of  unconventional  monetary  policies.  It  is  often  suggested  that  the  policies  of 
central banks and governments have rescued western market economies from a far worse 
outcome  than  the  Great  Recession  of  2008–9.  Fiscal  policy  accompanied  the  strong 
monetary  policies.  A  second  case  of  unprecedented  monetary  policy  action  has  been  the 
recent  massive  3-year  liquidity  provision  by  the ECB.  The  latter  measure  was  designed to 
counter  the  freezing  of  credit  markets  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  latter  case,  there  was  no 
accompanying fiscal policy. 
Looking  at  the  current  mix  of  policies,  the  general  picture  is  that  central  banks  in  many 
advanced  market  economies  continue  to  have  policy  interest  rates near or  at  the  effective 
                                                
1  See e.g. Gertler and Karadi (2012) and the references therein. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
lower bound and unconventional policy measures are applied occasionally if a recovery is at 
risk to falter. In contrast, fiscal stimulus is no longer applied or its scale has been reduced in 
most countries. This state of affairs has two consequences for the changing role of central 
banking.  
First, the mix of macroeconomic policies is placing the main responsibility to central banks for 
achieving  more  satisfactory  macroeconomic  developments.  This  situation  and  the  use  of 
unconventional policies are straining the conventional boundary between monetary and fiscal 
policy.  Large-scale  asset  purchases  and  liquidity  provision  to  banks  in  the  euro  area  have 
clear fiscal consequences and there have recently been several political calls for more action 
from the central banks. 
Second,  one  can  ask  whether  this  kind  of  policy  mix  can  lead  the  economy  back  to  the 
“normal regime”, where inflation is near the targeted level and the economy grows near its 
potential. The traditional answer is due to Pigou and Patinkin, who argued that wealth effects 
at very low inflation levels eventually lead to increased consumer spending and recovery of 
the  economy  to  the  normal  regime.  It  should  be  noted  that  efficacy  of  the  Pigou-Patinkin 
mechanism depends on the degree of private-sector indebtedness – high debts weaken the 
mechanism. 
Modern answers to this question are surprisingly few. Looking at current research, there has 
been a lot of work in the efficacy of fiscal policies when interest rates are at their effective 
lower bound.2 Another major research effort focuses on the significance of financial market 
imperfections for macroeconomics and for macroeconomic policies.3 However, I have seen 
only limited amount of new work that tries to assess the role of monetary and fiscal policies in 
aiding  the  path  toward  the  normal  regime.  A  careful  approach  requires  taking  a  global 
viewpoint. I do not have time to go into further detail, except to note that this area is in need 
of much more research.4 
Interrelations between domains of fiscal and monetary policy 
IV. 
The  latest  stage  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  is  also  affecting  the 
boundary between monetary and fiscal policies. This situation is not new. We know well from 
economic  history  that  the  lines  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  the  respective 
decision-makers become strained from time to time in situation of high levels of public debt. 
The  recent  paper  by  Reinhart  and  Sbrancia  (2012)  describes  very  well  the  strains  in  this 
relationship in the decades after World War I and II.  
The current situation has compelled many central banks take a more encompassing view of 
their mandate in relation to the fiscal authorities. In particular, there are major difficulties in 
the  euro  area  in  this  respect,  though  the  debates  are  also  visible  in  other  countries,  for 
example,  in  the  UK  and  the  United  States.  The  ECB  is  the  central  bank  not  for  a  single 
sovereign  country  but  for  17  sovereign  countries.  In  this  setting  there  is  no  one-to-one 
correspondence between the ultimate owners of the central bank and the ultimate owners of 
each government’s budget. The fact that the ECB has to serve 17 sovereigns also means 
that the tool kit of monetary policy is more limited than for a single-country central bank. 
It follows that the moral hazard considerations related to central bank actions in a monetary 
union  are  very  different  in  comparison  to  a  single-country  central  bank.  Even  in  a  country 
                                                
2  For example, see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) and the references therein. 
3  See Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov (2012) for a recent survey of this literature. 
4  Two  new  papers  that  take  the  nonlinearities  seriously  are  Benhabib,  Evans  and  Honkapohja  (2012),  and 
Fernández-Villaverde, Gordo, Guerrón-Quintana and Rubio-Ramirez (2012). These papers can be consulted 
for references to the other literature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
with its own central bank, a government may, for political reasons, be occasionally tempted 
to  resort  to  monetary  financing  of  fiscal  costs,  even  though  the  inflationary  and  financial 
repression cost will fall on its own taxpayers. But surely such temptation is stronger when the 
bulk  of  the  inflationary  cost  falls  on  not  just  domestic  taxpayers  but  also  other  countries’ 
taxpayers. 
When  the  EMU  was  established,  it  was  often  suggested  that  current  account  positions 
between members of a currency union do not matter. There cannot be balance-of-payments 
crises within a currency union. The financial crisis has proved that this view is fallacious. The 
sovereign debt crisis carries many of the hallmarks of a balance-of-payments crisis. It is by 
now obvious that a central bank whose job it is to equalize monetary conditions between the 
crisis countries and the safe-haven countries will inevitably face a formidable task. 
The tradeoffs the ECB has faced during the crisis range from what is necessary to maintain a 
sufficient  functioning  of  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  for  the  single  monetary 
policy to avoidance of making monetary policy a vehicle of fiscal transfers. The path between 
the two is full of difficulties, and only time will tell whether the euro system succeeded.  
Conclusions 
V. 
If  one  looks  at  the  history  of  central  banking,  it  is  evident  that  the  objectives  of  central 
banking and their balance have changed over time. This movement depends on what are the 
important  objectives  of  economic  policies.  Before  the  current  crisis  the  emphasis  was  on 
inflation  and,  depending  on  the mandate,  also more generally  on  macroeconomic  stability. 
This pre-crisis focus on price stability came in part as a response to the Great Inflation of the 
1970’s.  
The  current  financial  crisis  has  brought  the  financial  stability  tasks  to  the  discussions  of 
central  banking  objectives  and  practices.  New  frameworks  and  tools  for  macro-prudential 
supervision  and  new  regulations  on  the  financial  system  have  taken  a  central  position  on 
current  policy  and  research  agendas.  This  development  has  come  as  a  response  to  the 
financial crisis. Price stability as the macroeconomic objective continues to play an important 
part in central banking. Inflation targeting with a credible and independent central bank may 
well  survive  as  the  framework  for  monetary  policy.  However,  interconnections  between 
financial and macroeconomic stability are one topic that needs more attention in the future. 
Redrawing the boundaries between fiscal and monetary policy is a second topic that needs 
attention in the future. There are two reasons for this. First, the roles of fiscal and monetary 
policy  in  the  Great  Recession  and  in  exit  from  the  current  stagnation  need  further 
assessment. Second, the sovereign debt crisis and the rising debt levels in many advanced 
market economies may well influence the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy in 
the coming years.  
References 
Benhabib  J.,  G.W.  Evans  and  S.  Honkapohja  (2012),  Liquidity  Traps  and  Expectation 
Dynamics: Fiscal Stimulus or Fiscal austerity?, NBER working paper nr. 18114. 
Brunnermeier M.K., T.M.Eisenbach and Y.Sannikov (2012), Macroeconomics with Financial 
Frictions: A Survey, mimeo, March. 
Christiano  L.,  M.  Eichenbaum  and  S.  Rebelo  (2011),  When  Is  the  Government  Spending 
Multiplier Large?, Journal of Political Economy, vol.119, 78–121. 
Fernández-Villaverde  J.,  G.  Gordon,  P.A. Guerrón-Quintana  and  J.  Rubio-Ramirez  (2012), 
Nonlinear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound, NBER working paper nr. 18058. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Gertler M. and P. Karadi (2012), QE 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 … A Framewrok for Analyzing Large Scale 
Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool, mimeo, March. 
Reinhart  C.M.  and  M.B.  Sbrancia  (2011),  The  Liquidation  of  Government  Debt,  NBER 
working paper nr. 16893.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
