Masaaki Shirakawa: The importance of fiscal sustainability – preconditions 
for stability in the financial system and in prices 
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Bank of France 
Financial Stability Review launch event, Washington DC, 21 April 2012. 
 Relationship between fiscal sustainability and central banks 
The  mission  of  a  central  bank  is  to  contribute  to  sustained  growth  of  the  economy  by 
maintaining public confidence in money, and price stability and financial system stability are 
two  facets  of  this  mission.  Fiscal  sustainability  is  an  important  element  that  has  a 
fundamental impact on both. According to conventional wisdom, when the government loses 
its credibility with respect to the sustainability of government debt and does not make enough 
effort to regain it, this ultimately leads to either inflation or a default on the debt. To put this 
differently, it is often said that a central bank comes to face a tradeoff between price stability 
and financial system stability. However, since both are essential preconditions for sustained 
economic growth, it is not at all meaningful to consider which of the two we should choose. 
What is crucially important is to prevent the economy from getting into such a tradeoff in the 
first place; for that reason, fiscal sustainability itself is an essential precondition for the proper 
functioning of a central bank. Let me now elaborate on this point. 
In  normal  times,  government  bonds  are  traded  in  large  volumes  in  financial  markets  and 
used  as  collateral,  reflecting  their  characteristics  as  safe  assets.  They  are  also  held  by 
financial institutions as liquidity buffers and investment assets. As such, a heightened risk for 
government  debt  default  is  likely  to  lead  to  instability  in  the  financial  system,  through  an 
increase in the liquidity risk and the capital loss of financial institutions. In such a situation, a 
central  bank  may  be  called  into  action  as  a  “lender  of  last  resort”  by  providing  liquidity  in 
order  to  maintain  the  stability  in  financial  markets  and  the  financial  system,  and  such 
operations are expected to be effective at least in the short term. Taking an example from 
Europe, the ECB’s Long-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs) have helped to restore calm 
in financial markets. We are fully aware of the importance of such operations, but one has to 
also keep in mind that they can only be used to “buy time.” 
A central bank’s operations to “buy time” may help the government to garner time to build a 
public  consensus  on  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  and  gain  the  credibility  of  market 
participants for a consolidation plan. However, the side effects of such operations become 
significant  when  the  government’s  commitment  to  fiscal  reforms  is  weak  and  the  plan  for 
fiscal consolidation is less effective. Specifically, a temporary lull in financial markets due to a 
decline  in  government  bond  yields  is  likely  to  dilute  the  sense  of  urgency  among  the 
government  and  the  public,  and  thus  weaken  the  momentum  for  progress  toward  fiscal 
reforms.  If  the  government  continues  to  run  fiscal  deficits,  a  possibility  arises  in  which  the 
central bank is forced to supply an unlimited amount of liquidity – in the form of either liquidity 
provision  against  government  bonds  as  collateral  or  an  outright  purchase  of  government 
bonds – in order to get around a re-emergence of financial system instability. Historically, the 
consequence  of  such  a  large-scale  supply  of  money  is  uncontrollable  inflation.  If  market 
participants  and  the  public,  which  have  the  knowledge  of  this  history,  were  to  anticipate  a 
regime  shift  at  some  point,  the  credibility  with  respect  to  government  bonds  and  money 
would be lost abruptly, and a process leading to uncontrollable inflation would begin. 
After  all,  without  solid  progress  toward  fiscal  consolidation,  we  cannot  avoid  significantly 
adverse impacts on economic activity and the standard of living. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The case of Japan 
Now I would like to take up the case of Japan, which attracts frequent questions. As is well 
known, the ratio of gross government debt to GDP in Japan is the highest among developed 
countries. In spite of such unfavorable fiscal conditions, the government bond yields remain 
low  and  stable,  and  policy  discussions  are  focused  on  mild  deflation  instead  of  concerns 
regarding  inflation,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  consumer  price  index  has  fallen  by 
3.4 percent in cumulative terms since 1998, which can be translated to 0.2 percent annually. 
The  low  level  of  the  government  bond  yields  is  consistent  with  the  growth  rate  of  the 
economy and the inflation rate, and at issue is the interpretation of the premium that could 
arise from worsening fiscal situations. 
It  seems  difficult  to  explain  the  case  of  Japan  in  light  of  the  conventional  wisdom.  One 
frequently offered explanation is that the ample domestic savings in Japan have absorbed 
the issuances of Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) and the share of JGBs held by foreign 
investors  is  very  small.  But  a  more  fundamental  explanation  is  that  the  stability  in  the 
government bond yields reflects market participants’ expectations that fiscal soundness will 
be restored through structural reforms in both the economic and fiscal areas. At the moment, 
such  expectations  are  not  firmly  backed  by  concrete  reform  plans;  the  public  therefore 
restrains  spending  on  concerns  over  future  fiscal  developments,  and  this  constitutes  one 
factor  behind  sluggish  economic  growth  and  mild  deflation.  If  this  is  indeed  the  case,  the 
experience of Japan indicates a possibility that a cumulative increase in government debt, 
combined with weak growth expectations, might generate deflationary pressures as long as 
the  government  retains  its  credibility  with  respect  to  eventual  fiscal  consolidation.  In  other 
words, this is the situation before the loss of fiscal sustainability leads to either inflation or a 
default on the debt. 
Behind the decline in growth expectations and the cumulative increase in government debt 
are the aging of the population and the failure of the Japanese economy to adjust to it in a 
flexible manner. There is a limitation, at least in the short run, to changing the demographic 
trend  itself.  Therefore,  given  that  the  rapid  aging  of  the  population  is  likely  to  continue, 
strengthening the growth potential through productivity improvements and making the fiscal 
structure  sustainable  in  the  situation  of  an  aging  population  are  the  most  important 
challenges  for  Japan  in  terms  of  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  over  the  medium  to 
long term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
