Anand Sinha: Changing contours of global crisis – impact on the Indian 
economy 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Finance 
Summit, organised by IIM Kashipur (Indian Institute of Management), Kashipur, 11 February 
2012. 
 Inputs  provided  by  Mr.  Janak  Raj,  Mr.Sudarsana  Sahoo,  Ms.  Pallavi  Chavan  and  Mr.  Jayakumar  Yarasi  are 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Dr. Devi Singh, Director, IIM Lucknow and Mentor Director, IIM Kashipur; Professor Manoj 
Anand; other members  of the faculty;  my fellow bankers and the young and “raring to go” 
students of Indian Institute of Management, Kashipur. A very good evening to you all. I deem 
it a privilege to address young and bright students like this. I see in them the willingness to 
listen, courage to question and the enthusiasm to take on challenges that the future holds for 
them.  In  short,  I  see  in  them,  the  answers  to  the  challenges  we  face  today.  It  is  always 
energizing as well as educating to interact with students and that is the precise reason why I 
had no second thoughts in accepting the invitation to interact with them even at a place far 
off from my workplace, Mumbai. 
IIM, Kashipur is the youngest IIM. There is a benefit in being young in the group. You have a 
pool of experience to choose from and to learn. At the same time, the challenges of being 
young  in  the  group  are  also  quite  daunting.  You  are  expected  to  reach  and  maintain  the 
heights reached by your seniors and even surpass them. Looking at the enthusiasm of the 
students today, I am sure IIM, Kashipur will soon emerge as one of the premier institutions 
among IIMs.  
The  topic  chosen  for  today’s  address,  on  the  face  of  it,  looks  quite  jaded.  So  much  has 
already  been  said,  discussed,  analysed,  dissected  and  written  about  the  crisis.  The  crisis 
which erupted in 2007 has, in no time, engulfed the consciousness of the public so much, 
that  no  finance  speech  is  complete  without  a  reference  to  it  nor  is  a  finance  book 
consummate without a chapter devoted. Going by the number of books published on crisis, 
one would not be greatly surprised if publishing industry was one of the few industries that 
stayed afloat, or in fact, thrived during the crisis.  
Then,  why  am  I  deliberating  on  a  topic  which  has  been  discussed  so  much  already?  It  is 
because of two reasons. One, this crisis still continues to offer a wealth of information and 
lessons, which will remain relevant in times to come. Second, the crisis does not remain what 
it  was,  when  it  started.  The  crisis  which  started  off  as  a  localized  sub-prime  crisis  has 
morphed  into  a  financial  crisis  leading  to  a  full  blown  global  economic  crisis  and  has  now 
taken the shape of a sovereign debt crisis. While its current spread is localized in Eurozone, 
its impact continues to be felt all across the globe. It is in this context that I would place my 
talk today on the changing contours of crisis and its impact on the Indian economy.  
Calm before the storm – a period of great moderation 
I.  
The period preceding the Global Crisis was a phase of Great Moderation representing the 
decline in macroeconomic volatility (both output as well as inflation). The period was marked 
by strong worldwide GDP growth coupled with low or stable inflation and very low interest 
rates which lulled the policy makers and the economists into believing that their search for 
“holy  grail”  was  over  and  the  magic  formula  of  strong  growth  with  low  inflation  had  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
finally  discovered.  The  great  moderation  was  attributed1  to  (i)  structural  changes  that  may 
have  increased  macroeconomic  flexibility  and  stability  such  as  improved  management  of 
business  inventories  made  possible  by  advances  in  computation  and  communication, 
increased depth and sophistication of financial markets, deregulation in many industries, the 
shift away from manufacturing to services and increased openness to trade and international 
capital flows etc. (ii) improved performance of macroeconomic policies or (iii) good luck. The 
role  of  good  luck  in  maintaining  great  moderation  was  extensively  discussed  and  debated 
and, as anyone would expect, its role was discounted when things were going good. 
The  problem  in  attributing  entire  credit  to  good  luck  is  that  it  leaves  you  unprepared  and 
vulnerable to shocks since, by relying solely on luck, you become effectively, a prisoner of 
circumstances. On the other hand, not giving luck its rightful due encourages you to overrate 
yourself and leaves you underprepared when a crisis hits.  
Whatever  was  the  reason,  the  good  times  did  not  last  long  and  the  period  of  great 
moderation  came  to  an  end  by  2007  when  the  crisis  erupted.  The  impact  of  the  crisis  on 
financial  world  was  immense.  The  global  growth  slumped,  unemployment  burgeoned, 
interbank markets froze on account of heightened counterparty concerns and risk aversion, 
banking  activity  plummeted  while  the  non-performing  loans  increased and  many  large  and 
famous institutions were obliterated from the face of financial world. The impact of the crisis 
on  the  non-financial  front  was  no  less.  In  fact,  the  crisis  caused  deeper  impact  on  the 
intellectual  world,  by  rubbishing  concepts  and  theories  that  were  held  sacrosanct  till  then. 
Analysts, researches and policymakers huddled to diagnose the reasons for the crisis and 
came out with various theories and explanations. The more plausible explanation goes this 
way. Differences in the consumption and investment patterns among countries (a saving glut 
in Asia and oil exporting countries and a spending binge in the United States) have resulted 
in  emergence  of  global  imbalances  which  led  to  large  capital  flows  from  surplus  countries 
into deficit countries which were mostly the advanced countries.  
These capital flows have resulted in a surge of liquidity in advanced economies leading to 
low interest rates. Both the short term as well as the long term real interest rates remained 
too low for a too long period. Low interest rates forced the investors to hunt for yield which 
sowed the seeds for asset inflation. Financial engineering assumed the centre stage in a bid 
to design and offer high yielding products to investors. 
                                                  
1   Bernanke, Ben, (Feb 2004), The Great Moderation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 the  CDS, 
In addition to the above factors, gaps in the regulatory framework also played their part in 
accentuating  crisis.  The  following  reasons  are  widely  attributed  to  the  outbreak  of  crisis- 
inadequate quantity and quality of capital, insufficient liquidity buffers, excessively leveraged 
financial  institutions,  inadequate  coverage  of  certain  risks,  absence  of  a  regulatory 
framework  for  addressing  systemic  risks,  proliferation  of  opaque  and  poorly  understood 
financial  products  in  search  of  yields  in  the  backdrop  of  an  era  of  “great  moderation”, 
perverse incentive structure in securitisation process, lack of transparency in OTC markets 
particularly 
regulation  and  supervision,  and  a  burgeoning 
under/unregulated shadow banking system. 
While all these factors were playing in the background creating a perfect recipe for the crisis, 
the most proximate cause for the Crisis was the developments in the US subprime market. 
As observed by Raghuram Rajan2, growing income inequality in the United States, stemming 
from  unequal  access  to  quality  education,  led  to  political  pressure  for  more  housing  credit 
which  led  to  distorted  lending  in  the  financial  sector.  In  a  classic  case  of  best  intentions 
leading  to  worst  outcomes  due  to  bad  implementation,  the  envisaged  policy  of  financial 
inclusion by enabling homeless to own homes, led to reckless lending in sub-prime market 
and, eventually, resulted in a meltdown.  
inadequate 
                                                 
2   Rajan, Raghuram, (2010), “Fault Lines – How hidden fractures still threaten the world economy”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
The crisis, when erupted in 2007, started off as a mere sub-prime crisis localized in the US. 
But soon the crisis spread to other markets cutting across geographical boundaries signifying 
the extent of the global integration. The subprime crisis became a banking crisis due to the 
exposures  banks  had  to  the  subprime  assets  which  were  fast  turning  bad.  Counterparty 
concerns exacerbated, leading to freezing of global interbank markets. The crisis had spread 
to  other  jurisdictions  through  various  channels  of  contagion  –  trade,  finance  and  most 
importantly,  confidence.  Foreign  investors  started  withdrawing  investments  from  emerging 
markets  pushing  them  also  into  liquidity  crisis.  By  Oct  2008,  when  Lehman  Brothers  had 
collapsed under the weight of sub-prime exposures, the crisis had become truly global, both 
in spread and impact.  
The crisis had a devastating impact on the world economy in terms of output losses and rise 
in unemployment. It had impacted all the segments of the global financial markets in terms of 
heightened  volatility,  tighter  credit  conditions,  low  asset  prices  and  increased  write  downs. 
The  policy  makers,  regulators  and  the  sovereigns  had  to  immediately  step  in  and  initiate 
measures  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  crisis.  There  have  been  many  measures,  both 
conventional and unconventional, that were taken which provided relief to the badly battered 
global economy.  
Just  when  we  thought  the  crisis  was  behind  us,  with  economies  slowly  limping  back  to 
normalcy, another crisis hit the World. In a classic case of cure being more painful than 
the disease, various fiscal measures taken to mitigate the impact of 2007 crisis have, along 
with  other  factors,  led  to  huge  and  unsustainable  sovereign  debts  resulting  in  a  sovereign 
debt  crisis  in  Eurozone.  Countries  that  have  run  up  huge  fiscal  deficits,  either  to  maintain 
populist  policies  or  to  bail  out  institutions  during  the  global  crisis  by  guaranteeing  failing 
banks etc., have suddenly found themselves on the verge of bankruptcy unable to honour 
their  obligations  and  the  word  “sovereign  debt”  suddenly  ceased  to  evoke  images  of  a 
riskless (less risky, at least) asset.  
With this background in place, I would now move on to the central theme of the talk today 
“Changing Contours of global Crisis – Impact on Indian Economy”. I intend to cover the 
impact  of  both  the  crises  i.e.  Global  Crisis  2007  and  the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis,  on 
Global  and  Indian  economies  with  specific  focus  on  real  sector,  financial  markets  and  the 
banking system.  
II.  
Global crisis 
Impact on global economy 
a.  
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the global inter-bank financial 
markets  froze  in  view  of  large  losses  suffered  by  the  major  financial  institutions  and  the 
extreme uncertainty over the health of the counterparty balance sheets. This had a knock on 
effect on various segments of financial markets, including inter-bank markets. Fire sales by 
investors  contributed  to  further  downward  pressures  on  asset  prices,  leading  to  a  vicious 
cycle of distress sales and declining asset prices. Heightened risk aversion and search for 
safe  havens  led  to  deleveraging  by  investors  and  consequent  sharp  and  substantial 
retrenchment  in  capital  flows  to  emerging  and  developing  economies.  All  this  turmoil  in 
various segments of the financial markets led to a sharp decline in economic activity in the 
major advanced economies. Unemployment rates soared and labour markets became weak. 
Given the high and growing degree of trade and financial integration between the advanced 
economies and the Emerging and Developing Economies (EDEs), activity in the EDEs also 
decelerated sharply. 
Real GDP growth in advanced economies turned negative in 2009 (–3.7 per cent) from the 
strong pace of 2.9 per cent during 2004–07. Growth recovered modestly in 2010, but again 
turned  anaemic  in  2011  (1.6  per  cent).  Growth  in  advanced  economies  averaged  a  mere 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
0.3 per cent during 2008–11 and output still remains well below potential. The IMF expects 
growth in advanced economies to decelerate further to 1.2 per cent in 2012. Unemployment 
rate in the US more than doubled from 4.4 per cent in December 2006 to a peak of 10.0 per 
cent in October 2009; it has since then eased, at a very gradual pace, to 8.5 per cent. 
 Capital  flows  (net)  to  EDEs  more  than  halved  from  US  $  715  billion  in  2007  to 
US $ 246 billion in 2008 as portfolio and banking flows turned negative. Reflecting the growth 
shock  in  the  advanced  economies  as  well  as  the  retrenchment  in  capital  flows,  real  GDP 
growth in the EDEs decelerated from 8.0 per cent during 2004–7 to 2.8 per cent in 2009. It 
recovered quickly to 7.3 per cent in 2010. Overall, global GDP growth contracted to 0.6 per 
cent in 2009 from the robust growth of 5.0 per cent during 2004–07. 
In  the  global  credit  and  money  markets,  the  risk  spreads  had  ballooned  during  the  crisis 
period. The TED spread3 exceeded 300bps on September 17, 2008 breaking the previous 
record set after the Black Monday crash of 1987 and, thereafter, reached an all time high of 
464 bps on Oct 10, 2008. The 3M LIBOR-3M OIS spread4 touched the high of 364 bps on 
October 10, 2008 as against the normal level of around 10 bps. The huge risk aversion was 
reflected  in  sharp  decline  in  the  stock  indices  across  the  globe  and  heightened  volatility. 
Global  equity  markets  witnessed  major  sell-offs  in  March  2009.  The  Dow  Jones  Industrial 
Average  (DJIA)  registered  the  new  twelve-year  low  of  6,547.05  (on  closing  basis)  on 
March 9, 2009 and had lost 20% of its value in only six weeks. The VIX index –a widely used 
measure of market risk and often referred to as the “investor fear gauge” – rose to a record 
high of 80.86 on November 20, 2008. The yields of the treasury securities plummeted on the 
back of safe haven demands, with the 10 year US Treasury yield touching a low of 2.05% on 
Dec 30, 2008. The three month T-Bill yield fell to (–) 4 basis points, the lowest it has been 
since  1954  reflecting  unprecedented  flight-to-safety.  The  CDS  spreads  widened  markedly. 
                                                 
3   TED spread =3M USD LIBOR minus 3M US T-bill yield. It is an indicator of the perceived credit risk in the 
general economy. The long term average of the TED has been 30 basis points with a maximum of 50 bps. 
It reflects counterparty credit risk premium and watched as barometer of distress in money markets. 
4  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  major  CDS  indices5,  i.e.  CDX  Cross  Over,  CDX  Investment  Grade,  iTraxx  Europe 
crossover and iTraxx Europe, touched the highs of 699 bps, 242 bps, 1150 bps and 206 bps 
respectively during March 2009. In a parallel development, while other asset classes have 
fallen in value, commodity prices surged during this period. Financialisation of commodities is 
believed  to  have  added  to  the  inflationary  pressure.  Both  Gold  and  Crude  oil  prices  had 
spiralled during the period. 
 Global crisis has also severely affected the growth and health of global banking sector. Bank 
credit  growth  in  major  economies  such  as  US,  UK,  and  the  Eurozone  secularly  declined 
throughout  2009.  The  asset  quality  has  also  been  adversely  impacted  with  NPA  (as  %  of 
total loans) rising to higher levels. The NPAs in the UK and US have risen from 0.9 per cent 
and 1.4 per cent in 2007 to 4.0 per cent and 4.9 per cent in 2009 respectively. The capital 
position of the banks, however, remained comfortable with most global banks continuing to 
step  up  their  capital  positions  notwithstanding  the  crisis.  By  2010,  the  Capital  to  Risk 
Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) was placed above 15 per cent for banks in UK, US, Japan 
and Germany. 
                                                 
5   CDX indices contain North American and Emerging Market companies and iTraxx indices contain companies 
from the rest of the world. CDX Cross over – 35 North-American entities that are at crossover points between 
investment grade and junk , CDX Investment grade-125 North-American entities of investment grade, iTraxx 
Europe crossover– 50 entities of sub-investment grade, iTraxx Europe-125 entities of investment grade 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Policy responses: global 
b. 
In response to the collapse in economic activity, large losses suffered by major banks and 
financial institutions and severe disruption in financial markets, there was an unprecedented 
policy  response  by  both  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities.  Given  the  severe  impact  on 
economic  activity  and  the  vicious  circle  of  expectations,  the  policy  response  was  globally 
coordinated.  As  economic  activity  slowed  down  sharply,  monetary  policy  was  eased 
aggressively in both advanced economies and EDEs. In major advanced economies, policy 
interest rates were cut to almost zero levels by early 2009 which stayed around those levels 
even three years later (as of early 2012). Given the large unemployment rates and negative 
output gaps, the US Federal Reserve has indicated that the policy rate – the federal funds 
rate – will remain near zero till late 2014. The policy rate would thus remain near zero for 
almost six years, going by the Fed’s current assessment. In view of near zero policy interest 
rates  and  limitations  imposed  by  the  zero  bound  on  the  interest  rates,  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  and  other  major  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  also  resorted  to 
unprecedented quantitative easing – substantial infusion of liquidity – in an attempt to ease 
credit and financing conditions and drive long-term yields lower.  
Turning  to  fiscal  measures,  to  begin  with,  governments  in  major  advanced  economies 
provided  direct  support  to  the  failing  financial  institutions.  Subsequently,  in  view  of  the 
collapse of growth and the constraints posed by the lower zero bound on the interest rates, 
governments  in  almost  all  jurisdictions  resorted  to  stimulus  packages  to  boost  activity. 
Despite the large fiscal and monetary stimuli, economic activity remained sluggish.  
Impact of crisis on India 
C. 
The  global  financial  crisis  impacted  India  significantly,  notwithstanding  the  sound  banking 
system,  negligible  exposure  of  Indian  banks  to  sub-prime  assets  and  relatively  well-
functioning financial markets. The impact was mainly on account of India’s growing trade and 
financial  integration  with  the  global  economy.  India’s  two  way  trade  (merchandize  exports 
plus imports), as a proportion of GDP, was 40.7 per cent in 2008–09, the crisis year, up from 
19.6 per cent in 1998–99. The ratio of total external transactions (gross current account flows 
plus  gross  capital  account  flows)  to  GDP  –  an  indicator  of  both  trade  and  financial 
integration – was 112 per cent in 2008–09 up from 44 per cent in 1998–99.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The immediate impact of the crisis was felt through large capital outflows and consequent fall 
in  the  domestic  stock  markets  on  account  of  sell-off  by  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  and 
steep  depreciation  of  the  Rupee  against  US  Dollar.  The  BSE  Sensex  (on  closing  basis), 
which  had  touched  a  peak  of  20873  on  January  8,  2008,  declined  to  a  low  of  8160  on 
March 9, 2009. While the capital outflows led to decline in the domestic forex liquidity, RBI’s 
intervention in the forex market resulted in tightening of Rupee liquidity. The inter-bank call 
money (overnight) rates firmed up during the period from second half of September ’08 to 
end  October  ’08  (high  of  19.70  per  cent  on  October  10).  However,  the  series  of  liquidity 
augmenting measures undertaken by RBI resulted in call rates coming back to the normal 
levels from first week of November ’08.  
Global recession had adversely affected the Indian exports resulting in widening of current 
account  deficit  (CAD).  Exports  which  grew  at  25  per  cent  during  2005/08  decelerated  to 
13.6 per cent in the crisis year (2008–09) and registered a negative growth of 3.5 per cent in 
2009–10. Output growth, which averaged little less than 9 per cent in the previous five years 
and 9.5 per cent during the three year period 2005–08, dropped to 6.8 per cent in the crisis 
year (2008–09). 
In the pre-crisis years, capital inflows were far in excess of the current account deficit (CAD) 
and the Reserve Bank had to absorb these flows in its balance sheet. As global investors 
tried to rebalance their portfolios during the crisis period, the country witnessed large capital 
outflows immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers leading to a downward pressure 
on the rupee. The exchange rate depreciated from Rs. 39.37 per dollar in January 2008 to 
Rs. 51.23 per dollar in March 2009. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The  credit  markets  also  came  under  pressure  as  corporates,  finding  it  difficult  to  raise 
resources  through  external  sources  of  funding,  turned  to  domestic  bank  and  non-bank 
institutions for funding and also withdrew their investments from the liquid schemes of mutual 
funds. This, in turn, put redemption pressure on mutual funds (MFs) and, further along the 
chain, on non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) for whom MFs were a significant source 
of funding.  
The Indian banking sector has, however, withstood the spillover effects of the global financial 
crisis as was evident in the robust CRAR and Tier 1 CRAR which remained far above the 
stipulated regulatory minimum of 9 per cent. The asset quality was also comfortable despite 
some slippages. By end March 2010, the Gross NPA ratio stood at 2.50 per cent (net NPA 
1.13%) while the CRAR was 13.58 per cent. The spillover effects of the crisis were, however, 
most visible in the credit growth of banking sector. Since September 2008, the growth rate of 
advances, as also of assets, started witnessing a declining trend which continued for almost 
one year up to September 2009. The Y-o-Y growth in advances fell from 28.5 per cent at the 
end March 2007 to 12.3 per cent by end Sept 2009 while the Y-o-Y growth in assets fell from 
22.9 per cent to 15.1 per cent during the same period.  
 Policy response – India 
d. 
Given the deceleration in growth and drying up of capital flows, both the Reserve Bank and 
the  Government  undertook  a  number  of  measures  to  minimise  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on 
India. There was, however, a notable difference between Indian response and those of many 
EMEs,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  advanced  economies,  on  the  other  hand.  While  policy 
responses in advanced economies had to contend with both the unfolding financial crisis and 
deepening recession, the Indian response was predominantly driven by the need to arrest 
moderation  in  economic  growth.  The  main  plank  of  the  government  response  was  fiscal 
stimulus  while  the  Reserve  Bank’s  action  comprised  counter-cyclical  regulatory  measures 
and also measures to ensure easy liquidity and monetary conditions. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  measures  were  aimed  at  containing  the  contagion  from  the 
outside – to keep the domestic money and credit markets functioning normally and ensure 
that  the  liquidity  stress  did  not  trigger  solvency  cascades.  As  in  the  case  of  other  central 
banks, both conventional and unconventional measures were undertaken. The conventional 
measures included, first, a sharp reduction in the policy interest rates – the effective policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
rate was cut from 9 per cent (repo rate) in September 2008 to 3.25 per cent (reverse repo 
rate)  in  April  2009.  Second,  the  cash  reserve  ratio  was  reduced  from  9.0  per  cent  in 
September  2008  to  5  per  cent  in  January  2009  with  a  view  to  injecting  liquidity  into  the 
banking system. Third, liquidity injection in bulk was made through purchase of government 
securities under open market operation (OMO) and unwinding of the balances under Market 
Stabilization  Scheme  (MSS)  through  buy-back,  redemptions  and  de-sequestering.  Fourth, 
refinance facilities for export credit were enhanced. Measures were also taken for enhancing 
forex  liquidity  which  included  an  upward  adjustment  of  the  interest  rate  ceiling  on  the 
deposits by non-resident Indians under FCNR (B) and NRE deposit accounts and relaxation 
in  norms  for  external  commercial  borrowings  (ECB).  In  view  of  the  slowing  economy  and 
decelerating  credit  flow,  the  counter-cyclical  regulatory  measures  introduced  in  2006  were 
also reversed.  
The unconventional measures taken by the Reserve Bank of India included; institution of a 
rupee-dollar  swap  facility  for  Indian  banks  to  give  them  comfort  in  managing  short-term 
foreign funding requirements of their overseas branches; special liquidity support to banks for 
on-lending  to  mutual  funds  and  non-banking  financial  companies;  liquidity  support  to  non-
banking financial companies through a special purpose vehicle created for the purpose and 
expansion  of  the  lendable  resources  available  to  apex  finance  institutions  for  refinancing 
credit extended to small industries, housing and exports. The measures undertaken by the 
Reserve  Bank  during  September  2008  –  July  2009  have  resulted  in  augmentation  of 
actual/potential liquidity of Rs. 5, 61,700 cr.  
The  fiscal  stimulus  measures,  undertaken  in  December  2008  and  January  2009,  included 
additional public spending as well as cuts in taxes. These stimulus packages came on top of 
an already announced expanded safety-net for rural poor, a farm loan waiver package and 
salary increases for government staff, all of which too stimulated demand. 
Taken  together,  the  fiscal  and  monetary  measures  were  successful  in  achieving  their 
objectives. Financial markets and the banking sector began to function normally. Real GDP 
growth  which  took  a  hit  in  2008–09  as  it  reached  6.8  per  cent  recovered  quickly  to  reach 
8.0 per cent in 2009–10 and 8.5 per cent in 2010–11 under the impact of stimulus measures 
as also the inherent strength of domestic demand. Strong recovery in demand, along with 
persistent supply pressures, however, led to inflationary pressures during 2010–2011.  
Why was the impact on India muted? 
e. 
Despite its immediate impact on the financial markets and the trade flows, the crisis did not 
have  very  significant  impact  on  the  Indian  financial  system.  The  reasons  for  the  muted 
impact is attributable primarily to (i) the macroprudential approach to regulation (ii) multiple 
indicator  based  monetary  policy, 
(iii)  calibrated  capital  account  management, 
(iv) management  of  systemic  interconnectedness,  (v)  robust  market  infrastructure  for  OTC 
transactions and (vi) a conservative approach towards financial innovation.  
The monetary policy formulation by the Reserve Bank of India has been guided by multiple 
objectives and multiple instruments contrary to the approach followed by some countries of 
single objective and single instruments. Monitoring of multiple macroeconomic indicators has 
helped the Reserve Bank in interpreting developments in financial system and taking prompt 
corrective action. Similarly, measures such as putting in place robust systems for reducing 
counterparty risk in OTC transactions through CCP arrangements and regulation of shadow 
banking institutions to address the interconnectedness issues have helped in containing the 
impact  of  the  crisis  and  helping  the  economy  keep  afloat  despite  the  huge  global 
turbulences.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Metamorphosis of the crisis into sovereign debt crisis: 
III. 
Just when the global economy was reverting to the normalcy, another crisis in the nature of 
sovereign  debt  crisis  surfaced.  The  growing  debts  of  many  European  sovereigns  caused 
sustainability  concerns  forcing  investors  to  withdraw  from  these  markets  which  led  to 
significant  escalation  of  their  CDS  spreads.  The  crisis  which  emerged  in  late  2009  has 
engulfed the entire Eurozone by end 2011. While only Greek bonds had CDS spreads higher 
than 200 bps in April 2010, by Jan 2012, bonds of all countries except Germany, Finland and 
the  Netherlands  had  CDS  spreads  higher  than  200  bps.  In  fact,  bonds  of  PIIGS  countries 
(Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece and Spain) had CDS spreads even higher than 400 bps. 
 The  combination  of  sluggish  activity,  bailouts  and  fiscal  stimulus  measures  have  led  to 
ballooning  of  fiscal  deficits  and  public  debt/GDP  ratios  in  major  advanced  economies  and 
have raised concerns over fiscal sustainability. These concerns are most visible in euro area 
countries,  which  were  plagued  by  various  combinations  of  problems  such  as  over-large 
banking  sector  that  had  become  exposed  to  a  housing  boom  and  bust,  an  uncompetitive 
economy signaled by repeated current account deficits, and a bloated state sector with high 
private-sector unemployment6. For example, fiscal deficit/GDP ratios of advanced economies 
jumped from a near balance position (deficit of 0.6 per cent) in 2007 to 9.0 per cent in 2009, 
with that of the US jumping from 2.7 per cent to 13.0 per cent over the same period. Fiscal 
deficits of emerging economies also rose, albeit relatively modestly, from a surplus of 0.1 per 
cent  in  2007  to  a  deficit  4.8  per  cent  in  2009.  The  public  debt/GDP  ratio  for  advanced 
economies  increased  from  73.4  per  cent  in  2007  to  93.7  per  cent  in  2009  and  further  to 
103.5 per cent in 2011. The ratios for Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) over the same 
years were almost unchanged at 35.9 per cent, 36.7 per cent and 37.8 per cent.  
The sovereign debt crisis, in a way has completed the circle – during the Global crisis 2007 
the impact spread from banking system to sovereigns while in the current crisis, the impact is 
in  the  reverse  direction,  from  sovereigns  to  banks.  What  makes  the  present  crisis  more 
disturbing is, in the Global crisis, when banks were under stress there was a backstop in the 
nature  of  sovereigns,  but  now  sovereigns  themselves  are  on  the  verge  of  default  leaving 
everyone wonder as to what could be a backstop for a sovereign default. 
                                                 
6   Coggan, Philip (2012) – “Paper Promises – Money, Debt and the New World Order”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Impact of sovereign debt crisis on global economy: 
The  current  crisis  has  jeopardized  the  recovery  plans  put  in  place  by  regulators,  policy 
makers and the sovereigns post global crisis. Despite the source and the immediate impact 
being localized in Eurozone, the knock on effects of the crisis are felt all across the globe. 
Financial conditions have deteriorated, growth prospects dimmed and downside risks have 
escalated. IMF’s World Economic Outlook has revised the Global output growth downwards 
to 3.25 per cent with the Euro area economy expected to go into a mild recession in 2012 as 
result of rise in sovereign yields, the effects of bank leveraging and the impact of additional 
fiscal  consolidation.  The  EDEs  are  also  expected  to  post  lower  growth  on  account  of 
worsening external environment and a weakening internal demand.  
Heightened risk aversion and deleveraging induced by the euro area crisis impacted financial 
markets  across  the  globe.  Despite  European  Union’s  announcement  of  significant  policy 
actions during December 2011, the financial markets continued to reel under stress in the 
backdrop  of  rating  downgrade  of  European  Financial  Stability  Fund  (EFSF)  and  nine  euro 
area countries by S&P, of which four were downgraded by two notches. The CDS spreads 
and yields of sovereign debts in the euro area have increased substantially during the recent 
period.  The  inter-bank  LIBOR  market  has  been  witnessing  growing  stress  in  terms  of 
declining  volume,  rising  rates  and  shortening  of  tenor  of  lending.  The  USD  LIBOR-OIS 
spread  and  EURIBOR-OIS  spread  have  widened  significantly 
increased 
counterparty credit risk premium. The equity markets across the globe have witnessed sharp 
fall with increased volatility.  
As regards the banking system, in countries directly impacted by the sovereign debt crisis 
such as Spain, Portugal and Italy, there was a persistent slowdown in bank credit through 
2011. In countries peripherally affected by the crisis such as France and Germany, the credit 
growth which was showing signs of revival in 2010, has dipped again reflecting the impact of 
the  deepening  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  asset  quality,  as  reflected  in  NPL  ratios, 
continued to deteriorate in Eurozone countries.  
Apart from raising credit risks, the sovereign crisis has also increased funding risks for Euro 
zone  banks.  As  per  an  analysis  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  banks  in 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal have increasingly found it difficult to raise wholesale debt and 
deposits,  and  have  become  reliant  on  central  bank  liquidity.7  The  increase  in  the  cost  of 
wholesale funding has also partially affected banks in other European countries.  
According to the BIS, there are, broadly, four channels through which sovereign risk affect 
banks’ funding costs, given the pervasive role of government debt in the financial system. 
i. 
implying 
First,  losses  associated  with  government  debt  weaken  balance  sheets  of  banks 
making funding more costly and difficult to obtain.  
Second, higher sovereign risks reduce the value of the collateral that banks can use 
to raise wholesale funding and central bank liquidity.  
Third,  sovereign  rating  downgrades  generally  flow  through  to  lower  ratings  for 
domestic  banks  as  banks  are  more  likely  than  other  sectors  to  be  affected  by 
sovereign  distress.  As  the  banks’  credit  ratings  decline,  their  wholesale  funding 
costs rise.  
Fourth, a weakening of the sovereign reduces the funding benefits that banks could 
derive from implicit and explicit government guarantees.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
                                                 
7   Bank for International Settlements (2011), The Impact of Sovereign Credit Risk on Bank Funding Conditions, 
July. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Impact of sovereign debt crisis on India: 
With the euro area appearing to head for a recession and the global growth slowing again 
after a short recovery, growth in India too has moderated more than was expected earlier. 
Increase in global uncertainty, weak industrial growth, slow down in investment activity and 
deceleration in the resource flow to commercial sector led to dip in output growth. Inflation 
risks emanating from suppressed domestic energy prices, incomplete pass-through of rupee 
depreciation  and  slippage  in  fiscal  deficit,  further  fuelled  by  food  and  commodity  inflation 
have led to policy tightening. All these factors have resulted in the growth projection for India 
for 2011–12 being revised downwards from 7.6 per cent to 6.9 per cent. 
Indian banking system has, however, not been impacted by current crisis as it does not have 
any significant presence in countries impacted by the current crisis nor Indian banks have 
any significant exposures to bonds issued by them. While there is no first order impact of the 
sovereign  debt  crisis,  there  could,  however,  be  second-order  impact  through  various 
channels  including  trade.  There  could  be  funding  constraints  for  Indian  bank  branches 
operating  overseas  if  European  banks  deleverage.  The  cost  of  borrowing  for  banks  and 
corporates  may,  therefore,  go  up  leading  to  concerns  over  refinancing  foreign  currency 
liabilities.  Due  to  the  slump  in  the  overseas  demand  and  the  associated  downturn  in 
investment activity, there has already been some sluggishness in the credit as well as asset 
growth of Indian banking sector during 2011–12.  
The crisis also had a measurable impact on the Indian financial markets, with equity prices 
witnessing sharp decline on account of large net sales by FIIs in the backdrop of worsening 
macroeconomic  environment  and  bearish  outlook  on  earning  growth  of  Indian  corporates. 
Further, moderation in capital flow coupled with widening trade deficit led to a sharp fall in the 
INR-USD exchange rate to touch an all time low of 54.30 on December 15, 2011.  
Reserve  Bank  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  to  contain  the  excessive  volatility  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market.  The  prudential  measures  undertaken  with  a  view  to  contain 
speculative  activities  included  disallowing  rebooking  of  cancelled  forward  transactions 
(involving the Rupee as one of the currencies which are booked to hedge current account 
transactions regardless of the tenor and capital account transactions falling due within one 
year),  reduction  in  Net  Overnight  Open  Position  Limits  of  Authorised  Dealer  (AD)  banks, 
curtailment  in  limit  for  cancellation  of  forward  contracts  booked  on  the  basis  of  past 
performance route by the importers, prohibiting passing of exchange gains to the customers 
on cancellation of forward contracts booked under past performance route, disallowing FIIs 
to  rebook  cancelled  forward  contracts,  stipulating  all  cash/tom/spot  transactions  to  be 
delivery/ remittance based. With a view to encouraging inflows, measures such as raising the 
limits on FII investments in debt securities, further liberalisation of ECB policy, relaxation of 
interest rate ceilings on NRE and NRO deposits, have been taken.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
Takeaways from the crisis: 
IV.  
Notwithstanding the risk of sounding cliché’ I cannot contain myself to remind you that every 
cloud has a silver lining and every crisis brings with it, a lesson. The Global crisis 2007 and 
the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis  offer,  in  fact,  many  lessons  and  the  analysts  are  busy 
deciphering  one  each  day.  While  there  are  many  regulatory  and  policy  lessons  that  have 
come  to  the  fore  and  are  under  various  stages  of  implementation,  I  would  flag  some 
takeaways  which  would  be  most  relevant  for  you  as  you  prepare  to  enter  into  the 
professional world which is currently beset with crises. 
Takeaway 1: Too much of anything is bad 
You  must  have  often  heard  your  grandmother  saying  this  and,  mind  you,  this  remains 
relevant  even  today,  in  fact  more  today,  post  crisis.  Too  much  of  leverage,  too  much  of 
liquidity, too much of complexity and too much of greed – they all have led to the crisis. It is 
now being argued that too much of finance is also not conducive to growth. Recent studies8 
suggest that while at low levels a larger financial system leads to higher productivity, beyond 
a point, more banking and more credit result in lower growth. Further, it is also argued that 
fast  growing  financial  sector  can  be  detrimental  to  the  aggregate  productivity  growth. 
Moderation in approach, therefore, is an important lesson.  
Takeaway 2: Models are not absolute 
In  the  run  up  to  the  crisis,  there  was  an  excessive  reliance  and  almost  a  blind  faith  that 
models  convey  absolute  truths.  Entire  risk  management  systems  were  built  around  this 
belief. Post crisis, participants have woken up to the harsh reality that  models do not fully 
reflect the realities of life and excessive reliance on quantitative models is fraught with risk. 
Exact sciences such as physics are governed by nature’s laws that are immutable and lead 
to  definite  and  predictable  results.  Finance  on  the  other  hand,  is  governed  by  capricious 
human behavior and biases which cannot be easily modeled. To an argument that models 
with  all  their  limitations  are  better  than  not  having  any,  Nassim  Taleb  has  said  “  You  are 
worse of relying on misleading information than on not having any information at all. If you 
give a pilot an altimeter that is sometimes defective he will crash the plane. Give him nothing 
and  he  will  look  out  the  window”  Knowing  the  shortcomings  of  the  models  is,  therefore, 
extremely important for their judicious usage. 
Takeaway 3: Finance should serve the real sector and not the converse 
While  it  is  agreed  that  financial  system  furthers  the  economic  development  by  enabling 
efficient allocation of capital and risk, the ultimate objective of finance, which is the furthering 
of economic development should not be lost sight of. In the period prior to crisis, the financial 
activity grew so much that the umbilical cord between financial and real sectors was severed 
and the finance started to exist for its own sake. The dangers of such a scenario have been 
quite emphatically conveyed by the Crisis. 
With these thoughts, I conclude my address. I thank you all for your patient hearing and wish 
you all the best in your future endeavors. 
References: 
Acharya, Shankar (2012) “India-After the Global Crisis” 
                                                 
8   Cecchetti, Stephan and Kharroubi, Enisse (Jan 2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance on growth”. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bank for International Settlements, (Jul 2011), “The Impact on sovereign credit risk on bank 
funding conditions” CGFS Papers No. 43 
Bernanke, Ben, February (2004), “The Great Moderation” 
Cecchetti, Stephan and Kharroubi, Enisse, (Jan 2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance 
on growth” 
Coggan, Philip, (2011), “Paper Promises: Money, Debt and the New World Order” 
Commission of Growth and Development, 2008, “The US Subprime Mortgage Crisis: Issued 
raised and lessons learnt”, Working Paper No. 28 
International Monetary Fund, (Feb 2009), “Lessons of the Global Crisis for Macroeconomic 
Policy” 
----, January 2012, “World Economic Outlook Update” 
----, January 2012, “Global Financial Stability Report Update” 
Rajan,  Raghuram,  (2010),  “Fault  Lines  –  How  hidden  fractures  still  threaten  the  world 
economy” 
Reserve Bank of India, March 2010, Financial Stability Report 
---- December 2011, Financial Stability Report 
Sheng, Andrew, (Feb 2009), “From Asian to Global Financial Crisis”, Third K B Lall Memorial 
Lecture 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
