Andreas Dombret: Business models and the banking sector seen in 
terms of financial stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 16th Banking Symposium of the European Center for Financial Services 
“Profile  and  profitability  –  are  banks’  business  models 
transition?”,  Düsseldorf, 
20 September 2012. 
in 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Rolfes 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
No  question:  the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  are  manifold.  How  they  all  fit  together  is 
currently not yet fully known. Perhaps this can never be fully explained – not by practitioners 
and academics. However, they might be able to achieve an improved understanding of how 
some of the individual parts interact. 
This is one of the aims of a symposium like this one, in which practitioners and academics 
can convene and communicate with one another. This is also why I was very glad to accept 
your invitation, for which I thank you very much. 
I would like today to address the distinctly interesting individual elements of the build-up of 
risk and some elements of the associated financial innovations – key components of a bank’s 
business model. If a business model can be regarded as a bank’s genetic code, the business 
models of banks and intermediaries make up the DNA of the financial system. 
This  not  just  interesting  for  its  own  sake.  In  fact,  it  is  a  vital  aid  in  better  understanding 
another debate: that on universal banking systems and specialised banking systems. 
title  “Financial 
the  somewhat  non-descript 
From unsustainable business models to the financial crisis 
2. 
In  key  areas  in  the  financial  system,  several  banks’  business  models  were  undergoing  a 
change best described as a departure from traditional commercial banking. What essentially 
lay behind this? Why was it able to pose such a severe threat to financial stability? 
Few  models  have  provided  as  much  information  in  the  search  for  an  answer  to  these 
questions as that in the seminal work by University of Chicago economist Douglas Diamond. 
Its  bears 
Intermediation  and  Delegated 
Monitoring”. And his seemingly more innocuous question is, why do financial intermediaries 
exist? Put another way: What can intermediaries do better than the markets? And then the 
question no longer sounds as innocent. 
Diamond  presumes major  information  asymmetry  between  creditors  and  debtors.  Only  the 
entrepreneur  can  freely  observe  his  investment  project.  Potential  lenders  have  a  choice 
between costly monitoring of the investment project or setting incentives to comply with the 
contract.  If  a  borrower  only  stands  to  lose  his  house,  as  was  the  case  with  US  subprime 
borrowers, the incentives are quite flawed, indeed. 
If a bank monitors the status of investment projects, diversification and economies of scale 
can be achieved. By financing multiple projects simultaneously and monitoring them over a 
relatively  long  period  of  time,  banks  can  reduce  their  monitoring  costs.  By  contrast, 
monitoring  individual  projects  is  inefficient.  This  explains  the  existence  of  banks  –  and  of 
intermediaries. And it is probably also for this reason – at least as seen from the assets side 
– that commercial banking is a wholesale bank’s “natural” business model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Through  credit  substitution  business,  many  banks  have  departed  from  this  model;  have 
surrendered  much  of  the  inherent,  comparative  (says  Diamond)  advantages  of  their 
intermediary  function;  have  left  credit  assessments  to  rating  agencies;  and  have,  in  some 
cases,  delegated  monitoring.  At  the  same  time,  when  packaging  loans  and  in  lending 
contracts, they looked not at appropriate incentive structures but, above all, at tradability. If it 
can be traded, the risk can then be fobbed off on a third party – or, at least, that is how the 
thinking goes. In  effect, securitisation techniques  dissolved  the  link  between  oversight  and 
the ultimate bearer of risk. 
The  advantages  of  intermediation  were  forsaken  without  creating  sustainable  contractual 
solutions at the same time. Even in theory, there was no  way that could work. As Warren 
Buffett famously put it, “It’s only when the tide goes out that you learn who’s been swimming 
naked.” 
From that angle, the oft-cited deficiencies in some banks’ risk management practices are not 
an  accident,  but  instead,  seen  in  that  light,  the  logical  outcome  of  the  departure  from  the 
traditional  business  model.  In  this  middle  world  between  intermediation  and  the  market,  in 
which neither worked, there were simply not enough incentives to mitigate risk. 
Please do not misunderstand me: I firmly believe that those innovations which have created 
real  economic  value  added  will  survive  in  the  long  term.  But  that  will  probably  be  on  a 
reduced  scale,  in  less  complex  and  more  transparent  structures,  and  embedded  in 
supervisory  practice.  If  used  prudently  and  monitored  carefully,  they  can  enhance  the 
performance of the financial system without jeopardising financial stability. 
Another  thing  should  not  be  overlooked:  not  every  transaction  that  generates  commission 
income  is  a  complex  securitisation.  A  savings  bank  or  cooperative  bank  can  successfully 
diversify  its  earnings  side  by  selling  Riester  retirement  products.  It  is  less  dependent  on 
maturity  transformation and  swings  in  interest  rates. Who  could  possibly  object  to that? In 
and of itself, this is good for financial stability. 
And not every trading transaction with modern financial products is driven by the search for 
maximum yields in proprietary trading. If a bank closes a currency hedge deal for a customer 
who  is  active  in  international  trade,  this  has  a  sound  real  economic  basis.  In  that  case, 
investment banking serves the customer’s interests. Nobody can really have object to that, 
either. A bank whose business model is targeted at export-oriented customers will have to 
provide  this  kind  of  service,  otherwise  its  business  model  will  not  work.  And  it  will  obtain 
commission income that should be in reasonable proportion to the services rendered. The 
same is also true, for example, of M&A consultancy services. 
However,  the  non-interest  earnings  components  are  generally  more  volatile,  especially  if 
generated  by  proprietary  trading  in  complex  investment  banking  products.  Such  earnings 
components evaporate quickly in a crisis and can put a strain on profitability. This is shown 
by many empirical studies. 
We therefore have to assess the relationship between profitability and resistance differently 
than  in  the  pre-crisis  era.  Back  then,  there  were  many  –  but  not  among  supervisors  or 
academics – who believed that there was a one-to-one relationship between profit and risk. 
We  now  know  this:  sustainability  is  what  counts.  And  sustainability  cannot  exist  in  an 
environment of very high volatility. 
Those  who  desire  more  sustainable  profitability  and  business  models  have  to  put  stricter 
limits  on  proprietary  trading.  The  Basel  III  rules  governing  market  risk  serve  this  objective 
and,  in  my  opinion,  point  in  the  right  direction.  They  are  set  up  to  reduce  the  volatility  of 
profitability. 
Volatility, the close interrelationships with other players in the financial system and the high 
financial leverage are all reasons for the systemic importance of investment banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On  the  liability  side,  too,  quite  a  few  institutions  departed  from  the  commercial  banking 
model.  The  significance  of  market-based  funding  instruments  has  increased  enormously, 
while the role of customer deposits has shrunk. This has increased banks’ dependency on 
market-based funding and made such funding more vulnerable to market pricing and market 
movements. And this has been accompanied by a tendency towards short-term funding. 
This  should  actually  lead  to  an  increase  in  interest  rate  risk  and  liquidity  risk.  However, 
empirical studies by the Bundesbank show that the major systemically important banks – at 
least in Germany – largely shield themselves from interest rate risk. On balance, they have 
hedged a large percentage of their positions. Interest income risk is therefore not affected. 
However, there is still liquidity risk – in other words, refinancing risk. This was seen by many 
as  irrelevant  during  the  boom  cycle.  Market  liquidity  dried  out  quickly  during  the  financial 
crisis,  though.  It  became  ever-more  difficult  to  roll  over  loans,  even  though  central  banks 
were doing all they could to help. 
It used to be true that “liquidity followed creditworthiness” or that “liquidity followed solvency”. 
The financial crisis has shown that this is not the case all the time. Even institutions with a 
“healthy” asset portfolio were capable of running into distress – not least because, at first, 
nobody  was  entirely  sure  who  was  holding  how  much  in  “toxic  assets”  on  their  balance 
sheets – and also, and especially, off their balance sheets in the “shadow banking system”. 
Spun-off SPVs meant that now everyone was a suspect. 
Specialised banking versus universal banks: missing the point 
3. 
One of the main concerns in the aftermath of the crisis has been making the banking system 
safer overall and protecting taxpayers, and thus the general public, from having to pay the 
price for banks’ mistakes – and quite rightly so. 
Some  observers  who  are  “in  the  know”  believe  that  divorcing  investment  banking  from 
commercial banking is the perfect way to limit the social costs of ailing banks. A high-level 
Expert Group of the European Commission, headed by Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank 
of Finland, is studying these issues. I therefore now only want to go into some aspects which 
I think are particularly important. 
As I said at the beginning, investment banking does, indeed, involve very specific risks. By 
contrast,  traditional  banking,  with  its  deposit  and  lending  business,  is  often  –  but  not 
necessarily  always  –  characterised  by  a  less  risky  business  model.  Some  argue  that 
separating the two types of banking activities would protect the macroeconomically vital task 
of supplying the real economy with credit and, at the same time, shielding it from investment 
banking’s inherent risks. They also claim that this would make bank resolution easier. 
What I’m wondering, however, is if such a specialised banking system can truly fulfil all the 
hopes invested in it. Unfortunately, in practice it is not always possible simply to put the good 
ones into the pot and the bad ones into the crop, to paraphrase the Grimm Brothers. 
For one thing, we cannot ignore the problems of where to draw the line and how to put this 
into practice. In particular with regard to corporate services, it is not quite that easy to make a 
clear distinction between traditional banking services and investment banking services. And, 
problems in drawing a clear boundary generally result in loopholes. 
In terms  of financial  stability,  however,  a  much more  serious  issue  is  at  stake. One of the 
proposals for a specialised banking system currently on the table – the Vickers blueprint – 
would  distinctly  reduce  interlinkages,  which  is  welcome  as  far  as  its  effects  on  financial 
stability are concerned. However, that would probably not close off every possible contagion 
channel.  Banks  are  interlinked  through  all  sorts  of  other  channels.  Not  least,  during  the 
financial crisis, in order to prevent contagion, in particular, governments also gave support 
and  assistance  to  many  investment  banks  or  –  as  I  would  call  them  –  quasi-investment 
banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy  caused  precisely  such  contagion,  but  not  because 
customer deposits were at risk. Rather, it had many connections to other financial institutions 
including,  and  above  all,  as  counterparty  in  derivative  transactions,  in  which  Lehman 
Brothers was particularly heavily exposed. Essentially the same applied to AIG – which was 
not even a bank, but an insurer. AIG was also a major counterparty. In this case, too, the 
government  rescue  package  was  intended  to keep  further  shock  waves from  buffeting  the 
financial system. And in the case of the largest rescue operation in Germany, that to save 
Hypo Real Estate, customer deposits were not the main issue, either, but rather the danger 
of  wide-ranging  domino  effects  –  on  other  banks;  on  the  Pfandbrief  market,  for  which  the 
affected  institution  was  a  major  issuer;  and  for  insurers,  for  whom  Pfandbriefe  are  key 
investments. 
Not  everything  is  rosy  even  in  classical  banking  business.  The  very  large  banks  –  those 
deemed “too big to fail” – are not the sole sources of systemic risk. The Spanish case has 
made  this  abundantly  clear.  Here,  banks  were  destabilised  by  their  exposure  to  the  real-
estate market. These vulnerabilities were created in traditional lending business. 
Proponents of specialised banking systems believe this will produce a better solution to the 
“too big to fail” problem. And, the wisdom of introducing a system of specialised banks has to 
be  judged  in  terms  of  whether  it  makes  it  easier  to  supervise  large,  complex  financial 
institutions. Even more important, as I see it, is whether such banks can, in a crisis, be more 
easily resolved if they do not have an investment banking arm. After all, a break-up leads to 
the creation of smaller banks. 
This  much  I  believe:  the  best  regulatory  solution  for  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  is  the 
credible  threat  of  an  institution’s  orderly  market  exit.  This  is  well  within  the  tradition  of 
standard insolvency law, if you will. And in cases where standard insolvency or bankruptcy 
proceedings  cannot  be  applied  precisely  because  of  this  “too  big  to  fail”  problem,  other 
resolution  regimes  –  and  credible  regimes  at  that  –  are  needed.  Developing  cross-border, 
harmonised resolution regimes is therefore also at the core of international reform efforts. 
Shareholders and creditors of distressed banks are to bear the losses, wherever possible, 
without passing them on to taxpayers and without posing a threat to financial stability. In a 
crisis,  it  should  be  possible  to  transfer  an  institution’s  critical  functions  to  third  parties  or 
government bridge banks – even without the prior consent of the institution, shareholders or 
creditors. These critical functions have to be maintained; otherwise financial stability would 
be at risk. 
The decisive factor – as always when it comes to money and finances – is credibility. Is it 
possible to introduce a credible resolution regime with the existing structures? Or are these 
structures too complex for a realistic market exit? The TBTF problem desperately requires a 
solution. If a solution can be found through credible resolution regimes, the advantages of 
universal banking do not need to be sacrificed. Let me repeat: credible resolution systems 
are the much better option for regulatory purposes. 
I do see where the proponents of specialised banking are coming from. However, do not be 
fooled: simply ring-fencing investment banking from banks’ core business will not be enough 
to prevent future systemic crises. 
We  therefore  need  to  focus  more  strongly  on  the  underlying  sources  of  systemic  risk  in 
banks’ business models and then effectively mitigate them. 
This  will  involve  subjecting  activities  such  as  banks’  proprietary  trading  to  critical 
examination. As it is difficult to draw a clear line, it would be better for us, here, to focus less 
on whether or not to permit its very existence and more on capital adequacy. 
I  am  fully  in  agreement  with  Mr  Schmitz,  President  of  the  Association  of  German  banks, 
when  he  says  that  “the  decisive  factor  is  that  the  risk  incurred  is  commensurate  with  risk 
buffers.  To  that  extent,  imposing  greater  restrictions  on  some  areas  of  proprietary  trading 
than existed before the crisis makes sense and is the right move.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Capital adequacy: a key element 
4. 
Solvency is a necessary, but not sufficient condition for financial stability. What is crucial for 
solvency,  besides  the  quality  of  the  asset  portfolio,  is  the  amount  of  capital.  This  is  a  key 
element in restoring confidence. 
That  is  just  as  relevant  now  as  it  was  in  2008  and  2009.  In  its  2011  Financial  Stability 
Review,  for  example,  the  Bundesbank  had  the  following  to  say,  “However,  in  times  of 
systemic  stress,  markets  cease  to  make  broad-based  distinctions  because,  supposing  an 
exogenous  shock  actually  triggers  a  systemic  crisis,  it  is  almost  impossible  ex  ante  to 
forecast  the  position  of  an  individual  bank.  In  such  a  scenario,  the  task  of  restoring 
confidence is not merely the responsibility of an individual bank but also a call to arms for the 
system as a whole.” 
Injections of capital can be one weapon in that cause. Capital adequacy is not everything. 
But without adequate capital, it all comes to nothing. 
Capital acts as a substantial internal buffer. Such buffers have to be large enough to cushion 
any stresses and strains. Provided they are put in place in good time, lending does not have 
to  be  cut  back  straightaway,  even  in  the  event  of  a  systemic  shock.  The  institutions  gain 
some respite and do not have to launch fire-sale auctions to shed their risky assets all at the 
same time, which can bring about a cumulative decline in the value of those assets. 
Here  I  can  see  many  practitioners  objecting  on  the  grounds  that  capital  is  too  scarce  and 
expensive. Most economists doubt that or – like the Bonn economist, Martin Hellwig – they 
do not accept it as a reason for forgoing stricter regulatory capital requirements. 
The reason is that, at this point, practitioners like to argue implicitly using a ceteris paribus 
clause,  in  other  words,  all  other  things  being  equal.  In  this  line  of  reasoning,  the  capital 
donors  have  a  certain  idea  about  the  return  on  the  capital  they  have  put  in.  If  the  capital 
share is increased, expenditures are greater than in a situation with higher borrowed capital. 
The crux of the matter is this: all other things are not equal. That is because the required 
return  on  capital  contains  a  risk  premium.  This  compensates  the  shareholders  for  the 
entrepreneurial risk. And the risk premium falls if the capital is increased, which means that 
the  entrepreneurial  risk  is  spread  over  more  capital.  Under  certain  assumptions,  it  is  even 
possible  to  show  by  how  much  the  risk  premium  is  reduced:  and  that  is  by  precisely  the 
amount  that  the  overall  capital  costs  remain  unchanged.  This  is  the  substance  of  the 
Modigliani-Miller theorems. 
And to anyone saying this is nothing but dry theory and that everything is quite different in 
investment  banking  practice,  I  would  reply  that  this  can  be  proved  by  precisely  the  same 
means  used  in  investment  banking  for  valuing  options.  And  even  if  complete  neutrality  of 
financing  is  not  guaranteed,  there  is  no  way  round  the  fact  that  the  risk  premium  and  the 
required return on capital have to go down if the capital share goes up. It is simply a matter 
of  economic  logic.  That  fact  alone  puts  the  notion  of  “expensive  capital”  into  some  sort of 
perspective. 
The neutrality of funds applies as long as there are no distortions which affect the two types 
of capital differently. Even so, outside capital is given preferential tax treatment over equity 
capital by way of the tax deductibility of interest payments. Tax breaks for servicing debt thus 
lower the costs of borrowed capital. 
And  what  is  perhaps  even  more  significant:  during  the  financial  crisis,  explicit  and  implicit 
guarantees  for  systemically  important  institutions  meant  that  borrowing  was,  eventually, 
being subsidised. From the point of view of a big bank, loan capital becomes cheaper than 
equity capital. Is the practitioners’ view that equity capital leads to higher costs is therefore 
right in this context after all? No, because the implicit guarantee on loan capital means that, 
in the event of a crisis, the costs are transferred to the general public or, in other words, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
taxpayer.  This  results  in  a  disconnect  between  microeconomic  and  macroeconomic  costs 
and benefits, as was pointed out by the German Council of Economic Experts. 
There  was  fallout  from  this,  of  course.  It  set  the  wrong  incentives.  It  favoured  highly 
leveraged business models. It gave an excessive stimulus to risk-taking. In short, it created 
moral hazard. Thus, if a higher input of borrowed capital was or is cheaper for the bank, this 
was only because the costs of this were or are payable elsewhere. Conversely, the business 
costs of higher capital requirements are offset by relief elsewhere, namely for the taxpayer – 
quite apart from the stabilising effects which larger capital buffers have for financial stability. 
From  a  microeconomic  perspective,  one  can,  of  course,  well  understand  that  there  is 
resistance  to  higher  capital  requirements.  That  does  not  mean  that  such  resistance  is 
justified in macroeconomic terms, far from it. 
Or,  as  Mr  Hellwig  put  it,  “Given  these  negative  externalities  from  banks  using  debt  rather 
than equity, there is no reason to refrain from requiring banks to have more capital on the 
grounds that equity is expensive and the regulation would raise bank’s cost of capital. Quite 
the  contrary,  such  a  regulation  would  merely  counteract  the  perverse  incentives  that  are 
created  by  the  corporate  tax  system  and  by  the  inability  of  government  to  commit  to  not 
bailing out banks.” 
Conclusion 
5. 
Allow me to summarise my thoughts as four basic propositions. 
First:  the  business  models  of  a  number  of  banks  underwent  a  fundamental  transformation 
associated with turning away from traditional business towards investment banking. 
Second: this meant that profitability was subject to a high degree of volatility. 
Third:  if  we  solve  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem,  there  will  then  be  no  reason  to  forgo  the 
advantages of universal banks. 
Fourth: adequate capital is a key element in achieving financial stability. 
These  propositions  might  not  cover  everything,  but  I  see  them  as  vital  elements.  If  these 
lessons are applied in the reform efforts, we shall already have achieved a great deal. I, at 
least, shall do my utmost to make this happen. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
