Barry Whiteside: Assisting and developing small businesses in Fiji 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of the 
ANZ Small and Medium Enterprises Credit Scheme, Suva, 19 April 2012. 
 Acting Chief Executive Officer and Head of Corporate Banking Fiji, Mr Rakesh Ram 
Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corp 
Permanent Secretary for Finance, Mr Filimone Waqabaca 
Staff of ANZ 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Ni sa bula vinaka and a very good evening to you all. 
Introductory comments 
Let  me  first  thank  Mr  Ram  and  the  ANZ  Team  for  your  kind  invitation  to  officiate  at  this 
launch  of  ANZ’s  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise  Credit  Scheme.  I  would  also  like  to 
congratulate ANZ and commend your efforts in working on a SME-focussed product line and 
for being the first lending institution to publicly acknowledge the adoption of Government’s 
SME Credit Guarantee Scheme. Today’s product launch and announcement are testament 
to  your  commitment  towards  assisting  and  developing  small  businesses  in  Fiji.  It  also 
demonstrates ANZ’s alignment to the objectives of the Fijian Government. 
Why we need to support the SME sector 
So why should we place much emphasis on our small and medium sized businesses when it 
seems  so  much  easier  and  less  risky  to  support  larger  entrenched  businesses  employing 
many more people and which are likely to be way more profitable as customers of financial 
institutions?  Clearly  the  Prouds(Motibhais),  Tappoos,  Jacks(Khatris),  Punjas,  Niranjans, 
Manubhais and Vinod Patels of today weren’t always the way they are now. Each have their 
own  interesting  stories  to  tell  of  their  history  of  growth  from  small-town  struggling  start-up 
businesses with just a handful of employees, not unlike our SMEs of today perhaps. I have 
visited these modern day conglomerates and seen the photos prominently displayed of the 
single shop, that first vehicle and the family patriarch and matriarch. Each business is proud 
of that heritage and I am sure you have seen the same and some of you here today could 
share similar stories.  
Ladies and gentlemen, our estimate is that Fiji’s SME sector accounts for around 12 percent 
of economic activity in the country. It is therefore, still largely untapped. Consequently, our 
potential for growth is large when considering that SMEs in other developing countries can 
contribute as much as 40–60 percent of GDP. In some of these economies, the SME sector 
accounts  for  more  than  90  percent  of  all  firms  outside  the  agriculture  sector.  They  add 
significantly  to  growth  by  creating  jobs  and  generating  significant  domestic  and  export 
revenue.  
If we are to take these figures to heart, there is obviously a need to recognise and support 
the contribution of SMEs in Fiji’s economy. The launch today of ANZ’s SME facility is a step 
in the right direction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Government support 
In  its  2012  National  Budget  Address,  the  Fiji  Government  introduced  its  SME  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme with the aim of encouraging and supporting local business, particularly 
by  improving  private  sector  lending  in  their  direction.  Under  the  Scheme,  Government  will 
provide a guarantee for up to 50 percent of the outstanding principal amount of any defaulted 
SME  business  loans,  up  to  a  limit  of  $50,000  per  business.  Government  has  set  aside 
$3.0 million for the Scheme which will be administered by the Reserve Bank of Fiji. Interest 
charged on such lending must not be higher than 10 percent per annum.  
Effective  from  1st  January  this  year,  lending  institutions,  such  as  ANZ,  have  the  option  of 
applying the Government guarantee to all new and renewed SME loans. Eligibility will cover 
lending  to  all  sectors,  except  for  loans  to  sugar  cane  farmers  and  Government-subsidised 
businesses.  
Government has indicated its total commitment to the Scheme as it is a small price to pay for 
assisting industry and bringing about growth. Clearly the long term benefits to this Scheme 
will be increased employment and economic activity which effectively translates to increased 
tax revenue for Government. I therefore commend the Government for being bold enough to 
provide this incentive for the SME sector. 
Public private partnership in supporting SMEs 
Ladies and gentlemen, we all have important roles to play in supporting the growth of SMEs 
in  Fiji.  The  Fijian  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  are  tasked  with  building  and 
maintaining an enabling and supportive environment, conducive to growth and development. 
The  private  sector  assists  in  allocating  funds  and  providing  advice  in  an  efficient  manner. 
Lending institutions, such as ANZ, play a crucial role in the current set-up as they provide the 
funds that SMEs require to function, expand operations, generate employment and produce 
export  receipts  or  goods  for  our  local  market.  Both  outputs  benefit  our  foreign  reserves 
position.  
The newly introduced Credit Guarantee Scheme is part of our goal to improve SME access 
to  finance  and  at  the  same  time  enable  lending  institutions  to  share  part  of  the  risk  with 
Government.  Public  and  private  sector  partnerships  such  as  these  are  exactly  what  our 
country needs to boost domestic growth and improve our overall economic wellbeing. 
An advantage of the above Scheme is that it can be used in conjunction with current loan 
schemes,  including  existing  flood  rehabilitation  facilities  to  alleviate  collateral  requirements 
for flood affected SMEs.  
Fiji economy 
I  guess  no  Governor’s  speech  is  complete  without  coverage  of  the  outlook  for  the  Fiji 
economy  and  I  do  not  intend  to  disappoint.  That  being  said,  our  current  estimates  for 
economic  growth  sees  Fiji  expanding  by  around  2.3  percent  in  2012  following  growth  of 
2.1 percent last year. However, as I speak, the economic forecasts are being re-examined in 
light  of  the  recent  floods  that  have  affected  infrastructure,  crops  and  businesses.  Our 
domestic  growth  forecast  is  broad-based  with  improvements  expected  in  most  economic 
sectors. The downside risks to this projection are expected to stem largely from the recent 
floods which greatly affected the livelihoods of those in the Western Division. However, this 
will be partly offset by necessary replanting, re-construction and other capital infrastructure 
work.  The  blessing,  if  there  is  a  blessing  to  be  had  in  all  the  sadness  and  misery  of  the 
natural disasters, is that our tourism industry was little affected and, in addition, it is still early 
in the year and with a lot of hard work there is time to “catch up”. Our foreign reserves remain 
healthy  at  around  $1.5  billion  (or  just  under  5  months  of  imports)  and  inflation  has  been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
trending downwards. Furthermore, bank credit has picked up and new loans in the first few 
months of 2012 are higher than in the comparable period last year. 
At this point it would be remiss of me not to acknowledge and commend the lending sectors 
efforts in assisting our local community to recover from the effects of the January and March 
floods. Our financial institutions, including ANZ, have contributed generously towards flood 
relief  through  a  number  of  local  charities,  including  the  Fiji  Red  Cross  and  the  Prime 
Minister’s Flood Relief Appeal. It is also pleasing to note the financial support that they have 
extended  to  affected  customers,  including  the  temporary  suspension  on  loan  repayments, 
adjustments  to  lending  limits  and  waiver  of  selected  fees  and  charges.  These  acts  of 
generosity and empathy go a long way in maintaining customer loyalty, sustaining business 
and ultimately contributing to future growth. They also show our hearts lie with our country 
and fellow citizens. 
Commercial bank lending to SMEs 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  commercial  bank  lending  to  private  sector  businesses  currently 
stands at just over $2.0 billion. Our records show that of this total, the 15 largest business 
loans from each of Fiji’s four commercial banks make up close to 60 percent, while lending to 
micro businesses and SMEs account for just 8 percent. There is definitely room for this to 
grow.  
I  am  particularly  pleased  to  highlight  that  commercial  banks  have  already  given  around 
$10 million  in  loans  under  the  SME  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  since  the  Facility  was 
introduced in January this year. With an interest rate pegged at no greater than 10 percent 
per annum this should greatly assist businesses. We hope that within 5 years, the share of 
SME loans would double to around 16 percent of total lending.  
ANZ SME scheme 
Ladies and gentlemen, I understand that ANZ’s commitment and work in the SME sector is 
something that has been honed over the last 5 years, with particular focus on streamlining 
processes and improving access to affordable finance. The creation of a 20-staff SME Team 
to serve all parts of Fiji will positively impact SME growth in both credit and numbers.  
In  addition,  ANZ’s  efforts  in  working  together  with  local  regulators  and  SME  operators  is 
welcome  news  for  sector  engagement  towards  SME  development.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
always  grateful  to  financial  institutions  that  assume  additional  responsibility  and  take  the 
initiative  in  accommodating  Government  and  RBF  supported  policies,  as  this  portrays  an 
alignment of our goals in taking the economy forward. The Reserve Bank is confident that 
the  combined  efforts  of  ANZ  and  other  financial  institutions  in  taking  the  new  Scheme  on 
board, will act as a platform for SME growth and is a step towards realising his sector’s true 
potential. 
In closing, I wish your Team every success in the launch of this new product and thank ANZ 
Bank  for  the  continued  confidence  and  commitment  towards  the  development  of  both  the 
SME sector and the Fiji economy. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
