Choongsoo Kim: Financial integration, financial stability and central 
banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  International 
Conference  on  “Financial  integration,  financial  stability  and  central  banking”,  organized  by 
Japan Financial Services Agency, Tokyo, 10 February 2012. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  a  true  pleasure  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  here  this  morning.  I  am  very  grateful  to 
Commissioner  Hatanaka  of  the  Financial  Services  Agency,  Chairman  Mae  of  Japan 
Securities  Dealers  Association,  and  President  Saito  of  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  Group,  for 
inviting me to this conference as a keynote speaker. 
As  we  all  know,  the  global  crisis  has  demonstrated  how  financial  disruption  in  a  major 
economy  can  quickly  spill  over  to  affect  the  entire  world,  through  a  complex  web  of 
interconnected  markets  and  cross-border  exposures.  And  while  causing  global  recession, 
these  spillovers  also  manifested  themselves  in  diverse  forms,  depending  upon  where  the 
weakest points in the vulnerability chain lay–for example, leading to fiscal crises in advanced 
economies  and  to  abrupt  capital  flow  reversals  in  emerging  economies.  The  crisis  also 
revealed a number of shortcomings in our financial regulation and supervision, as shown for 
instance by our failure to detect the systemic risk arising from pro-cyclicality and nonlinearity 
in asset prices. 
Given its far reaching impact on the financial sector and the broader economy as well, the 
global crisis has and will continue to cast a long shadow on financial and real activities over 
the  coming  years  if  not  decades.  But  it  has  also  brought  us  important  lessons  and  new 
thinking about central banking, financial regulation and fiscal prudence. And we have made 
substantial progress, ranging from formulating a strengthened regulatory framework to laying 
the foundation for better international policy coordination through bodies such as the G20. 
And  now,  as  we  enter our  fourth  year  since  the  crisis,  I  would  argue  that  it is time  to  pay 
greater attention to reviving economic growth and the related policy agenda. The ensuring of 
financial  stability–or  more  broadly  macroeconomic  stability–is  of  course  a  prerequisite  for 
reviving growth, but the converse is also true. The real and financial sector linkages in other 
words  involve  two-way  traffic.  And  indeed,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  that  the  highly  indebted 
countries  in  Europe  will  be  able  to  succeed  in  putting  their  public  finances  on  sustainable 
footings if their growths remain stagnant. 
In this respect, global financial resources may have in recent years been directed too much 
toward financing of unsustainable fiscal deficits in debt-ridden countries and too little toward 
growth  and  job  creation.  I  believe  that  redirecting  of  financial  resources  more  toward 
growth–more  specifically,  toward  countries  with  high  productivity–could  yield  substantial 
stability benefits to all in the long run. 
This is why I see a greater role for Asia going forward. Asia weathered the global crisis well, 
and  has  thus  far  remained  resilient  to  negative  spillovers  from  the  on-going  fiscal  crisis  in 
Europe.  Moreover,  many  expect  Asia  to  develop  even  more  into  the  engine  of  global 
economic growth. But Asia also faces many challenges. Its source of growth is skewed to 
external  demand,  and  there  is  limited  scope  for  domestic  demand  to  play  a  major  role. 
Intra-regional trade has been on the rise, true, but it remains only secondary to trade with 
other advanced regions. Our regional financial markets are meanwhile underdeveloped, less 
satisfactorily integrated, and vulnerable to shocks of external origin. While Asia accounts for 
over one-third of world GDP, its share in world finance is less than one quarter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
That said, I find the theme of this conference to be highly topical. Asian Market Integration 
and  Financial  Innovation  should,  I  believe,  be  our  path  to  prosperity  and  stability.  In  what 
follows, I would like to set out my views on this theme, with a particular emphasis on the role 
of the central bank. 
Asian market integration: a way forward to financial deepening and stability 
Let me begin by addressing the benefits and the risks of financial integration in Asia. 
Asian economies grew rapidly over the past several decades, by integrating themselves to 
the  world  economy  through  trade.  During  the  catch-up  process,  Asia  was  able  to  upgrade 
and  boost  the  scale  of  its  productive  capacity  and,  through  learning-by-doing,  significantly 
reduce its productivity gap vis-à-vis its advanced trading partners. 
I believe that financial integration can and should bring the same benefits for Asia as trade 
integration.  In  principle,  financial  integration  facilitates  domestic  financial  development, 
improves  resource  allocation  within  and  across  countries,  and  ultimately  promotes  growth. 
The diverse stages of development and demographics of Asian countries offer fertile ground 
for  such  efficiency  gains  from  financial  integration.  These  benefits  are  relatively  well 
understood. 
Another  important  but  less  known  benefit  is  a  stronger  market  base  for  financial  stability. 
Financial  integration  tends  to  bring  about  greater  market  liquidity,  improved  risk  allocation 
and  enhanced  competition,  all  of  which  contribute  to  financial  stability  by  allowing  market 
participants to better absorb and trade risks among themselves (IMF, 2011)1. 
I think these stability gains are particularly relevant for Asia, where the brunt of regional trade 
and  finance  is  denominated  and  settled  in  the  dollar  and  other  reserve  currencies.  Heavy 
dependence  on  the  dollar  has  nurtured  currency  and  maturity  mismatches  here,  and  the 
associated liquidity risks of individual banks have often translated into sovereign risks as our 
domestic  financial  markets  have  offered  little  scope  for  liquidity  trade.  And  while  Asia  has 
been relatively free from financial crises since 1997, this has been aided by capital controls 
or large holdings of low-yield foreign reserves or both. 
If better integrated Asian markets can produce more safe assets of our own, offer greater risk 
hedging, and help to reduce financial mismatches, the financial stability gains to us could be 
quite  large.  Korea’s  recent  experience  offers  some  anecdotal  evidence  of  the  potential 
benefits of bond market integration. Specifically, increased investment in Korean treasuries 
by  Asian  official  investors  helped  very  much  last  year  to  offset  capital  outflows  from  our 
country driven by Eurozone investors. 
Despite efforts devoted for more than a decade, however, Asian market integration is still far 
less  than  satisfactory.  For  instance,  intra-regional  bond  investment  accounts  only  for 
7 percent of total bond investment in Asia, compared to figures of 59 percent for the EU and 
19 percent for North America. In this light, the Asian Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI) should 
remain a high priority on Asia’s financial reform agenda. 
We should keep in mind as well that financial integration is a market process that takes a 
very long time and evolves only gradually. Policies and institutions implemented to promote 
financial integration may–and perhaps should–also differ across time and place. But I do not 
think Asian markets are intrinsically different, in terms of their modus operandi, from other 
advanced  markets.  Therefore,  I  believe  Asian  market  integration  should  be  guided  by  the 
same  principles  adopted  by  advanced  markets–such  as  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility, 
                                                 
1  Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the International Conference on “Financial 
integration,  financial  stability  and  central  banking”,  organized  by  Japan  Financial  Services  Agency,  Tokyo, 
10 February 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
freer  capital  mobility,  transparent  rules  and  regulations,  and  fair  competition  based  upon 
reciprocity. In addition, a clear roadmap should be in place to enable the private sector to 
prepare itself well in advance for the changes that are coming. 
Financial stability and central banking  
The  efficiency  and  stability  benefits  of  Asian  market  integration  are  not  things  that  can  be 
taken  for  granted.  Instead,  reaping  these  benefits  requires  the  meeting  at  all  times  of  an 
important precondition–namely, adequate risk control. 
As noted earlier, financial integration and deepening can lead to a stronger market base for 
financial  stability.  Nevertheless,  financial  integration  will  in  all  likelihood  lead  to  increased 
systemic  risk,  as  countries  and  markets  become  more  interconnected.  The  fact  that  the 
global crisis started in the most advanced and financially integrated regions suggests that the 
systemic risk can be far larger than the sum of the risks of the individual financial institutions 
or markets involved. 
Systemic risk is a complex function of all sorts of linkages, arising from cross-correlated and 
pro-cyclical asset prices, market frictions, and interconnectedness, among other factors. This 
is  what  makes  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  managing  systemic  risk  pivotal.  At  the  most 
basic  level,  of  course,  control  of  systemic  risk  will  require  strong  prudential  oversight  of 
individual financial institutions and markets. 
But  that  is  not  enough.  A  shock  in  an  isolated  financial  market  or  in  the  real  sector  can 
quickly  spill  over  into  another,  and  in  the  process  be  dramatically  amplified.  After  all, 
subprime  mortgage-related  assets  accounted  for  only  a  small  portion  of  the  total  financial 
assets of the United States and Europe leading up to the global crisis, but they nevertheless 
triggered the global crisis when the housing bubbles in these economies burst. 
For  this  reason,  systemic  risk  control  should  be  approached  from  a  macro-prudential 
perspective in which the real and financial sector linkages take center stage. And given their 
mandates  and  financial  resources,  central  banks  are  arguably  well  positioned  to  develop 
macro-prudential judgment of systemic risk and to take actions if warranted. To be specific, 
the existence of real and financial linkages implies that price stability and financial stability 
cannot be considered in isolation, and that monetary and macro-prudential policies, despite 
being so distinct in many respects, should be closely coordinated. In addition, we should note 
that the central bank’s exercise of its lender of last resort function during times of  liquidity 
disruption is in fact also a macro-prudential policy (BIS, 2011)2. 
We have recently witnessed sea changes in the governance structures of macro-prudential 
policy in major financial center countries, where central banks have now become responsible 
for–or at least involved in–both monetary and macro-prudential policies. Such departure from 
the so-called Tinbergen Principle reflects the new thinking on central banking and financial 
stability since the global crisis. I believe there is no one-size-fits-all solution, however, and 
that  governance  structure  should  rather  be  tailored  to  individual  country  circumstances.  It 
should  nevertheless  be  made  clear  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  play  a  role  in 
macro-prudential oversight on systemic risk, and that close dialogue and policy coordination 
between the central bank and the supervisory authority, if they are not the same, is crucial for 
financial stability. 
                                                 
2  Central Bank Governance and Financial Stability, BIS Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Korea’s take on stronger financial stability 
Before  concluding,  let  me  touch  briefly  on  Korea’s  take  on  the  strengthening  of  financial 
stability since the global crisis. 
Korea has learned from the crisis that the combination of good macroeconomic fundamentals 
and  a  large  reserve  buffer  is  not  sufficient  to  guard  against  adverse  external  shocks, 
particularly if the economy’s underlying financial vulnerabilities are large. At the center of our 
acute  policy  concern  since  the  crisis  has  been  excessive  capital  flow  volatility,  stemming 
from  currency  and  maturity  mismatches  in  our  foreign  liabilities.  Another  priority  has  been 
institutional reform to strengthen the role of the Bank of Korea in ensuring financial stability, 
with a greater focus on crisis prevention and management. 
Macro-prudential measures have recently been implemented to limit the excessive FX risks 
on our banks’ balance sheets. First, ceilings on the forward FX positions of domestic banks 
and  foreign  bank  branches  were  imposed  in  October  2010,  and  are  currently  set  at 
40 percent  and  200  percent  of  equity  capital,  respectively.  Second,  a  macro-prudential 
stability levy (a bank levy) on the non-core liabilities of banks was put into effect from August 
2011, with the levy rate varying depending on maturity–in a range from 20 basis points for 
short-term  liabilities  with  maturities  of  one  year  or  less  to  2  basis  points  for  longer-term 
liabilities with maturities five years or longer. 
These  two  measures  are  not  capital  controls  as  they  are  applied  equally  to  domestic  and 
foreign banks. And although it may be premature to judge, they do appear to have influenced 
banks’ risk taking in foreign currencies. Finally, for precautionary purposes, Korea renewed 
and expanded its central bank currency swap arrangements with Japan and China late last 
year,  a  move  which  increased  the  amount  of  foreign  currency  liquidity  available  to  us  by 
about 90 billion dollars. 
In parallel, a major governance reform was also implemented in 2011 by revision of the Bank 
of  Korea  Act.  Through  this  revision,  the  Bank  of  Korea  is  now  mandated  with  the 
responsibility  not  only  for  maintaining  price  stability,  but  also  for  paying  due  attention  to 
financial  stability  as  well.  The  Bank  is  in  addition  required  to  prepare  an  official  financial 
stability report semi-annually, and submit it to our National Assembly. The revision has also 
endowed us with expanded scope for providing emergency liquidity support, and with greater 
access to information from financial institutions including non-banks. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude now with a few final remarks. 
Asia can open a new chapter in its economic development by turning to take advantage of 
relatively unexplored opportunities in financial trade. If the trading of goods has enabled Asia 
to  grow  rapidly  thus  far,  financial  integration  and  innovation  can  and  should  do  the  same. 
This  is  because  it  is  in  the  area  of  finance  where  Asia  has  yet  to  catch  up  with  the 
forerunners, and where the productivity gap hence remains substantial. The first step toward 
Asian  market  integration  and  financial  innovation  should  be  financial  liberalization  at  the 
national level, guided by the same principles that guided our advanced peers in the past. 
But  the  risks  attendant  to  financial  integration  and  innovation  are  by  no  means  small. 
Economic  growth  and  financial  prowess  will  prove  elusive  if  systemic  risk  is  not  brought 
under  adequate  control.  And  the  recipe  for  success  in  this  regard  is  well  known–stable 
monetary policy, fiscal prudence, and enhanced financial regulation with a greater focus on 
macro-prudential oversight. 
I  hope  my  address  today  will  serve  as  a  reminder  of  why  the  central  bank  and  the 
supervisory  authority  should  work  together  to  ensure  financial  stability,  an  important 
precondition for success in the process of Asia’s future financial take-off. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I look forward to productive discussion during this conference, hoping that it will guide us to 
solutions to the challenges that Asia faces. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
