Ignazio Visco: The TARGET2-Securities Framework Agreement 
Key statement by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Baml of Italy, at the event marking the 
first signatures to the T2S Framework Agreement, Frankfurt am Main, 8 May 2012. 
 I am very pleased to be here today to sign, on behalf of Banca d’Italia acting in the name of 
the Eurosystem, the Framework Agreement with Monte Titoli. 
This is an important day for T2S, since this signature represents the achievement of one of 
the  crucial  milestones  of  the  project.  We  all  know  that  the  last  two  years  of  negotiations 
between the Eurosystem and the European central securities depositories have not always 
been  simple  and  straightforward  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Programme  Board  and  the 
CSDs for the efforts they have made to reach a common consensus on such a relevant legal 
act. 
From now onwards the Eurosystem and the CSDs will have to jointly focus on making T2S a 
reality. The Eurosystem will have to deliver T2S to the market according to schedule. The 
CSDs will have to adapt their internal systems to the pan-European platform. 
This is an important day not only for T2S but for the European financial community at large, 
which can reap significant benefits from T2S. The reduction of settlement costs that will be 
achieved  thanks  to  the  economies  of  scale  which  this  project  will  bring  about  has  the 
potential  to  greatly  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  our  marketplace.  Furthermore,  by 
harmonising  the  settlement  process  T2S  will  stimulate  competition  among  CSDs  and 
between them and the large custodian banks. Perhaps even more important is the role that 
T2S will play as a catalyst for further harmonisation of the European financial market, at a 
time when the design of a new European CSD Regulation is striving to remove legal barriers. 
We  are  therefore  aware  that  a  significant  signal  is  being  delivered  today.  It  is  a  signal  of 
confidence in the importance of the area’s financial integration, against some tendencies of 
financial fragmentation that we are currently observing. Not so far is the day in which the very 
concept of cross-border transactions in Europe will lose any meaning. 
I am very pleased that the Italian banks and Monte Titoli have supported this project from the 
very  beginning.  As  a  representative  of  the  Eurosystem,  let  me  congratulate  in  particular 
Monte Titoli on its early decision to join T2S by migrating already in the first wave, a decision 
that has greatly enhanced the chances of success of the project. 
Now that hopefully all CSDs in the euro area will sign the Framework 
Agreement  by  the  end  of  June,  the  main  challenge  facing  us  is  the  implementation  of  a 
sound governance of T2S, which has to involve in an appropriate way all stakeholders, i.e., 
market players, the Eurosystem and non-euro area central banks. 
The aim is to balance the rights of the Eurosystem – as system owner and operator – with 
the  rights  of  the  CSDs  which  will  adopt  T2S,  and  with  those  of  the  central  banks  which 
eventually  will  provide  their  currencies  to  T2S.  At  the  same  time,  the  needs  of  securities 
market users will have to be respected. 
Let me finally state that Banca d’Italia, as one of the providers of T2S, is firmly committed to 
the  success  of  this  project  and  to  fulfil  the  expectations  of  the  Eurosystem  and  of  the 
European market community. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
