Alan Bollard: Learnings from the Global Financial Crisis 
Paper by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and Mr Tim Ng, 
for the Sir Leslie Melville Lecture at the Australian National University, Canberra, 9 August.  
 Introduction 
1. 
The global financial system went through major convulsions in 2008, putting great pressure 
on an already  weakening global economy. A massive global economic recession followed, 
contributing  to  the  emergence  of  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  European 
sovereign debt problems remain a dark cloud overhanging the world economy.  
These  extreme  events  have  provoked  us  to  re-think  what  is  known  and  where  economic 
research  should focus,  in  some  cases fundamentally. We  had  long known  that  banks  that 
appear individually sound can be vulnerable to problems affecting the whole banking system, 
and that such problems can amplify economic shocks. But the crisis sharply accelerated the 
study of financial fragility, contagion and instability nonetheless.  
The  crisis  has  also  challenged  us  as  financial  regulators  and  monetary  and  fiscal 
policymakers. We are all working to understand, contain and repair the damage to financial 
systems, to economies and to governments’ financial capacity. The policy choices in many 
areas involve difficult and uncertain tradeoffs.  
This paper discusses some lessons from the crisis experience to date, and some analytical 
and policy challenges. Australia and New Zealand escaped the worst of the financial crisis, 
but not without extraordinary policy actions of our own at  various times, and not  without a 
certain legacy of issues to deal with in our own neighbourhood. 
We  find  it  useful  to  structure  the  discussion  in  three  parts:  the  episode  of  near-seizure  in 
many advanced-country financial systems in 2007–08; the global recession of 2008–09; and 
the current situation of extreme fiscal weakness in many parts of Europe. (Of course, real 
events have not been as simple and linear as that structure might suggest – expectations 
and  feedback  loops  have  played  a  substantial  role.)  We  conclude  with  some  reflections 
about research and policy strategy in this new world. 
Financial system disruption, 2007–08 
2. 
Global financial markets sharply became unsettled in July and August 2007, when a number 
of  large  US  and  European  financial  institutions  suspended  redemptions  in  investment 
vehicles  linked  to  US  mortgage  debt  and  their  derivatives.  Through  the  following  year, 
concerns  mounted  about  the  extent  and  complexity  of  global  bank  exposures  and 
vulnerabilities to growing economic weakness. These concerns soon embraced a very wide 
sweep of financial products in the US and elsewhere. Bear Stearns was effectively bailed out 
by the US taxpayer on the basis that it was too interconnected to be allowed to fail. But the 
shock  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  saw  investors  panic,  as 
perceptions  about  the  safety  of  financial  institutions  in  general  took  a  sudden  turn  for  the 
worse.  Each  of  these  events  saw  funding  spreads  in  interbank  markets  worldwide  spike 
(Figure 1). 
Firms,  investors  and  regulators  generally  failed  to  anticipate  quite  how  financial  system 
fragilities  could  interact. Prior  to  the  crisis, they  had  viewed  hedging  markets  and financial 
engineering as powerful means of detaching credit and liquidity risk from a wide range and 
large volume of circulating private-sector securities. The rapid growth and use of apparently 
low risk private-sector securities in funding markets was itself due to a number of interacting 
factors. These included a strong global demand for low-risk assets (mis-sold or mis-used on 
the  basis  of  inaccurately  high  credit  ratings),  loose  monetary  policy,  and  credit-fuelled 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
housing booms in a number of advanced economies, which encouraged financial innovation 
to meet the demand for low-risk assets.  
Figure 1 
LIBOR-OIS spreads 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 In many large advanced countries, an overall result leading up to the crisis was increased 
leverage  and  funding  fragility  in  both  the  financial  system  and  the  “real”  economy.  Many 
could see that these growing imbalances were unsustainable and would need to correct, and 
that  the  correction  might  be  very  disruptive.  But  to  anticipate  fully  the  magnitude  of  the 
subsequent event would have required connecting many apparently disparate pressures and 
signals.  Among  the  most  important  of  these  were  two  factors:  first,  the  funding  fragilities 
created  by  the  shadow  banking  system;  and  second,  the  catastrophic  collapse  of  liquidity 
caused  by  investors’  sudden  doubts  about  the  credit  risk  and  marketability  of  previously 
“safe” assets, and about the standing of counterparties.  
The  dumping  of  risky  financial  assets  and  indiscriminate  cutting  of  funding  caused  asset 
return correlations to jump. The shock rapidly spread between global banks, partly reflecting 
high-frequency marking-to-market. The cost of credit default insurance for the large financials 
shot  up  (Figure  2).  Bottlenecks  in  market  or  institutional  hubs  impeded  or  prevented  risk 
shedding. The fire sales and chain reactions proved very difficult to halt.  
Faced with disappearing private-sector funding markets, central banks stepped in to supply 
funds in large quantity to solvent banks. To limit their own (and hence their governments’) 
financial  exposure,  the  idea  was  to  take good collateral  at  interest  rates  and  haircuts  high 
enough to recognise the lending risks. However, lending terms could not be so punitive as to 
discourage use of the facilities, which would defeat their purpose. This was easier said than 
done given the shrinking supply of good collateral. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 2 
CDS spreads, selected global banks 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 Banks  that  became  insolvent  despite  central  bank  funding  assistance  presented  their 
governments  with  tough  choices  about  rescue.  Financial  support  in  the  form  of  direct 
injections of equity or debt blew out government balance sheets in many cases (Figure 3), 
and guarantees of bank debt added sizeable contingent liabilities.  
Gross government outlays to support financial sector since crisis 
Figure 3 
Source: IMF. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
In New Zealand and Australia, problems in the core banking system during the crisis were 
comparatively mild, reflecting our more vanilla-flavoured banking sector and relatively sound 
bank  capital  structures.  There  was  little  exposure  to  complex  instruments  and  opaque 
interconnections in our markets. Nevertheless, during the period of extreme market nerves, 
like  other  authorities  we  had  to  act  rapidly  to  support system  liquidity  and  banks’  ability  to 
fund themselves, including by issuing government guarantees of bank liabilities.  
important 
the  most 
Regulatory responses 
Regulators  worldwide  have  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  experience  with  a  large  and 
ongoing  programme  of  reforms.  Among 
include  strengthening 
requirements  on  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  structures,  and  bolstering  domestic  and 
international financial supervision.  
Basel III is a key international process to facilitate the parts of these reforms focused on bank 
balance sheets. We do note, however, that not all the proposed reforms relate to problems in 
the  Australasian  banking  system.  Neither  is  it  clear  that  all  countries  that  experienced 
banking system problems will adopt all the reforms. 
In  our  simpler  banking  systems  it  is  generally  easier  to  recalibrate  regulatory  standards. 
Capital levels have not been heavily eroded by the crisis, so capital and liquidity standards 
can be strengthened quickly compared to those advanced economies struggling with weak or 
complex  financial  systems.  In  some  economies  there  is  a  risk  that  banks  will  meet  higher 
capital or liquidity ratio requirements by contracting lending, rather than by increasing capital. 
This  has  slowed  the  strengthening  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  crimped  the  availability  of 
credit to firms for investment. With the current risk that global funding conditions could turn 
adverse  very  suddenly  and  our  banking  system’s  dependence  on  offshore  wholesale 
funding, in New Zealand we have placed priority on strengthening liquidity standards even 
before increasing capital ratios.  
Global recession, 2009–10 
3. 
The  rapid  deterioration  in  financial  and  economic  conditions  in  late  2008  and  early  2009 
quickly  caused  a  collapse  in  business  and  consumer  confidence,  exacerbating  the 
interruption  of  economic  activity  across  the  world.  Cross-border  spillovers  through  regional 
supply chain structures and global customer markets were accelerated by short-term funding 
disruptions, such as in trade finance. Now economies without large direct financial exposures 
to “toxic” assets, such as Asian export-oriented economies, were sucked into the downdraft. 
The abrupt marking-down of the outlook for Western growth and consumption of high-value 
goods  saw  inventories  pile  up,  especially  in  those  countries  positioned  as  manufacturing 
hubs  or  producers  of  capital  goods.  In  six  months  or  less,  industrial  production  in  Japan, 
Singapore and Korea, for example, fell 30, 25 and 19 percent respectively.  
The damage to bank balance sheets from suspect loans and marked-down asset valuations, 
as  well  as  the  sudden  exit  from  the  scene  of  many  financial  intermediaries,  showed  up  in 
restricted  lending  capacity  and  greatly  expanded  funding  spreads.  Accordingly,  those 
non-financial  firms  and  households  that  still  wanted  or  needed  credit  either  had  to  pay 
elevated rates or to deleverage, further depressing activity.  
When central banks recognised the magnitude of the recessionary forces in train, they cut 
policy  interest  rates  very  quickly  (Figure  4).  In  some  Northern  Hemisphere  markets,  the 
dysfunction  in  the  financial  system  had  loosened  the  link  between  official  policy  rates  and 
lending  rates  to  firms  and  households.  As  well  as  cutting  official  interest  rates,  the  US 
Federal Reserve and the Bank of England stepped in directly to key credit markets to lower 
interest rates in those markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 4 
Policy interest rates 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 The  relatively  high  level  of  interest  rates  before  the  recession  meant  that  deep  cuts  were 
possible. The New Zealand and Australian Reserve Banks, for example, cut policy rates by 
575 and 425 basis points respectively between July 2008 and April 2009. 
Crisis  then  brought  opportunities.  Monetary  policy  researchers  had  always  wondered  what 
might happen if price inflation and interest rates approached zero in several major countries, 
or  even  went  negative.  Now  we  would  find  out.  The  case  of  Japan  no  longer  seemed  so 
unique.  As  monetary  policy  interest  rates  approached  zero  in  a  number  of  advanced 
countries, some central banks began to try to influence general financial conditions through 
“unconventional” tools, meaning tools other than the official short term interest rate (the “cash 
rate” in this part of the world).  
One such tool is purchases of long-maturity financial securities in large volume on the open 
market,  called  “quantitative  easing”  or  QE.  These  purchases  have  been  most  prominently 
carried  out  by  the  US  Fed  and  the  Bank  of  England,  causing  roughly  a  tripling  and 
quadrupling,  respectively,  of  their  balance  sheet  sizes  to  date  (Figure  5).  One  channel  by 
which QE is believed to work is by increasing demand for the targeted securities, raising their 
prices and hence reducing interest rates on them, which should then flow through to longer-
term interest rates in general. Other possible channels include exchange rate impacts and 
signalling of a central bank’s expectations to keep policy rates low.  
Unconventional  policies  can  have  unconventional  side  effects.  We  are  currently  observing 
spillovers  from  large  economy  QE  impacting  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate  pressures  in 
small open economies. Continuing exchange rate pressure is problematic for a country like 
New Zealand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Figure 5 
Central bank asset holdings 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 In  the  face  of  plummeting  demand,  many  countries  hurriedly  enlisted  discretionary  fiscal 
policy  also.  With  a  fiscal  and  credit  stimulus  package  of  4  trillion  yuan  (about  600  billion 
US dollars, or 14% of Chinese GDP), China carried out the biggest fiscal stimulus in post-war 
history.  Fiscal  stimulus  packages  were  typically  worth  several  percent  of  GDP,  with  the 
cumulative  expansionary  shift  of  the  fiscal  stance  over  the  three  years  from  2007  to  2009 
amounting  to  four  percent  of  GDP  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  These 
expansions are now being wound back (Figure 6). 
Figure 6 
Shifts in fiscal stance 
Source: IMF. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Sovereign credit challenges, 2010– 
4. 
In many advanced countries, the recession-induced reductions of tax revenue and increased 
social  spending  were  compounded  by  governments  taking  on  debt  to  support  the  banking 
sector.  These  actions  brought  forward  sovereign  debt  sustainability  problems  in  some 
countries,  particularly  in  Europe.  By  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  sharply  rising  concerns 
about the fiscal position of first Greece, and then other non-competitive indebted euro area 
countries,  were  quickly  reflected  in the  interest rates  they  had to  pay  in  sovereign funding 
markets.  Markets  made  and  continue  to  make  sharply  differentiated  judgements  about 
sovereign  creditworthiness  across  the  euro-area  countries,  placing  considerable  strain  on 
euro-area political and economic institutions. 
The crisis also refocused public and market attention on the fiscal cost of aging populations. 
The  projected  sharply  increasing  cost  of  state-funded  health  care  and  income  support  for 
retirees, at the same time as a reducing working population, had been recognised for some 
time.  But  now,  the  problem  has  come  forward  in  time,  with  the  potential  national  incomes 
available to support future fiscal expenditure looking much lower. Some severe implications 
for  wealth  and  transfers  between  generations  are  starkly  apparent,  and  these  will  be 
politically and socially difficult to manage. 
While market fiscal sustainability concerns are especially focused on the euro area currently, 
governments elsewhere are also drawing lessons for the re-alignment of fiscal settings with 
reduced growth prospects. In some ways these are difficult lessons to accept, as well as to 
debate publicly. Where countries are under strain, fiscal austerity measures may be needed 
to  signal  the  political  commitment  to  achieving  consolidation,  even  though  this  can  also 
reduce growth, at least in the short term. The cost and availability of funding for many euro 
area  countries  remains  very  sensitive 
fiscal  sustainability  projections,  probably 
exacerbated by the inability of these countries to issue the currency of their debt.  
to 
Figure 7 
Government debt ratios and bond rates 
 
Sources:  Haver  Analytics,  IMF.  AU=Australia,  AT=Austria,  BE=Belgium,  CA=Canada, 
CH=Switzerland, DE=Germany, ES=Spain, FI=Finland, FR=France, GB=United Kingdom, 
IE=Ireland, 
IT=Italy,  JP=Japan,  KR=Korea,  NL=Netherlands,  NZ=New  Zealand, 
PT=Portugal, US=United States.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Governments needing to finance deficits have had to pay considerable attention to market 
conditions  and  perceptions.  In  general,  where  discretionary  fiscal  measures  were  quickly 
implemented,  and  were  seen  to  be  extraordinary,  targeted  and  sunsetted,  markets  have 
been  more  forgiving.  To  date,  the  US,  Germany,  Japan  and  the  UK  have  retained  the 
confidence of investors and their status as safe havens – despite government debt ratios that 
are  high  even  by  the  standards  of  the  troubled  euro  area  countries.  Australia  and  New 
Zealand have continued to benefit from relatively low public debt ratios (Figure 7). 
A new world 
5. 
Five years after the first tremors in 2007, the world looks rather different. Interest rates are 
much lower. Risk pricing is much more sharply differentiated. The threat of deflation is now 
real  for  several  countries,  and  inflation  is  very  low  for  others.  In  most  advanced  countries 
since the crisis, real per capita GDP growth has been insipid at best. 
Although  weak  banks  appear  to  be  much  less  of  a  problem  in  Australasia,  impaired  bank 
balance  sheets  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  are  casting  a  long  economic  shadow.  Some 
banking  systems  remain  weighed  down  by  non-performing  loans,  while  markets  for 
securitised loans are still largely moribund. Financial institutions and their funders appear to 
have recognised the importance of robust funding, loss-absorption capacity and clarity about 
bank balance sheet exposures.  
The  risk  aversion  in  global  credit  markets  is  still  reaching  our  shores  via  bank  funding 
markets,  in  the  form  of  elevated  funding  spreads  and  a  heightened  demand  for  local 
deposits.  Although  these  developments  at  least  partly  reflect  a  transition  to  “new  normal” 
balance  sheet  structures,  it  is  also  possibly  a  sign  that  the  pre-crisis  model  of  highly 
leveraged and interconnected banking may no longer attract investors. That of course could 
be a helpful thing for macro-financial stability and for the rebalancing of non-bank balance 
sheets – provided it persists when good times return. 
The  new  environment  creates  some  structural  and  strategic  challenges  for  the  global 
financial  industry.  Much-reduced financial  engineering  and  weaker financial  institutions  are 
likely  to  see  some  retrenchment  of  certain  banking  activities.  Also,  with  very  low  yields, 
financial institutions subject to obligations or strong expectations to pay fixed returns (such 
as  pension  funds) face  pressure to  increase  holdings  of risky  assets,  so  they  can  support 
these  returns.  A  renewed  search  for  yield  for  these  reasons  raises  the  risk  of  excessive 
investment or bubbles in such lower quality assets.  
Global  spending  and  investment  appear  very  cautious,  and  seem  likely  to  remain  so  for 
some  time,  given  the  overhang  of  debt  from  before  the  crisis.  In  advanced  economies, 
deleveraging in the private sector appears to have started, but will take a long time – perhaps 
a  generation.  Very  cautious  households  are  a  large  part  of  the  story  of  a  slow  and  fragile 
recovery. They have been hit hard by sustained labour market weakness, and in the US and 
some other advanced economies this has been compounded by loss of housing wealth and 
balance sheet weakness.  
The apparently lower appetite for debt among New Zealand and Australian households is an 
interesting  departure  from  the  recent  past,  or  perhaps  a  return  to  the  more  restrained 
standards of post-war years. In New Zealand, this continues, despite an emerging pickup in 
housing market activity  (albeit off a very low base). For example, New Zealand household 
credit  growth  has  traditionally  tracked  the  value  of  house  sales,  but  this  relationship  has 
loosened since the crisis. 
Household caution is understandable given the restrained growth outlook, and the continued 
need  for  external  rebalancing.  But  it  is  also  consistent  with  cyclically  weak  labour  and 
housing  markets.  We  have  yet  to  see  whether  deleveraging  will  continue  as  the  gradual 
recovery proceeds, or if households instead revert to pre-crisis behaviours.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Currently, business sector balance sheets after the crisis are generally in better shape than 
following  previous  recessions.  The  labour  market  weakness  probably  means  some  shift  in 
the share of national income in favour of capital. Furthermore, a reluctance to invest in the 
current environment of uncertainty (the Australian mining sector being a notable exception) 
means that many firms are actually quite cash-rich.  
Asia-Pacific impacts 
Increased saving and reduced investment in advanced economies, and the beginnings of a 
shift  towards  domestic  expenditure  and  away  from  exports  in  emerging  economies,  are 
starting to reduce the global imbalances that had grown markedly pre-crisis. However, in the 
meantime,  the  reduced  investment  is  also  holding  back  global  productivity  and  potential 
growth. This probably adds to the pressure for re-balancing of external and domestic growth 
drivers in emerging economies. 
While  world  growth  has  fallen  overall,  the  share  accounted  for  by  emerging  markets, 
particularly in Asia, has continued to grow. This shift, combined with the strong rebalancing 
forces, has produced an unusual constellation of economic conditions in Australia and New 
Zealand.  
The high exposure of Australia and New Zealand to emerging Asian demand for industrial 
raw materials and protein has sent the relative prices of those products, and hence our real 
exchange rates, to high levels. While that shift has encouraged labour and capital to move to 
those  sectors,  high  real  exchange  rates  are  also  promoting  expenditure  switching  towards 
foreign  goods  and  away  from  domestic  ones.  Non-resources  sectors  and  regions  are 
squeezed as a result. 
At the same time, in New Zealand we have our own post-crisis debt, resulting from pre-crisis 
debt-fuelled household expenditure, which is now proving to be a restraint on demand. And 
although our fiscal positions are favourable relative to many other advanced economies, the 
debt overhangs, dependence on offshore funding and its sensitivity to sustainability concerns 
suggest that the current tilt of fiscal policy towards consolidation may persist for a while.  
Moreover, the pressure of the high nominal exchange rate is not the only relevant “headwind” 
for our economies. Sectors other than those directly exposed to resources are seeing their 
relative  productivity  and  cost-competitiveness  decline.  This  reflects  the  ongoing  and  rapid 
industrialisation of Asia, and perhaps globalisation more generally. In New Zealand, the most 
obvious relative decline is in import-substituting sectors. 
Research and analysis 
The  crisis  has  re-oriented  the  economic  research  agenda.  Beliefs  that  self-stabilising 
processes  in  the  economy  and  financial  system  generally  dominate  destabilising  herd 
behaviour  have  been  shaken  up.  The  potential  and  proper  roles  of  financial,  fiscal  and 
monetary policy, have also been seriously challenged by experience.  
The management of tail risks is the supposed province of regulators, financial experts and 
insurance  contracts.  Yet  the  industry’s  extensive  risk-management  apparatus  failed  to 
anticipate  and  struggled  to  cope  with  the  financial  crisis.  Some  markets  that  locked  up 
involved  recent  financial  instruments  such  as  complex  mortgage  derivatives,  whose 
behaviour under stress had never really been tested.  
When  markets  struggle  to  clear  at  any  price,  and  when  cross-border  exposures  grossly 
multiply  the  number  of  relevant  variables,  formal  modelling  to  support  risk  management 
becomes difficult. By definition, tail risk analysis is about extrapolation of observed behaviour 
to  speculate  about  scenarios  never  before  seen.  We  should  be  humble  about  our 
frameworks’ ability to capture these scenarios.  
Economists  have  yet  to  get  fully  to  grips  with  the  complex  roles  of  the  financial  system, 
financial  frictions,  asset  prices  and  credit  flows  in  international  macroeconomic  dynamics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
The research and policy communities are now busy introducing richer financial behaviour in 
models.  Some  promising  avenues  include  study  of  how  financial  margin  behaviour  can 
propel  economic  booms,  financial  incapacity  can  exacerbate  busts,  and  diffusion  of  bad 
news  can  generate  panics.  Experimental  economics  is  using  lab  settings  to  study  human 
reactions to imperfect information and discontinuous events.  
But  uncovering  enduring  and  reliable  inferences  about  behaviour  from  discontinuous  and 
perhaps unique real-life observations is daunting. Non-linearities, contagion and large-scale 
failures  are  a  far  cry  from  familiar  linear  models  with  diversified  exposures  and  rational 
expectations. The jury is still out on whether extreme behaviour is forecastable in a useful 
way at all, even if it can be modelled in the abstract. A good example is the sudden change 
of perceptions about current monetary and fiscal arrangements for euro area. From barely 
perceptible  differences  between  euro  area  government  bond  rates  since  the  euro  began 
trading  in  1999  until  2008,  we  now  face  divergences  many  times  greater  than  those  seen 
even during the convergence period before the euro’s creation (Figure 8).  
Figure 8 
Euro area government bond rates 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 Policymakers’  models  are  usually  built  around  a  well-defined  economic  equilibrium.  In  the 
current environment, knowing exactly where equilibrium is and whether it is unique seem like 
especially big asks. More than usual, the financial industry and policymakers alike appear to 
be groping to understand how things will look in the next decade.  
Modelling approaches based on chaotic dynamics and multiple equilibria are not new to the 
profession. But their utility has been limited due to their extreme sensitivity to assumptions, 
and the difficulty of extracting a simple story on which to base decisions. Yet at least they 
remind us of the limits to predictability and certainty. 
Policy strategy 
What does all this mean for macroeconomic and financial policy strategy in the years ahead? 
As a first goal, and one that is unchanged by the crisis, macroeconomic and financial policy 
should  seek to  provide  a  stable  backdrop for  economic  activity.  The familiar  guideposts of 
price and financial stability remain relevant. As a second goal, policy might try to buffer and 
insulate the economy to some extent from disturbances. Third, while buffering to the degree 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
possible  given  limited  knowledge,  policy  should  allow  resource  allocation  signals  to  come 
through as undistorted as possible.  
Within this high-level policy framework, the stresses on fiscal and monetary policy in many 
economies have led to new policy challenges. Policy interest rates are very  low and fiscal 
deficits  very  large  in  many  countries.  In  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  policymakers  must 
manage  ongoing  exposures  to  offshore  financial  disruptions  as  well  as  generalised 
deleveraging pressures at home and abroad. Finally, exchange rates and relative prices and 
wages are shifting due to commodity market developments.  
Financial regulation and supervision 
The crisis confirmed that the financial system’s central economic role, and sudden escalation 
of  systemic  problems, make  it  politically  very  difficult to  ensure that  a bank’s shareholders 
and creditors bear the full costs of the bank’s failure when the entire system is under threat. 
Weak banks, effectively holding the economy to ransom, readily pass their liabilities and risks 
on to governments. Authorities’ priority in the midst of a financial crisis tends to be focused 
on  ensuring  that  the  liquidity  crunch  conditions  sparked  by  bad  banks  do  not  drag  good 
banks under.  
All the various forms of official support involve unpalatable market distortions and incentives 
for further bad behaviour (moral hazard). While equity stakes capture some upside from the 
rescue  for  the  government,  they  also  involve  difficult  governance  problems.  Junior  debt 
leaves  the  government  with  credit  risk  but  no  influence  over  risk-taking.  Senior  bank  debt 
limits  the  government’s  credit  risk,  but  can  make  the  bank’s  fragility  worse  by  scaring  off 
private  investors.  Government  guarantees  of  deposits  and  other  liabilities  might  limit  the 
upfront cashflow implications of financial support, but cast the shadow of moral hazard very 
broadly. 
Moral  hazard  can  probably  never  be  eliminated,  only  reduced,  especially  after  the 
widespread bailouts and government guarantees seen in the crisis. Some level of regulation 
and supervision to constrain the extremes of risk-taking behaviour will therefore always be 
necessary.  
With  reduced  credit  demand,  costly  funding  and  stricter  regulations,  the  banking  sector  is 
going to have to get used to more restrained returns. The financial system’s basic function is 
to make credit judgements across uncertain investment propositions, to monitor borrowers’ 
performance and creditworthiness, and to price credit accordingly. Restoring that function is 
the ultimate goal of financial reform. In doing so, we need to ensure that regulation does not 
overly increase the costs of banking, especially in more vanilla systems such as Australia’s 
and New Zealand’s. Our systems are already focussed on utility banking, rather than on the 
riskier types of investment banking.  
The sobering experience of the crisis underlines the difficulty of getting the right balance of 
light-handed  versus  heavy-handed  supervision.  Supervisors,  financial  institutions,  credit 
rating  agencies  and  everyone  else  inevitably  see  financial  and  economic  developments 
imperfectly, both ex ante and ex post. It is therefore unrealistic to expect to be able to reduce 
the probability of a systemic crisis to zero. Part of the strengthening of the financial system 
overall must therefore include practical preparation for further crises. This includes regulation 
and supervision with an eye to ensuring that a crisis can be dealt with effectively, should it 
eventuate.  
In  our  integrated  Australasian  banking  system  we  have  learned  the  value  of strong  home-
host  cooperation  in  regulating  trans-Tasman  entities.  We  have  also  learned  the  value  of 
having the capacity in each jurisdiction to deal with failed institutions expeditiously, whatever 
their  size  or  parentage.  In  New  Zealand,  we  have  emphasised  having  mechanisms  to 
allocate losses appropriately to creditors and shareholders and to release residual claims on 
the bank quickly, in the event of trouble at the banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Macro-financial policy 
We  learned  in  the  crisis  that  a  “micro-prudential”  focus  on  the  soundness  of  individual 
institutions  does  not  ensure  that the  whole  system  will  continue  functioning  under  adverse 
conditions. Part of the international response is macro-financial policy, a new focus of policy 
development concerned with the stability of the financial system as a whole, and on financial 
behaviour and its interactions with the economy.  
Macro-financial  policy  acts  on  the  structure  of  financial  institution  balance  sheets  and 
behaviours  across  the  whole  system.  Such  controls  add  to  micro-prudential  controls  to 
ensure the soundness of individual institutions considered in isolation. Macro-financial policy 
settings are intended to deliver automatic stabilisation akin to that of fiscal (tax and benefit) 
systems, as well as larger buffers against system-wide shocks and some degree of leaning 
against  strong  credit  upswings.  The  settings  would  be  reviewed  from  time  to  time  to  suit 
changing financial and economic circumstances. Macro-financial settings would be expected 
to change much less frequently than monetary policy.  
Like most policy interventions, macro-financial measures (such as capital and liquidity buffers 
or restraints on certain kinds of risky lending) involve costs in the form of potential distortions 
to  financial  activity.  Such  interventions  are  likely  to  complement  monetary  policy,  but  this 
cannot be guaranteed. Indeed, we have very limited practical experience of macro-financial 
policy. 
These  concerns  suggest  that  macro-financial  policy  should  not  seek  to  be  too  activist. 
Distortions will be most likely to occur where a policy intervention creates an opportunity for 
regulatory  arbitrage  between  the  regulated  and  unregulated  sectors,  or  between  regulated 
and unregulated activities. And the incentives for arbitrage will be greater under strong credit 
demand  conditions,  suggesting  the  likelihood  that  any  restraining  effect  of  macro-financial 
tightenings on business cycle upswings is likely to be small.  
Under such conditions, the appropriate response to a future credit-fuelled upswing could well 
be  a  combination  of  measures.  Macro-financial  tightening  would  counter  banks  relaxing 
credit standards and undermining the stability of the overall system, while monetary policy 
tightening  would  address  rising  inflationary  pressures  associated  with  the  strong  credit 
demand. But in comparison with other policy areas, macro-financial policy knowledge is still 
immature, and we have a lot to learn. 
Fiscal policy 
The  experience  of sovereigns  in  less favourable fiscal  positions  demonstrates  how  quickly 
and catastrophically a sovereign can lose credibility for ongoing prudent fiscal and economic 
management, especially if the exchange rate is not available as an adjustment mechanism 
and internal cost structures are not flexible. That credibility is a vital resource. 
Although we have our own versions of the aging population problem, we went into the crisis 
from a fairly healthy government financial position. Australia’s position now appears still to be 
relatively  favourable,  while  New  Zealand  is  more  in  the  middle  of  the  pack  of  advanced 
countries.  
Yet,  other  features  of  our  national  balance  sheets  give  some  cause  for  concern  should 
another global funding pressure event occur. It will take a long time for the structural causes 
of  financial  fragility  in  Europe  to  be  addressed,  and  for  the  process  of  public  and  private 
balance sheet repair to run its course. In the meantime, crises may reoccur and cause either 
funding disruption to Australia and New Zealand, or even worse, a renewed global economic 
downturn.  
Local issues include the relatively heavy dependence of our economies on bank lending, the 
relatively  heavy  dependence  of  the  banks  on  foreign  funding,  and  the  high  degree  of 
concentration  of  the  banking  sectors. We  therefore  seem  to face  a  similar  priority  to  other 
advanced economies in reducing the risk that investors will progressively tighten constraints 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
on the room for fiscal action. Countries with high debt/GDP positions remain exposed to the 
longer-term economic outlook, putting a premium on structural reform measures to promote 
growth. Of course, implementing such reforms is easier said than done, especially when their 
short-term effect on demand is usually adverse. 
The fiscal balancing act over the next few years is to restore headroom through consolidation 
where  possible,  while  taking  into  account  any  adverse  short-term  impacts  on  activity.  This 
should  help  reduce  the  chances  of  getting  backed  into  the  very  difficult  and  constrained 
space in which a number of advanced economies now find themselves. However, this is of 
course  yet  another  policy  challenge  in  the  category  of  things  easier  said  than  done. 
Moreover,  the  link  to  monetary  policy  is  particularly  important  in  the  current  environment, 
because  of  the  zero  lower  bound  on  interest  rates.  Fiscal  austerity  is  probably  not  as 
contentious  when  monetary  policy  loosening  can  offset  its  short-term  effects  on  economic 
activity. 
Monetary policy 
The  events  of  the  past  five  years  have  led  monetary  policy  into  unfamiliar  territory.  After 
responding  largely  successfully  to  the  priority  of  reducing  and  stabilising  inflation  following 
the 1970s experience, monetary policy now faces a number of new concerns.  
First,  financial  cycles  are  evidently  able  to  destabilise  the  economy  without  necessarily 
implying  large  inflation  fluctuations.  Second,  the  financial  system  is  far  from  neutral 
“plumbing”  for  the  real  economy.  Instead,  it  substantially  modulates  economic  shocks  and 
can  generate  shocks  itself.  It  can  also  materially  affect  monetary  policy’s  effectiveness  in 
stabilising  economic  activity.  We  can  probably  expect  that,  for  some  time,  risk  premia  on 
private and public debt will remain much more variable and differentiated, and a source of 
noise in the policy formulation process. 
How monetary policy strategy should account for these complications is not at all settled. It 
does not help that monetary policy settings and interventions themselves have been highly 
unusual in many countries. Many researchers are studying the possible adverse effects of 
very low interest rates on investor risk-taking, and the effects on global financial conditions of 
large-scale QE activities by major central banks. 
There are other questions, such as how to set interest rates in a deleveraging environment. 
Increased  saving  promotes  the  longer-term  stability  objectives  of  stronger  balance  sheets, 
but its impact on demand needs to be accounted for. In addition, the exchange rate effects of 
monetary  policy  are  no  doubt  important,  but  distinguishing  these  impacts  from  other 
influences  is  far  from  straightforward.  Currently  it  appears  that  a  large  part  of  the 
Australasian currencies’ strength can be attributed to emerging market demand underpinning 
global markets for New Zealand and Australian commodity exports, at least on a medium-
term  view.  Shorter-term  volatility  seems  to  have  increased  with  foreign  exchange  markets 
swinging between willingness to back economic outperformance of the region (so called “risk 
on”), and aversion to anything that looks “peripheral” (so called “risk off”).  
The  growth  of  resource-hungry  Asia  (China  especially)  will  gradually  shift  domestic  labour 
and  capital  allocation.  This  shift  is  certainly  not  easy,  and  maybe  beyond  the  realm  of 
stabilisation policy to manage. Instead, the key factor in smoothing the transition is flexible 
capital and goods markets, and clear relative price signals. The challenge for all is to look 
through aggregate and shorter-term cyclical effects and read the longer-run signals from real 
exchange rate and relative price developments. 
In the current volatile environment, the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is not very 
far  away.  Policy  rates  fell  a  lot  further  during  the  acute  phase  of  the  crisis.  Conventional 
monetary  policy  is  safer  known  ground,  but  central  banks,  including  in  our  region,  are 
realising they may be pushed by events into unsafe territory.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Fortunately  there  is  now  experience  at  home  and  abroad  with  market-supporting  liquidity 
interventions that can be activated at short notice, as well as some tentative lessons from the 
QE experience in the major advanced economies. Nevertheless, QE remains new ground for 
central banks in many ways. The early evidence suggests that it does work to some degree 
to  stimulate  the  economy,  although  the  precise  mechanisms  involved  are  still  a  matter  of 
some debate. The large expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet under QE markedly 
increases the central bank’s financial risk, and its dominance in the targeted markets distorts 
market  pricing  (indeed,  the  distortions  are  one  means  by  which  QE  is  believed  to  work). 
These factors place limits on how much QE can be relied upon as an additional tool. 
In a globalised  world, big players lowering their domestic interest rates, whether by QE or 
any  other  tool,  will  (all  else  equal)  tend  to  promote  capital  flows  to  other  countries  and 
appreciation of their exchange rates. As a small open economy, New Zealand has often seen 
the effects of carry trades on the exchange rate. This can be distortionary and problematic, 
because an economy relies on its exchange rate as a signalling price. 
Conclusion 
6. 
The  combination  of  G7  weakness  and  rapid  growth  of  the  resource-hungry  and  populous 
emerging world is unique in post-war economic history. Over the next few years, Australian 
and New Zealand firms will need to make strategic decisions about how to make the most of 
these  opportunities.  Their  success  or  otherwise  will  depend  on  how  well  they  can  extract 
resource allocation signals from volatile data. 
We are living in a new economic world, albeit one that may be best enjoyed from hindsight. 
Until then we will keep on learning.  
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
