G Padmanabhan: India’s regulatory approach to sophisticated financial 
products 
Comments by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Award Ceremony of Dufrenoy Prize for Responsible Innovation  in Finance, Paris, 18 June 
2012. 
 Assistance provided by Alpana Killawala and Ms Indira Nanu is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
C' est en effet un honneur et un privilège d’être ici ce soir, dans une des plus belles villes du 
monde, d’accepter au nom de l’une des Banques centrales les plus respectées du monde le 
prix Dufrenoy de l’Innovation décerné pour l’année 2012, à la Reserve Bank of India (pour 
nos calibrage politique dans le règlement des produits financiers). Je remercie tous ceux qui 
ont contribué à nous choisir pour cet honneur. Maintenant avant que l’on me décerne le prix 
pour l’innovation dans la langue française, je voudrais continuer mon discours en anglais. (It 
is indeed and honour and a privilege to be here this evening, in one of the most beautiful 
cities in the world and to accept, on behalf of one of the most respected Central Banks in the 
world, the Dufrenoy Prize for innovation, awarded for the year 2012 to the Reserve Bank of 
India,  for  our  calibrated  approach  to  the  introduction  and regulation  of  financial  products.  I 
thank all those who have contributed to conferring this honour on us. And now, before I am 
awarded  the  prize  for  innovations  to  the  French  language,  let  me  continue  my  speech  in 
English.) 
Let me begin by referring to the citation of the jury who decided on this prestigious Dufrenoy 
Prize  to  the  RBI.  The  observations  of  the  honourable  jury  members  about  the  Indian 
regulatory  approach  being  precautionary  and  gradual,  with  a  culture  of  testing  and  paying 
attention  to  potential  negative  effects  of  sophisticated  financial  products  before  facilitating 
them, precisely encapsulates the culture and methodology of the Reserve Bank of India, as it 
seeks to fulfill its mandate – by juggling the multifarious roles assigned to it – of maintaining 
stability of both prices and the financial system and supporting economic growth. In all the 
roles  that  we  play,  the  common  thread  that  underlies  any  policy  is  that  it  should  promote 
growth. Not just growth, but sustainable growth, which in turn can be brought about only with 
inclusive  growth,  benefiting  the  society  at  large,  but  without  undermining financial  stability. 
Now, a few words about what RBI does. 
Apart from the quintessential  central  banking roles  like  formulation  of  monetary  policy  and 
printing  and  distribution  of  currency,  we  also  manage  the  external  sector,  regulate  and 
supervise  banks,  non-bank finance  companies  and  segments  of financial  markets (money, 
forex,  government  securities). We  also  regulate  the  payment  and  settlement  systems. We 
are banker to banks and to the Government – federal and state governments. We are also 
the debt manager of the government, managing all their market borrowings, calibrating both 
the amounts and the timing to ensure that this does not crowd out other players. Added to all 
this, and perhaps unique to Central Banking anywhere in the world, we are mandated to pay 
special attention to the agricultural and allied sectors and have created and hived off several 
institutions  for  channelizing  credit  to  agriculture,  industry,  small  and  medium  enterprises, 
housing, mutual funds, settlement of trades, etc., etc. 
We also have a key role at very micro levels in the development process. We are currently in 
the  process  of  ensuring  empowerment  to  a  hitherto  voiceless  segment  of  society  by 
facilitating their entry into the mainstream of economic activity by trying to bring them into the 
ambit  of  formal  banking  channel  (financial  inclusion)  by  customizing  certain  products  and 
services for them. We are following up this objective by also educating the people (financial 
literacy) about the benefits of being part of the formal financial sector and the host of facilities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to  a 
large  extent 
and  benefits  they  can  demand  from  it.  We  are  also  following  up  with  the  Government  to 
include financial literacy in the curriculum of educational institutions so as to equip the young 
ones with the necessary skills before they enter the real world. 
Having  given  you  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  our  myriad  functions,  let  me  walk  you  through  our 
policy  formulation  processes.  Before  introduction  of  any  new  concepts,  regulations  or 
financial products, we generally elicit the opinions of various segments, i.e., stake holders, 
academicians,  financial  institutions,  researchers,  and  laymen.  We  do  this  by  placing  a 
discussion paper on our website and the paper is converted into policy only after factoring in 
the various inputs so received. This serves the dual purpose of (i) preparing the market for 
the  new  product/dispensation  and  (ii)  negating 
the  unexpected 
consequences that a possibly one sided regulation could have brought about. 
Since we have been awarded the prize for the gradual introduction of new financial products 
into the markets, let me illustrate with an example on the guided, gradual, sequenced and 
calibrated development and integration of markets in India, one of which, namely, the forex 
market,  Mrs.  Gopinath  and  I  have  been  privileged  to  witness  almost  since  the  very 
beginnings. Forex markets started in India with the banks being required to maintain square 
or  near  square  open  exchange  position  and  the  central  bank  announcing  the  buying  and 
selling rates. Today the country can boast of a market with a daily turnover of USD 60 Billion, 
with most of the products and their variants being traded and a Central Counter Party (CCP) 
arrangement for settling inter-bank forex transactions. Even today, corporates are allowed to 
access the market only to hedge an underlying exposure and not to take any punts on the 
currency. They are still not allowed to write options and thereby take on open ended risks. In 
recent  times,  the  same  thumb  rule  has  been  followed  even  while  enabling  Credit  Default 
Swaps  (CDS)  contracts.  In  other  words,  little  skeptical  of  the  globally  accepted,  almost 
axiomatic  belief  in  the  self  correcting  mechanism  of  markets,  but  also  conscious  that  too 
much regulation could throttle, we have put in place certain safeguards, which while allowing 
normal free play would guard against the ability of individual market makers to move markets 
in directions beneficial to them but detrimental to the stability of the system. We, therefore, 
prescribed  limits  on  positions  and  leveraging  keeping  in  view  the  interconnectedness  of 
institutions  in  the  financial  system.  The  recent  global  meltdown  occasioned  precisely  on 
account  of  these  factors  of  excessive  leverage  coupled  with  lack  of  regulation  have 
vindicated  our  stand  that  no  systems  that  undermine  the  real  economy  should  be  allowed 
unbridled freedom as any ravages to the real economy take years to repair. 
At  the  same  time,  recognizing  that  well  developed,  efficient  markets  are  a  prerequisite  for 
price discovery and critical from a Central Bank perspective for the efficient transmission of 
monetary  policy  impulses,  the  RBI  has  been  playing  a  proactive  role  in  developing  the 
financial markets in a manner so as to ensure that they are in sync with the real economy. 
Simultaneously, efforts are being made to develop infrastructure, technology and capabilities 
of market participants, while evaluating their ability to absorb shocks, and insisting on their 
putting  in  place  robust  risk  management  systems,  since  we  are  conscious  that  our 
overarching objective is the maintenance of financial stability. 
But  should  all  this  mean  a  total  change  in  approach  to  financial  innovation?  At  the 
International Research Conference hosted by us, Mr John Lipsky of the IMF while focussing 
on the importance of finance for rapid and sustainable growth, observed, and I quote, “While 
some might consider this topic odd in light of the current crisis, I will seek to draw out some 
key  lessons  of  recent  events  for  the  appropriate  policy  stance  toward  financial  innovation. 
Many critics...have concluded that such innovation is to be actively discouraged. But I would 
claim  that  this  is  precisely  the  wrong  lesson  to  draw.  Despite  the  unsettling  and  even 
dramatic  recent  global  experience  with  “cutting  edge”  finance,  I  believe  that  without  a 
renewed effort to foster financial innovation in the global economy, all countries – including 
emerging market economies – will underperform their potential. The principal challenge for 
policymakers,  then,  is  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  financial  openness  that 
supports  growth  –  enhancing  innovation  while  at  the  same  time  implementing  regulations 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
innovation 
financial  services  can 
and  effective  supervision  that  limit  the  potential  risk  of  financial  instability...”  The  recently 
published  report  by  the  World  Economic  Forum  titled  “Rethinking  Financial  Innovation” 
(2012)  concludes,  “Successful 
improve  capital 
productivity with beneficial effects that permeate through the wider economy. Unsuccessful 
innovation can have the opposite effect. It is important, therefore, to face up to the challenge 
effectively...” The report advocates that effective risk management systems need to be put in 
place  and  goes  on  to  argue  that  “aside  from  explicit  risk-management  frameworks, 
governance  mechanisms  (should)  also  include  new  product  development  and  approval 
processes  employing  various  safeguards  against  unwise  innovation…and  an  extensive 
regulatory infrastructure”. This is a daunting challenge and has indeed been challenged, but 
the  Indian  regulatory  approach  to  financial  innovation  has  always  endeavoured  to  be  on 
these lines. 
In concluding, I would once again like to convey gratitude of the Reserve Bank of India to 
Ecole des Mines de Paris for recognizing and appreciating us for the very reason we were 
criticized not so long ago. It is indeed an honor and we are here to accept the award with all 
humility and are deeply conscious of the fact that we have miles to go yet. I would also like to 
thank all those who are present here today to witness this award ceremony. 
Merci beaucoup and a bientôt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
