Mary C Nkosi: Reflections on Malawi’s economy 
Speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the business 
breakfast organized by Sunbird Malawi, Blantyre, 29 June 2012. 
  The CEO of Sunbird Malawi, Mr Roger Gardner  
The Director of Finance for Sunbird Malawi, Mr Patrick Lisilira  
The Chairman of the Malawi Confederation of Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(MCCCI), Mr Chikankheni  
Chief Executive Officers of various organisations represented here  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
• 
• 
• 
I am delighted to be here this morning at this important Business Breakfast organized by Sunbird 
Malawi.  Let  me  start  by  applauding  the  management  of  Sunbird  Malawi  for  their  foresight  in 
fostering discussions and debate on issues that affect our economy through such an interaction. It 
is through such fora that the intellectuals and business community in this country make enormous 
contribution  to  the  policy  making  process.  I  am  aware  of  your  active  participation  in  Ministry  of 
Finance pre-budget sessions and other brainstorming and consultative sessions on the economy. 
We  do  not  take  that  for  granted.  It  shows  your  commitment  to  seeing  positive  change  in  our 
economy.  
At the mention of a business breakfast, my expectation was that it was going to be a time to enjoy 
breakfast while listening to business people discussing. But when I learnt of what was expected of 
me, I was able to understand the importance if this occasion to the business community and the 
valuable opportunity it provides in enabling us to interact and share ideas on issues that affect our 
day to day life, especially things that affect the economy and lives of many Malawians. 
I  deem  the  theme  “Think  Global,  Act  Local”  as  a  very  important  one  especially  at  this  juncture 
when tremendous will and effort is being applied to fight the numerous challenges facing us. There 
is renewed optimism amongst Malawians, especially the business community; reflecting the desire 
of  every  Malawian  to  see  that  the  economy  is  doing  well  and  that  most  people  have  sufficient 
income for essentials and perhaps a little extra. We would want to see that businesses are hiring 
and jobs are relatively easy to get. We may, not have a job for everyone but we would like to see 
that everyone is well off.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
The economic problems we have been facing in recent years reflect, to a large extent the sources 
of our growth. The Malawi economy, prior to 2011, performed well, supported by macroeconomic 
stability. However, this growth led to a rapid rise in imports, which outpaced the growth of exports 
and contributed to the widening of the external current account deficit, and to falling international 
reserves.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
Malawi’s economic growth slowed down significantly to 4.3 percent in 2011 after enjoying growth 
rates above the needed 6 percent since 2005. Actually growth averaged 8 percent between 2007 
and  2010  with  agriculture  taking  the  lead  and  other  sectors  benefiting  from  the  growth  in 
agriculture. The recent underperformance is largely registered by sectors that heavily depend on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
imports  –  manufacturing,  transportation,  construction  and  wholesale  and  retail  trade  sectors 
–  reflecting  unavailability  of  foreign  exchange  in  the  domestic  market.  Growth  is  expected  to 
stagnate in 2012 and remain at 4.3 percent but will pick up in 2013 with a projected growth rate of 
5.7 percent. 
The rate of inflation has trended upwards since early January 2012 reaching 17.3 percent in May 
2012 (12.4 percent in April), largely explained by rising import costs, as imports have been priced 
at a much depreciated rate. Gross official reserves have declined from slightly over $218 million 
(1.7 months of prospective imports) in June last year to just over $120 million (one month of import 
cover) by end-April 2012. Money supply has been growing at unprecedented levels, an average of 
over  30  percent  since  early  2011  owing  to  expanded  net  credit  to  government  as  government 
revenue  performance  was  negatively  affected  by  the  underperformance  of  businesses  in  recent 
years.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
The  results  of  all  that  we  were  going  through  started  manifesting  in  November  2009  when  we 
started  having  queues  for  forex.  After  our  suppliers  cut  our  lines  of  credit,  we  did  not  adjust 
accordingly although we are a price taker and with worsening terms of trade there seemed to be no 
end to the woes.  
Whereas Malawi escaped the first round effects of the Global Financial Crisis, we were caught up 
in  the  second  and  third  round  effects  in  2009/10.  Our  foreign  markets  started  to  adjust  their 
demand for our commodities and at the same time global financiers started to look cautiously at 
their balance sheets resulting in locking up the financing facilities. As you might be aware, the tap 
of foreign aid at that same time was closed due to political and economic governance issues.  
Revitalising the economy remains our biggest challenge but it can be done. The good thing is that 
we know where things went wrong and if that were corrected, it is not too late to get back on a 
positive  trajectory.  Recent  policy  changes,  including  the  49  percent  devaluation  of  the  official 
Malawi kwacha exchange rate against the US dollar, and the subsequent floatation of the kwacha 
exchange rate are some of the policies that are being put in place to create a better Malawi. There 
will be short term costs, but the long-term gains more than compensate for the losses.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
We  made  it  clear  at  the  onset  that  the  adjustment  we  have  taken  will  have  a  price  that  we  all, 
Malawians  have  to  pay  in  order  to  have  a  long  lasting  solution. Waiting  any  longer  would  have 
been worse. At the Bank we do not envisage a reversal on the position that we have taken.  
The  results  in  the  short  term  have  been  exceptional.  Forex  is  now  available;  the  queues  at  the 
bank for forex and fuel have dissipated. Tobacco prices are good and we anticipate a reversal in 
the tobacco production this coming season. There is an immediate pass-through to price increases 
and we anticipate the full effect of the devaluation in the next six months with inflation going up 
from  the  March  level  of  12%  to  an  average  of  18.4%  in  2012.  However  we  anticipate  an 
amelioration of inflation to average 16.1% in 2013 and returning to a single digit average in 2014.  
The most frequently asked question is: “How will the Reserve Bank ensure sustainability of foreign 
exchange?” I am proud to report that the Bank has put tremendous efforts to address the supply 
side  of  foreign  exchange.  You  may  be  aware  that  the  Bank  has  taken  a  lead  in  the  Export 
Development Fund (EDF) initiative to promote exports in the country.  
Consequently  the  Government  has  developed  the  National  Export  Strategy  (NES)  to  be 
implemented  through  participatory  process  to  transform  Malawi  from  a  predominantly  importing 
and  consuming  nation  to  becoming  a  producing  and  exporting  nation.  The  NES  will  prioritise 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investment incentives to develop productive capacity, encourage foreign and domestic investment 
and ultimately create sustainable export capacity.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
You  will agree with me  that Malawi has  lagged behind its neighbours in the sub-Saharan Africa 
with its share of regional exports to the world declining sharply over time in terms of the business 
environment indicators such as transaction costs and infrastructure. Adjusting the exchange rate 
regime  was  one  of  the  measures  to  enhance  Malawi’s  international  competitiveness.  The  bank 
recognises  that  further  steps  still  remain  to  be  undertaken,  such  as  removal  of  structural 
bottlenecks that are retarding growth and diversification of the economy, e.g. reliable and adequate 
supply of energy.  
The  Bank  believes  that  the  private  sector  is  an  engine  of  growth  in  any  economy.  But  for  the 
private sector to make any  impact the Bank would encourage that they should improve on their 
efficiency in both resource mobilisation and allocation.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Why do we think that the steps we have taken are plausible and will work for Malawi? Malawi has 
actually  come  late  in  responding  to  problems  we  were  facing.  There  is  a  lot  to  learn  from  our 
neighbours who went through similar situations and had responded. We are far behind some of the 
countries  such  as  Zambia,  Uganda,  Tanzania  and  to  some  extent  Mozambique  who  liberalised 
their financial sectors some time ago. It was also painful for each one of those countries but the 
pain did not last.  
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen  
I thank you for your attention and God bless you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
