Mario Draghi: Interview with Le Monde 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Le  Monde, 
conducted  by  Mr  Erik  Izraelewicz,  Ms  Claire  Gatinois  and  Mr  Philippe  Ricard  on 
18 July 2012, published 21 July 2012. 
 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised downwards its global growth 
forecasts because of Europe. Is there a risk of recession? 
No. Since the start of the year, the risks of a deterioration in the economy that we had feared 
have certainly materialised in part. The situation has gradually worsened, but not to the point 
of plunging the whole of the Monetary Union into recession. We still expect a very gradual 
improvement in the situation by the end of this year or the beginning of next year.  
Thanks to the ECB? 
The  cuts  in  interest  rates  at  the  end  of  2011  and  in  July  should  produce  their  effects,  as 
should the unprecedented LTROs, three-year loans to banks, which we carried out to deal 
with the risk of a “credit crunch”, a restriction or an increase in the costs for loans.  
Should the ECB not do more to ease the economy, as the IMF has requested? 
We are very open. We do not have any taboos. We decided to reduce interest rates to below 
1% in July because we forecast that inflation would be close to or below 2% at the start of 
2013.  It  now  seems  likely  that  it  will  fall  sooner  than  expected,  at  the  end  of  2012.  Our 
mandate  is  to  maintain  price  stability  in  order  to  prevent  both  higher  inflation  and  a 
generalised, broadly based fall in prices. If we see such risks of deflation, we will act.  
The European Council of 28 and 29 June was positively received by the markets which 
since then have expressed doubts. 
The Summit was a success. For the first time, it seems to me, a clear message was given: 
exit the crisis with more Europe. By putting in place a roadmap to create a Union with four 
building  blocks – financial, fiscal,  economic  and  political – and  delivering tangible  results: a 
financial union, one banking supervisor, allowing the rescue funds to recapitalise banks once 
this supervision is in place. And a calendar for implementation. 
These are long-term solutions. Doesn’t something need to be done about the urgency 
of the situation? 
Let me tell you about my experience. In 1988 the Delors Committee set out the route towards 
Monetary Union, with a goal, a timetable and commitments to be respected. This prospect 
resulted in the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. Italy’s borrowing rates were very high at the time. 
But as a result of its involvement in the project of Monetary Union, Italy saw an abrupt fall in 
its rates, before there was even a decrease in the deficit, which stood at 11% of GDP! This 
leads me to believe that if countries make firm commitments, even of a long-term nature, this 
has an impact in the short term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The ECB has been criticised for not doing more for the governments. Is the ECB 
waiting for government efforts to be made before acting? 
This idea that there is bargaining between the governments and the ECB is a “quiproquo”. 
Our mandate is not to resolve the financial problems of countries, but to ensure price stability 
and to contribute to the stability of the financial system in full independence.  
What do you think of the growth pact held dear by François Hollande? 
It will certainly help, but we need to go further. Each country must also make efforts. 
Are you thinking more of structural reforms than of a Keynesian stimulus? 
Yes,  although,  in  my  view,  the  focus  is  too  often  on  labour  market  reforms,  which  do  not 
always translate into increased competitiveness because companies sometimes benefit from 
monopolies  or  situation  rent.  So  we  also  need  to  look  at  the  markets  for  products  and 
services  and  liberalise  where  necessary  to  increase  competitiveness.  Politically,  these  are 
difficult decisions to take. A European agenda of the reforms to be undertaken would help 
hugely. We  also  need  to  strengthen  joint  decision-making  in  these  areas  at  the  European 
level. 
So it is a victory for liberal arguments?  
No.  Putting  an  end  to  certain  situation  rents  is  a  question  of  fairness,  for  employees  and 
entrepreneurs, and for all citizens.  
What do you think of the policies followed in France? 
I welcome the continuation of fiscal consolidation, which remains indispensable, and I also 
welcome  the  emphasis  on  growth  potential  that  will  pave  the  way  for  recovery.  Debt 
reduction is vital. And the country must respect its commitment to bring its deficit back down 
to 3% of GDP in 2013 so that it can continue to benefit from low interest rates. 
You are one of the most influential men in Europe, yet you are not elected. Does this 
not pose a problem for democratic legitimacy? 
I  am  cognisant  of  the  importance  of  being  accountable  for  our  actions.  I  stand  before  the 
European  Parliament  about  ten  times  a  year,  and  we  are  very  active  in  terms  of 
communication. We stand ready to do more, if our powers were to be strengthened. In the 
extraordinary  conditions  that  we  are  experiencing,  it  is  necessary  to  see  the  ECB  take  a 
stand beyond monetary policy for matters that cannot be addressed by monetary policy, such 
as  high  public  deficits,  a  lack  of  competitiveness  or  unsustainable  imbalances,  especially 
where financial stability may be at risk. Safeguarding the euro is part of our mandate. 
When you arrived at the head of the ECB, you were considered the most German of 
the Italians. Is this still the case? 
That’s  up  to  you  to  judge!  We  have  to  maintain  price  stability  in  both  directions,  face 
problems as they present themselves, and act without prejudice. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In some ways you are very German when you support the calls for political union 
made by Angela Merkel 
Any move towards a financial, budgetary and political union is, to my mind, inevitable. This 
will  lead  to  the  creation  of  new  supranational  entities. In  some  countries  the  transfer  of 
sovereignty  – I  prefer to  say  sharing  –  that this implies  is  a major  stake,  in  others  it  is  no 
problem.  But  one  must  remember  that  with  globalisation,  it  is  precisely  by  sharing 
sovereignty that countries can better preserve it. In the long term, the euro must be based on 
a greater degree of integration. 
Is a Greek exit from the euro area still a leading concern? 
Our unequivocal preference is for Greece to remain in the euro area. But that is a matter for 
the Greek government. It has stated its commitment, now it must deliver results. Regarding 
the renegotiation of the memorandum [to ease the austerity measures and reforms imposed 
on the country], I will not take any stance before seeing the Troika’s report. 
On Friday, 20 July, the finance ministers of the euro area should have completed the 
aid plan for banks. Have they done so? Will it suffice to prevent the country from 
defaulting? 
One important point is the involvement of senior creditors of banks: the ECB believes that 
such involvement should be possible in the case of the liquidation of a bank. Savers must be 
protected, but creditors should be part of the solution of the crisis. It is a matter of limiting the 
involvement of taxpayers. They have already paid a great deal! 
Do you think you can go on holiday this summer in peace? 
I never plan my holidays ahead and I only ever go away for a few days. One thing is certain: 
I will not be going to Polynesia. It’s too far. 
So is the euro still in danger? 
No, absolutely not. From the outside, analysts are seen to be imagining scenarios in which 
there  is  an  explosion  of  the  euro  area.  That  underestimates  the  political  capital  that  our 
leaders have invested in this union, as well as the support of European citizens. The euro is 
irrevocable! 
Having formerly worked for Goldman Sachs, what do you think of the Libor scandal? 
It undermines trust in one of the cornerstones of the world financial system. Just think that 
hundreds of trillions of euro of financial operations are based on the Libor and that in many 
countries all over the world people buy their homes with mortgages indexed to the Libor. The 
unspeakable  personal  behaviour  and  design  flaws  have  shown  once  again  a  faulty 
governance of the process. Two inquiries are under way in the United Kingdom and in the 
United  States,  as  well  as  an  inquiry  about  the  Euribor.  They  must  shine  a  light  on  these 
matters.  
Does your time at Goldman Sachs make you uncomfortable? 
No,  indeed,  I  value  this  experience  of  the  world  of  finance  and  of  the  private  sector. 
Obviously, there is much to do to rebuild the financial services industry after the crisis. Much 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
has been done by the governments, by the regulators and by the industry itself, but much still 
remains to be done. 
Heads of State and Government want to place the ECB at the heart of bank 
supervision. Are you in favour of this? 
The European Commission is responsible for preparing proposals on this in consultation with 
the ECB and the European Parliament. The fact that the central bank plays a role in banking 
supervision has worked well at national level, particularly in France and Italy. If this role fell to 
the ECB, it would work with national supervisors, counting on their considerable experience 
and abilities. 
Do you not fear a conflict of interest between monetary policy and this supervisory 
role? 
Monetary  policy  must  be  kept  separate from  banking  supervision  so  that  the former  is  not 
contaminated  by  the  latter.  You can  build  an  independent  structure,  and  at the  same  time 
benefit usefully from information provided by supervision. 
Would such a system have enabled the banking crisis in Spain to be avoided? 
A  centralised  system  is  preferable  to  take  account  of  the  very  high  degree  of  financial 
integration that a monetary union entails. On the subject of Spain, the ECB has warned the 
country on several occasions not to let the current account deficit get out of control and has 
also  warned  of  the  excessive  growth  of  credit.  But  in  a  monetary  union,  the  fight  against 
property bubbles stems from macro-prudential policies carried out at national level. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
