Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
9 February 2012. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Rehn. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  mid-January 
broadly  confirms  our  previous  assessment.  Inflation  is  likely  to  stay  above  2%  for  several 
months  to  come,  before  declining  to  below  2%.  Available  survey  indicators  confirm  some 
tentative signs of a stabilisation in economic activity at a low level around the turn of the year, 
but  the  economic  outlook  remains  subject  to  high  uncertainty  and  downside  risks.  The 
underlying pace of monetary expansion remains subdued. Looking ahead, it is essential for 
monetary policy to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole. This ensures a firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy 
to make its contribution to supporting economic growth and job creation in the euro area. A 
very  thorough  analysis  of  all  incoming  data  and  developments  over  the  period  ahead  is 
warranted.  
Through  our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  we  will  continue  to  support  the 
functioning  of  the  euro  area  financial  sector,  and  thus  the  financing  of  the  real  economy. 
Since  the  first  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operation  (LTRO)  was  conducted  in 
December  2011  we  have  approved  specific  national  eligibility  criteria  and  risk  control 
measures for the temporary acceptance in a number of countries of additional credit claims 
as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations, which should lead to an increase in available 
collateral.  Further  details  will  be  provided  in  a  press  release  to  be  published  today  at 
3.30 p.m.  At  the  start  of  the  current  reserve  maintenance  period  on  18  January  2012  the 
reserve ratio was reduced, freeing up additional collateral. As stated on previous occasions, 
all our non-standard measures are temporary in nature. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2011 is likely to have been very weak. According to 
the  survey  data  for  the  last  two  months,  there  are  tentative  signs  of  a  stabilisation  in 
economic activity at a low level. Looking ahead, we expect the euro area economy to recover 
very  gradually  in  the  course  of  2012.  The  very  low  short-term  interest  rates  and  all  the 
measures taken to foster the proper functioning of the euro area financial sector are lending 
support to the euro area economy. Moreover, stress in financial markets has diminished in 
response  to  our  monetary  policy  measures,  but  also  in  response  to  the  progress  made 
towards  a  stronger  euro  area  governance  framework  and  intensified  fiscal consolidation  in 
several  euro  area  countries.  However,  subdued  global  demand  growth,  the  remaining 
tensions in euro area sovereign debt markets and their impact on credit conditions, as well 
as  the  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  in  the  financial  and  non-financial  sectors, 
continue to dampen the underlying growth momentum.  
This outlook is subject to downside risks. They notably relate to tensions in euro area debt 
markets  and  their  potential  spillover  to  the  euro  area  real  economy.  Downside  risks  also 
relate  to  possible  adverse  developments  in  the  global  economy,  higher  than  assumed 
increases  in  commodity  prices,  protectionist  pressures  and  the  potential  for  a  disorderly 
correction of global imbalances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.7%  in  January  2012,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash 
estimate, unchanged from December. The average inflation rate for 2011 was 2.7%, mainly 
driven by higher energy and other commodity prices. Looking ahead, inflation is likely to stay 
above 2% for several months to come, before declining to below 2%. This pattern reflects the 
expectation that, in an environment of weak growth in the euro area and globally, underlying 
price pressures in the euro area should remain limited.  
Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments remain broadly balanced. On the 
upside,  they  relate  to  higher  than  assumed  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered 
prices,  as  well  as  increases  in  commodity  prices.  The  main  downside  risks  relate  to  the 
impact of weaker than expected growth in the euro area and globally.  
The monetary analysis indicates that the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains 
subdued. The annual growth rate of M3 decreased to 1.6% in December 2011, after 2.0% in 
November, reflecting a further weakening of monetary dynamics towards the end of the year.  
The  annual  growth  rates  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  and  loans  to  households, 
adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, also decreased further in December, and stood at 
1.2% and 1.9% respectively. The volume of MFI loans to both sectors declined in December, 
and  this  was  particularly  pronounced  in  the  case  of  the  non-financial  corporate  sector.  In 
addition, there are indications that bank lending conditions tightened further, affecting loan 
supply  in  several  euro  area  countries  in  late  2011.  It  is  not  yet  possible  to  draw  firm 
conclusions from these developments, particularly given that the impact of the first three-year 
LTRO on bank funding is still unfolding and may not have been fully reflected in the most 
recent  bank  lending  survey.  In  addition,  other  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures 
announced  in  December  are  still  to  be  implemented.  Accordingly,  close  scrutiny  of  credit 
developments in the period ahead is essential. 
The  soundness  of  bank  balance  sheets  will  be  a  key  factor  in  facilitating  an  appropriate 
provision of credit to the economy over time. It is essential that the implementation of banks’ 
recapitalisation plans does not result in developments that are detrimental to the financing of 
economic activity in the euro area.  
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that underlying price pressures should remain 
limited  and  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments  remain  broadly 
balanced. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms this picture. 
A combination of structural reforms and fiscal discipline is essential for boosting confidence 
and delivering a favourable environment for sustainable growth. Regarding fiscal policies, 
all euro area governments need to continue to do their utmost to ensure fiscal sustainability. 
It  is  essential  that  all countries  adhere  to  the  fiscal  targets  they  announced  for  2012.  This 
should help to anchor expectations of sound fiscal policies and strengthen confidence. The 
rules guiding the design and implementation of national fiscal policies are being strengthened 
at  the  EU  level  as  well  as  in  the  legal  frameworks  of  several  Member  States.  These  are 
important  steps  in  the  right  direction.  With  regard  to  structural  reforms,  these  are  key  to 
increasing  the  adjustment  capacity  and  competitiveness  of  euro  area  countries,  thereby 
strengthening  growth  prospects  and  job  creation.  Notably,  far-reaching  and  ambitious 
reforms  should  be  implemented  to  foster  competition  in  product  markets,  particularly  in 
services  sectors,  while  rigidities  in  labour  markets  should  be  reduced  and  wage  flexibility 
should be enhanced.  
We are now at your disposal for questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
