Glenn Stevens: The lucky country 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  Anika 
Foundation  Luncheon,  supported  by  Australian  Business  Economists  and  Macquarie  Bank, 
Sydney, 24 July 2012. 
 The  Anika  Foundation  raises  funds  to  support  research  into  adolescent  depression  and  suicide.  See: 
<http://www.anikafoundation.com/>. I thank Mark Hack for assistance in preparing these remarks, and Ryan Fox 
for help in understanding the difficulties in comparing dwelling prices across countries. 
Thank you for coming today to support the Anika Foundation.  
Before  I  proceed  I  want  also  to  thank  Macquarie  Bank  for  their  support,  once  again,  in 
providing  today’s  venue  and  sustenance,  and  the  Australian  Business  Economists  for  their 
continuing organisational support for these annual functions.  
It is slowly becoming better recognised that the Australian economy’s relative performance, 
against a very turbulent international background, has been remarkably good. Many foreign 
visitors to Australia comment on this relative success and I have noticed an increase in the 
number of foreign companies interested in investing in Australia as a result, notwithstanding 
our domestic tendency towards the “glass half empty” view.  
But  some  observers  –  admittedly  not  the  majority  –  still  harbour  concerns  about  the 
foundations of recent economic performance and question the basis for confidence about the 
future.  There  are  several  themes  to  these  doubts,  but  the  common  element  is  that  recent 
relative success owes a certain amount to things that will not continue  – to luck  – and that 
our luck may be about to turn.  
Rapid  growth  in  Chinese  demand  for  resources,  for  example,  has  been  of  great  benefit  to 
date,  but  what  if  the  Chinese  economy  suffers  a  serious  downturn?  Another  potential 
concern  is  dwelling  prices.  Australia  saw  a  large  run  up  in  dwelling  prices  and  household 
borrowing  until  a  few  years  ago.  Some  other  countries  that  saw  this  subsequently  suffered 
painful  corrections  and  deep  recessions,  associated  with  very  stressed  banking  systems. 
Can Australia escape the same outcome?  
A further theme is the focus on the funding position of Australian financial institutions, insofar 
as they raise significant amounts of money offshore. Could this be a weakness, in the event 
that  market  sentiment  turns?  Actually,  this  is  another  version  of  the  old  concern  about  the 
current account deficit: what will happen if markets suddenly do not want to fund our deficit? 
It  has  long  been  a  visceral  fear  among  Australian  officials  and  economists  that  global 
investors will suddenly take a dim view of us. The same sorts of concerns of organisations 
such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  ratings  agencies  seem  to  lie  behind  a 
perpetual question mark about Australia and its financial institutions.  
It is unlikely we will ever be able to change definitively the views of all the sceptics. And – let 
us  be  clear  –  we  should  welcome  the  sceptics.  Perhaps  some  of  their  concerns  are  valid. 
The Reserve Bank gives a lot of thought to these issues; we certainly do not dismiss them. 
We should always be wary of the conventional wisdom being too easily accepted. We should 
never, ever, assume that “it couldn’t happen here”.  
It is in that vein that I wish to pose a set of questions that are thrown up by these sceptical 
views. In particular:  
  How  much  of  the  recent  relatively  good  performance  was  due  to  luck?  To  what 
extent did we improve our luck by sensible policies, across a range of economic and 
financial fronts?  
Are there signs of any of the things going wrong that people typically worry about?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And if there are, or were to be, such signs, could we do anything about it?  
To begin, I shall re-state some key metrics.  
Graph 1  
 Graph 2  
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3  
   
These charts really require no exposition (Graph 1, 2 and 3). The message is clear. It is fair 
to  conclude  that,  given  the  circumstances  internationally,  the  Australian  economy  has 
exhibited more than acceptable performance over recent years. This conclusion would stand 
whether  comparisons  were  made  either  against  most  other  countries,  or  against  our  own 
historical experience. 
Why  was  it  that  Australia  did  not  have  a  deep  downturn  in  2009  when  so  many  other 
countries did? And why was it that we have returned to reasonable growth, when others have 
struggled to do so?  
This question has been answered on numerous occasions. There are several elements.  
First,  the  Australian  banking  system  went  into  the  crisis  in  reasonable  shape.  To  be  sure, 
there were some poor lending decisions during the preceding period of easy credit and there 
was,  in  hindsight,  too  much  reliance  on  wholesale  funding.  But  among  major  institutions, 
credit  quality  issues  have  turned  out  to  be  manageable.  Asset  quality  was  not  as  good 
among some of the regional banks, and even less so among some foreign banks operating 
in Australia, but the problems have not been insurmountable.  
Some  observers  might  counter  that  the  banks  received  assistance  with  wholesale  fund 
raising in the form of the government guarantee. But the banks paid for that, and it was an 
appropriate  response  at  a  time  of  massive  market  dislocation  when  all  their  peers  were 
receiving  like  assistance  –  and  much  more.  Moreover  the  banks  have  neither  had,  nor 
needed, access to this for some time now and the stock of guaranteed liabilities outstanding 
has fallen by about half from its peak level, as issues mature or are repurchased  
So  our  banking  system,  while  not  entirely  free  from  blemishes,  was  nonetheless  in  pretty 
good shape overall. Banks were able to raise capital privately in the depths of the crisis. The 
lowest rate of return among any of the major banks over a year during the crisis period was 
about 10 per cent. The Australian Government has not needed to take an ownership stake in 
a financial institution.  
Second,  Australia  had  scope  for  macroeconomic  policy  stimulus,  which  was  used  promptly 
and decisively. Interest rates were lowered aggressively, from a high starting point, lowering 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
debt servicing burdens at a rapid rate. The fiscal stimulus was one of the larger ones, as a 
percentage of GDP, among the various countries with which we can make comparisons. The 
evidence suggests that these macroeconomic measures were effective in sustaining growth.  
Thirdly,  the  rapid  return  to  growth  of  the  Chinese  economy  saw  demand  for  energy  and 
resources strengthen again after a brief downturn in late 2008 and the first couple of months 
of 2009. This reversed the fall in Australia’s terms of trade, and in fact pushed them to new 
highs, which led to a resumption of the historic investment build-up that had already begun. It 
benefited the whole of Asia, which staged a very pronounced V-shaped recovery on the back 
both of the Chinese measures and things other countries did themselves.  
A fourth element that many people add is that the exchange rate fell sharply, which was an 
expansionary  impetus  for  the  economy.  But  of  course  the  exchange  rate  was  responding 
endogenously to the various shocks and policy responses, and has since reversed the fall. It 
was doing what it was supposed to do. Perhaps the real point is that the right exchange rate 
system was implemented nearly 30 years ago, and that it was allowed to work.  
So Australia had these things going for it.  
Was this all just luck?  
We  could  not  deny  that  our  geography  –  thought  for  much  of  our  history  to  be  a  handicap 
because of the distance from European and American markets  – combined with our natural 
resource endowment has provided a basis for the country to ride the boom in Asian resource 
demand.  We  did  not  create  that,  though  we  still  have  to  muster  the  capability  to  take 
sustained advantage of it.  
But a well-managed and well-supervised banking system is not an accident.1 Years of careful 
work both by banks and APRA went into that outcome.  
Nor  was  the  ability  to  respond  forcefully,  but  credibly,  with  macroeconomic  policy  just  luck. 
You don’t suddenly acquire the credibility needed to ease monetary policy aggressively while 
the exchange rate is heading down rapidly. Authorities in lots of countries would not feel they 
could do that. At an earlier point in time we probably would not have felt we could have done 
it  either.  The  credibility  needed  to  do  it  comes  from  having  invested  in  a  well-structured 
framework,  and  having  built  a  track  record  of  success  in  containing  inflation,  over  a  long 
period. The floating exchange rate is an integral part of that framework.  
Likewise,  you  can’t  have  a  major  fiscal  easing  and  expect  it  to  be  effective  if  there  are 
concerns  about  long-run  public  debt  dynamics,  as  recent  debate  elsewhere  in  the  world 
shows. You need to have run a disciplined budget over a long period beforehand, so that the 
amount of debt you have to issue in a crisis does not raise questions about sustainability. In 
both  the  monetary  and  fiscal  areas,  of  course,  having  used  the  scope  we  had  so 
aggressively,  it  was  also  necessary,  as  I  argued  in  2009,  to  re-invest  in  building  further 
scope, by returning settings to normal once the emergency had passed.  
So,  yes,  Australia  has  had  its  share  of  luck.  But  to  explain  the  outcomes,  we  need  also  to 
appeal to factors that didn’t just happen by accident.  
Of course, that doesn’t mean we still couldn’t have problems. Even if success to date hasn’t 
been due to luck alone, perhaps our luck could turn so bad that all our efforts at good policy 
making could be overwhelmed.  
 1  Canada’s banking system was sound like Australia’s, which has helped it outperform their G7 peers. But the 
large neighbour to which Canada exports about 20 per cent of its GDP has held it back. Australia’s exposure 
to  Asia,  as  opposed  to  Canada’s  exposure  to  the  United  States,  presumably  helps  to  explain  Australia’s 
stronger  growth  outcome  relative  to  Canada’s.  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  experience  has also  been  stronger 
than Canada’s. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let us then take a look at some of the potential pressure points that people sometimes worry 
about. The first is the Chinese economy.  
One of the data series people pay a lot of attention to is the Chinese version of the so-called 
“Purchasing  Managers’  Index”.  The  usual  commentary  surrounding  such  indexes  invariably 
refers to the “50” level as the threshold between growth and contraction in the sector of the 
economy being examined.  
But  what  have  these  PMIs  actually  been  saying  about  the  Chinese  economy?  Properly 
calibrated, as in this chart, they suggest that growth in China’s industrial production has been 
running at about 5 percentage points below average, which means it is just under 10 per cent 
(Graph 4). But it is a long way from a contraction. We did actually see Chinese IP contract for 
several months in 2008; we are not seeing that at present.  
Graph 4  
  The conclusion I draw is that the Chinese economy has indeed slowed over the past year or 
so.  It  was  intended  that  a  slowing  occur.  But  the  recent  data  suggest  that,  so  far,  this  is  a 
normal cyclical slowing, not a sudden slump of the kind that occurred in late 2008. The data 
are  quite  consistent  with  Chinese  growth  in  industrial  output  of  something  like  10 per cent, 
and GDP growth in the 7 to 8 per cent range.  
To be sure, that is a significant moderation from the growth in GDP of 10 per cent or more 
that  we  have  often  seen  in  China  in  the  past  five  to  seven  years.  But  not  even  China  can 
grow  that  fast  indefinitely  and  there  were  clearly  problems  building  from  that  earlier 
breakneck pace of growth. Inflation rose, there was overheating in property markets and no 
doubt  a good  deal  of  poor  lending.  It  is far  better,  in fact, that the moderation  occur,  if that 
increases the sustainability of future expansion.  
Moreover, the Chinese authorities have been taking well-calibrated steps in the direction of 
easing macroeconomic policies, as their objectives for inflation look like being achieved and 
as  the  likelihood  of  slower  global  growth  affecting  China  has  increased.  Prices  for  key 
commodities are lower than their peaks, but are actually still high.  
So far, then, the “China story” seems to be roughly on course. It is certainly true that we will 
feel  the  effects  of  the  Chinese  business  cycle  more  in  the  future  than  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  in  the  past.  That  presents  some  challenges  of  economic  analysis  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
management. But even so, it may be better to be exposed to a Chinese economy with a high 
average, even if variable, growth rate, than, say, to a Europe with a very low average growth 
rate that is apparently also still rather variable.  
Next I turn to dwelling prices. As everyone knows, dwelling prices rose a great deal over the 
decade or more from 1995, and not just in Australia. This occurred globally. The fact that it 
was  a  widespread  phenomenon  is  a  hint  that  we  should  be  wary  of  explanations  that  are 
solely domestic in their focus. It suggests that the global dwelling price dynamic had a lot to 
do  with  financial  factors  –  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  finance  for  housing  became  more 
readily available.  
In  various  countries  prices  have  subsequently  fallen.  In  the  United  States,  for  example, 
prices are down by about  30 per cent from their peak, though they look like they have now 
reached  bottom.  In  the  United  Kingdom  the  fall  was  smaller  –  at  about  15–20 per cent.  In 
Australia,  the  decline  since  the  peak  has  been  about  5  to  10 per cent,  depending  on  the 
region.  There  are  of  course  prominent  examples  of  particular  localities  or  even  individual 
dwellings where price falls have been much larger.  
Scaled  to  measures  of  income,  Australian  dwelling  prices  on  a  national  basis  have  in  fact 
declined  and  are  now  about  where  they  were  in  2002  (Graph  5).  That  is,  housing  has 
become more “affordable”. Four or five years ago we supposedly had a housing affordability 
“crisis”. Now it seems that  the problem some people fear is that of housing becoming  even 
more affordable.  
Are dwelling prices overvalued? It’s very hard to be definitive on that question. There are two 
aspects to the claim that they might be. The first is that prices relative to income are higher 
than  they  were  15  or  20  years  ago.  If  this  ratio  is  somehow  mean-reverting,  then  either 
incomes  must  rise  a  lot  or  prices  must  fall.  It  could  be  that  this  analysis  is  correct,  but  the 
problem is that there is no particular basis to think that the price to income ratio 20 years ago 
was “correct”. There are reasons that might be advanced for why the ratio might be expected 
to be higher now than then – that the mean has shifted – though again there is little science 
to  any  quantification  for  such  a  shift.  In  any  event,  arguments  that  appeal  to  historical 
averages for such ratios lose potency the longer the ratio stays high. In Australia’s case the 
ratio  of  prices  to  income  on  a  national  basis  has  been  apparently  at  a  higher  mean 
level – about 4 to 4½ – for about a decade now.  
The second support for the claim that dwelling prices are overvalued is  the observation that 
they  seem  high  in  comparison  with  other  countries.  In  seeking  to  make  such  comparisons, 
though,  there  are  serious  methodological  challenges.  The  key  difficulty  is  in  sourcing 
comparable  data  on  the  level  of  prices  across  countries.  Such  data  are,  at  best,  pretty 
sketchy. With that caveat very clearly in mind, consider the following two charts.  
Simply  comparing  Australia  and  the  United  States,  it  is  hard  to  avoid  the  impression  that 
gravity will inevitably exert its influence on Australian dwelling prices. But if we put these two 
lines  on  a  chart  with  a  number  of  other  countries  with  which  we  might  want  to  make 
comparisons, the picture is much less clear (Graph 6).2 To the extent that we can make any 
meaningful  statements  about  international  relativities,  the  main  conclusion  would  be  that 
Australian dwelling prices, relative to income, are in the pack of comparable countries. In this 
comparison, the United States seems the outlier.  
 2  These  comparisons  use  average  (rather  than  median)  dwelling  prices  and  average  household  income. 
Average  dwelling  prices  are  estimated  using  nationwide  (urban  and  regional)  prices  for  both  houses  and 
apartments  (mostly  for  the  privately  owned  housing  stock);  dwelling  price  data  are  taken  either  from 
transaction price information or from data on national capital stocks. Average household disposable income is 
sourced from national accounts data. Note that alternative income measures give slightly different results, and 
Australia’s  relativity  is  somewhat  higher  when  using  broader  income  measures  that  incorporate  the  taxation 
and social welfare system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 5  
 Graph 6  
   None of this can be taken to say definitively that Australian dwelling prices are “appropriate”, 
or  that there  is  no  possibility  they  will  fall. It  is  a  very  dangerous  idea to  think  that  dwelling 
prices cannot fall. They can, and they have. The point is simply that historical or international 
comparisons,  to  the  extent  they  can  be  made,  do  not  constitute  definitive  evidence  of  an 
imminent slump. At the very least, the complexity of making these comparisons suggests we 
ought to look at some other metrics in thinking about the housing market.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
One would be the performance of the associated mortgages. Here, the main story is that not 
much has changed. Arrears remain low and if anything have been edging down over the past 
year. That in turn is not altogether surprising given that debt servicing burdens have declined 
(Graph 7).  
Graph 7  
  As  a  result  of  lower  house  prices  and  therefore  lower  loan  sizes,  somewhat  lower  interest 
rates and a good deal of income growth, the repayment on a new loan on a median-priced 
house  as  a  share  of  average  income  is  now  at  its  lowest  for  a  decade  (except  for  the 
“emergency” interest rate period in 2009).  
It is true that a low unemployment rate is a key factor helping here, but it is also true that the 
proportion  of  households  that  are  ahead  on  their  mortgage  payments  is  also  high  –  with 
some evidence pointing to over half – which would provide a buffer of some months for those 
households in the event a period of lower income was experienced. If we look at applications 
for possessions of dwellings, they have been running at about 0.15 per cent of dwellings on 
an annualised basis. Such applications have actually declined since their peak in both NSW 
and Victoria, though they have risen over the past couple of years in WA and Queensland. In 
the  United  States 
for  repossessions  –  “foreclosures 
started” – peaked at over 2 per cent of dwellings.  
the  most  comparable 
figure 
The conclusion? We should never say a crash couldn’t happen here, and the Reserve Bank 
continues  to  monitor  property  markets  and  the  performance  of  mortgages  quite  closely,  as 
we have for many years. But it has to be said that the housing market bubble, if that’s what it 
is,  seems  to  be  taking  quite  a  long  time  to  pop  –  if  that’s  what  it  is  going  to  do.  The 
ingredients  we  would  look  for  as  signalling  an  imminent  crash  seem,  if  anything,  less  in 
evidence now than five years ago.  
What then about funding vulnerabilities?  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The pre-crisis period saw too much “borrowing short to lend long”, and too much reliance on 
the  assumed  availability  of  market  funding.  Banks  everywhere  have  been  adjusting  away 
from  that  model  over  recent  years,  Australian  banks  among  them.  The  share  of  offshore 
funding has fallen, and its maturity has been lengthened (Graph 8).  
Graph 8  
  The flip side of this is of course the rise in domestic deposit funding, which has occasioned 
such competitive behaviour in the market for deposits.  
Interestingly  enough,  while  we  have  been  told  over  the  years  how  Australian  banks  were 
doing  the  country  a  favour  by  arranging  the  funding  of  the  current  account,  they  have 
stopped doing this over the past year without, apparently, any dramatic effects. As measured 
in the capital account statistics, there has been a net outflow of private debt funding over the 
past  two  years,  offset  roughly  by  increased  inflow  of  foreign  capital  into  government 
obligations (Graph 9). This has occurred with a net decline in government debt yields and a 
net  rise  in  the  exchange  rate.  The  current  account  deficit  has,  in  other  words,  been  easily 
“funded”  without  the  assistance  of  banks  borrowing  abroad  –  in  fact,  while  they  have  been 
net re-payers of funds borrowed earlier.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 9  
  A  reasonable  conclusion  is  that  the  degree  of  vulnerability  to  a  global  panic  of  any  given 
magnitude appears to have diminished, rather than grown, over the past few years. It hasn’t 
completely  disappeared,  and  it  would  not  be  sensible  to  expect  it  would,  unless  we  were 
pursuing  a  policy  of  financial  autarky.  But  there  is  little  reason  to  assume  that  Australian 
institutions  are  somehow  unusually  exposed  to  these  risks  compared  with  most  of  their 
counterparts overseas.  
In the end, of course, any bank’s ability to maintain the confidence of its creditors is mainly 
about  its  asset  quality.  That  brings  us  back  to  lending  standards,  the  macroeconomic 
environment, and so on. One would think that, overall, things look relatively good in Australia, 
compared  to  the  world’s  trouble  spots.  Think  for  just  a  moment  about  the  holdings  of 
government  debt  on  the  books  of  banks  in  any  number  of  other  countries,  and  about  the 
state of public finances of many of those countries.  
The  arguments  I  have  presented  amount  to  saying  that  some  necessary  adjustments  have 
been occurring gradually and reasonably smoothly. China’s growth had to moderate. It has 
slowed, but it hasn’t collapsed. Housing values and leverage in Australia couldn’t keep rising. 
They haven’t. Dwelling prices have already declined, relative to income, and it is in fact not 
obvious that they are particularly high compared with most countries. Housing “affordability” 
has improved significantly; over 99 per cent of bank-held mortgages are being serviced fully.  
Banks  have  reduced  their  need  for  the  sort  of  funding  that  might  be  difficult  to  obtain  in  a 
crisis situation. The current account deficit is being funded by a combination of direct equity 
investment,  and  flows  into  high-quality  Australian  dollar-denominated  assets,  the  latter  at 
costs  that  have  been  falling.  In  fact,  the  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  and  its  constituent 
States, are at present able to borrow at about the lowest rates since Federation.  
Markets  do  not,  then,  seem  to  be  signalling  serious  concerns  about  Australia’s  solvency  or 
sustainability. But markets can be wrong sometimes. They can sometimes be too optimistic 
(and  other  times  too  pessimistic).  So  even  though  we  don’t  face  immediate  problems,  we 
should ask: what if something went wrong? Below I consider a few possibilities.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If  the  thing  that  goes  wrong  is  a  major  financial  event  emanating  from  Europe,  the  most 
damaging potential transmission channel would be if there were a complete retreat from risk, 
capital  market  closure  and  funding  shortfalls  for  financial  institutions.  Let  me  emphasise, 
importantly, that this is not occurring at present and if it did occur it would be a problem for a 
great many countries, not just Australia. But in that event, the Australian dollar might decline, 
perhaps significantly. We might find that, in an extreme case, the Reserve Bank – along with 
other central banks – would need to step in with domestic currency liquidity, in lieu of market 
funding. The vulnerability to this possibility is less than it was four years ago; our capacity to 
respond is undiminished and, if not actually unlimited, is not subject to any limit  that seems 
likely to bind. An alternative  version of this scenario, if it involved the sort of euro break-up 
about which some people speculate, could be a flow of funds  into Australian assets. In that 
case our problem might be not being able to absorb that capital. But then the banks would be 
unlikely to have serious funding problems.  
If  the  thing  that  goes  wrong  is  a  serious  slump  in  China’s  economy,  the  Australian  dollar 
would  probably  fall,  which  would  provide  expansionary  impetus  to  the  Australian  economy. 
But  more  importantly,  we  could  expect  the  Chinese  authorities  to  respond  with  stimulatory 
policy  measures.  Even  if  one  is  concerned  about  the  extent  of  problems  that  may  lurk 
beneath  the  surface  in  China  –  say  in  the  financial  sector  –  it  is  not  clear  why  we  should 
assume that the capacity of the Chinese authorities to respond to them is seriously impaired. 
And  in  the  final  analysis,  a  serious  deterioration in  international  economic  conditions  would 
still see Australia with scope to use macroeconomic policy, if needed, as long as inflation did 
not become a concern, which would be unlikely in the scenario in question.  
If  dwelling  prices  in  Australia  did  slump,  then  there  would  be  obvious  questions  about  how 
that  dynamic  could  play  out.  In  such  circumstances  people  typically  worry  about  two 
consequences. The first is a long period of very weak construction activity, usually because 
an excess of stock resulting from previous over-construction needs to be worked off. But we 
have  already  had  a  fairly  protracted  period  of  weak  residential  construction;  it’s  hard  to 
believe it will get much weaker, actually, at a national level. The second potential concern is 
the balance sheets of lenders. This scenario is among those routinely envisaged by APRA’s 
stress  tests  over  recent  years.  The  results  of  such  exercises  always  show  that  even  with 
substantial falls in dwelling prices, much higher unemployment and associated higher levels 
of defaults, key financial institutions remain well and truly solvent.  
Of course, it can be argued that the full extent of real-life stresses cannot be anticipated in 
such exercises. That’s a reasonable point. But we actually had a real life stress event in 2008 
and  2009.  The  financial  system  shows  a  few  bruises  from  that  period,  but  its  fundamental 
stability was maintained  
Conclusion 
Most Australians I encounter who return from overseas remark how good it is to be living and 
working here. We are indeed “lucky” in so many ways, relative economic stability being only 
one of them.  
But  what  matters  more  is  what  we  do  with  what  we  have.  Not  every  good  aspect  about 
recent  performance  is  down  to  luck.  By  the  same  token  there  are  things  we  can  do  to 
improve  our  prospects  –  or,  if  you  will,  to  make  a  bit  of  our  own  future  luck.  Some  of  the 
adjustments  we  have  been  seeing,  as  awkward  as  they  might  seem,  are  actually 
strengthening  resilience  to  possible  future  shocks.  Higher  –  more  normal –  rates  of 
household saving, a more sober attitude towards debt, a re-orientation of banks’ funding, and 
a period of dwelling prices not moving much, come into this category.  
The  years  ahead  will  no  doubt  challenge  us  in  various  ways,  including  in  ways  we  cannot 
predict. But what’s new about that? Even if the pessimists turn out to be right on one or more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
counts, it  doesn’t follow  that we would be unable to cope. Acting sensibly, with a long-term 
focus, has as good a chance as ever of seeing us through whatever comes our way.  
Most of all, and to return to the whole point of today’s event, we have much to live for. We 
want  to  do  everything  we  can to  ensure the  next generation  can  share  the  positive  outlook 
that most Australians have (almost) always had. That is why the Anika Foundation’s work is 
so  important,  and  why  your  presence  here  today  is  so  valuable.  Thank  you  again  for  your 
support.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
