Yaseen Anwar: Role of financial institutions and capital markets in 
Pakistan’s economy 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
Launching Ceremony of the National Financial Literacy Program, Karachi, 20 January 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen!  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  launch  the  first  ever  National  Financial  Literacy  initiative  in 
Pakistan.  The  program  will  initially  impart  basic  financial  literacy  to  poor  and  marginalized 
people of Pakistan. It is my firm belief that the initiative will work towards improving financial 
inclusion and also serve the interests of all financial sector stakeholders. Therefore, I would 
like to thank and congratulate our partners including the Asian Development Bank, Pakistan 
Banks’ Association, Pakistan Microfinance Network, Pakistan Poverty  Alleviation Fund and 
Bearing Point for their support and collaboration to make financial literacy a key priority.  
To  set  the  stage,  I  would  like  to  begin  with  a  workable  definition  of  financial  literacy  as 
developed  by  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development’s  (OECD) 
International Network for Financial Education (INFE):  
“Financial  literacy  is  the  combination  of  consumers’  /  investors’  understanding  of  financial 
products  and  concepts  and  their  ability  and  confidence  to  appreciate  financial  risks  and 
opportunities,  to  make  informed  choices,  to  know  where  to  go  for  help,  and  to  take  other 
effective actions to improve their financial well-being.” 
The definition highlights four key aspects:  
First, financial literacy is about educating consumers so that they are knowledgeable about 
financial services and enables them to use this knowledge to evaluate products and make 
informed decisions. Therefore, financial education must aim to build consumers’ awareness 
and knowledge of financial terms and calculations;  
Second,  for  poor  and  rich  alike,  financial  literacy  is  about  empowering  consumers  through 
developing money management skills to enable them to make the most of their resources, 
and  reducing  vulnerability  to  overzealous  retailers  or  fraudulent  schemes.  Therefore, 
financial literacy must enable people to make better financial decisions, to appreciate their 
rights  and  responsibilities  as  consumers  of  financial  products,  and  to  understand  and 
manage risk;  
Third, there is increasing evidence that those who are financially less literate are more likely 
to have problems with debt, are less likely to save, are more likely to engage in high-cost 
credit, and are less likely to plan for the future. Therefore, for regulators of financial services, 
it is necessary to develop programs to promote public awareness for helping people to make 
informed financial decisions and maintain market confidence; and  
Finally,  financial  literacy  program  adds  the  missing  demand-side  dimension  to  financial 
inclusion  strategies.  Therefore,  financial  literacy  can  be  a  very  effective  tool  to  tackle  the 
psychological,  emotional  and  cultural  barriers  that  prevent  people  from  being  financially 
included.  
Many  poor  and  non-poor  people  do  not  have  a  bank  account  and  very  few  of  them 
understand why this puts them at a disadvantage when it comes to their personal financial 
management. According to Pakistan Access to Finance Survey (A2FS), only 12 percent of 
the population has access to formal financial services. Whereas of the remaining 88 percent, 
only  32  percent  are  informally  served  and  56  percent  are  completely  excluded.  Moreover, 
according  to  the  A2FS  analysis,  about  40  percent  of  the  financially  excluded  population 
reported  lack  of  understanding  of  financial  products  as  the  main  reason  for  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
exclusion.  This  clearly  identifies  the  need  for  financial  education  as  a  systemic  area  to  be 
addressed to tackle financial exclusion in a big way.  
Allow  me  to  very  briefly  share  the  various  conventional  and  non-conventional  measures 
adopted by SBP to boost financial inclusion:  
SBP introduced Basic Banking Account (BBA), a simplified financial product for low income 
consumers. BBA aims to reduce costs for consumers by removing more expensive facilities 
and requires no minimum balance, and neither does it have complex terms and conditions 
thereby reducing administrative and management costs.  
SBP introduced Microfinance Banking Regulations in 2001 to specifically meet the demands 
of  low  income  consumers.  These  regulations  have  been  improved  to  a  world  class 
microfinance regulatory framework, ranked number one for the last two years in a row by “the 
Economic Intelligence Unit” of UK’s “The Economist” magazine.  
SBP  has  adopted  innovative  solutions  to  overcome  geographical  barriers,  including 
branchless  banking  through  retail  agents  and  harnessing  technology  via  mobile-phone 
banking. The Branchless Banking Regulations were introduced in 2008, clearing the way for 
development  of  branchless  and  mobile  phone  banking  services  in  Pakistan.  The  retail 
network of banks has overwhelmingly multiplied due to agents and mobile phone channels. 
In less than three years, there are now 18,000 branchless banking outlets, augmenting and 
surpassing the 10,000+ conventional bank branches.  
In addition to these policy and regulatory measures, SBP has been managing various market 
interventions funded by donors including GOP, UKAID, and ADB. I would like to especially 
thank  ADB  and  UKAID  for  actively  supporting  financial  inclusion  in  Pakistan.  Under  the 
programs  sponsored  by  these  donors,  a  number  of  market  interventions  are  managed  by 
SBP including:  
The  Institutional  Strengthening  Fund  (ISF)  providing  grant  funding  to  Microfinance  (MF) 
providers  to  top  and  middle  tier  Microfinance  Banks  (MFBs)  and  Microfinance  Institutions 
(MFIs)  for  key  investments  in  HR,  IT,  product  development,  risk  management  systems, 
business plans and branchless banking development.  
The  Microfinance  Credit  Guarantee  Facility  to  link  microfinance  with  financial  markets  for 
mobilization of wholesale commercial funding through partial guarantees.  
Similarly,  the  Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund  (FICF)  for  grants  to  innovative  projects 
and  testing  new  markets  to  lower  cost  of  delivery,  enable  systems  and  procedures  to  be 
more efficient and provide new ways of meeting the larger demand for financial services.  
And the Improving Access to Financial Services Fund which is supporting today’s program.  
These are mostly supply side interventions aiming to increase financial services by removing 
bottlenecks and have raised financial inclusion to a certain extent. However, what has been 
missing is a demand side solution – a program to impart financial education and awareness 
to consumers. This recognises that the very low level of financial awareness and confidence 
of financially excluded groups remains a strong barrier to their access and use of financial 
services. In addition, there are risks involved in creating new opportunities for consumers if 
the  consumers  are  not  proficient  at  making  financial  decisions.  Therefore,  going  forward, 
SBP considers financial literacy as an integral part of the financial inclusion strategy.  
Financial literacy has assumed greater importance in recent years for both developed and 
developing  countries,  therefore,  best  practices  in  this  area  are  still  evolving.  However, 
synthesizing  from  the  OECD’s  high  level  principles  for  financial  education,  some  best 
practices are:  
First, the financial education program must involve key players from the beginning. This may 
take a lot of time and effort due to slow decision making process but will ensure success of 
the program in the long-run. In particular, the consumers must be consulted to understand 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their preferences and identify appropriate curriculum and dissemination channels and tools. 
Therefore, financial education surveys must be conducted to appropriately identify the needs 
and to set a baseline for program monitoring. This will also help identify teachable moments 
for  low  income  groups  that  may  typically  occur  around  the  receipt  of  money,  the  need  for 
credit etc.  
Second, it is better to implement and earn quick wins to generate positive energy such as 
starting  from  a  pilot  launch  initially  before  going  national  to  gain  the  buy-in  of  all  the 
stakeholders.  
Third, the program design should be flexible enough to enable diverse stakeholders to join-in 
and create synergies. This will also give the program high visibility and help partners achieve 
their  own  goals.  However,  due  care  must  be  exercised  that  messages  are  product  and 
institution neutral and can be used by all partners to create a multiplier effect.  
Finally, the program must enjoy ownership by leadership from participating institutions that 
increases the interest of the topic with stakeholders, politics and media.  
The  National  Financial  Literacy  Program  (NFLP)  is  broadly  in  line  with  these  guiding 
principles. NFLP pilot will impart financial education and awareness on six personal finance 
themes  namely  budgeting,  savings,  investments,  debt  management,  financial  products, 
branchless banking and consumer rights & responsibilities to about 50,000 beneficiaries from 
low income strata. We should not ignore the important peer effects of the direct beneficiaries 
which is very likely to be spread around a community. Those who have received education 
can  pass  on  their  knowledge  to  friends  and  family,  thereby  increasing  the  impact  of  the 
education.  
The  program  has  been  developed  after  the  Financial  Literacy  Gap  Assessment  Survey  of 
beneficiaries. The survey has been helpful in development and adaptation of curriculum and 
dissemination strategy. The curriculum will also be translated into national and main regional 
languages including Urdu, Sindhi, Punjabi, Pushto and Balochi.  
The  Program  is  financed  under  the  ADB-funded  Improving  Access  to  Financial  Services 
Fund  (IAFSF)  and  implemented  under  the  oversight  of  the  IAFSF  Committee  which  has 
representation  from  SBP,  Pakistan  Banks’  Association,  Pakistan  Poverty  Alleviation  Fund, 
Pakistan Microfinance Network, education sector, and the ADB. Upon completion of the pilot 
phase, an impact assessment of the pilot will be conducted by a third party. Based on the 
experience and assessment of the pilot, the program will be scaled-up to target more than 
half a million beneficiaries all over the country.  
In addition to focused training sessions of beneficiaries, the dissemination strategy involves 
street theatres, board games, comic strips, activity-based competitions, website and media 
campaigns to reach out the masses on a larger scale. The training sessions will be sourced 
from banks, MFBs and MFIs based on their interest and pre-defined qualification criteria. In 
order to encourage and incentivize participation from partners, professional fees and out of 
pocket expenses of partners will be reimbursed from the program budget.  
Besides  involvement  of  local  institutions,  the  project  has  formed  partnerships  with 
international  financial  education  programs  including  Microfinance  Opportunities,  Finmark 
Trust, Association of Microfinance Institutions of Uganda (AMFIU), Sewa Bank, Microfinance 
Innovation  Centre  for  Resource  and  Alternatives  (MICRA),  World  Bank  Institute,  Aflatoun, 
and others.  
Conclusion:  
I  would  like  to  conclude  with  the  thought  that consumer  protection  and  financial education 
should  be  vital  components  of  any  financial  inclusion  initiative.  It  is now  clear  that  policies 
which  focus  entirely  on  changing  the  supply  of  financial  products  and  services  can  leave 
consumers  ill-informed,  vulnerable  and  not  willing  to  participate  in  financial  markets. 
Moreover, the focus of financial literacy program should be broader than financial inclusion. It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
should aim to increase consumer awareness about their rights, obligations and mechanisms 
for recourse to build a fair, inclusive and robust financial sector.  
In addition, I would like to encourage financial service providers to partner in the NFLP rollout 
and exercise proportionate level of accountability and responsibility to act in the best interest 
of  their  clients.  Intermediaries  should  fully  disclose  their  terms  and  conditions  to  clients 
before selling them a product or service.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  you  for  coming  together  to  show  your  commitment  to 
promoting financial literacy in Pakistan.  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
