Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Engaging the SMEs to stabilize economy 
Keynote address by Mr Kazi Abdul Muktadir, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
at the 6th SME Banking Conference, Karachi, 5 September 2012. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it’s  my  pleasure  to  address  the  delegates  and  speakers  at  this 
Conference, arranged by Shamrock Conferences International, on “Engaging the SMEs 
to stabilize Economy”. 
Through this Conference, all the stakeholders in the SME sector have been brought together 
that  will  generate  valuable  debate  on  the  issues  confronting  the  sector  and  look  at  the 
various  strategies  being  developed  at  the  regulatory  and policy level, to support this very 
important sector of our economy. It is particularly in this context that this Conference is really 
a timely initiative. 
There exists strong evidence that SMEs expansion boosts employment more than large firm 
growth due to the fact that SMEs are normally more labour intensive. In Pakistan, the SME 
sector contributes 30 percent towards the country’s GDP, employ  more  than  70  percent  of 
the  non-agricultural  workforce,  accounts  for  35  percent  of  the  value  added  in  the 
manufacturing  industry  and  generates  25  percent  in  the  export  earnings.  The  sector  has 
huge potential in generating employment and alleviation of poverty in the country. 
Today, most big industrial establishments depend on SMEs for their value addition.  In  most 
emerging  markets,  SMEs  have  played  dominating  role  in  the  economy  especially  in 
reducing  the  poverty  levels.  Emphasis  has  been  placed  on  pro-poor  growth  led  by  the 
private  sector  especially 
through  SMEs.  Sectors  such  as  agriculture,  services, 
manufacturing with heavy content of labor-intensive activities have received much support by 
the Governments because of their potential for reducing poverty. These countries have also 
successfully  integrated  their  SMEs  with 
through  sub-
contracting  which  has  proved  to  be  an  extremely  useful  and  efficient  way  of  integration 
across the size and scale. 
The  sustained  and  long-term  growth  of  SME  sector  in  Pakistan  remains  constrained  by  a 
number of factors on both demand and supply side. Most SMEs are sole proprietorships or 
family  businesses  that  are  managed  rather  informally, and  therefore,  face  issues  such  as 
lack of formal business management skill, poor maintenance  of  accounts,  lack  of  business 
planning,  etc. They often do  not have adequate collateral to meet banks’ requirements, and 
have  little  awareness  about  available  financing  options.  Further,  reliable  research  data  on 
important SME segments is also not available for use of banks. 
At  the  same  time,  on  the  supply  side,  one  of  the  primary  issues  seems  to  be dearth of 
appropriate  skills  to  evaluate  SMEs’  credibility  on  non-traditional  parameters.  This 
is 
reflected  in  the  lack  of  innovation  in  product  design  and  in marketing of financial products 
for SMEs. 
A  sustainable  solution  requires  that  we  take  a  more  holistic  view  of  this  problem. A  large 
number  of  players  have  to  be  involved  in  contributing  to  the  success  of SMEs. There are 
number of different stakeholders who have to work together in a coordinated and cohesive 
manner to ensure sustainable growth of SMEs especially removing the hurdles in the way of 
their  easy  access  to  finance.  Important  stakeholders  are  the  Government,  State  Bank, 
Commercial Banks, SMEDA and various chambers and SME Associations. 
First  of  all,  the  Government  and  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  need  to provide  a  conducive  and 
enabling  environment  for  SMEs  to  operate.  This  requires  that  the macroeconomic  policies 
are  sound,  the  regulatory  regime  is  supportive  and  the  legal  system  is  able  to  enforce 
contracts and property rights. 
large  corporate  sector 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Secondly,  organizations  such  as  SMEDA  have  to  play  a  critical  role  in  the  business 
developments  support,  advisory  services  and  managerial 
training  of  SMEs.  For 
example, most small enterprises do not maintain proper accounting of their operation and do 
not have a trained accountant on their staff. This impedes their ability to access credit from 
commercial banks. SMEDA can organize training courses in this and many other important 
areas. 
SME  Associations  also  need  to  come  forward  and  launch  awareness  programs  for  their 
members  on  the  opportunities  that  are  already  available,  assist  them  in linking up with 
the appropriate support institutions, listen to the genuine difficulties  and  problems  faced  by 
their members and communicate these to the concerned quarters. 
As  far  SBP’s  role  is  concerned,  it  has  been  taking  various  important  measures  for 
improving the business environment for the sector, and addressing financing needs of SMEs. 
Keeping  in  view  the  specific  business  dynamics  of  the  sector,  SBP  issued  specific 
Prudential Regulations (PRs) for SMEs in 2003 that greatly helped banks to focus on SME 
Financing  and  accordingly  align  their  business  strategies.  These  Prudential  Regulations 
for  SMEs  do  not  make  it  mandatory  for  banks  to require  collateral  but  allow  them  to 
take  cash  flow  generation  as  the  basis  for loan  approval. We  have  always  been  open to 
any  suggestion  from  the  sector  for  further  improvement  and  strengthening  of  these 
regulations. 
Further,  SBP  has  introduced  various  Refinance Schemes for  SMEs. These  schemes carry 
concessional rates for the end-users, in order to meet both short-term and long-term needs 
of  different  SME  segments.  Of  special  mention  in  these  schemes  are  the  Schemes  for 
Modernization  of  SMEs,  for  developing  alternate  energy resources  and  establishing  silos 
and  storage  houses.  The  maximum  use  of  these  schemes  by  SMEs  can  benefit  the 
sector  in  a  big  way  with  resultant  positive impact on the economy. 
SBP  has  also  launched  a  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  for  Small  and  Rural  Enterprises that 
shares  credit  losses  of  banks,  to  the  extent  of  40  percent  on  loans  to  the  Small 
Enterprises, under a UKAID-supported financial inclusion program. This Scheme  has  been 
highly  successful  and  the  latest  figures  show  that  64%  of  the guarantee  limits  allocated 
to  banks  have  been  utilized  by  them.  Discussions  are underway  to  further  enhance  the 
size  of  this  facility  so  that  a  larger  number  of Small Enterprises are accommodated under 
the Scheme. 
Additionally,  SBP,  in  collaboration  with  IFC,  is  assisting  banks  in  their  capacity building 
efforts,  focusing  on  the  areas  of  Strategy  Formulation,  Product  Development,  Risk 
Management,  HR  Development  and  Marketing  Area.  Initially,  Bank  Al  Falah  has  been 
selected  for  its  capacity  building,  while  many  other  mid-tier banks have been lined up for 
the  subject  consultancy  project.  This  project  will  revitalize  the  SME  lending  by  the 
participating  financial  institutions  and  will  be  a  prototype  for  other  financial  institutions 
who  could  see  financing  to  SMEs  as profitable business ventures. 
Keeping  in  view  the  absence  of  credible  research  data  on  SME  clusters,  SBP  has been 
undertaking cluster development surveys, in partnership with IFC and LUMS, that will greatly 
help  stakeholders,  and  especially  banks,  in  coming  up  with  cluster-specific  products  and 
tailored  SME  banking  strategies.  So  far,  11  clusters  have  been  covered  whose  survey 
profiles  are  available  on  the  SBP  Web,  while  surveys  of  10  more  SME  clusters  are 
underway, that will soon be completed for the use of relevant stakeholders. 
Lastly,  I  would  emphasize  the  role  of  banks  that  is  crucial  for  the  development  of SMEs, 
given their critical positioning and greater capacity in terms of their outreach and availability 
of funds. The actual statistics for lending to SMEs are not satisfactory in recent years. Bank 
credit  to  SMEs  has  declined  over  the  last  4  years  from  Rs  437  billion  in  2007  to 
Rs 248 billion  on  June,  2012.  With  this  decline,  the  SMEs’  loan  proportion  to  the  total 
advances of banks has also decreased from 16 percent in 2007 to less than 8% percent in 
2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 
lending 
industry 
tendency  of 
the  financial 
to  break-out  of 
Although,  this  decline  can  partly  be  attributed  to  adverse  economic  conditions during  the 
period  and  growing  NPLs,  however,  a  more  risk-averse  posture  of  banks  remains  a 
major  factor  responsible  for  their  low  exposure  to  SMEs.  In  the recent years, banks have 
increasingly invested in safer havens – opting for government paper and increased financing 
for commodity operations, rather than supporting the fragile private sector which is the main 
driver of economic activity. 
I  would  stress 
to 
conventionally  profitable  and  relatively  safer  sectors,  and  rather  move  towards promoting 
SMEs  through  prudent  banking  solutions.  The  banks  should  formulate  strategies  to 
overcome the challenges presented by the market as well as by the cyclicality  in  economic 
conditions.  Banks  need  to  shift  from  traditional  banking approach  towards  SMEs  to  the 
provision  of  more  customized  and  differentiated  financial  products  and  services  to  suit 
different  SME  segments.  They  also  need  to  develop  and  implement  appropriate  credit 
evaluation  techniques  used  globally such as credit scoring, cash flow based lending, and 
program based lending. 
A  strategic  shift  in  focus  for  SMEs  would  greatly  benefit  the  financial  institutions 
themselves  as  SMEs  will  grow  into  larger  corporations,  resulting  in  increased  business 
opportunities  for  them.  Banks  need  to  remember  that  their  industry  is only as strong as the 
underlying economy. 
Let  me  conclude  by  restating  the  fact  that  SMEs  will  continue  to  play  a  very important 
and  vital  role  in  our  economy  where  the  twin  problems  of  unemployment  and  poverty 
constitute major development challenge. Well targeted government intervention in this sector 
and  effective  coordination  among  the  stakeholders  remain  indispensable  for  the  true 
development of the sector and its sustainability. 
Given  the  quality  of  participants  in  the  conference,  I  am  convinced  that  useful  policy 
recommendations will emerge at the end of different sessions. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
