Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Macroeconomic management in 
turbulent times 
Presentation by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, to the 
NRM (National Resistance Movement) Retreat, Kyankwanzi, 19 January 2012. 
 Introduction  
I want to begin by reminding you of the difficulties which are currently facing economies all 
over the world. The IMF has warned that the global economy has entered a “dangerous new 
phase”. Also, the World Bank, in its Global Economic Prospects Report released this week, 
warned  that  the  “world  economy  has  entered  a  very  difficult  phase  characterised  by 
significant downside risks and fragility”. Given that the Ugandan economy is closely linked to 
the rest of the world through trade, tourism, workers’ remittances, donor aid, foreign direct 
investment  and  other  types  of  capital  flows,  it  cannot  be  fully  insulated  from  the  serious 
problems affecting other parts of the global economy.  
We  should  bear  this  in  mind  when  debating  the  available  policy  options  for  our  own 
economy. Since the global financial crisis in 2008 and the subsequent Great Recession in 
industrialised countries, the global economic environment has become much less propitious 
for  developing  countries  such  as  Uganda.  The  global  economy  has  become  more  volatile 
and generates macroeconomic shocks which are transmitted to developing economies. This 
means that we have to be more cautious in our approach to macroeconomic management 
and to build up buffers of resources – for example foreign exchange reserves – which can 
help  us  to  ride  out  economic  or  financial  shocks  when  they  occur,  as  they  inevitably  will. 
Sound  macroeconomic  management,  including  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  will 
become even more important in this age of global turbulence than they have ever been in the 
recent past.  
The current economic situation  
Three broad trends characterise the current economic situation, pertaining to real economic 
growth, the balance of payments and inflation.  
Real economic growth  
Economic  growth  in  Uganda  has  been  relatively  robust  despite  the  problems  in  the  global 
economy.  Real  GDP  growth  dipped  just  after  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  to 
5.9 percent  in  2009/10,  from  the  growth  rates  of  7–8  percent  recorded  prior  to  the  global 
financial  crisis,  but  then  recovered  to  6.7  percent  in  the  last  fiscal  year.  This  is  shown  in 
figure 1. Growth in the industry and services sectors has been consistently strong over the 
last  five  years,  in  most  years  growth  rates  in  these  sectors  have  exceeded  6  percent  per 
annum; but in contrast agricultural growth has been persistently weak and only occasionally 
exceeded 2 percent.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Figure 1  
Real GDP Growth (percent); 2006/07 to 2010/11 
Source: UBOS. 
Despite the problems in the global economy and the need to tighten macroeconomic policies 
domestically to fight inflation, we are forecasting real GDP growth of about 5 percent in the 
current  fiscal  year  and  6  percent  next  year.  This  is  much  better  than  the  current  global 
average economic growth of 2–3 percent. Talk of the economy being in crisis is, therefore, 
far removed from reality.  
 The balance of payments and the exchange rate  
Uganda’s balance of payments has deteriorated since the onset of the global financial crisis. 
Uganda  has  always  run  fairly  large trade  deficits  but  these have  been  funded  with foreign 
savings from a variety of sources; workers’ remittances, foreign aid and net capital inflows. 
However because of the slowdown in global growth and the economic recession in some of 
our most important export markets, include Europe, our exports have grown very slowly over 
the last three years, by only 4 percent per annum on average in US dollar terms. In contrast, 
our import bill has grown much faster, by about 10 percent per annum on average, because 
the buoyancy of the Ugandan economy has raised incomes and thus demand for imports. 
The consequence of this divergence in the growth rates of exports and imports is that the 
trade deficit has widened. In the last fiscal year the trade deficit in goods and services was 
20 percent of GDP, compared to only 13 percent of GDP in 2007/08.  
The widening trade deficit since the mid 2000s is shown in figure 2, along with the current 
account deficit, of which a major component is the trade deficit. The current account deficit 
has also widened since the mid 2000s. Also shown in figure 2 are the capital and financial 
account surpluses, which have not increased to match the widening current account deficits.  
Unfortunately, the problems in the global economy mean that it has become much harder to 
mobilise  foreign  savings  to  fund  our  wide  trade  deficits.  Foreign  savings  have  increased 
slightly in US dollar terms, but as a share of our GDP foreign savings have been virtually flat 
over the last four years, at about 18 percent of GDP. Whereas foreign savings were more 
than sufficient to fund our trade deficits prior to the global financial crisis, allowing Uganda to 
run BOP surpluses and accumulate foreign exchange reserves, this is no longer the case. 
This is the main reason why our exchange rate has been under so much pressure, as shown 
in figure 3. Our trade deficits are becoming unsustainably large.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2  
Components of the Balance of Payments;  
current account balance, capital account balance,  
balance of trade in goods and services and transfers  
(percent of GDP)  
Source: BOU. 
 To rectify this problem will take time; we need to expand exports and shift our expenditures 
from imports to domestic goods where this is feasible. One of the main channels for bringing 
about  this  necessary  adjustment  to  the  trade  balance  is  through  the  exchange  rate.  A 
weaker,  more  depreciated,  exchange  rate  facilitates  this  adjustment  because  it  makes  the 
production of exports more profitable and makes imports more expensive. Structural policies, 
for  example  to  support  export  production  and  reduce  transport  costs  for  exports,  are  also 
required, but structural policies alone will not work if the exchange rate is uncompetitive.  
The Exchange Rate of the Uganda Shilling against the US Dollar;  
June 2008–December 2011  
Figure 3  
Source: BOU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Inflation  
The third feature of the economy that I want to discuss is inflation and how we are tackling it. 
Annual inflation rose to 31.7 percent in October of last year, far above our target of 5 percent. 
The reasons for the rise in inflation and the policy response of the Bank of Uganda (BOU) 
have recently generated controversy, so I will take some time to explain what has happened 
in detail.  
Figure 4  
Annual Inflation; Headline, Core and Food Crop (percent);  
January 2006–December 2011  
Source: UBOS.  
 Our  record  in  controlling  inflation  over  the  long  term  has  been  very  good.  Over  the  last 
20 years, since the early 1990s, annual inflation has averaged just over 6 percent. However, 
since the mid 2000s our economy has faced major exogenous, supply side, shocks which 
have  affected  domestic  inflation.  Inflation  was  forced  up  in  2008  by  global  food  and 
commodity price shocks but was brought back under control in 2009 and 2010.  
Inflation began rising sharply towards the end of 2010, as can be seen in figure 4. Initially this 
rise was driven by food price inflation. Food crop harvests were poor in Uganda and other 
parts of East Africa, while international world food prices were also pushed up steeply in the 
first  half  of  2011  by  bad  harvests  in  major  cereal  producers  such  as  Russia.  As  a  result, 
annual  food  crop  price  inflation  soured  to  a  peak  of  42  percent  in  Uganda  in  May  and 
remained high for several months thereafter. This was a pure supply side shock to prices and 
had nothing to do with excess demand or to too much money chasing too few goods.  
The  impact  of  food  prices  on  inflation  was  exacerbated  in  the  middle  of  2011  by  the 
weakening of the exchange rate. This was mainly due the deteriorating BOP position that I 
have just described, but the volatility in the exchange rate also reflected some speculation 
against  the  Shilling  on  the  part  of  Ugandans  who  purchased  dollars  to  hoard  and  foreign 
portfolio  capital  investors.  The  turbulence  on  the  global  financial  markets,  which  entailed 
stock  prices  and  exchange  rates  gyrating  on  a  daily  basis,  also  affected  volatility  in  the 
Ugandan  exchange  rate  and  the  exchange  rates  of  other  developing  countries,  including 
Kenya.  Between  the  end  of  May  2011  and  the  end  of  September  2011,  the  nominal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exchange rate of the Ugandan Shilling depreciated by 19 percent against the US dollar, as 
shown in figure 3.  
The exchange rate depreciation drove up the domestic prices of imports; for example fuel, 
clothing and various household goods. Moreover, the combination of higher food prices and 
higher import prices began to spill over into other prices, such as the prices of services which 
comprise nearly half of the consumer basket. For example, school fees were raised because 
the  cost  of  food  had  risen.  By  the  first  quarter  of  2011/12,  inflation  was  becoming  more 
generalised in that it was affecting most items in the consumer basket. The very rapid growth 
in bank lending to the private sector, which by September 2011 had reached 44 percent on 
an annual basis, was also contributing to the build up in inflationary pressures.  
Monetary policy  
The rise in inflation created difficult challenges for monetary policy. Monetary policy affects 
the  demand  side  of  the  economy;  it  influences  spending  by  the  private  sector,  which 
comprises about 80 percent of total final expenditure in the economy. Monetary policy does 
not affect the supply side of the economy; therefore it is ineffective as a tool for reversing 
pure  supply  side  shocks  to  prices. Consequently  monetary  policy  could  not  realistically  be 
expected to have prevented the rise in food prices which occurred last year. However supply 
side  shocks  such  as  those  which  affected  food  prices  and  the  exchange  rate  in  2011  will 
have  serious  long  term  consequences  for  inflation,  long  after  the  shocks  themselves  have 
dissipated, if they are allowed to spill over into a much broader range of prices, such that 
inflationary  expectations  become  entrenched  in  the  mind  of  the  public.  This  is  why  it  was 
imperative for the BOU to tighten monetary policy in 2011, by raising interest rates.  
Interest  rates  are  the  main  tool  of  a  modern  monetary  policy  in  a  market  economy.  The 
rationale for raising interest rates last year was threefold.  
First, higher interest rates discourage borrowing by the private sector and, therefore, could 
be expected to bring about a slowdown in credit growth, which had been growing very rapidly 
in  2011  as  I  have  already  mentioned.  Secondly,  higher  interest  rates  could  encourage 
households  to  increase  their  savings  and,  therefore,  reduce  consumption.  Both  of  these 
channels  work  by  dampening  the  growth  of  private  sector  expenditures,  thereby  easing 
inflationary pressures as demand for goods and services weakens. It is a basic principle of 
economics that the price of goods and services is positively related to their demand. Thirdly, 
higher interest rates can provide support for the exchange rate, by attracting foreign portfolio 
investment. A stronger exchange rate takes some of the heat out of the inflation of the prices 
of imported goods and services.  
The BOU’s policy interest rate – the Central Bank Rate (CBR) – was raised from 13 percent 
in  July  2011  when  it  was  first  introduced  as  the  main  policy  tool  of  monetary  policy,  to 
23 percent in November. It has been kept at 23 percent in the subsequent two months. The 
BOU  does  not  fix  commercial  bank  interest  rates;  that  would  be  counterproductive  in  a 
market  economy  because  it  would  distort  business  decisions  and  lead  to  borrowers  being 
denied access to credit, because banks could not properly cover their costs of lending. The 
commercial  banks  must  be  free  to  set  interest  rates  which  reflect  market  forces  and  the 
specific characteristics of individual customers; for example the credit risk of borrowers. The 
CBR acts as a benchmark to guide commercial bank interest rates upwards or downwards. 
Hence  when  we  raised  the  CBR  we  expected  that  commercial  banks  would  raise  their 
lending rates, as the marginal cost of funds was increased. This has happened. Most of the 
banks  have  raised  their  Prime  Lending  Rates  and  average  bank  lending  rates  have  risen 
since the middle of 2011, as can be seen in figure 5. The interest rates paid on large term 
deposits have also been raised, reflecting the competition among banks for these deposits, 
although  disappointingly  most  small  depositors  have  not  seen  much  benefit  in  terms  of 
higher deposit rates.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In the last two to three months we have seen clear signs that our policies to fight inflation are 
starting  to work.  Bank  credit  growth  has  slowed  markedly  since  September  2011,  from  an 
annual  rate  of  47  percent  in  September  to  34  percent  in  November.  The  exchange  rate 
against the US dollar has strengthened by about 15 percent since mid October, partly as a 
result of foreign portfolio capital inflows attracted by the higher interest rates in Uganda. Fuel 
prices have just started to edge down as a result of the strengthening of the exchange rate. 
In  addition  the  food  price  shock  has  begun  to  abate.  As  a  result  of  these  positive 
developments,  both  headline  and  core  inflation  peaked  in  October  and  then  fell  back  in 
November and December, as can be seen in figure 4. Monthly inflation rates, which provide 
a  good  indicator  of  current  inflationary  pressures,  fell  very  sharply  in  November  and 
December;  monthly  core  inflation  averaged  only  0.6  percent  in  November  and  December, 
which was much lower than the average of 3.8 percent in the previous four months. Annual 
inflation rates are still high – headline and core inflation stood at 27 percent and 29.2 percent 
respectively in December – and we still have a long way to go to comprehensively subdue 
inflation, but we are moving firmly in the right direction. I am confident that if we persevere 
with our monetary policy stance we will be able to pull inflation down to single digits by the 
end of this year. As inflation falls during the course of this year, it will be possible to start 
reduce interest rates gradually.  
Figure 5  
Bank lending rates and the 364 day Treasury Bill rate, percent:  
June 2008–November 2011  
Source: BOU. 
 Concluding thoughts  
I hope that I have helped you to understand the current difficulties facing our economy and 
the response of monetary policy, the primary objective of which is to control inflation. As I 
have  explained,  monetary  policy  is  purely  a  tool  of  aggregate  demand  management. 
Economic policy consists of both demand management and supply side policies. The latter 
aim to strengthen the productive capacity of the economy; its aggregate supply. Fiscal policy 
is  central  to  supply  side  policies  although  fiscal  restraint  is  also  important  to  support 
monetary policy in demand management.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Supply side policies comprise structural policies and mostly sectoral and microeconomic in 
nature;  they  include  the  construction  of  public  infrastructure,  incentives  for  private 
investment,  competition  and  trade  policies,  and  agricultural  extension  services.  As  a 
government we need to improve supply side policies to strengthen economic growth over the 
medium to long term, in particular by improving the quality of public services, the cost and 
quality  of  public  infrastructure  and  the  business  environment.  Supply  side  and  demand 
management  policies  are  not  alternatives;  they  complement  each  other  and  both  are 
necessary for sound economic management.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
