Már Guðmundsson: Iceland – recent economic developments, conditions 
and outlook 
Keynote address by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 
51st Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavik, 29 March 2012. 
 Prime  Minister;  Minister  of  Finance;  Chairman;  Directors  and  Ambassadors;  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen:  
As  we  convene  for  the  51st  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  the 
economic  recovery  that  began  late  in  2010  is  gaining  momentum  in  spite  of  international 
headwinds, while inflation has been higher and more persistent than was considered likely 
last year. It is important, too, to note that inflation is driven much more strongly by domestic 
factors  than  it  was  around  this  time  last  year,  with  wages  rising  in  excess  of  increases  in 
productivity and the nominal exchange rate declining in the recent term.  
According to preliminary estimates, GDP grew by 3.1% in 2011. In international terms, this 
compares well, as output growth in the OECD averaged 2% last year. However, it should be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  economic  recovery  began  later  in  Iceland  than  in  most  OECD 
countries. Business investment and private consumption contributed equally to growth, about 
2 percentage points each. The contribution from factors was negative, however. This growth 
was not borrowed, either: last year’s underlying current account surplus measured roughly 
3% of GDP.  
In some respects, the composition of last year’s output growth lays a sound foundation for 
continued  economic  recovery.  Growth  in  business  investment  is  an  important  factor, 
contributing over 25% in 2011. Business investment measured 9½% of GDP during the year. 
This is somewhat below the 30-year pre-crisis average of 13%, but the good news is that in 
Q4  the  ratio  of  business  investment  to  GDP  was  up  to  12.2%.  Of  course,  business 
investment should rise up above the average in a conventional upswing. But our upswing, as 
that  of  most  other  countries  hit  hard  by  the  financial  crisis,  is  not  conventional.  Iceland 
suffered a deep banking and currency crisis in 2008. Research shows that the contraction 
following such a twin crisis is usually deeper and more protracted than a contraction following 
either one of these crises. In addition, research shows that the economic recovery following a 
financial crisis is generally weaker than after a normal recession, as domestic debt levels are 
high. And finally, studies show that the post-crisis recovery of investment is usually slower 
than usual if the investment level was high before the crisis struck. All of these factors apply 
to Iceland and should be borne in  mind in any discussion of the strength and pace of the 
economic recovery.  
The labour market has developed broadly in line with the business cycle and the historical 
experience  of  Iceland  and  other  countries.  During  the  downswing,  firms  appeared  to  have 
tried to avoid layoffs, opting instead to reduce the number of hours worked and step up part-
time employment. The turnaround in the labour market usually occurs somewhat later than 
the turnaround in general economic activity, emerging first in an increase in hours worked 
rather  than  in  job  creation.  This  is  illustrated  clearly  in  recent  statistics.  In  recent  months, 
however, there have been indications that this process has come to an end and job creation 
is on the rise.  
In August 2011, the Central Bank forecast that inflation would rise sharply in coming months, 
peaking  at  about  6.8%  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  This  forecast,  together  with  the 
assessment  that  the  economic  recovery  was  strong  enough  in  spite  of  international 
headwinds to withstand modest interest rate hikes, lay behind the Bank’s decision to raise 
interest  rates  last  year.  The  consumer  price  index  for  March  was  published  yesterday.  It 
shows that inflation measured 6.4% in Q1, driven primarily by a wide range of increases: in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
public and private services, housing costs, petrol, and other imported goods. Core inflation is 
also high, at 6%.  
The past few months’ depreciation of the króna plays a role in the recent rise in inflation. In 
small, open economies like Iceland, the exchange rate is a key factor in the inflation process. 
In  the  long  run,  however,  inflation  cannot  be  explained  solely  as  a  function  of  nominal 
exchange  rate  movements,  as  it  reflects,  on  the  one  hand,  rises  in  wages  and  prices  in 
excess  of  those  in  other  countries  and,  on  the  other,  changes  in  the  real  exchange  rate, 
which  stem  from  developments  in  underlying  economic  conditions  such  as  terms  of  trade. 
Inflation  that  remains  above  target  levels  for  a protracted  period  can  only  be  explained  by 
weaknesses in economic structure and policy, particularly monetary policy. In the short run, 
however,  under-  or  overshooting  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate  can  cause  swings  in  the 
inflation  rate,  particularly  if  inflation  expectations  are  poorly  anchored  to  the  target  and 
exchange rate movements are significant.  
In trade-weighted terms, the króna has fallen by 5.8% year-to-date and just over 7½% since 
November,  when  it  last  peaked.  The  depreciation  seems  to  stem  from  several  causes.  It 
appears that net foreign currency inflows from trade in goods and services have been at a 
low  ebb  in  recent  months.  While  seasonal  factors  are  at  play  here,  it  could  also  be  that 
foreign currency subject to repatriation requirements is not being returned to Iceland in full. 
This  situation  is  being  investigated  by  the  Bank’s  Capital  Controls  Surveillance  Unit.  In 
addition, firms and municipalities have been paying down foreign debt. In many instances, 
they  are  forced  to  do  so,  as  they  have  no  access  to  refinancing  from  abroad  and  would 
otherwise default on these loans. But there are also signs that interest rates in Iceland are 
low  enough  relative  to  corporate  inflation  and  exchange  rate  expectations  that  some  firms 
consider it in their best interests to convert foreign loans to domestic currency, which could 
be positive in the long run but puts pressure on the króna at present. This is one example of 
how  the  domestic  interest  rate  level  can  affect  the  exchange  rate  in  spite  of  the  capital 
controls. Finally, recent exemptions from the capital controls, which the Bank has granted in 
cases  where  the  exemptions  were  important  for  the  growth  and  performance  of  the  firms 
concerned  and  benefit  the  Icelandic  economy  in  the  long  term,  have  affected  the  foreign 
exchange  market  in  recent  weeks.  In  some  instances,  these  exemptions  have  triggered 
short-term outflows, even though they may generate increased foreign exchange revenues in 
the future. This is why the Central Bank intervened in the foreign exchange market earlier 
this month.  
Judging from recent public discussion, it appears to be a commonly held misconception that 
a currency depreciation within a capital controls regime is in itself a sign of a major problem. 
The króna can – and should – fluctuate within the capital controls, even if they work perfectly. 
Trade  in  goods  and  services  is  unrestricted,  firms  and  institutions  are  free  to  service  their 
foreign  debt,  and  all  capital  and  the  resulting  outflows  are  unhindered.  And  all  of  these 
variables can fluctuate. The main aim of the capital controls is to stop uncontrolled currency 
outflows related to capital account transactions. But the controls affect the exchange rate of 
the króna and should do so. By all available measures and in international comparison, the 
króna has fluctuated less since the controls were imposed than it did over a long period prior 
to the banking and currency crisis.  
I have discussed recent economic developments and conditions, but what about the outlook? 
According  to  the  Bank’s  February  forecast,  output  growth  is  expected  to  measure  2½%  in 
2012  and  roughly  the  same  in  the  following  two  years.  If  this  forecast  materialises, 
unemployment will decline gradually over the period, to about 5% in 2014, by which time the 
slack  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  have  disappeared.  An  underlying  current  account 
surplus is expected throughout the forecast horizon. According to the forecast, inflation will 
subside over the course of 2012, approaching the target in 2013 and aligning with it in 2014. 
These projections are dependent on a number of factors, however, specifically the exchange 
rate, which is currently below the levels assumed in the forecast.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  so  often  before,  the  economic  outlook  is  uncertain,  not  least  because  of  the  global 
situation. The most recent indicators of private consumption and economic activity in the first 
quarter are broadly in line with the forecast, and perhaps a bit better. On the other hand, the 
short-term inflation outlook has deteriorated, and it could take a longer time than previously 
expected  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  unless  the  króna  appreciates  in  coming  months. 
According to the forecast, business investment as a share of GDP will be below the historical 
average  throughout  the  forecast  horizon,  but  the  most  recent  developments,  which  I 
mentioned  a  moment  ago,  and  the  process  of  channelling  offshore  krónur  towards 
investment  could  change  that  somewhat.  The  outlook  for  output  growth  and  employment 
would improve even more, however, if business investment proved stronger.  
The global economic outlook was very bleak towards the end of 2011, particularly in the euro 
area. The picture has changed, however, in the first months of 2012. International measures 
of risk aversion have declined more or less steadily since the winter began. Risk premia on 
debt-ridden  euro  area  countries  have  fallen  since  the  European  Central  Bank  offered  the 
banks  three-year  loans  at  low  interest  rates,  action  has  been  taken  to  address  the  debt 
problems  facing  individual  countries,  and  moves  have  been  made  to  improve  the  ground 
rules for the future. This does not mean that the flaws in the design of the eurozone have 
now been permanently fixed. Nonetheless, there are indications that the contraction in the 
euro area is easing, and other parts of the world are doing better than expected. In essence, 
the global economy is continuing to grow, and growth could begin anew in the euro area in 
the second half of this year. But the outlook is uncertain, and the global economic situation is 
fragile. In this context, we should bear in mind that while Iceland’s performance in 2011 was 
good in spite of heavy weather globally in the latter half of the year, it is a small country and 
cannot remain insulated from international economic developments for long.  
Monetary policy has been under discussion recently, as it has often been before, and opinion 
is divided on its optimum stance. There was a turning point in August, when the Central Bank 
published  its  forecast  that  inflation  would  rise  strongly  in  ensuing  months  and  peak  in 
Q1/2012. It was also projected that Iceland’s economic recovery would continue and that the 
difficult situation globally would not necessarily intensify enough to derail it. This outlook lay 
behind  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  decision  to  raise  Central  Bank  interest  rates  by 
0.25 percentage  points  and  indicate  further  increases  ahead,  which  materialised  in 
November and again this March. Another underlying factor was that the real policy rate had 
fallen considerably in the weeks beforehand. These decisions and the analysis on which they 
were based have proven correct. The economic recovery gained momentum, and it tolerated 
turbulence from abroad and modest rate hikes at home, which did little more than prevent the 
real policy rate from becoming even more negative.  
The  Bank’s  rate  increases  were  very  controversial  at  first,  but  the  discussion  has  become 
less heated as the underlying analysis has been shown to be correct. At present, criticism is 
coming from both directions, and many critics maintain that interest rates are lagging behind 
developments in inflation and economic recovery. Whether this is true will come clear in the 
next  few  months,  and  if  it  is,  remedial  action  will  be  taken.  At  its  March  meeting,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee stated that further nominal rate increases were likely in coming 
months  but  that  the  scope  of  such  action  would  depend  on  near-term  developments  in 
inflation  and  the  exchange  rate.  Further  ahead,  it  will  be  necessary  to  reduce  the  slack in 
monetary  policy  as  the  slack  in  the  economy  diminishes.  The  degree  to  which  this  takes 
place 
inflation 
developments.  
In order to understand current monetary policy, it is necessary to place it in the larger context 
of post-crisis adjustment and recovery. In a sense, it can be said that the inflation that has 
plagued Iceland since the crash is a three-fold phenomenon. First of all, it stemmed from the 
currency depreciation that was part of the economic adjustment that inevitably followed the 
overheating  of  2005–2007  and  the  subsequent  financial  crisis.  Monetary  policy  should  not 
have quelled it, nor could it have done so. The real challenge as I mentioned in my speech at 
through  higher  nominal  Central  Bank  rates  will  depend  on 
future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  2010,  was  to  allow  the  adjustment  to  take  place  without 
permitting inflation or unemployment to become entrenched afterward. Second, inflation rose 
temporarily as a result of rising global oil and commodity prices. Monetary policy should not 
react to these either – and it didn’t. On the other hand, it is the task of monetary policy to 
prevent such increases from turning into a persistent inflation episode through a reaction of 
wages and other domestic cost factors. It is the third type of inflation that is a home-grown 
product. In increasing measure, the current bout of inflation falls into this category, as can be 
seen in the wage increases of the past year. Monetary policy must take action to impede this 
type  of  inflation,  particularly  when  inflation  expectations  are  well  above  target,  as  they 
currently are.  
A  key  question  in  this  regard  is  why  this  inflation  episode  has  occurred  in  spite  of 
unemployment figures and other measures suggesting a considerable slack in the economy. 
Of course, a number of explanations are possible: that there is a lack of confidence in the will 
and  ability  to  apply  policy  tools  as  needed  to  attain  the  inflation  target;  that  the  tradable 
sector, which enjoys good operating conditions due to the low exchange rate, is a driver of 
wage developments; and that the exchange rate is temporarily low because of the repayment 
of  foreign  debt,  which  is  to  some  extent  forced  and  is  occurring  more  rapidly  than  is 
desirable. It is interesting, too, to ponder whether the slack in the economy is actually smaller 
than  current  assessments  indicate.  This  question  is  one  that  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
Monetary Policy Committee must grapple with at all times.  
In the recent term, monetary policy has been conditioned by the private sector debt crisis, 
which  stems  from  years  of  overheating  and  the  subsequent  financial  crisis.  As  the  debt 
situation improves and the slack in the economy diminishes, it will become more important to 
tackle  inflation  aggressively.  Historical  and  international  experience  shows  that  this  cannot 
be done without temporary sacrifices in economic activity and employment levels. We must 
therefore hope that inflation subsides as forecast in the near future.  
Lifting  the  restrictions  on  capital  outflows  is  one  of  the  most  complex  tasks  facing  the 
Icelandic authorities at present. The controls probably prevented further depreciation of the 
króna  after  the  banks  collapsed,  although  no  one  knows  how  long  the  depreciation  would 
have persisted. The controls therefore provided shelter for restructuring of private sector debt 
and the financial system as a whole and afforded monetary policy the room to concentrate 
more on domestic economic conditions than would otherwise have been possible.  
The benefits of the capital controls are most pronounced during the resolution of the balance 
of  payments  problems  proceeding  from  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system.  If  all  non-
residents’ so-called impatient claims on residents were paid in a short period of time, Iceland 
would pay down foreign debt much more rapidly than is desirable. If worse comes to worst, 
the deleveraging could amount to roughly half Iceland’s GDP in relatively few years. In such 
a scenario, the króna would depreciate sharply, at least over a considerably long period of 
time, undermining banking system liquidity and public sector finances and making domestic 
and foreign Treasury financing much more expensive and difficult.  
In this context, it is appropriate to emphasise that Iceland is facing a balance of payments 
problem and not a debt problem. Its gross debt currently amounts to 224% of GDP, and net 
debt is 52% of GDP, excluding the debt of the failed banks. The underlying debt position is 
much stronger, however. Estimates prepared by Bank staff a year ago suggest that once the 
old banks’ estates have been settled and the air has cleared, gross debt will total 230–240% 
of GDP, and net debt, based on the estimated financial statements of the old banks will be 
about 60–80%. If the effects of one company’s subordinated debt to its owners are excluded, 
net debt declines by another 40–50% of GDP. These estimates are subject to considerable 
uncertainty. The figures are currently being revised to take account of the most recent data, 
but there is a strong likelihood that Iceland’s underlying debt will be roughly the levels seen 
at the turn of the century when all is said and done. The problem is that too large a share of it 
is  short-term  debt  and  without  a  negotiation  process.  The  capital  controls  are  intended  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
provide the space and negotiating position needed to address this situation. In this context, it 
is important that payments from the estates of the failed banks are no longer exempt from 
the  provisions  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Act  restricting  cross-border  movement  of  capital. 
Structuring the resolution of and disbursements from the estates makes it possible to prevent 
them from causing instability.  
In  the  near  future,  the  Bank  will  describe  more  fully  how  it  intends  to  use  its  expanded 
powers to steer payments from the estates of the old banks. It is clear that asset recovery 
from the estates will not be affected. Furthermore, every attempt will be made to ensure that 
disbursements do not cause a balance of payments problem; however, payments that have 
no  bearing  on  Iceland’s  balance  of  payments  problem  will  be  allowed  to  be  disbursed  as 
speedily as possible to creditors. This applies in particular to foreign-denominated claims on 
non-residents. Ultimately, it is in the best interests of Iceland and the failed banks’ creditors 
to  safeguard  economic  and  financial  stability,  as  is  made  plain  by  the  fact  that  one  of  the 
creditors’ largest assets is their stake in the new banks.  
It is the authorities’ duty to ensure that the capital controls are not a haven in which violators 
and  circumventors  can  profit  –  and  such  profits  can  be  substantial  in  some  cases.  These 
profits are not based on any value creation, nor do they fall from the skies like manna from 
Heaven. Far from it: these profits are obtained at the expense of those who either have no 
opportunity to circumvent the controls or who belong to the majority of people who abide by 
the  law.  The  cost  emerges  in  an  excessively  weak  króna,  elevated  inflation,  and  higher 
interest  rates.  This  is  why  it  is  so  important  to  close  the  loophole  entailed  in  cross-border 
transfer of payments on amortised bonds. It is also why the surveillance and investigation of 
the Bank’s Capital Controls Surveillance Unit and the activities of the Special Prosecutor’s 
Office  are  so  important.  Whether  or  not  the  capital  controls  should  exist  is,  of  course,  a 
subject  for  debate,  but  while  they  do  exist,  not  enforcing  them  to  the  maximum  extent 
possible would simply be discriminatory.  
In a broader context, I think it is useful to think of the capital controls as tools that provide 
short-term benefits related to economic and financial stability but have associated long-term 
costs due to trade restriction, and these costs grow over time. Untimely and poorly structured 
removal  of  the  controls  could  jeopardise  economic  and  financial  stability  and  entail 
substantial short-term costs. Careful structuring of the liberalisation process will significantly 
reduce this risk, although it will not  eliminate it. The problem is that  we know the  signs of 
these effects but not their magnitude. At present, there are no research findings on the costs 
associated with capital controls or how much those costs rise each year, as this is a complex 
estimation  task  that  may  not  even  be  feasible  until  several  years  from  now.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  costs  were  small  to  begin  with  because  of  the  situation 
represented  by  a  worldwide  financial  crisis.  Furthermore,  in  implementing  the  capital 
controls,  the  Central  Bank  has  attempted  to  reduce  these  costs  as  much  as  possible  by 
granting  exemptions.  A  bill  of  legislation  relaxing  certain  restrictions  affecting  firms  and 
individuals is expected in the near future.  
But  none  of  this  changes  the  need  to  make  every  effort  to  abolish  the  capital  controls.  I 
mentioned long-term costs. In addition to this, the controls were imposed as an emergency 
measure  and  constitute  a  deviation  from  our  contractual  obligations  under  the  EEA 
Agreement. That deviation has been approved by our counterparties, but we are still obliged 
to  make  our  best  effort  towards  lifting  the  controls  without  jeopardising  financial  and 
economic stability. Does this mean we must revert all the way to the regime we had before 
the crisis? I think that, as regards corporate and household capital movements, the answer is 
broadly yes. On the other hand, it will be necessary to limit financial companies’ exchange 
rate  risk  more  than  was  done  before  the  crisis,  including  the  maturity  mismatches  in  their 
balance  sheets  and  overall  size  of  foreign-denominated  balance  sheets.  It  will  also  be 
necessary  to  impose  tight  restrictions  on  foreign-denominated  lending  to  households  and 
businesses without corresponding foreign currency-linked income. But these restrictions are 
prudential rules rather than capital controls. The Central Bank sent the Minister of Economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Affairs  a  report  on  this  topic  at  the  end  of  2010  and  intends  to  send  him  a  more  in-depth 
report on the same subject shortly after Easter.  
Looking ahead to the next several years, the question is not whether we lift the controls, but 
how.  This  is  not  the  time  or  place  to  go  into  that  topic  in  detail,  as  it  has  been  discussed 
recently  in  some  depth  by  the  Bank  and  its  representatives,  and  that  discussion  will 
presumably continue. The main point is that carefully preparing the liberalisation process, as 
is  currently  being  done,  significantly  reduces  the  risk  to  financial  and  economic  stability. 
Progress has been made in this area, and a great deal more can be done in the near future. 
There is quite a bit at stake: the short-term benefits conferred by the capital controls could be 
lost at the eleventh hour and several years of long-term benefits of free capital movements 
could be burned up if liberalisation is carried out recklessly.  
To  that  end,  it  is  of  key  importance  to  move  unstable  offshore  krónur  out  of  the  hands  of 
those who cannot hold them and do not want them and into the hands of investors prepared 
to  commit  capital  in  Iceland  for  a  long  period  of  time.  It  is  also  important  that  the  general 
conditions provided for in the liberalisation strategy be met as fully as possible, for this will 
reduce  the  risk  of  instability  when  the  controls  are  lifted.  These  conditions  include  ample 
foreign exchange reserves, Treasury access to foreign credit markets, and a sound banking 
system that can fund its activities in an environment free of capital controls.  
Great strides have been made in this respect, as can be seen in the Treasury’s foreign bond 
issue last summer, the Bank’s sizeable foreign exchange reserves, the prepayment of loans 
from the IMF and our Nordic neighbours, improvements in Iceland’s sovereign credit rating, 
declines in Iceland’s CDS spread, and the banks’ sound capital position in spite of the court 
judgments  handed  down  in  cases  involving  exchange  rate-linked  loans.  But  it  is  also 
important  that  the  Treasury’s  net  domestic  borrowing  need  be  as  small  as  possible  once 
liberalisation  begins,  as  it  is  probable  that  financing  costs  will  rise  sharply  at  that  point  in 
time. In this context, it is interesting to note that the Treasury’s real domestic financing costs 
in 2011 were negative by roughly 0.7%. It is therefore vital to adhere closely to the plan to 
achieve an overall Treasury surplus in 2014.  
Honoured guests: I have spent considerable time on economic developments and prospects, 
monetary policy, and the capital controls, as these are the topics of most importance to the 
Central Bank at present. But as the Minister of Economic Affairs said in his speech today, we 
are  faced  with  formulating  long-term  policy  concerning  our  currency,  our  monetary  policy 
framework, our financial system structure, and the substance and institutional framework for 
our  financial  stability  policy.  Other  opportunities  to  discuss the  substance  of  these  matters 
will present themselves in coming months. I would like to mention two points in the context, 
however. The first is that we must carry out these tasks very carefully and make good use of 
the  time  that  we  have.  Some  issues  are  more  urgent  than  others,  but  in  some  areas  the 
discourse  is  far  from  being  fully  developed,  and  the  topics  are  in  a  state  of  flux  in  the 
international  arena.  This  applies,  for  example,  to  the  subject  of  how  and  to  what  extent 
separation is achieved between the financial system infrastructure and support systems that 
the  Government  will  always  try  to  keep  functioning  –  such  as  payment  intermediation  and 
general depositors’ access to their bank accounts – and leveraged speculation on the part of 
the banks’ owners and customers. It also applies, but to a smaller degree, to the structure for 
monitoring and responses to risk in the financial system as a whole. The danger is that, if we 
do  not  proceed  with  due  care,  hurried  decisions  will  be  made  that  will  be  revealed  to  be 
poorly conceived the next time the financial system runs aground, which might not occur until 
decades from now. The other point I wish to make is that the Central Bank of Iceland will do 
its  utmost  to  ensure  that  this  policy-making  process  is  carried  out  as  meticulously  as 
possible, and its staff have significant expertise on all of these issues. The Bank’s next major 
contribution  to  this  process  will  be  an  in-depth  report  on  Iceland’s  options  for  a  currency 
regime, which will be published this spring or early this summer.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Before I close, I would like to thank the Central Bank’s many collaborators for a successful 
cooperative relationship over the past year. Particular thanks are due to the ministries with 
which  the  Bank  works  most  closely:  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, as well as the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. I would 
also  like  to  express  my  gratitude  for  the  cooperation  with  the  Parliament  of  Iceland, 
particularly  the  Economics  and  Commerce  Committee.  In  addition,  I  wish  to  thank  the 
Financial Supervisory Authority for successful collaboration in 2011, the first year of the new 
cooperation agreement between the two institutions. And last, but certainly not least, I would 
like to thank the staff of the Central Bank for their work during the year.  
And in closing, I wish to say this: We have a tendency to give little thought to our important 
economic  and  societal  infrastructure  until  it  gives  way.  This  is  true  of  electricity  and  heat 
utilities,  water  and  sewage  systems,  and  matters  such  as  payment  intermediation.  But 
fortunately, we have specialised groups of people who monitor such systems, and within the 
Central Bank and its subsidiary, Greiðsluveitan, is just such a group specialising in payment 
intermediation.  The  banking  crisis  put  domestic  payment  intermediation  to  the  test.  The 
system passed that test, although banknote inventories were very slim at one point. Since 
then,  significant  work  has  been  done  to  enhance  payment  intermediation  security  and  to 
learn from the weaknesses that came to the fore during the crash. In 2011, changes were 
implemented in the banks’, savings banks’ and Central Bank’s decades-long joint ownership 
and operation of payment intermediation infrastructure, which is now solely in the hands of 
the  Central  Bank.  In  addition  to  improvements  in  security,  emphasis  has  been  placed  on 
enhancing transparency and disseminating information on payment intermediation. In part for 
this  purpose,  the  Bank  has  issued  two  reports  on  payment  card  transactions:  a  report  on 
credit card transactions, issued in 2011, and a recent report on debit card transactions. We 
hope that both of these reports will increase all stakeholders’ knowledge and understanding 
of the payment card market and will highlight the items in need of improvement.  
Although credit and debit cards are the most important means of payment among the general 
public, cash (banknotes and coin) is still an important payment instrument and has actually 
gained in importance in the recent term. For a long period, cash in circulation amounted to 
less than 1% of GDP, whereas it now totals roughly 2½%.  
Price level developments and the increase in cash in circulation give cause to consider the 
need  to  issue  a  new  banknote  with  a  higher  face  value.  The  Central  Bank  has  therefore 
begun preparing for the issue of a new 10,000 kr. banknote that will be equipped with better 
and  more  numerous  security  features  than  its  predecessors.  In  appearance,  the  new  note 
will  be  similar  to  the  others  in  use,  and  the  graphics  will  be  related  to  the  poet  Jónas 
Hallgrímsson. The bill will also feature the plover. It is planned that the new banknote will be 
put into circulation in the autumn or early winter of 2013.  
On this occasion, and because we are faced with a large array of complex tasks, as I have 
mentioned  in  my  speech  today,  I  think  it  is  appropriate  to  close  with  a  poem  by  Jónas 
Hallgrímsson,  which  I  interpret  to  mean  that  challenges  like  those  ahead  of  us  certainly 
require  organisation  and  forethought.  We  can  only  cross  the  river  where  it  is  possible  to 
pass. But to make the crossing we also need determination and courage. In Jónas’ words:  
The cliffs on life’s swift current  
are cleft by shallow valleys.  
Masses have queued to cross there ---  
crowds of billy-goat milkers.  
We’ll go upstream, God willing,  
to walk the hawk-high ridges  
and pitch ourselves --- impetuous ---  
plumb in the roaring torrent!  
Above the Ford (1845)  
English translation: Dick Ringler 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
