William C Dudley: Impact of the Great Recession on public schools in the 
region 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York 
City, 27 January 2012. 
 Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic 
Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our 
region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will focus on regional 
economic conditions, with particular attention to how the recession has affected public school 
spending in New York and New Jersey – states that dominate the Second Federal Reserve 
District. Following my remarks, my colleagues will provide more details. As always, what I 
have to say reflects my own  views  and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
National economic conditions  
I will begin with a review of overall economic conditions. Recent data suggest that the U.S. 
economy ended 2011 on a somewhat stronger note – the best performance since the first 
half  of  2010.  Nonetheless,  the  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  remains  substantial. 
Moreover, I think it is unlikely that the pace of growth we saw in the fourth quarter will carry 
through to the first half of 2012. 
Growth of consumer spending strengthened in the fourth quarter, adding a needed boost to 
the  economy.  Much  of  this  stronger  spending  was  for  durable  goods,  particularly  motor 
vehicles.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011,  sales  of  light-weight  motor  vehicles  reached  the 
highest  quarterly  rate  since  the  first  half  of  2008.  This  increase  is  encouraging  because  it 
suggests that consumers are now more able to borrow money to finance their purchases of 
cars and trucks. 
However, I must note that this boost is likely due in part to temporary factors. First, vehicle 
sales in the middle of 2011 were depressed due to supply chain disruptions stemming from 
the tragic earthquake and tsunami in Japan. In addition, a stimulus-related tax provision that 
allowed businesses to immediately expense some investments expired at the end of 2011. 
So, some purchases were no doubt timed to occur before that expiration. 
Moreover, for goods and services other than durable goods, the rate of growth of consumer 
spending has been rather tepid. The picture that emerges – up to now – is of a consumer 
who continues to be cautious. 
In addition to stronger growth of consumer spending, manufacturing output has firmed over 
the past several months. For example, the widely followed Institute of Supply Management 
manufacturing composite index rose from October to December 2011. Improvements were 
particularly  notable  in  new  orders  and  production  activity.  Stronger  growth  of  consumer 
spending on durable goods is likely boosting the manufacturing sector. In addition, growth of 
U.S. exports has been well maintained, while import growth has been subdued. 
Alongside the somewhat stronger near-term growth we have also seen some improvement in 
the  labor  market.  Workers  are  filing  fewer  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance.  New 
claims have fallen to levels not seen since mid-2008. Private-sector employees are working 
more hours. Aggregate hours worked rose at a 3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 
2011,  up  from  essentially  no  growth  in  the  third  quarter.  Combined  with  average  hourly 
earnings rising at a 1.8 percent rate, the increase in hours worked suggests an annual rate of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
increase in private wage and salary income of close to 5 percent. This is a respectable rate 
that might support more spending – if sustained. 
A  firmer  labor  market  has  been  accompanied  by  partial  recovery  in  consumer  confidence 
over the past few months. Confidence is rising up from levels that were often – in the third 
quarter of 2011 – lower than at the depths of the Great Recession. 
It  should  be  noted  that  while  workers’  hours  grew  at  a  healthy  pace  in  the  fourth  quarter, 
employers added an average of just 140,000 payroll jobs per month, somewhat less than in 
the  third  quarter.  Despite  this  rather  tepid  increase  in  jobs,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  a 
cumulative 0.5 percentage points from September to December. This apparent discrepancy 
is  due  to  two  factors  –  faster  job  growth  as  measured  by  the  household  survey  and  an 
outright decline of the labor force. Workers aged 25 to 54 have been particularly prone to 
dropping out, which suggests that the decline in the unemployment rate may overstate the 
improvement in labor market conditions. 
Despite  some  improvements,  the  economy  continues  to  operate  with  significant  excess 
slack.  Less  than  59  percent  of  the  U.S.  working-age  population  has  a  job.  This  is 
unacceptably low – just about the same share as in late 2009 and well below the levels in 
2006 and 2007. 
Once again, this large amount of slack is putting downward pressure on trend inflation. After 
a brief run-up during the second quarter of 2011 – reflecting the pass-through from higher 
commodity prices and supply-chain disruptions – inflation has retreated and may be headed 
down further. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  faster  growth  experienced  in  the  fourth  quarter  of 
2011 will be matched in the first half of 2012. In addition to the temporary nature of some of 
the recent improvement, there are significant impediments to a robust recovery that I’ll list 
briefly. 
First,  global  financial  and  economic  conditions  may  impede  faster  growth.  In  particular, 
growth in the euro area is slowing and a recession may be underway with adverse direct and 
indirect effects on the U.S. economy. 
Second, fiscal policy has become more contractionary. Despite the extension of the payroll 
tax cut, the stance of federal fiscal policy has tightened and employment and spending by 
state and local governments continues to decline. 
Third, despite record low mortgage interest rates, the depressed housing market remains a 
significant impediment.1 While house prices are no longer overvalued by historical standards, 
restrictions  on  access  to  credit  and  the  large  number  of  homes  in  the  foreclosure  pipeline 
means  that  home  prices  remain  under  downward  pressure.  The  ongoing  weakness  in 
housing makes achieving a vigorous economic recovery more difficult for several reasons:  
 
The strong rebound in housing construction and related activities, such as furniture 
sales, that typically power economic recoveries following deep recessions is absent.  
The  decline  in  home  prices  has  eroded  household  wealth,  which  then  inhibits 
consumer  spending.  Since  home  values  peaked  in  2006,  homeowners  have  lost 
more than half their home equity and many expect further declines.  
The  weakness  in  home  prices  has  reduced  credit  availability  because  many 
households  and  small  businesses  use  their  homes  as  their  primary  source  of 
collateral for loans.  
                                                   
1   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  2012  White  Paper,  “The  U.S.  Housing  Market: 
Current Conditions and Policy Considerations” and “Housing and the Economic Recovery” by William 
Dudley. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The big drop in house prices has made it more difficult for borrowers to refinance, 
undercutting some of monetary policy’s ability to support demand.  
In  a  recent  speech  I  discussed  some  policy  interventions  that  could  help  to  stabilize  the 
housing market. I will not discuss this further as our focus today is on education. 
In  sum,  I  continue  to  expect  moderate  growth  in  the  year  ahead  and  see  the  risks  to  that 
outlook as skewed to the downside, mainly due to uncertainty as to how events in Europe will 
unfold. 
Earlier this week we had a meeting of the FOMC. The committee reiterated its intention to 
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy to support a stronger economic 
recovery  and  to  help  ensure  that  inflation,  over  time,  is  at  levels  consistent  with  the  dual 
mandate.  The  committee  said  it  now  anticipates  that  economic  conditions  are  likely  to 
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014. 
The committee also released a statement of longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy 
within the context of the dual mandate, and published information on individual participants’ 
expectations of the appropriate future interest rate path. As Chairman Bernanke explained in 
his press conference on Wednesday, the strategy statement “should not be interpreted as 
indicating  any  change  in  how  the  Federal  Reserve  conducts  monetary  policy.  Rather,  its 
purpose is to increase the transparency and predictability of policy.” 
Further  details  on  the  discussion  at  the  meeting  will  be  available  when  the  minutes  are 
published in three weeks.  
I will not comment on monetary policy any further today beyond stating that monetary policy 
has done and will continue to do its part in supporting the recovery – but it is not all-powerful. 
Other  complementary  policy  actions  in  housing,  fiscal  policy  and  structural  adjustment  or 
rebalancing of the economy will be essential if we are to achieve the best available recovery. 
Regional economic conditions  
Turning now to the regional economy, growth slowed in late 2011 in New York City and New 
York State, whereas New Jersey has seen a modest pickup. 
As  attendees  at  previous  regional  press  briefings  may  recall,  the  New  York  Fed  produces 
economic activity indexes to help monitor the performance of the regional economy.2 Based 
on these measures, economic activity has leveled off in both New York State and New York 
City since the summer, following above-average growth in the first half of 2011. In contrast, 
New Jersey’s economy, which was sluggish throughout 2010 and into the first half of 2011, 
has picked up noticeably in recent months. 
We monitor Puerto Rico using an index produced by the Government Development Bank for 
Puerto  Rico.  This  index  suggests  that  the  island’s  recession,  which  started  back  in  2005, 
may 
fairly  
sharply  –  reaching  a  one-year  high  in  November.  Still,  Puerto  Rico’s  recovery  has  had  a 
number of “false starts” before and this measure is noisy. Thus, the recent improvements will 
need to be sustained for longer before we can confidently declare that the island’s recession 
is over. 
Turning  to  the  employment  situation,  our  region  finished  2011  on  a  mixed  note.  In  New 
Jersey, private-sector job growth was quite robust in the fourth quarter, despite a small dip in 
December.  New  York  State,  in  contrast,  slowed  more  in  December  and  has  seen  only 
minimal job gains since we last met in August. 
finally  be  ending.  After  bottoming  out 
last  August,  activity  has  risen 
                                                 
2   For more information, see Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators on the New York Fed website. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Job  growth  in  the  region  no  longer  appears  to  be  out-performing  the  nation,  and  regional 
unemployment rates remain unacceptably high: at around 9 percent in both New York City 
and New Jersey, and close to 8 percent across New York State. 
Turning  to  New  York  City,  the  local  job  market,  which  had  been  quite  resilient  during  and 
after the recession, has lagged recently – partly reflecting weakness in the city’s securities 
industry.  Still,  the  Big  Apple  has  recovered  over  half  of  the  jobs  lost during  the  recession, 
whereas the nation has recouped only about a third of its job losses thus far. Despite recent 
weakness in the securities industry, other industries, such as tourism, and professional and 
business  services,  have  fared  reasonably  well  in  the  City.  Weakness  in  financial  activities 
industry – and securities in particular – is worrisome because this sector has tended to drive 
overall local growth and provide a major source of tax revenue for the city and the state. 
The New York Fed also conducts the Empire State Manufacturing Survey to track conditions 
for regional manufacturers. I am pleased to say that January’s report points to some firming 
in manufacturing and a pickup in hiring – a big improvement from late last year, when this 
survey consistently signaled little or no growth. 
Nonetheless,  ongoing  weakness  in  the  housing  market,  coupled  with  a  sluggish  jobs 
recovery has increased financial pressures on families. Attendees at previous press briefings 
may recall that at the New York Fed we have a special consumer credit panel that allows us 
to track these trends closely.3 Since the beginning of 2008, many regional households have 
been  reducing  their  per-person  debt  for  mortgages,  credit  cards  and  auto  loans  quite 
consistently. However, the last three to four quarters show signs that households may have 
reached  the  end  of  this  deleveraging  process.  Debt  levels  have  been  flat  to  slightly 
increasing in both New York and New Jersey – as they have also been for the United States 
as  a  whole.  Only  in  Puerto  Rico  have  debt  levels  continued  to  decline,  suggesting  that 
households on the island may not be finished with their deleveraging. 
The picture for debt delinquencies is similar. Although still quite high by historical standards, 
as of the third quarter of 2011, delinquencies were subsiding in New York and New Jersey, 
as they were for the nation as a whole. Unfortunately, Puerto Rican households stand out as 
now having a higher delinquency rate than the mainland, New York and New Jersey – and 
one  that  is  continuing  to  rise.  Thus,  although  the  financial  strains  on  many  families  in  the 
region  remain  severe  and  are  very  troubling  to  me,  they  do  show  some  signs  of  abating 
slowly outside of Puerto Rico. 
Impact of the great recession on public schools in the region 
Now, I will turn to our special topic. In an important sense, schools constitute the backbone of 
our national and regional economy. Yet, this backbone can be vulnerable during recessions. 
Schools teach our citizens skills, including how to read, write, do math, create art or music 
and  work  in  teams.  Economists  call  these  skills  “human  capital”  because  they  are  an 
important  input  that  fuels  a  nation’s  or  region’s  economic growth  and  development.  In  this 
way, schools play a key role in shaping our future. Therefore, it is essential to understand 
how  the  Great  Recession  has  affected  our  ability  to  educate  the  next  generations  of 
students. 
Thus, today, we will examine how the recession has affected funding levels for schools in our 
region.  As  you  know,  there  is  an  ongoing  vigorous  debate  about  how  to  most  effectively 
organize public education and provide incentives to teachers, students and administrators. 
Such inquiry is key to any effort to ensure the best possible education for our citizens, but it 
is beyond the scope of this briefing. 
                                                 
3   For a more information, see “An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel,” New York Fed Staff 
Report No. 479, November 2010. For the recent releases from the panel, see U.S. Credit Conditions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The housing bust and the onset of the recession in 2007 strained state and local government 
finances. Most local governments rely heavily on property tax revenue to fund their schools 
and other activities. This was particularly true during the first half of the decade, when the 
housing boom strongly supported property tax revenues. Then came the bust; steep declines 
in  the  housing  market  led  to  corresponding  drops  in  local  property  tax  revenue.  State 
governments’  revenues  also  fell,  as  rising  unemployment  cut  income  tax  revenue  and 
reduced  consumption  shrank  sales  tax  revenues.  Since  most  state  and  local  governments 
spend  at  least  half  of  their  budgets  on  education,  these  developments  have  constrained 
funding for our primary and secondary schools. 
To  stave  off  drastic  state  and  local  government  spending  cuts,  the  federal  government 
allocated $100 billion to states, including New York and New Jersey, for education through 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). Research done here at the New York 
Fed reveals that school finances in both New York and New Jersey were impacted by the 
Great Recession, with New Jersey sustaining particularly severe cuts.4 ARRA funds helped 
school  finances  in  both  states,  yet  did  not  completely  compensate  for  lost  state  and  local 
revenues. 
With ARRA funding drying up and our local and state economies still under stress, a question 
looms before us. How might we expect school finances and student learning to fare in the 
near  future?  Given  the  key  role  that  human  capital  plays in  our  nation’s  growth,  this  is  an 
important issue. We at the New York Fed will continue to monitor school finances and other 
education indicators in our region closely as this will, over time, affect our regional economy. 
Conclusion 
In summary, during the second half of 2011, growth slowed in New York, falling well short of 
the national rate, although New Jersey kept pace. It’s also important to note that the national 
labor market is showing more consistent signs of improvement, and the regional labor market 
has  continued  to  make  progress.  However,  at  the  national  level,  the  pace  of  recovery 
remains sluggish by historical standards and is likely to slow somewhat in early 2012. Thus, 
unemployment,  both  nationally  and  locally,  is  likely  to  remain  unacceptably  high  for  some 
time. Also, inflation is likely to be below our objective for several years. Clearly, much work 
remains  to  achieve  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  in  the 
context of price stability. 
The Great Recession has affected education financing in both New York and New Jersey, 
but New Jersey was hit harder. Through its impact on the education of the next generation, 
this  situation  could  have  troubling  implications  for  the  ability  of  the  next  generation  to 
succeed in the demanding jobs of the future. 
I will now ask Jason Bram to provide additional details on the regional economy.  
                                                 
4   For more detail, see Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Elizabeth Setren. 2011. “The Impact of the Great Recession 
on School District Finances: Evidence from New York,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 
No.  534;  Chakrabarti,  Rajashri  and  Sarah  Sutherland.  2012.  “Precarious  Slopes?  The  Great  Recession, 
Federal Stimulus, and New Jersey Schools,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 538; and 
watch for two forthcoming Liberty Street Economics Blog posts on January 30 and February 1, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
