B Mahapatra: Underlying concepts and principles of dynamic 
provisioning 
Keynote address by Mr B Mahapatra, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Conference  on  “Introduction  of  dynamic  provisioning  framework  for  banks  in  India”, 
organised by the Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL), Mumbai, 
21 September 2012. 
 The contributions made by Mrs Usha Janakiraman and Mrs Tariqa Singh are gratefully acknowledged. 
Thank you very much for inviting me to this conference to share with you my understanding 
of the underlying concepts and principles of dynamic provisioning. A discussion paper on the 
subject was brought out by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in March 2012. We are still in the 
process of examining the comments received from banks and other stakeholders and it may 
take us a while to finalise anything in this regard. 
Why make provisions? 
Let me start the discussion with a question: why make provisions? To my mind provision is 
an  accounting  concept.  Accounting  standards  define  provision  as  a  liability  of  uncertain 
timing or amount which can be measured only by using a substantial degree of estimation. 
The term “provision” is also used in the context of items such as depreciation, impairment of 
assets and doubtful debts: these are adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets. 
It is a requirement for any entity to assess at the end of each reporting period whether there 
is any objective evidence that any asset has been impaired as also whether a liability needs 
to be recognised in settlement of an obligation involving an outflow of resources. When such 
is  the  case,  the  amount  is  required  to  be  recognised  in  the  profit  or  loss  account  for  the 
reporting period. This enables presenting a “true and fair” financial position of the entity for 
the period, which is the raison d’être of accounting. 
Entities have strong incentives for under-provisioning, because: 
• 
• 
It is generally not fully tax deductible in many jurisdictions; and 
Many business executives take a short term view of showing enhanced profits. High 
provisioning  reduces  profits,  and  hence  dividend  distribution  and  share  price;  and 
more importantly, bonus payment to top management and staff. 
The same holds good for banks also. However, banking business adds another dimension to 
the issue, that is, of pro-cyclicality. Banks are more prone to business cycles. In good times, 
there is demand for credit and banks become aggressive loosening credit standards. Debtors 
also do well and service the loans in time. Loan loss rates are below the long-run average, 
and  need  for  loan  loss  provisions  are  less.  Therefore,  loan  loss  provisions  are  usually 
under-funded during a boom period. 
When the business cycle turns and economic conditions deteriorate, borrowers’ credit quality 
tends  to  worsen  leading  to  a  higher  probability  towards  default  in  servicing  interest  and 
principal  payment.  These  loans  become  non-performing  assets  (NPAs).  Banks’  profits  go 
down  but  at  the  same  time  they  are  required  to  make  higher  loan  loss  provisions  for  the 
non-performing  loans.  This  is  the  cyclical  property  of  credit  losses.  This  results  in  banks 
becoming cautious and restricts lending; as a result the risk spills over to the real sector of 
the economy. Procyclicality thus has the impact of amplifying business cycles. 
In  terms  of  the  accounting  standard  for  recognizing  credit  losses,  the  IAS  39  –  Financial 
Instruments:  Recognition  and  Measurement,  a  financial  asset  is  impaired  and  impairment 
losses are incurred if and only if, there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
or more events (i.e., loss event/s) that occurred after the initial recognition of the assets, and 
that loss event (or events) has an impact on the future cash flows of the financial asset that 
can be reliably estimated. 
This  approach  to  provisioning,  also  known  as  “incurred  loss”  based  approach  waits  for 
certain  events  to  happen  such  as  default,  delinquency  in  interest  or  principal  payments, 
significant financial difficulty of the borrower, etc., before losses can be recognized. Provision 
for  losses  can  only  be  made  after  the  loss  event  has  been  identified,  or  loss  has  been 
incurred,  and  not  in  a  proactive  manner  ex  ante  before  the  event,  based  on  “expected 
losses”. 
The incurred loss model came under severe criticism after the recent global financial crisis 
for delaying loss recognition. There is a view that earlier recognition of loan losses based on 
“expected losses” could have potentially reduced the cyclical impacts of the recent crisis. 
However,  accountants  were  not  comfortable  with  the  expected  loss  based  provisioning  on 
the fear that it could foster earnings management by profit smoothening and compromise the 
raison d’être of accounting to give a “true and fair” or transparent picture of the financials of 
an entity as on the reporting date. 
Improvements  in  credit  risk  models  have  supported  the  concept  of  expected  losses  and 
unexpected  losses.  From  a  conceptual  point  of  view,  loan  loss  provisions  should  cover 
expected  losses  while  capital  provides  an  adequate  buffer  for  unexpected  losses.  The 
internal  rating  based  (IRB)  model  approach  under  Basel  II  credit  risk  capital  computation 
gave  a  fillip  to  the  expected  loss  based  provisioning  and  unexpected  loss  based 
capitalisation. 
In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  in  April  2009,  the  G20  leaders  called  upon  the 
accounting  standard  setters  to  work  urgently  with  banking  supervisors  and  regulators  to 
improve  standards  on  valuation  and  provisioning  and  achieve  a  single  set  of  high  quality 
global accounting standards. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  took  it  forward  by  publishing  a 
document in August 2009 titled Guiding principles for replacement of IAS 39 that was also 
sent to the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). These principles state that loan 
loss provisioning should be robust and based on sound methodologies that reflect expected 
credit losses in the banks’ existing loan portfolio over the life of the portfolio. The accounting 
model  for  provisioning  should  allow  early  identification  and  recognition  of  losses  by 
incorporating a broader range of available credit information than presently included in the 
incurred  loss  model.  For  the  purpose  of  these  principles,  expected  credit  losses  are 
estimated  losses  on  a  loan  portfolio  over  the  life  of  the  loans  and  considering  the  loss 
experience over the complete economic cycle. 
Post-crisis, there is convergence of views among the prudential regulators and accounting 
standard setters on the desirability of a forward looking expected loss approach to loan loss 
provisioning. In reality, financial results do objectively worsen in an economic downturn in a 
way  similar  to  the  rise  in  unemployment  rates.  Therefore  applying  an  impairment  model 
based  on  expected  losses  is  arguably  a  faithful  representation  of  current  conditions.  The 
IASB,  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  as  well  as  the  BCBS  are  actively 
engaged  in  finding  a  solution  to  this  complex  problem.  In  this  context,  the  expected  loss 
based provisioning approach is a topic of significant interest for the global financial markets. 
Even  when  banks  and  accountants  were  making  incurred  loss  based  provisioning  for 
identified  losses,  called  “specific”  provisions,  they  also  voluntarily  did  make  some  sort  of 
“general” provisions or “floating” provisions. These “general” provisions are not based on any 
expected loss model, but as a prudent practice to strengthen the balance sheets. The Basel 
Committee also incentivises general provision up to 1.25% of credit risk weighted assets by 
counting towards Tier 2 capital. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concepts and principles 
Dynamic provisioning is a technique that allows banks to build up loan loss provisions when 
their profits are growing to draw on these provisions during an economic downturn. There are 
several variants of dynamic provisioning. However, the underlying principle behind dynamic 
provisioning  is  that  provisions  should  be  set  in  line  with  estimates  of  long-run,  or 
through-the-cycle  expected  losses.  This  will  help  in  breaking  pro-cyclicality  and  creating 
countercyclical provision buffers. Dynamic provisioning builds on this and can be generally 
expressed as: 
Dynamic provision = Expected loss provision – Specific provision, or 
Dynamic  provisions  =  Through-the-cycle  loss  ratio  *  Flow  of  new  loans  –  Flow  of  specific 
provision, where specific provisions correspond to realised or incurred losses, or simply put: 
Dynamic provisions = Expected loss provisions – Incurred loss provisions. ----- (1) 
17. A close look at the formula shows that during good times dynamic provisions are positive 
and add to loss provisions as realised or incurred losses, that is, specific provisions are lower 
than  their  through-the-cycle  estimates.  During  bad  times,  the  opposite  takes  place  and 
negative  dynamic  provisions  deplete  the  loss  provision  buffer.  Therefore,  provisioning, 
instead of becoming pro-cyclical, becomes countercyclical. 
The Spanish model 
Let  me  now  talk  about  the  dynamic  provisioning  as  implemented  in  Spain.  Prior  to 
introduction of dynamic provisioning in Spain, the Spanish banks’ provisioning patterns were 
close  to  those  that  currently  prevail  in  most  countries.  According  to  the  standard  system, 
banks  were  required  to  make  two  types  of  provisions  for  loan  losses.  First,  a  general 
provision was made as a fixed percentage of credit growth. This intends to account for losses 
incurred  on  an  average  on  a  homogeneous  portfolio  without  specifically  identifying  the 
suspect  loans.  Second,  specific  provisions  for  delinquent  assets  i.e.,  incurred  losses  on 
individual loans were made which depended on the level of risk of the loan and on the time 
overdue. 
Dynamic provisioning system was put in place in Spain by its Central Bank, Bank of Spain in 
July  2000  to  cope  with  a  sharp  increase  in  credit  risk  on  Spanish  banks’  balance  sheets 
following  a  period  of  significant  credit  growth  during  the  late  1990s.  Intense  competition 
among  banks  had  resulted  in  inadequate  loan  pricing.  Moral  suasion  also  proved  to  be 
inadequate  in  inducing  banks  to  become  more  conservative.  There  was  a  significant 
reduction in non-performing loans in the second half of the 1990s indicating very low specific 
provisions. In fact, in 1999 Spain had the lowest ratio of loan loss provisions to total loans 
among  OECD  countries.  It  also  had  the  highest  correlation  between  the  provisioning  ratio 
and the GDP growth rate (–0.97) for the period 1991–1999. Thus loan loss provisions were 
very  pro-cyclical  in  Spain:  they  were  very  low  during  periods  of  expansion  and  very  high 
during recessions, while credit risk and under-pricing of risk spread during the boom period. 
Under the new system (2000 regime) in addition to specific and general provision, statistical 
provision  was  added  which  was  the  difference  between  the  latent  risk  (risk  parameter 
dependent upon the credit growth) and the specific provision. The statistical provision  was 
charged quarterly. This implied that statistical provisions for a given period could be positive 
or  negative,  depending  on  credit  growth  and  contemporary  bad  loans.  When  statistical 
provisions accumulate they generate a fund called statistical provision fund. The fund had an 
upper and lower limit. 
After the introduction of the statistical provision, the upswing of the economic cycle turned 
out to be much stronger and longer than anticipated. This, together with an initial design of 
the limits of the fund that was based on very rough estimates led to a rapid increase in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
statistical  provision  fund,  whereas  specific  provisions  were  kept  to  a  minimum,  in  an 
environment of historically low non-performing loans. 
In  2004  it  became  evident  that  the  accumulation  of  statistical  provisions  was  probably 
excessive.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  of  Spain  was  being  increasingly  criticised  in 
international  accounting  fora  for  applying  a  mechanism  that  appeared  to  favour  profit 
smoothing,  which  was  considered  contrary  to  the  “fair  value”  principles  and  International 
Accounting Standards. To correct this excessive accumulation and to counter the criticisms 
of accountants, a new accounting regulation was adopted in 2004. 
The changes involved reverting to only two types of loan loss provisions, viz., general and 
specific  provisions.  General  provision  was  the  sum  of  two  components  based  on  two 
important parameters, alpha and beta. Alpha was the average estimate of credit losses, say 
expected losses based on past experience and beta was the historical average of specific 
provisions.  The  underlying  principles  behind  dynamic  provisions  in  Spain  was  to  build  up 
general  provisions  that  account  for  (i)  expected  losses  in  new  loans  extended  in  a  given 
period; and (ii) historical average losses on the outstanding stock of loans at the end of that 
period after netting off specific provisions incurred during the period. Formula-wise: 
General  provisions  during  a  period  =  [alpha  *  incremental  loans]  +  [(beta  –  delta  specific 
provision / outstanding loans) * (outstanding loans)] or 
General provisions during a period = [alpha * incremental loans] + [(beta * outstanding loans) 
– (delta specific provision)] -------- (2) 
The first component of the general provision was alpha times the incremental loans granted 
by a bank. This component therefore recognised the credit risk expected during expansions 
although  the  loan  losses  have  not  yet  been  identified  in  a  specific  loan.  The  second 
component  was  beta  times  the  stock  of  outstanding  loans  reduced  by  specific  provisions 
made  during  the  period.  One  can  observe  that  in  the  second  component,  beta  which  is 
historical average specific provision is compared with the current level of specific provision. 
This difference would be positive during periods of boom when the current levels of specific 
provisions  are  lower  than  the  historical  average  and  thus  adds  towards  the  balance  of 
general provision. Similarly, in periods of downturns/recession, the current level of specific 
provision  may  be  higher  than  the  historical  average  of  specific  provision;  in  that  case,  the 
second  component  becomes  negative  and  this  component  is  subtracted  from  the  first 
component and may cause the general provision fund to be drawn down. Thus the second 
component is countercyclical in nature which builds up during upturns and is drawn during 
downturns.  The  second  component  is  also  reflective  of  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the 
lending cycle depending upon the addition/drawals made from the general provision. 
Alpha  and  beta  were  calibrated  by  Bank  of  Spain  for  six  homogeneous  risk  categories 
ranging  from  zero  risk  (cash,  public  sector  debt,  etc.)  to  high  risk  (credit  cards  and 
overdrafts). An option was also given to banks to use their own calibrated parameters based 
on their own credit histories and experiences, subject to supervisory approval. 
Let me give an example to make things clearer. Assume outstanding stock of loans in a bank 
X to be Rs. 1000 and the previous year balance of loans to be Rs. 800, thus assuming the 
incremental  growth  in  credit  to  be  Rs.  200.  Further  assume  that  the  alpha  and  beta 
component as given by the supervisor to be 2% and 1% respectively. Assume the specific 
provision required for the current year to be Rs. 8. For the first year, bank X would make a 
general provision equal to alpha times incremental loans i.e. 2% of Rs. 200 i.e., Rs. 4 plus 
difference  between  beta  times  outstanding  loans  and  specific  provision  which  in  this  case 
works out to 1% of Rs. 1000 – Rs. 8 = Rs. 2. Thus, a total general provision of Rs. 6 (4+2) 
would be made by the bank X during the year. Total provision made during the year would be 
the sum of general provision and specific provision i.e., Rs. 6 + Rs. 8 = Rs. 14. 
To  avoid  under  provisioning  and  excess  provisioning  and  to  satisfy  the  accountants,  the 
general provisions had a floor of 33% and a cap of 125% of alpha times outstanding loans. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These limits were placed in 2004 when most banks were already at the new upper limit at the 
time  of  the  application  of  this  regulation.  In  general,  excess  provisioning  would  occur  in  a 
long expansionary phase as specific provisions remain below the betas and the alphas also 
contribute positively. The cap is intended to avoid loan loss provisions growing for too long a 
period,  producing  coverage  ratios  (ratios  of  provisions  to  non-performing  loans)  that  are 
unrealistic. 
The  total  provisions  under  the  dynamic  provisioning  model  viz.,  summation  of  general 
provisions and specific provision thus worked out to alpha times incremental loans plus beta 
times outstanding credit. The Spanish model is conservative as it creates general provision 
equal to alpha times incremental credit growth i.e., the general provision still increases due to 
the  first  component  even  if  the  current  level  of  specific  provisions  are  equal  to  historical 
average specific provision. However, during economic downturns the second component is 
solely responsible for reduction in the stock of provisions. 
The FSA model 
Having explained the basic tenets behind the Spanish dynamic provisioning model, it is also 
important  to  briefly  cover  the  FSA,  UK  model  of  dynamic  provisioning  suggested  in  the 
Turner Review of March 2009. Under the FSA model, dynamic provisions are the difference 
between  long  term  loan  loss  estimate  and  incremental  specific  provision.  Thus,  dynamic 
provisions will be created when the incremental specific provision will be lower than the long 
term loan loss estimate which is akin to expected losses. The total provisions required during 
a year under the model viz., dynamic and specific works out to long term loan loss estimate. 
Under the FSA model, the flow of dynamic provisions is calculated using the stock of loans 
outstanding at the beginning of each year and is set as under: 
Dynamic  provisions  (to  be  made  during  the  year)  =  Long  term  loan  loss  estimate 
– Incremental specific provisions ---- (3) 
I have taken the following example from the RBI’s discussion paper: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Key assumptions in the example are: 
i. 
ii. 
Ten-year economic cycle, 
An average long-run loss rate of 0.8% of loans, an unchanged mix of loans within 
the portfolio, and 
An average risk weight of 60% for the loans. It is also assumed that, mainly through 
the application of a variable scalar approach to Probability of Default (PDs), this risk 
weight does not itself vary with the cycle. 
iii. 
The example starts with a loan book of Rs. 100 during the downturn, but before a dynamic 
provisioning approach has been implemented. In the early years, the dynamic provisioning 
reserve has no impact. Because it had not been set up in the good part of the cycle, prior to 
the downturn, there is no balance that may be run down in those years when actual credit 
losses exceed the long-run average. 
As the economy reverts to more normal conditions, growth starts to return and credit losses 
fall.  During  years  4  to  9  the  latter  are  less  than  the  long  run  average,  and  this  allows  a 
dynamic provisioning reserve to be built up. This can then be automatically reduced in years 
11 and 12 in order to provide substantial coverage of the above average losses of the next 
downturn. 
The example shows how a dynamic approach would operate to build up a buffer in the good 
part  of  the  cycle,  and  which  could  then  be  used  up  when  the  downturn  materializes.  It  is 
based  upon  the  existing  Spanish  approach;  however,  there  is  no  separate  alpha  factor 
covering growth in the stock of loans. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Peruvian model 
Some South American countries have also introduced dynamic provisioning, the notable one 
is Peru. Peru has introduced cyclical provisioning in the form of general provisions, linked to 
the rate of growth of GDP. When GDP growth exceeds a certain threshold rate (i.e., booming 
period),  the  cyclical  provisioning  is  activated;  and  when  GDP  growth  rate  falls  below  a 
threshold level, cyclical provisioning is deactivated. It is assumed that GDP growth precedes 
credit growth and GDP is a better systemic growth indicator than credit. 
Proposed Indian framework 
Let me now come to the need for introduction of a dynamic provisioning framework in India 
and the theoretical model suggested in the discussion paper of March 2012. 
Although  RBI  has  been  following  a  policy  of  countercyclical  variation  of  standard  asset 
provisioning  rates  based  on  available  data  and  judgement,  the  current  provisioning 
framework does not have any inbuilt countercyclical or cycle smoothening element based on 
an  analysis  of  credit  cycles  and  loss  history.  The  need  for  introducing  a  countercyclical 
provisioning  framework  was  long  recognized  by  RBI.  However,  the  lessons  from  global 
financial  crisis further  strengthened the  need  to introduce  such  a framework. In  December 
2009, a minimum provisioning coverage ratio (PCR) was introduced by RBI to ensure build 
up  of  provisioning  buffer  when  banks  in  general  were  making  good  profits.  However,  the 
same was intended to be an interim measure till the time any comprehensive scientific study 
based on credit history of our banks was attempted by RBI. 
As  mentioned  above,  the  concept  of  dynamic  provisioning  generated  a  lot  of  interest from 
supervisors world over as most of the Spanish banks remained profitable during the global 
financial  crisis.  As  we  in  India  were  already  thinking  about  implementing  a  countercyclical 
approach, dynamic provisioning as a concept came handy in starting further work in the area. 
After studying various approaches of dynamic provisioning implemented by various countries 
viz.  Spain,  Peru,  etc,  a  dynamic  provisioning  framework  was  designed  by  RBI  keeping  in 
view the uniqueness of Indian banking system. Let me now briefly talk about the theoretical 
model discussed by RBI in its discussion paper of March 2012. 
Dynamic  provisioning  framework  in  India  is  more  or  less  based  on  the  FSA  model.  The 
theoretical formula is as under: 
Delta  dynamic  provisions  =  Expected  losses  –  incremental  specific  provisions  =  alpha  * 
outstanding loans – incremental specific provisions ----- (4) 
The  provisioning  framework  suggested  by  RBI  has  two  components  viz.  (i)  specific 
provisions  and  (ii)  dynamic  provisions.  While  specific  provisions  would  be  as  per  the  RBI 
guidelines  on  NPA  provisioning,  dynamic  provisions  would  be  the  difference  between  the 
long  run  average  expected  loss  of  the  portfolio  for  one  year  and  specific  provisions  made 
during the year. Thus, this will ensure that every year the charge to profit and loss account 
on account of specific provisions and dynamic provisions  is maintained  at a level of alpha 
times outstanding loans i.e., expected losses. 
As is observed from above, dynamic provisions are created only when the specific provisions 
are lesser than the expected losses. The framework thus ensures that at any point of time, 
provisioning  equivalent  to  expected  losses  should  be  made.  Thus,  the  objective  of  the 
dynamic provisioning framework is to smoothen the impact of incurred losses on the profit 
and  loss  account  through  the  cycle,  and  not  to  provide  general  provisioning  cushion  for 
expected losses. That is the essence of Indian dynamic provision framework. 
Let  me  now  discuss  some  of  the  important  aspects  relating  to the  proposed framework of 
dynamic provisioning. Although these are still being reviewed in light of the suggestions and 
feedback received from banks, I will briefly touch upon some of the important aspects of the 
framework: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Loss given default (LGD) used in the calculation of expected loss is based on downturn LGD 
(instead of normal LGD) as used in the internal ratings-based approach for credit risk (IRB) 
of Basel II. However, this was moderated by putting a cap on this. In India, we have not really 
seen  a  severe  downturn/cycle.  The  parameters  calibrated  by  us  are  based  on  a  data  of 
5–10 years.  Calibration  of  loss  parameters  based  on  say  10  years  of  data  may  not 
adequately reflect the severity of probable losses which may occur if there is a downturn in 
the  current  cycle.  In  order  to  make  a  sound  estimation,  the  actual  loss  data  of  at  least 
2–3 cycles, say 20–25 years is generally required. Therefore, there is risk in calibrating the 
dynamic provisioning rates based on average loss rate of just 10 years, and a reasonable 
element of conservatism is required to be added to the calibration. It was therefore felt that 
the downturn LGD rates based on the data for last 10 years could be a good measure of the 
required  conservatism.  However,  to  ensure  that  banks  are  not  unnecessarily  burdened,  a 
cap is put in place. 
When the dynamic provisioning framework is first implemented, banks will transfer the entire 
amount of general provisions and floating provisions to the balance of dynamic provisions. 
Thereafter,  dynamic  provisions  will  grow  with  an  amount  equal  to  the  difference  between 
expected losses and specific provisions made during the year. 
For  the  purpose  of  determining  the  provisions  that  may  be  counted  towards  capital,  in 
addition to calculation of dynamic provisions based on downturn LGD, banks would also be 
required  to  compute  dynamic  provisions  based  on  normal  LGD  on  notional  basis.  The 
difference  between  the  two  would  be  treated  as  general  provisions  counting  towards 
Tier 2 capital, while dynamic provisions based on normal LGD would be treated as specific 
provisions. 
In order to ensure that banks do not draw down from dynamic provisions to absorb higher 
losses  due  to  their  own  credit  appraisal  and  credit  supervision  weaknesses  and  deplete  it 
before  the  slowdown  occurs,  its  draw  down  is  proposed  to  be  allowed  specifically  by  RBI 
based on evidence of a slowdown. A suitable framework for release of dynamic provisions 
will be formulated by RBI. 
In times when dynamic provisions have not been released by RBI, banks will not be allowed 
to dip into dynamic provisions if their profitability is not sufficient to accommodate the specific 
provisions. 
Methodology adopted for calibration of alpha (expected losses) 
Expected losses over next one year was calculated using Basel II IRB formula i.e., PD*LGD. 
Movement  of  NPA  data  over  5–10  years  was  used  to  calibrate  PD  and  LGD.  Alpha  was 
calculated on a system wide basis for all the banks as well as for four asset classes, viz., 
Housing,  Retail,  Corporates  (other  than  Infrastructure  and  SME)  and  Others  based  on  a 
sample of 9 banks comprising 32.53% of gross advances of scheduled commercial banks as 
on March 31, 2010. 
Impact of the proposed framework 
While  the  impact  of  the  proposed  framework  on  individual  banks  was  not  assessed,  on 
system  wide  basis,  the  provisioning  charge  on  profit  and  loss  account  stood  at  1.37%  of 
gross advances annually. From the system-wide data collected at RBI, the average annual 
charge  on  profit  and  loss  account  on  account  of  standard  asset  provision  and  specified 
provisions  (including  write  offs)  over  the  8  year  period  (from  2003  to  2010)  amounted  to 
1.04% of gross advances. The additional charge is mainly attributed to calibration of alpha 
based on downturn LGD. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Issues 
Some of the issues worth debating and considering while implementing dynamic provisioning 
are the following: 
Data challenges 
For the calibration of alpha, apart from the “bank as a whole” data, data was called from all 
the banks in respect of 8 segments viz. Infrastructure, Commercial Real Estate (CRE), Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SME), Other Corporate, Retail, Housing, Credit cards and Others. 
However, useful data for the purpose of this study could be submitted only by 9 banks for 
Retail,  Housing  and  Other  Corporate  (corporate  excluding  infrastructure,  SME  and  CRE). 
Due to this, the study was limited to Retail, Housing, Other Corporate (corporates excluding 
infrastructure, SME and CRE) and Others (which was a residual category). 
Ideally,  alpha  (expected  loss)  should  be  calculated  for  different  loan  segments  which  may 
exhibit  different  levels  of  riskiness  and  thus  warrant  a  higher  provisioning.  Calibration  of 
alpha should be based on forward-looking through-the-cycle probability of default of various 
asset  classes/rating  classes  and  should  be  based  on  the  credit  history  of  individual  banks 
and reflect their own credit risk profile. However, it is not possible for all banks to have alpha 
calibrated based on their individual credit histories at this stage as the requisite data is not 
captured  by  them.  Further,  system-level  alpha  could  not  be  calculated  at  this  stage  for  all 
important segments requiring a separate alpha factor owing to the data issue. However, to 
ensure  improved  calibration,  the  discussion  paper  proposes  to  increase  the  number  of 
segments apart from increasing the number of years of data and size of the sample in due 
course. 
Calibration of parameters 
Requiring  banks  to  make  provisioning  based  on  standardized  parameters  calculated  on 
system wide basis may penalize some banks which manage their credit portfolio in a better 
manner  and  has  the  risk  of  under-provisioning  in  case  of  riskier  banks  having  poor  credit 
portfolio.  However,  this  may  be  addressed  by  requiring  banks  to  gradually  move  over  to 
calculation of alpha based on their own credit history. 
Timing of implementation 
It is argued that dynamic provisioning should be implemented in an upturn so that the same 
can  ensure  build  up  of  some  cushion  which  may  be  used  during  a  downturn. With  Indian 
economy and banking system experiencing some asset quality stress presently, a conscious 
call will be taken to implement dynamic provisioning at this stage of cycle. 
Lending cycle effect 
A dynamic provisioning system is usually designed using information on credit losses over 
the previous lending cycle. But there is no guarantee that a system designed in this way will 
be enough to cope with all the credit losses of the next downturn. Even in Spain, where the 
period used for the calibration included the worst recession in 40 years, it is not clear that the 
system will be enough to cover all credit losses. 
Profit smoothing 
There  is  widespread  criticism  that  the  dynamic  provisions  disguises  crucial  information  by 
lumping  together  provisioning  costs  for  incurred  and  expected  losses  in  the  income 
statement  and  is  therefore  counter  to  the  objective  of  ensuring  availability  of  timely  and 
reliable  information  on  bank  performance.  This  can,  however,  be  overcome  by  adequate 
disclosures about the extent of both specific and dynamic provisions. Such disclosures signal 
to the users of financial statements the differences between dynamic provisions representing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
loss  expectations  based  on  historical  data  and  specific  provisions  for  losses  actually 
identified in the loan portfolio. 
Interaction with the accounting standards 
One  question  which  will  invariably  arise  on  implementing  dynamic  provisions  would  be 
whether the concept is in accordance with the international accounting standards? Thus far, 
the answer is negative since the concept of dynamic provisions deviates from the principle of 
incurred losses as followed currently in accounting. However, in the wake of the crisis, the 
two major global standard setters the IASB and the FASB have agreed in principle that the 
incurred loss model has its limitations and needs to be replaced by an expected loss model. 
The “trigger events” that is required for loans to be written down under the current incurred 
loss model of IAS 39 is proposed to be replaced by a forward looking expected loss based 
provisioning approach in the new IFRS 9 which is set to replace IAS 39. 
As per the current update on IFRS 9, it is proposed that in implementing an expected loss 
model, entities shall take into account information about past loss events, current conditions 
and reasonable forecasts of economic conditions and future events. It is therefore doubtful 
whether the dynamic provisioning system will fully be in accordance with the principles in the 
forthcoming IFRS 9 since it is exclusively based on historical loss experience. We need to 
carefully  watch the developments on the accounting front to figure out how to dovetail the 
dynamic provisioning concept with the accounting principles. However, the progress made by 
IASB and FASB in developing an expected loss based provisioning standard is very slow. 
Why Spanish banks face problem now? 
The  Spanish  banking  system  was  credited  as  one  of  the  most  equipped  among  western 
economies to cope up with the global financial crisis and was appreciated for its conservative 
and  prudent  banking  rules  –  specially  the  dynamic  provisioning  which  was  seen  in  policy 
making circles as a model for the rest of the world. However, the crisis presently faced by the 
banking system in Spain mainly due to the real estate bubble that burst in 2007 has become 
the focal  point  of  interest for  supervisors  and  regulators.  Apprehensions  have  been  raised 
about whether Spanish banks actually faced the crisis or they merely postponed their losses, 
making it even worse for the banking sector. 
It is now apparent that banks in Spain were not reporting all their losses. This thinking was 
given  a  boost  when  Bankia, the  largest mortgage  lender  of  Spain, revised  its  earnings for 
2011 from €309 million profit to €4.3 billion loss. There were newspaper reports stating that 
by exploiting the terms such as dynamic provisioning which became a euphemism for an old 
accounting  trick  called  cookie  jar  accounting,  Spanish  banks  understated  past  profits,  and 
shifted them to later periods to mask future losses. Spanish banks claimed to have excess 
reserves long after they were depleted and in effect there was profit smoothing and earnings 
management, which made banks look healthy when they were in fact, quite the opposite. 
The  Spanish  case  exemplifies  the  limitations  of  any  provisioning  framework  in  preventing 
exuberance in bank lending to inherently risky sectors of the economy. Economic cycles can 
be  too  powerful  to  negate  the  impact  of  prudential  rules  to  some  extent  if  there  is  serial 
underestimation of risks. While partial recognition of loan losses can buy some time in the 
short run, in the long run it leads to more problems due to loss of credibility. With specific 
reference to Spain again, the loan loss reserves proved insufficient for the housing collapse. 
In 2004, the Spanish Central Bank put a cap of 125% on the general provisions reportedly 
under pressure from banks. Also, the floor of 33% placed in 2004 was later removed. From 
that time onwards, Spanish bank lending which was already growing at 14 per cent annually 
went into a further boom, growing over 25% in 2005 and 2006. The reserves naturally proved 
insufficient when crisis struck. This further strengthens the belief that economic cycles which 
are  harsher  and  deeper  than  previous  ones  can  wipe  out  the  provisions  based  on  earlier 
cycles. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It should be noted that dynamic provisions are no panacea for all ills plaguing the financial 
system.  It  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  other  macro-prudential  tools  aimed  at  mitigating 
pro-cyclicality and systemic risks. Further, while calibrating a dynamic provisioning system, 
care needs to be taken to maintain countercyclical reserves in line with expected losses so 
as to avoid both insufficient buffers and excessive provision coverage. There is no guarantee 
that dynamic provisions will be enough to cope with all the credit losses of a downturn if the 
cycle turns out to be deeper than anticipated. 
Conclusion 
The  crisis  experienced  by  Spain  cannot  dilute  the  efficacy  of  the  concept  of  dynamic 
provisioning.  Dynamic  provisioning  is  a  tool  that  certainly  deserves  attention  from  policy 
makers and regulators for it distributes the loan losses evenly over the credit cycle and so 
applies  the  breaks  on  an  important  source  of  pro-cyclicality  in  banking.  No  prudential 
rules/regulations can help save a banking system if there is failure of corporate governance. 
To avoid the pitfalls observed in the Spanish model, RBI has preferred to take downturn LGD 
in calibrating expected losses or alpha. This is a prudent approach. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  We  discussed  about  the  need  for  provisioning;  drawbacks  of  an 
incurred loss based provisioning model; post-crisis, the need for countercyclical provisioning 
tools  based  on  expected  losses;  the  underlying  concepts  and  principles  of  dynamic 
provisioning; the framework as implemented in Spain; and the proposed framework in India; 
issues in implementation and the lessons from the recent crisis in Spain. 
Dynamic or expected loan loss provisioning can contribute to financial stability by recognizing 
the  losses  early  in  the  cycle  at  the  time  of  loan  origination  by  building  up  buffers  in  good 
times that can be used in bad times, thereby limiting the consequences during a downturn. 
While there is no guarantee that dynamic provisions will be enough to cope with all the credit 
losses of a downturn and therefore may not tame credit cycles by itself, the time has come 
for  forward  looking  provisions  which  when  properly  calibrated  can  act  as  a  dependable 
macro-prudential policy instrument, to hedge against risks in banks’ balance sheets thereby 
enhancing the resilience of both individual banks as well as banking system as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
