Andreas Dombret: International coordination to enforce regulatory 
reform 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Salzburg  Global  Seminar  “Financial  regulation  –  bridging  global 
differences”, Salzburg, 16 August 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  cut  to  the  chase:  International  collaboration  between  regulators  has  never  been  so 
challenging – and yet never has collaboration been so important. 
Let me explain. 
Financial sector reform – time to slow down? 
2. 
The regulatory community is currently facing enormous pressures. The sovereign debt crisis 
has given a fresh impetus to calls to water down or delay regulatory reform. Some argue that 
the ongoing uncertainty in financial markets and the weak global economy are good reasons 
to  ease  up  on  regulatory  pressure. They  say  the  financial  sector  is  being  asked to  do  too 
much too soon, and regulators should slow the speed of adjustment. 
Yet I see it as more a case of “too little, too late”: If there is a reproach to be made, it is that 
regulatory progress has not been faster. The sovereign debt crisis, which is not least driven 
by systemic problems in some countries’ banking systems, underscores the urgent need to 
make the financial system more resilient. Relying on financial markets’ self-regulation will not 
do, I am afraid. We must deliver on our promise and extend regulation and oversight to all 
systemically important financial institutions, instruments and markets. 
To deliver this promise, close international collaboration is essential. Given the truly global 
financial system, “going it alone” is no longer a viable option. It will only lead to the migration 
of  business  and  to  regulatory  arbitrage,  undermining  not  only  the  integrity,  efficiency  and 
orderly functioning of financial markets, but ultimately undermining financial stability. 
International consistency versus one-size-fits-all 
3. 
The crisis has clearly demonstrated that countries cannot successfully regulate their financial 
markets  and  firms  in  isolation.  Capital  flows  do  not  stop  at  geographical  borders;  quite  a 
number  of  financial  institutions  operate  globally.  Therefore,  an  internationally  coordinated 
regulatory response is imperative. To be successful, reforms must be implemented at least at 
the major financial centres. 
International cooperation is not an end in itself, however. Instead, I suggest to measure its 
value by the extent to which it provides financial stability. While adopting a robust, common 
set of rules is essential, it is neither practical nor desirable to fine-tune all details of financial 
regulation  internationally.  As  the  characteristics  of  each  country’s  financial  system  differ, 
sometimes significantly, I do not think it to be appropriate to apply completely identical rules 
to every country or region. We must strike the right balance between providing a workable 
level playing field and at the same time providing sufficient flexibility for the peculiarities of 
national  financial  systems.  The  leitmotif  for  financial  regulation  ought  to  be  international 
consistency, not one-size-fits-all.  
A  uniform  set  of  rules  and  regulations  would  deprive  us  of  the  benefits  of  international 
regulatory competition. By this, I do not mean competition where countries are undercutting 
each other with ever laxer, but also ever more risky regulation. This would be equivalent to a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
race to the bottom as we would invite market players to arbitrage across divergent national 
regimes.  
By  regulatory  competition,  I  mean  assessing  the  merits  of  regulatory  approaches  and 
measures  undertaken  by  other  countries  and,  if  deemed  appropriate,  adopting  these 
approaches and measures. In short – learning from one another. For instance, in the USA, 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC for short, has gained an extensive wealth 
of experience in resolving failing financial institutions. In my opinion it would be careless for 
European  authorities  not  to  draw  on  the  knowledge  of  their  US  colleagues  when 
implementing their own resolution regimes. 
Need for international cooperation  
4. 
The  work  to  develop  a  new  regulatory  framework  for  the  international  financial  system  is 
slowly  but  surely  nearing  completion.  An  example  of  what  has  been  achieved  through 
intensive cooperation is the new regulatory standard for bank capital and liquidity, commonly 
known  as  “Basel  III”,  or  the  comprehensive  policy  framework  for  dealing  with  systemically 
important financial institutions, SIFIs for short. 
Yet,  we  can  not  at  all  be  satisfied  with  what  has  been  achieved. While  rule-making  at  the 
global  level  is  a  necessary  condition  for  financial  stability,  it  is  by  no  means  a  sufficient 
condition.  Rather,  for  the  agreed  reforms  to  be  effective,  they  have  to  be  translated  into 
national  laws  and  regulations.  This  must  be  done  in  a  globally  consistent  manner  and 
according to agreed timelines. Here, we must significantly step up our efforts and cooperate 
as closely as possible. Otherwise, we risk failing. 
Let me illustrate this with three examples. 
Solving the too-big-to-fail problem 
4.1 
Solving the too-big-to-fail problem will, without a doubt, constitute the litmus test of financial 
sector reform. The aim is clear: Taxpayers should not again be stuck with the tab for financial 
institutions’ failures. To achieve this, we must return to a founding principle of social market 
economy: individual responsibility. Those who take risks must also face the consequences. 
The possibility of losses and even default is a constitutive element of any functioning market 
– and financial markets can not and must not be an exception to this. 
Therefore, we have to find ways of resolving financial institutions, however large, complex, 
interconnected or internationally active, without causing systemic disruptions. Obviously this 
demands international cooperation. National resolution regimes are stretched to their limits 
when it comes to globally operating SIFIs. To borrow the well-known line from Mervyn King, 
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England:  “Global  banking  institutions  are  global  in  life  but 
national  in  death”.  In  the  past,  if  internationally  active  banks  ran  into  trouble,  national 
supervisors regularly ring-fenced their assets. Banking groups were broken up or rescued as 
separate entities along national boundaries. This led to systemic distortions and considerable 
costs to taxpayers. 
Against  this  background,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  developed,  and  the  G20  have 
adopted, a new international standard for resolution regimes, known as the Key Attributes of 
Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions. 
I very much welcome this development. The Key Attributes represent a major step forward, 
for the first time stipulating at the global level main features that national resolution regimes 
should  include.  Yet,  following  their  adoption  by  the  G20,  the  Key  Attributes  must  now  be 
implemented  consistently  across  borders.  Here,  a  great  deal  of  work  remains  to  be  done. 
The Key Attributes have to be transposed into legislation which, naturally, has to be much 
more concrete than the international standard. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  necessity  of  close  cooperation  is  further  underscored  by  the  fact  that  the  European 
Commission  has  recently  published  its  legislative  proposal  for  an  EU  framework  for  bank 
recovery and resolution. It is of utmost importance to ensure consistency between the two 
frameworks.  Otherwise  we  risk  unnecessary  inconsistencies  and,  consequently,  new 
problems in the event of financial institutions becoming distressed. 
Monitoring and regulating the shadow banking system 
4.2 
The so-called shadow banking system can serve as another prime example for the need for 
close  cooperation.  Firstly,  there  is  the  immediate  threat  of  regulatory  arbitrage,  as  stricter 
rules imposed on banks via Basel III as well as the rules for SIFIs set incentives for activities 
and risks to be pushed from the core of the financial system outward to the periphery. 
Secondly, the fluid, evolutionary nature of the shadow banking system is a reminder to us not 
to focus  solely  on  risks which  have  come  to  light  during the  current  crisis. We have  to  be 
flexible  enough  to  capture  future  developments  as  well.  To  ensure  this,  exchanging 
information across jurisdictions on a regular basis is crucial. 
Regarding  better  monitoring,  a  lot  has  already  been  achieved.  The  FSB  set  out 
recommendations  which  now  have  to  be  implemented  by  national  authorities.  Additionally, 
the  FSB  has  committed  to  conduct  annual  global  monitoring  exercises  to  assess  global 
trends and risks in the shadow banking system. 
Regarding better regulation, work at the international level  is ongoing to examine potential 
gaps  and  inconsistencies  of  the  existing  framework.  Several  working  groups  are  currently 
developing  proposals  on  possible  regulatory  measures.  An  integrated  set  of  policy 
recommendations  will  be  presented  by  the  end  of  this  year.  These  recommendations  will 
then  have  to  be  implemented  at  national  level,  calling,  once  again,  for  close  international 
cooperation to ensure consistency. 
Enhancing compensation practices 
4.3 
Reforming  compensation  practices  in  the  financial  sector  shall  serve  as  my  final  example. 
Asymmetries in remuneration systems in terms of risk and reward led to short-termism and 
excessive  risk-taking.  They  also  contributed  to  the  large,  in  some  cases  extreme  absolute 
levels  of  compensation,  leaving  firms  with  less  capacity  to  absorb  losses  as  risks 
materialised. 
Good work should be rewarded with good money. Yet to be good, work has to be sustainable 
and responsible. To safeguard financial stability, remuneration systems in the financial sector 
must be better aligned to long-term value creation as well as prudent risk-taking, including 
through malus or clawback arrangements. The Principles for Sound Compensation Practices 
and their Implementation Standards developed by the FSB are both helpful and welcomed 
guidelines to this effect. 
To  address  the  concerns  of  firms  and  improve  cross-border  supervisory  cooperation,  the 
FSB  established  its  Bilateral  Complaint  Handling  Process  in  early  2012.  This  mechanism 
enables  national  supervisors  to  bilaterally  report,  verify  and,  if  necessary,  address  specific 
compensation-related complaints by financial institutions that derive from level playing field 
concerns. 
Yet, it will take a lot of stamina and endurance to achieve lasting change in behaviour and 
culture  within  the  financial  sector.  The  organised  manipulation  of  LIBOR  is  just  one 
cautionary  example  for  this.  While  progress  has  been  made  in  implementing  the  FSB 
Principles  and  Standards,  more  work  is  necessary  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  in  the 
market  for  highly  skilled  employees.  Sustained  commitment  and  close  cooperation  of 
supervisory authorities therefore remain essential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Intensified implementation monitoring 
5. 
The success of financial sector reform crucially depends on the timely and globally consistent 
implementation  of  agreed  policies.  As  major  reforms  to  address  risks  and  strengthen 
regulation  across  the  financial  system  have  been  adopted,  it  is  becoming  increasingly 
important to ensure that countries live up to their commitments. By means of peer pressure 
and  transparency,  we  have  to  make  sure  that  the  measures  necessary  to  improve  the 
stability of the financial system are actually put into practice. 
A  number  of  steps  to  ensure  effective  and  timely  implementation  of  internationally  agreed 
reforms  have  already  been  taken.  The  results  of  numerous  monitoring  exercises  are 
summarised by the FSB in regular scoreboards and public progress reports to the G20. In 
order  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  implementation  monitoring,  the  FSB  and  important 
standard  setting  bodies  have 
for 
Implementation  Monitoring. 
implementation  and 
effectiveness of international financial standards and policies via its peer review programme. 
Peer  reviews  are  an  important  tool  to  promote  consistency,  enabling  FSB  members  to 
engage  in  dialogue  with  peers  and  share  lessons  and  experiences.  It  is  necessary  to 
continue on this path. 
jointly  established  a  Coordination  Framework 
the  FSB  monitors 
In  addition, 
the 
Closing remarks 
6. 
Allow me to summarise: 
Firstly,  ongoing  stress  in  the  financial  system  and  a  weak  economic  recovery  in  many 
countries is no excuse to weaken our commitment to financial sector reform. 
Secondly, today’s interconnected financial markets cannot effectively be regulated nationally. 
Close international cooperation is warranted. 
Thirdly, we must strike the right balance between achieving a level playing field and providing 
sufficient flexibility for the peculiarities of national financial systems. 
Finally,  rigorous  implementation  monitoring  will  be  indispensable.  As  the  old  saying  goes: 
Trust, but verify. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
