Lars E O Svensson: Differing views on monetary policy 
Speech  by  Prof  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
SNS/SIFR Finanspanel, Stockholm, 8 June 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Hans  Dellmo,  Karolina  Ekholm,  Gabriela  Guibourg,  Per  Jansson,  Stefan  Laséen, 
Ulf Söderström, Staffan Viotti and Anders Vredin for valuable discussions and views. Pernilla Johansson, as well 
as  Joanna  Gerwin  and  Marianne  Sterner  at  Sveriges  Riksbank,  has  contributed  to  this  speech.  The  views 
expressed are my own, and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board 
and other employees of the Riksbank.  
My  view  is  that  monetary  policy  should  stabilise  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and 
unemployment around a long-run sustainable rate. In my opinion, this mandate for monetary 
policy  follows  from  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  and  the  government  bill  that  contained  the 
proposal  for  this  legislation.1  According  to  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  the  objective  of 
monetary policy is to maintain price stability. The Government Bill states that the Riksbank 
should, without prejudice to the objective of price stability, support the objectives of general 
economic  policy  with  the  aim  to  achieve  high  employment.  Accordingly,  the  mandate  is  to 
maintain  price  stability  and  to  attain  the  highest  possible  sustainable  employment.  In 
practice,  it  is  the  same  thing  as  stabilising  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and 
unemployment  around  a  long-run  sustainable  rate.  At  each  monetary  policy  meeting  it  is 
therefore  a  matter  of  choosing  the  repo-rate  path  that  according  to  the  corresponding 
forecasts for inflation and unemployment best stabilises these around the inflation target and 
a  long-run  sustainable  rate  respectively.  In  recent  years  I  have  therefore  entered 
reservations against the majority decision, preferring a lower repo-rate path as I consider this 
would lead to better target fulfilment for inflation and unemployment.  
Several  objections  to  my  view  of  monetary  policy  have  been  expressed  in  the  monetary 
policy discussion. As far as I understand it, these objections are that monetary policy should 
have  more  objectives  than  stabilising  inflation  and  unemployment  or  other  real-economy 
objectives  than  stabilising  unemployment.  The  objectives  of  price  stability  and  the  highest 
sustainable employment – from which stabilisation of inflation and unemployment follows – 
can thus be set aside for a period if one wants to slow down growth in mortgage lending or to 
hold  interest  rates  at  a  higher  level,  as  low  interest  rates  are  assumed  to  build  up 
imbalances.  But  several  objectives,  and  unclear  ones,  would  risk  making  monetary  policy 
arbitrary  and  disjointed.  This  is  contrary  to  the  government  bill,  according  to  which  the 
delegation  of  monetary  policy  to  an  independent  Riksbank  requires  a  clear  objective  for 
monetary policy. This is to ensure there is no scope for arbitrary monetary policy and so that 
the  Riksdag  (the  Swedish  parliament)  can  evaluate  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  the 
established objectives. In my  view,  it should only be possible to neglect price stability and 
highest sustainable employment for a limited period if there are clear signs of problems with 
financial stability, if there are no means of addressing these problems without setting aside 
price stability and highest sustainable employment and if it can be credibly demonstrated that 
another, for example a higher, repo-rate path would lead to better target fulfilment for inflation 
and  unemployment  in  the  longer  run.  This  last  condition  is  important.  The  government  bill 
that contained the proposal for the Sveriges Riksbank Act states namely that the policy rate 
may  only  be  used  to  prevent  a  financial  crisis  if  such  a  crisis  threatens  the  price  stability 
objective.  
In my opinion, there are no clear signs of problems with financial stability at present, there is 
no lack of means to maintain financial stability and if necessary to limit growth in mortgage 
                                                 
1  Sveriges Riksbank Act 1983:1385 and Government Bill 1997/98:40. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
lending, and nor is there any theoretical or empirical support for the view that a low policy 
rate would lead to imbalances in Sweden. If anything, a lower policy rate might instead mean 
that the banks have less incentive to seek short-term funding in foreign currency and thus the 
risks linked to this funding will decline. 
If the Riksbank succeeds in stabilising inflation around the target and unemployment around 
a sustainable rate, average inflation should be in line with the target over a longer period of 
time. In Sweden, however, inflation has significantly undershot the target of 2 per over the 
last 15 years. In other countries that have had a fixed inflation target for the same length of 
time  as  Sweden,  the  average  inflation  rate  has  instead  been  on  target.  At  the  same  time, 
inflation expectations in Sweden have been anchored to the target. According to established 
economic analysis, anchored inflation expectations lead to a negative relationship between 
average inflation and average unemployment. Then the long-run Phillips curve is no longer 
vertical, but down-ward sloping, which is confirmed by data. That the average inflation rate 
has  undershot  the  target  in  Sweden  has  thus  probably  led  to  substantial  costs  to  the  real 
economy  in  the  form  of  higher  average  unemployment.  This  makes  it  important  to  ensure 
that  average  inflation is  henceforth on  target  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  The  too  high 
average unemployment rate also means that the long-run sustainable rate of unemployment 
may have been overestimated.  
The Riksbank’s mandate for monetary policy 
Price stability and the highest sustainable rate of employment 
My view is thus that the Riksbank’s mandate for monetary policy means that monetary policy 
should  stabilise  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  unemployment  around  a  long-run 
sustainable  rate.  I  consider  that  this  follows  from  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  and  the 
government bill containing the proposal for the current Act. The Sveriges Riksbank Act states 
that the objective of the Riksbank’s monetary policy shall be to maintain price stability. The 
government  bill  also  states  that  the  Riksbank,  without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price 
stability,  should  also  support  the  objectives  of  general  economic  policy  with  the  aim  to 
achieve sustainable growth and high employment. 
The general economic policy that the Riksbank should support is very much a policy for full 
employment. According to the 2012 Spring Fiscal Policy Bill, the most important objective for 
the  present  government’s  economic  policy  is  full  employment.2  Full  employment  has  also 
been an important objective for previous governments. 
High employment is the same as the highest sustainable rate of employment. The Riksbank 
therefore writes at the beginning of every Monetary Policy Report that it strives to stabilise 
employment  around  a  path  that  is  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  The  Riksbank  therefore 
conducts what is generally referred to as flexible inflation targeting.  
If one follows this line of reasoning, then the Riksbank’s mandate for monetary policy is price 
stability and the highest sustainable rate of employment. It may be interesting to note in this 
context  that  the  Riksbank  has  in  principle  the  same  mandate  as  the  Federal  Reserve. 
According to the Federal Reserve Act, the US central bank should “promote effectively the 
goals of maximum employment and stable prices”. In this case too, maximum employment 
means maximum sustainable employment.  
It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  the  Riksbank’s  mandate  is  a  so-called  hierarchical  mandate, 
while  the  Federal  Reserve’s  mandate  is  a  so-called  dual  mandate.  With  a  hierarchical 
mandate,  price  stability  is  a  primary  objective  and  highest  sustainable  employment  is  a 
subordinate  objective,  while  with  a  dual  mandate  price  stability  and  highest  sustainable 
                                                 
2   Government bill 2011/12:100 page 29. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
employment  have  equal  status.  As  I  point  out  in  Svensson  (2004),  there  is  in  practice  no 
difference  between  these  mandates.  It  is  a  question  of  distinguishing  between  means  and 
variances,  what  is  known  in  statistics  as  first  and  second  moments.  With  regard  to  mean 
inflation and mean employment, the mandate is hierarchical. The central bank sets just one 
target, which is the inflation target. The highest sustainable rate of employment is not set by 
the central bank; it is determined by the structure of the economy and the way it functions, 
and  it  may  change  over  time.  It  can  only  be  estimated,  not  set,  by  the  central  bank.  With 
regard to the variance in inflation and employment, the mandate is dual. There it is a matter 
of  stabilising  both,  in  an  appropriate  trade-off.  This  applies  both  to  the  Riksbank  and  the 
Federal Reserve. 
Stabilising employment around a long-run sustainable path is in practice the same thing as 
stabilising unemployment around an estimated, long-run sustainable rate.3 One can therefore 
regard stabilising unemployment around a long-run sustainable rate as an operational target 
to stabilise employment around a long-run sustainable development path.  
According  to  the  government  bill,  the  Riksbank  should  support  the  objectives  of  general 
economic  policy  with  the  aim  to  achieve  not  only  high  employment  but  also  sustainable 
growth. However, the idea is hardly that there is any conflict between sustainable growth and 
high  employment.  The  Riksbank  writes  at  the  beginning  of  every  Monetary  Policy  Report 
that, in addition to stabilising employment, it also endeavours to stabilise production around a 
long-run  sustainable  development  path.  Nor  is  the  idea  here  that  there  is  any  conflict 
between  stabilising  production  and  stabilising  employment  around  a  long-run  sustainable 
path. However, in practice, the estimation of a sustainable path for production in addition to a 
sustainable path for employment requires assumptions about and estimates of sustainable 
average  working  hours,  sustainable  total  factor  productivity  and  a  sustainable  path  for  the 
capital stock. These assumptions and estimates introduce such large sources of error, and 
such a large degree of arbitrariness in a sustainable path for production, that in practice such 
a  path  provides  no  guidance  for  monetary  policy.  It  is  better  to  focus  on  stabilising 
unemployment  around  an  estimated  long-run  sustainable  rate.  To  estimate  the  long-run 
sustainable unemployment rate is not easy, but it is much easier than estimating a long-run 
sustainable  path  for  production.  Estimates  of  the  long-run  sustainable  unemployment  rate 
can  also  be  examined  and  evaluated,  while  estimates  of  a  long-run  sustainable  path  for 
production will in practice become more or less impossible to verify. 
With regard to specifying price stability, what measure of inflation should be used? There is a 
generally-accepted  principle  that  looking  a  few  years  ahead,  CPIF  inflation  is  the  relevant 
operational measure of inflation. The reason for this is that in the short term, CPI inflation is 
affected  directly  by  the  Riksbank’s  own  repo-rate  adjustments  and  monetary  policy  should 
not  react  to  these  temporary  effects.  CPIF  inflation  does  not  include  these  effects.  In  the 
longer run, these effects largely cancel one another out, and then it is CPI inflation that is 
relevant.4  
The  point  of  using  CPIF  inflation  as  the  operational  measure  is  thus  to  best  stabilise  CPI 
inflation in the longer run. In the longer run, monetary policy should therefore be assessed 
with regard to how well it stabilises CPI inflation around the target and unemployment around 
a long-run sustainable rate.  
                                                 
3   The employment gap is equal to the labour-force gap (the “participation” gap) minus the unemployment gap, 
where the “gap” refers to the difference between the actual rate and the long-run sustainable rate. If the labour 
force  gap  is  not  so  small  that  it  can  be  ignored,  the  employment  gap  can  be  stabilised  by  more  precisely 
stabilising unemployment around the sustainable unemployment rate minus the labour force gap. 
4   This is entirely in line with the recommendations in the assessment made by Goodhart and Rochet (2011), 
and which the Riksbank agreed with in its consultation response. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A more expansionary monetary policy gives better target fulfilment 
My view of monetary policy implies that at each monetary policy meeting one should choose 
the repo-rate path that with the corresponding forecasts for inflation and unemployment best 
stabilises inflation around the target and unemployment around a long-run sustainable rate. It 
should not be the case that a lower or higher repo-rate path leads to better target fulfilment 
for both inflation and unemployment. In other words, it should not be the case that inflation 
and the inflation forecast are below the target while unemployment and the unemployment 
forecast  are  above  a  long-run  sustainable  rate.  Based  on  Norwegian  central  bank  deputy 
governor  Qvigstad’s  (2005)  criteria  for  a  good  repo-rate  path,  this  can  be  worded  as:  For 
monetary  policy  to  be  well-balanced,  the  inflation  gap  (the  gap  between  inflation  and  the 
target) and the unemployment gap (the gap between the unemployment rate and the long-
run sustainable unemployment rate) should have the same sign. 
My  view  is  also  that  the  target  fulfilment  for  inflation  and  unemployment  during  the  entire 
forecast period is what is important, not just the target fulfilment at the end of the forecast 
period. For an unemployed person there is a major difference between getting a job in one or 
two years’ time and getting one in three years’ time. 
It  is  possible  to  assess  these  things  with  the  aid  of  the  so-called  four-panel  figures  that  I 
usually refer to at the monetary policy meetings, and which are included in the minutes of the 
meetings. These figures are central to monetary policy, as they make it possible to compare 
different  repo-rate  paths  and  to  see  what  level  of  target  fulfilment  for  inflation  and 
unemployment they result in. I consider these figures very useful when choosing a repo-rate 
path, when justifying the choice of the repo-rate path and when evaluating monetary policy. 
In Figure 1 I summarise some possible policy choices at the monetary policy meeting in April. 
The  figure  is  based  on  the  assessment  of  the  current  situation  and  the  economic  outlook 
presented  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Update  (Sveriges  Riksbank  2012c).5  The  figures  show 
clearly that a lower repo-rate path entails better target fulfilment, with inflation closer to the 
target and unemployment closer to a long-run sustainable rate. 
At the monetary policy meeting in April I considered that the forecast for foreign policy rates 
presented in the Update was too high, and that a much lower forecast in line with implied 
forward rates was more realistic. I also considered that the forecast for euro area growth was 
too optimistic. As I illustrated with a further figure at the meeting, an even lower repo-rate 
path would then be needed to best stabilise inflation and unemployment.  
Given  these  factors,  I  entered  a  reservation  against  the  decision,  preferring  a  much  lower 
repo-rate path than the one proposed by the majority. At the next monetary policy meeting in 
July, there will be a new assessment, with new four-panel figures.  
                                                 
5   So-called mean squared gaps are also shown, although they are not needed in this case to judge which of the 
alternative repo-rate paths leads to the best target attainment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Objections to monetary policy focusing on inflation and unemployment 
The Sveriges Riksbank Act, the government bill proposing it and economic analysis thus all 
provide strong support, in my opinion, for monetary policy aiming to stabilise inflation around 
the target and unemployment around a long-run sustainable rate. At the same time, it is clear 
that the majority of Executive Board members have conducted a monetary policy that aims to 
do something other than this. As I discuss in detail in Svensson (2011), the majority of the 
Executive  Board  began  to  raise  the  repo  rate  in  July  2010,  despite  the  forecast  for  CPIF 
inflation  being  below  the  target  and  the  forecast  for  unemployment  being  above  any 
reasonable long-run sustainable rate. In recent years, according to the forecasts made at the 
time of each monetary  policy meeting, a lower  repo-rate path than the one chosen by the 
majority would have led to better target fulfilment for both inflation and unemployment. If a 
more  expansionary  monetary  policy  had  been  conducted  instead,  as  advocated  by  my 
colleague Karolina Ekholm and myself, inflation would have been higher now and closer to 
the target, and unemployment would have been lower and closer to a long-run sustainable 
rate.  
So  what  are  the  most  important  objections  to  monetary  policy  stabilising  inflation  and 
unemployment as expressed in the monetary policy discussions at the Riksbank and which 
can thus justify conducting a different policy? 
An overall objection appears to be that monetary policy should have more objectives than 
stabilising  inflation  and  unemployment,  or  other  real  economic  objectives  than  stabilising 
unemployment.  Objectives  that  could  thus  justify  neglecting  the  objective  of  price  stability 
and highest possible sustainable employment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In line with this, it has been claimed that it is too narrow to merely focus on unemployment, 
that is, there are other or further variables than unemployment and employment that should 
be  real-economy  target  variables.  It  has  been  claimed  that  it  is  resource  utilisation  more 
generally that should be stabilised and that a broad approach to the assessment of resource 
utilisation is preferable. This means that resource utilisation in a more general and abstract 
sense would be the target variable, and not unemployment. Using several different measures 
of resource utilisation is highlighted as desirable as individual estimates are uncertain and a 
single measure does not capture the different dimensions of resource utilisation. 
It has also been said that it is not self-evident which measure of inflation should be used, that 
is,  that  some  other  index  than  the CPIF,  for  instance  the CPI,  could be  appropriate  as  an 
operational target variable within the forecast period. 
Another  objection  is  that  monetary  policy  should  also  be  aimed  at  maintaining  financial 
stability,  which  then  presumably  becomes  a  separate  objective  for  monetary  policy.  The 
objective  of  price  stability  and  highest  sustainable  rate  of  employment  could  then  be 
neglected  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  for  instance,  to  avoid  unsustainable  financial 
imbalances building up. 
A  more  precise  objection  is  that  monetary  policy  should  counteract  an  unsustainable 
development  in  household  indebtedness.  In  this  case  a  sustainable  development  of 
household  indebtedness  will  become  a  separate  objective  for  monetary  policy,  which  can 
justify  neglecting  the  objective  of  price  stability  and  the  highest  sustainable  rate  of 
employment. 
A more concrete variation of these objections assumes that there is a correlation between a 
low policy rate and the build-up of unsustainable financial imbalances. A normal level of the 
policy rate then becomes a separate target for monetary policy and can justify neglecting the 
objective of price stability and the highest sustainable rate of employment.6  
One kind of objection thus concerns the fact that, with regard to price stability, it is not as 
simple as to merely focus on the CPIF during the forecast period and the CPI in the longer 
run. It is actually not clear which target variable for inflation should be used. With regard to 
real  economic  stability,  it  is  not  as  simple  as  merely  focusing  on  employment  and 
unemployment. It is actually not clear which real-economy target variable should be used. 
The other kind of objection ultimately entails sustainable growth in mortgages and financial 
stability being separate objectives for monetary policy. One can then neglect the objective of 
price  stability  and  highest  sustainable  employment  for  a  while  in  an  attempt  to  slow  down 
mortgage  growth,  promote  financial  stability  and  maintain  a  higher  interest  rate,  as  it  is 
assumed that low interest rates would build up unsustainable financial imbalances. 
Clear targets mean that monetary policy is less arbitrary and easier to assess  
In  response  to  these  objections  I  would  like  to  state  that  several  and  unclear  targets  for 
monetary policy risks making it arbitrary and difficult to assess, which the work on formulating 
the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  aimed  to  counteract.  Delegating  monetary  policy  to  an 
independent Riksbank requires that monetary policy has clear objectives.7 
                                                 
6   See  the  discussion  of  the  “normalising  argument”  in  the  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  and 
Svensson (2011). 
7   “In the opinion of the government, a delegation of monetary policy to an independent Riksbank cannot take 
place  unless  the  objective  of  the  activities  is  clear.  An  independent  Riksbank  must  therefore  be  given  a 
democratically-anchored objective for its activities. If no objective is formulated, there would be scope for an 
arbitrary conduct of monetary policy. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  therefore  consider  it  important  that  monetary  policy  is  conducted  in  a  clear  and 
comprehensible  manner  so  that  it  can  be  evaluated  easily  and  fairly.  At  present,  the 
Riksbank  makes  a  qualitative  assessment  of  resource  utilisation  based  on  a  number  of 
different  measures.  This  contributes  to  making  the  justification  for  the  monetary  policy 
decisions  unclear  and  it  also  makes  it  more  difficult  to  assess  the  Riksbank  and  hold  it 
accountable.  
I thus instead want to focus on stabilising unemployment around a long-run sustainable rate 
and not on trying to stabilise a number of other, quite shaky measures of resource utilisation 
in  the  economy,  such  as  the  output  gap.  Compared  with  other  measures  of  resource 
utilisation, unemployment has a stronger link to household welfare, is better understood and 
more familiar to the public, is measured often and with fewer errors and is seldom revised. 
The  fact  that  other  measures  of  resource  utilisation  are  not  appropriate  as  targets  for 
monetary policy of course does not prevent them from playing an important role as indicators 
when assessing inflationary pressures and constructing inflation forecasts. 
Nor  do  I  see  that  there  is  any  support  for  a  qualitative  assessment  of  resource  utilisation 
instead  of  a  quantitative,  measurable  target  fulfilment.  In  economic  policy  it  is  now  well-
known  that  targets  must  be  measured  quantitatively  to  obtain  sufficient  weight  and  to  be 
fulfilled  in  practice.  “What  is  measured  gets  done,”  as  they  say.  This  is  why  there  is  an 
inflation target and why fiscal policy endeavours to have measurable surplus targets in public 
finances. It is thus important to have a measurable, quantitative target fulfilment not just for 
inflation but also for resource utilisation, and then in the form of unemployment.  
Monetary policy should not focus on financial stability as there are better instruments 
With  regard  to  the  view  that  monetary  policy  should  also  aim  to  limit  growth  in  mortgage 
lending and more generally to maintain financial stability, I would like to state the following: 
The policy rate is a blunt, indirect and inappropriate means of influencing financial stability in 
Sweden and it has a direct effect on inflation and unemployment. As I said in the beginning, 
the objective of price stability and highest sustainable employment should not be neglected 
out of consideration for financial stability, except in extreme circumstances and then only for 
a limited time. This only includes such situations where there are clear indications of threats 
to  financial  stability  and  where  there  are  no  means  to  manage  these  threats  without 
neglecting  the  objective  of  price  stability  and  the  highest  sustainable  employment.  At  the 
same time, there should be confidence that this type of temporary neglect will in the longer 
run  lead  to  a  better  development  of  inflation  and  unemployment.  This  last  condition  is 
important. According to the government bill, the monetary policy instruments should only be 
used to maintain price stability and they should only be used to prevent a financial crisis if 
this threatens the objective of price stability.8 
                                                                                                                                                      
  A further motive [for a clear objective] is that a far-reaching delegation of monetary policy should be combined 
with follow-ups and controls. The Riksdag as the Riksbank’s principal must therefore have the possibility to 
evaluate its activities on the basis of an objective that is set for the activities.” (Government bill 1997/98:40 
p. 52) 
8   “The  Riksbank  shall  also  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system.  This  is  a  fundamental  task  for  the 
Riksbank and not an actual objective for its activities. The corresponding task applies to the ESCB. It could be 
claimed that this task could come into conflict with the Riksbank’s objective of price stability, as the Riksbank 
could in certain situations use the policy rate to avoid a crisis in the banking system. However, the monetary 
policy  instruments  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  government’s  proposal,  only  be  used  to  maintain  price 
stability. The Riksbank has at its disposal  other instruments for managing such situations, for instance, the 
possibility to grant liquidity assistance, as lender of last resort. At the same time, there may be situations in 
which a crisis  in the  payment system threatens to jeopardise the price stability target. In these situations it 
should  of  course  be  possible  to  use  the  monetary  policy  instruments  to  prevent  a  crisis.”  (Government  bill 
1997/98:40 p. 54, my italics) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
In  the  present  circumstances  in  Sweden  I  therefore  see  no  clear  signs  of  problems  with 
financial stability, there is no lack of means to maintain financial stability and nor is there any 
reason  to  believe  that  higher  policy  rates  would  provide  better  outcomes  for  inflation  and 
unemployment in the longer run. I shall elaborate further on this. 
Financial stability can be defined as a situation where the financial system is able to perform 
its  most  important  functions  –  converting  savings  into  funding,  enabling  risk  management 
and mediating payments – and has sufficiently large resilience to shocks that may threaten 
these functions. Under normal circumstances, one can maintain financial stability with the aid 
of  financial  supervision  and  regulation  and  by  publishing  analyses  and  leading  indicators, 
which can warn of threats to stability at an early stage. When it comes to financial stability, 
monetary  policy  should  thus  be  the  last  line  of  defence,  not  the  first.  In  Sweden,  stricter 
capital requirements for the banks and minimum levels for liquidity measured by the Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the share of stable funding measured by the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio (NSFR), according to the Basel III agreement and in accordance with the Riksbank’s 
recommendations in the latest Financial Stability Report (Sveriges Riksbank 2012a), provide 
better means to manage financial stability than the policy rate.  
A view is sometimes expressed in the monetary policy debate that monetary policy should 
give consideration to the risks of imbalances resulting from low real interest rates over a long 
period  of  time.  There  is  a  lot  of  talk  about  a  low  policy  rate  entailing  risks  for  rapid  credit 
growth  that  will  lead  to  high  leverage  and  greater  risk  in  the  financial  sector.  However,  I 
consider that there is no theoretical or empirical support for a low policy rate in itself leading, 
for instance, to excessively high leverage in the Swedish financial system. This is because 
the Swedish system is dominated by a few major banks and does not have a large difficult-
to-regulate shadow-banking system of financial intermediaries and broker-dealers.  
Experiences  from  different  crises  indicate  that  it  is  not  low  policy  rates  in  themselves  that 
lead  to  imbalances  and  threats  to  financial  stability.  It  is  if  the  low  policy  rates  lead  to  an 
overheated  economy  that  problems  arise,  such  as  in  Sweden  prior  to  the  crisis  at  the 
beginning of the 1990s and more recently in Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Spain. It is the 
overheated  economy  that  entails  exaggerated  optimism,  with  for  instance  property  prices 
being pushed up above levels that are fundamentally motivated, an excessive construction 
boom and risky investments. It is not the low interest rates in themselves. Low interest rates 
that do not lead to an overheated, but to a balanced, development in the real economy and 
inflation do not appear to entail imbalances. There is thus hardly any support for low interest 
rates  in  themselves  causing  problems  for  financial  stability  or  for  high  interest  rates  in 
themselves improving financial stability.9 
The current situation in Sweden is rather that higher policy rates may have a negative effect 
on  financial  stability.  Swedish  banks  are  now  choosing  to  fund  themselves  by  short-term 
borrowing in foreign currencies, which is cheaper than borrowing in Sweden as interest rates 
are higher here than abroad. But this entails some risks as foreign investors are an unstable 
source of funding (Sveriges Riksbank 2012a). When the policy rate in Sweden is raised in 
relation to interest rates abroad, it becomes even more attractive for the banks to borrow in 
                                                 
9  
Is the United States an exception? Hardly. A very fragile financial sector arose there without resilience, as a 
result of a lack of regulation, exaggerated confidence in risk management, very excessive leverage, gigantic 
hidden off-balance sheet liabilities and large information problems with a large spread of uncertain assets. A 
modest  shock  in  the  form  of  loan  losses  due  to  untenable  sub-prime  mortgages  with  low-quality  credit 
assessments then led to a major financial crisis. It was not low interest rates that led to this lack of resilience 
and  to  these  untenable  sub-prime  loans,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  higher  interest  rates  would  have 
prevented the crisis. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
foreign currency. This is thus an example of a situation where raising the policy rate will if 
anything increase the risks to financial stability.10 
real  economy.  However,  Claussen,  Jonsson  and  Lagerwall  show 
Using policy rate to influence housing prices is costly 
There are also many references to developments in housing prices in the monetary policy 
debate.  Monetary  policy  would  appear  to  have  very  little  effect  on  housing  prices.  If  one 
nevertheless uses the policy rate to influence housing prices (and thereby mortgage growth) 
this will lead to large costs to the real economy. A study by Claussen, Jonsson and Lagerwall 
(2011),  which  is  included  in  the  Riksbank’s  inquiry  into  the  risks  in  the  Swedish  housing 
market shows, for instance, that it would have been very costly in terms of both production 
and  inflation  to  try  to  prevent  the  upswing  in  housing  prices  from  2004  onwards  using 
monetary policy. Keeping housing prices at a long-run trend level in 2004–2010 would have 
required repo-rate increases over several years of up to 5 percentage points in both 2006 
and 2007. GDP growth would then have been on average almost 2 percentage points lower 
up  to  2010,  which  corresponds  to an  accumulated  GDP  loss  of  around  12  per  cent.  CPIF 
inflation would have been on average 3 percentage points lower during the same period. The 
study confirms for Sweden what several other international studies have concluded, such as 
Assenmascher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010). 
One  argument  that  has  been  put  forward  for  trying  to  slow  down  an  increase  in  housing 
prices is that future falls in housing prices would have negative effects on future inflation and 
the 
the 
macroeconomic effects of a 20 per cent fall in housing prices would be relatively limited and 
possible to counteract by adopting a more expansionary monetary policy. This is shown in 
more  detail  in  the  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting  held  in  June  2010,  when  I 
presented simulations of how expansionary monetary policy can stabilise CPIF inflation and 
GDP growth following such a fall in housing prices (Sveriges Riksbank 2010).  
According to Finansinspektionen’s (the Swedish financial supervisory authority) report on the 
Swedish mortgage market (Finansinspektionen 2012), Swedish mortgages do not constitute 
any threat to financial stability at present. Mortgage borrowers have  a good debt-servicing 
ability  and  pass  stringent  stress  tests,  credit  assessments  are  thorough,  the  loan-to-value 
ratio for new mortgages is declining and the loan-to-value ceiling appears to be effective. If 
the  growth  in  mortgages  or  the  loan-to-value  ratio  were  to  develop  in  a  problematic  way 
further ahead, it is possible to lower the mortgage cap. This is a better means of influencing 
growth in mortgages and loan-to-value ratios than using the policy rate. 
All in all, I consider there is no reason to neglect the objective of price stability and highest 
sustainable  employment  to  conduct  some  form  of  “leaning  against  the  wind”  policy, 
conducting tight monetary policy in the belief that one is thereby improving financial stability, 
for  instance,  by  limiting  mortgage  growth.  I  cannot  see  that  there  is  any  theoretical  or 
empirical support for a higher policy rate in the current conditions being able to significantly 
improve financial stability in Sweden. To achieve this there are currently better tools within 
macroprudential policy, for instance, capital adequacy rules, a mortgage cap and minimum 
levels for the LCR and NSFR. These instruments have a greater and more direct effect on 
financial  stability  and  mortgage  growth.  With  the  Riksbank’s  work  on  its  financial  stability 
reports and Finansinspektionen’s work on its report on the Swedish mortgage market these 
institutions have very good information on potential risks. 
I  think  that  we  should  do  in  Sweden  what  they  now  appear  to  be  doing  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  that  is,  conduct  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy  separately,  with 
that 
                                                 
10   However, the risks of borrowing abroad can to a large degree be managed with the minimum levels for the 
Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  and  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  in  each  separate  currency,  in  accordance  with  the 
recommendations made in the Riksbank’s most recent Financial Stability Report (2012a). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
separate  policy  committees  with  separate  objectives  and  instruments  but,  especially  given 
the  overlap  of  some  committee  members,  with  full  information  on  which  policy  is  being 
conducted  in  each  area.  This  is  also  natural,  as  financial  stability  has  a  longer  cycle  and 
thereby  needs  less  frequent  decision-making  than  monetary  policy.  The  well-functioning 
relationship between separately conducted monetary policy and fiscal policy in Sweden can, 
in  my  opinion,  serve  as  a  model  for  how  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial-stability policy should be. 
If one mixes together monetary policy and financial stability, it also becomes more or less 
impossible to evaluate monetary policy. Then an overly tight monetary policy can be blamed 
on an endeavour to maintain financial stability. 
Inflation and unemployment in the longer run 
Average inflation has undershot the target 
If the Riksbank succeeds in stabilising inflation around the target and unemployment around 
a sustainable rate, average inflation should be in line with the target over a longer period of 
time. Indeed, “without prejudice to the price stability objective” can be seen as making sure 
that average inflation over a longer period of time is close to 2 per cent. But during the period 
1997–2011  average  CPI  inflation  in  Sweden  was  1.4  per  cent,  measured  using  real-time 
data.11 
One cannot of course expect average inflation to have been exactly on target over the last 
15 years. To get an idea of what is possible, however, we can compare the results in other 
countries that have had a fixed inflation target as long as Sweden, that is, since the early 
1990s.  It  is  also  reasonable  to  exempt  the  very  first  years  of  the  new  inflation-targeting 
regime  for  Sweden  and  other  countries.  Canada  has  had  an  inflation  target  since  1991, 
which  from  the  end  of  1995  is  2 per  cent  and  its  average  inflation  rate  during  the  period 
1996–2011 is 2.0 per cent. The United Kingdom has had an inflation target from the end of 
1992,  which  was  however  modified  in  2003/2004.  Up  to  the  end  of  2003,  the  UK  inflation 
target  was  2.5  per  cent,  when  measured  using  the  RPIX  price  index,  and  the  average 
inflation rate in 1996–2003 was 2.5 per cent. With effect from 2004 the United Kingdom has 
had an inflation target of 2 per cent for the CPI, which cannot be regarded as any significant 
change in level as inflation measured as the CPI is on average 0.75 percentage points lower 
than when measured using RPIX.12 The average inflation rate for the period 2004–2007 was 
2.0 per  cent,  while  the  average  for  the  crisis  years  2008–2011  is  higher,  at  3.4 per  cent. 
However,  given  the  higher  rate  of  unemployment  in  the  United  Kingdom  stemming  from 
the  crisis,  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  means  that  inflation  should  overshoot  the 
target. Australia has had an inflation target of between 2 and 3 per cent for CPI inflation 
over  the  cycle  since  1993,  and  its  average  inflation  rate  in  the  period  1996–2011  was 
2.7 per cent.13  
                                                 
11   An older method of calculating the rate of inflation with an unchanged consumer basket was used in real-time 
data prior to 2005. Using the current method of calculating the inflation rate as the percentage change in the 
CPI,  average  inflation  was  1.3  per  cent  during  the  period  1997–2011,  but  real-time  data  are  more  relevant 
when evaluating monetary policy. See Sveriges Riksbank (2004). 
12   In the period 1992-1996 the target was expressed as 2.5 per cent or lower in terms of the RPIX. RPIX = Retail 
Price  Index.  In  the  United  Kingdom  the  CPI  corresponds  to  the  HICP  price  index.  Since  1993  the  average 
HICP inflation rate has been 0.75 percentage points lower than average RPIX inflation.  
13   New Zealand has had an inflation target since 1990, but its target has been adjusted upwards twice and thus 
one cannot say that it has had a fixed inflation target. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How have things turned out for the large economies, the euro area and the United States? 
The  euro  area  has  had  a  target  for  inflation,  although  during  a  shorter  period  than  the 
countries mentioned earlier. The target is that inflation should be below but close to 2 per 
cent. The average inflation rate in the euro area in the period 2000–2011 was 2.1 per cent. 
The United States, on the other hand, did not have an explicit inflation target until the Federal 
Reserve announced a target of 2 per cent for PCE inflation in January 2012.14 However, a 
common view is that the Federal Reserve has even prior to this targeted a core inflation rate 
of 2 per cent or somewhat lower. The average for core CPI inflation in the United States in 
the period 2000–2011 was 2.0 per cent and for core PCE inflation 1.9 per cent. 
Sweden differs from these examples in that inflation in Sweden has both fallen below and 
deviated more from the target. Figure 2 shows that all of the five-year moving averages for 
CPI inflation are well below 2 per cent. The five-year average of CPIX/CPIF inflation has also 
been  well  below  the  target,  apart  from  the  period  2003–2004.15  As  the  average  for  CPI 
inflation is so far below 2 per cent, especially in comparison with other countries that have 
had  inflation  targets  as  long  as  Sweden,  one  could  perhaps  claim  that  the  Riksbank  has 
neglected the price stability objective. However, an even more important question is whether 
the missed target has also led to costs to the real economy. 
Inflation expectations anchored to the target entail a sloping long-run Phillips curve  
The standard response to the question of whether missing the target has led to costs to the 
real  economy  is  no.  This  is  because  average  unemployment  is  independent  of  monetary 
policy  and  the  inflation  rate.  This  is  in  turn  because  inflation  expectations  are  assumed  to 
adapt  to  actual  inflation.  The  long-term  Phillips  curve,  which  illustrates  the  relationship 
between average inflation and average unemployment, then becomes vertical, and average 
unemployment thus becomes independent of the average inflation rate. 
In Sweden, however, inflation expectations as measured according to TNS Sifo Prospera’s 
survey have stabilised around 2 per cent, despite the average inflation rate being lower. This 
is  illustrated  in  Figure  2,  which  shows  the  five-year  average  of  expectations  one  and  two 
years  ahead  for  all  of  those  interviewed  from  1996.  The  Riksbank  has  thus  succeeded  in 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  around  2  per  cent,  despite  actual  inflation  being  lower  on 
average.  That  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  to  the  target  is  good,  and  makes  it 
possible  for  the  Riksbank  to  better  stabilise  unemployment  without  inflation  fluctuating  too 
much.  
                                                 
14   PCE stands for personal consumption expenditure. 
15   CPIX/CPIF refers to CPIX inflation up to the end of the first quarter of 2008 ad CPIF inflation from the start of 
the second quarter of 2008. The CPIX excludes the effects of indirect taxes, subsidies and mortgage costs 
from the CPI. The CPIF excludes the direct effects on the CPI of changes in mortgage rates. The average 
CPIX/CPIF inflation is 0.4 percentage points lower than the target when measured using real-time data for the 
period 1997–2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 But if inflation expectations are anchored to the target at the same time as average inflation 
is deviating from the target, this means that the long-run Phillips curve is no longer vertical, 
but sloping downwards. This relationship is supported by data and shown in Figure 3. The 
red circles show the outcome for unemployment and the gap between CPI inflation and the 
target of 2 per cent from the first quarter of 1998 and up to the end of the fourth quarter of 
2011. The black line is an estimated long-run Phillips curve.  
If the average inflation rate would deviate substantially from the target, it is hardly likely that 
inflation  expectations  would  still  remain  anchored  to  the  target.  The  estimated  long-run 
Phillips curve is therefore reasonably only relevant in moderate deviations from the target. It 
is thus marked as a dashed line for average inflation that deviates more than 1 percentage 
point  from  the  target.  That  the  long-run  Phillips  curve  is  no  longer  vertical  for  inflation 
expectations  anchored  to  the  target  has  been  noted  for  the  United  States  in  the  period  
2000–2011 by Jeffrey Fuhrer (2011) at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Higher average unemployment when average inflation undershoots the target 
The right-hand square on the long-run Phillips curve in Figure 3 shows an average inflation 
rate that is 0.6 percentage points below the target, which thus corresponds to the deviation in 
Sweden during the period 1997–2011. This deviation gives an average unemployment rate 
of 7.3 per cent. The left-hand square corresponds to an average inflation that is on target, at 
2  per  cent,  which  gives  an  average  unemployment  rate  of  6.5  per  cent.  The  difference 
between  these  figures  is  thus  0.8  percentage  points.  For  Sweden  it  thus  appears  that  an 
average inflation rate 0.6 percentage points below the target has led to an 0.8 percentage 
points higher average unemployment rate over the past 15 years than would have been the 
case if average inflation has been on target.16 This estimate appears fairly robust for various 
assumptions.  If  one,  for  example,  uses  CPIX  and  CPIF  inflation  (which  on  average  have 
undershot  the  target  by  less  than  the  CPI  inflation)  the  estimated  long-run  Phillips  curve 
becomes somewhat flatter and gives roughly the same increased average unemployment. 
The fact that average unemployment that is compatible with average inflation on target is so 
much lower than actual average unemployment also indicates that estimates of the long-run 
sustainable unemployment based on historical averages may have a significant upward bias. 
                                                 
16   A 95-per cent confidence interval for the increased average unemployment is limited by 0.8 ± 0.3 percentage 
points and thus lies between 0.5 and 1.1 percentage points. Alternative assumptions and sample periods give 
roughly the same or a larger increase in average unemployment. For details, see Svensson (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
A higher average unemployment rate by 0.8 percentage points over 15 years is of course a 
very large cost to the real economy of undershooting the inflation target. At present, a higher 
unemployment  rate  of  0.8  percentage  points  corresponds  to  around  40,000  jobs.  In 
comparison, it can be mentioned that the government’s own calculations show that the four 
stages in the earned income tax credit and the changes in unemployment insurance reduce 
unemployment  in  the  long  run  by  0.6  and  0.7  percentage  points  respectively.17  The 
respective reforms are thus expected to have a slightly smaller effect on unemployment than 
the calculated real-economic cost of inflation on average undershooting the target over the 
past 15 years. 
Implications for future monetary policy 
Why  average  inflation  in  Sweden  has  undershot  the  target  over  the  past  15  years  is  a 
separate  and  important  question  that  requires  thorough  examination.  I  do  not  intend  to 
discuss this here. But a clear conclusion for future monetary policy is that it is important that 
the  Riksbank  ensures  that  average  inflation  is  actually  close  to  2  per  cent  over  a  longer 
period of time and that it does not fall as low as during the past 15 years. This means that the 
inflation target must be regarded as symmetrical and that it should constitute a central point 
for the fluctuations in inflation. One should thus not be more afraid of overshooting the target 
during  a  limited  period  than  undershooting  it.  It  is  particularly  appropriate  to  overshoot  the 
target when unemployment is higher than its long-run sustainable rate, as it can then reach 
its long-run sustainable rate sooner.  
The  usual  way  of  applying  the  current  inflation  target  entails  that  even  if  the  target  is 
undershot over a period of time the central bank still endeavours to maintain inflation in line 
with the target. Thus the central bank does not attempt to compensate for the previously low 
inflation with a period when inflation is above the target. To ensure that average inflation is 
on target over a longer period of time, the central bank could instead have a so-called price 
level target that means the price level should be stabilised around a price level path that rises 
by 2 per cent a year. Such a price level target would mean that average inflation is at 2 per 
cent over a longer period of time. The advantages and disadvantages of a price level target 
have  been  discussed  at  length  in  academic  literature  (see  for  instance  Bank  of  Canada 
2011). Since a downward-sloping long-run Phillips curve makes it important to keep average 
inflation over a longer period of time on target, this strengthens the arguments in favour of a 
price level target.  
A less dramatic change would be a target in the form of a moving average of inflation over a 
longer period of time, for instance five or ten years (Nessén and Vestin 2005). The Australian 
central bank has such a target for its monetary policy: to attain an average inflation rate of 
between 2 and 3 per cent over the economic cycle. However, the central banks in Canada 
and the United Kingdom appear to have succeeded well in keeping average inflation close to 
the inflation target without specifying a target for a longer period.18  
As undershooting the inflation target over a long period of time would appear to have major 
costs  to  the  real  economy  in  the  form  of  increased  average  unemployment,  it  is  thus 
important that monetary policy henceforth is conducted so that average inflation is close to 
the  target  over  a  longer  period  of  time.  It  is  an  open  question  whether  this  requires  some 
further specification or change to the current inflation target. 
                                                 
17   Swedish government (2012, p. 121, table 5.2). 
18   In  their  evaluation  of  monetary  policy  1995-2005,  Giavazzi  and  Mishkin  (2006,  p.  77)  noted:  “However,  in 
recent years the Riksbank has persistently undershot its inflation target; this has been associated with a loss 
in  output  and  higher  unemployment.”  They  recommended  that  the  Riksbank  should  ensure  that  it  neither 
undershoots nor overshoots the inflation target over a long period of time, that is, average inflation should be 
in line with the target over a longer period of time.  
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  summary,  in  this  speech  I  have  pointed  out  that  it  follows  from  the  Sveriges  
Riksbank  Act  and  the  associated  Government  Bill  that  the  mandate  for  monetary  policy  is 
price  stability  and  highest  sustainable  employment.  I  have  also  explained  that  this  means 
that  the  Riksbank  shall  stabilise  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent  and 
unemployment  around a  long-run sustainable  rate.  A  lower  repo  rate in  the  last  few  years 
would have led to better target attainment for both inflation and unemployment. At the same 
time, financial stability and mortgage growth under current circumstances provide no reason 
for  keeping  inflation  below  target  and  unemployment  above  a  long-run  sustainable  rate. 
Financial stability and mortgage growth can be better handled with the instruments available 
in macroprudential policy. It is also likely that average unemployment has been higher in the 
last 15 years because average inflation has undershot the target. Therefore it is important 
that average inflation over a longer period is kept in line with the target. 
References 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Katrin,  and  Stefan  Gerlach  (2010),  “Monetary  policy  and  financial 
imbalances: Facts and fiction”, Economic Policy, July 2010, 439–482.  
Bank of Canada (2011), “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – 
November 2011”, www.bankofcanada.ca. 
Claussen,  Carl  Andreas,  Magnus  Jonsson  and  Björn  Lagerwall  (2011),  “A  macroeconomic 
analysis of housing prices in Sweden”, The Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks in the Swedish 
housing market, April 2011, p. 67–95. 
Fuhrer, Jeffrey (2011), “Inflation Expectations and the Evolution of U.S. Inflation”, Policy Brief 
No. 11-4, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, www.bos.frb.org. 
Giavazzi,  Franscesco  and  Frederic  S.  Mishkin (2006),  An  evaluation  of  Swedish  monetary 
policy 1995–2005, 200/607:RFR 1. 
Goodhart,  Charles  and  Jean-Charles  Rochet  (2011),  Assessment  of  the  Riksbank’s 
monetary policy and work with financial stability 2005–2010, 2010/11:RFR 5.  
Nessén, Marianne and David Vestin (2005), “Average inflation targeting”, Journal of Money, 
Credit, and Banking 37(5), 837–63. 
Qvigstad,  Jan  F.  (2005),  “When  does  an  interest  rate  path  ‘look  good’?  Criteria  for  an 
appropriate  future  interest  rate  path  –  A  practician’s  approach”,  Staff  Memo  No.  2005/6, 
Norges Bank. 
SFS  1988:1385,  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  in  its  wording  as  of  1  July  2011,  Stockholm: 
Riksdagen. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2004), “Commentary” [on Laurence H. Meyer, “Practical Problems and 
Obstacles  to  Inflation  Targeting”],  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review  84(4) 
(July/August 2004), 161–164. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2011),  “Practical  Monetary  Policy,  Examples  from  Sweden  and  the 
United States”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011, 289–332. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2012), “The possible unemployment cost of average inflation below a 
credible target”, Working Paper, www.larseosvensson.net.  
Swedish  government  (1997),  Riksbankens  ställning  (the  position  of 
government bill 1997/98:40. 
Swedish government (2012), 2012 Spring Fiscal Policy Bill, government bill 2011/12:100. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2004), “Changes in Calculation Methods for the Inflation Rate,” Inflation 
Report 2004/2, 45–48.   
the  Riksbank), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
Sveriges Riksbank (2010), “Minutes of the monetary policy meeting, no. 3”, 30 June 2010. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012a), Financial Stability Report 2012:1, 1 June 2012. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012b), “Minutes of the monetary policy meeting, no. 2”, 17 April 2012. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012b), “Monetary Policy Update April 2012”, 18 April 2012. 
 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
