Choongsoo Kim: Out of the Great Recession – an EME’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Goethe  University,  Frankfurt,
16 April 2012. 
 The  author  acknowledges  the  contributions  by  Dr  Jun  Il  Kim  and  Dr  Hyun  Jeong  Kim  of  the  Bank  of  Korea 
Economic Research Institute for the preparation of the presentation. The usual disclaimer also applies. 
Guten abend, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am truly honored to speak here today at Goethe University, a prestigious institution that has 
been  home  to  19 Nobel  laureates.  I  would  like  to  extend  my  deepest  gratitude  to 
Prof. Siekmann  for  inviting  me,  and  to  Prof.  Klump,  Prof.  Luise  Hölscher,  Dr.  Raettig  and 
Consul General Hahn for their welcoming and congratulatory remarks. I wish also to thank 
Prof. Gerlach, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, for being with us today. 
The 2008 global financial crisis was a true test of our modern financial system’s resilience. 
But  unfortunately  the  system  failed  this  test,  triggering  severe  dislocation  of  the  world 
economy,  both  advanced  and  emerging.  And  in  the  early  stage  at  least  of  the  crisis, 
advanced  market  economies  –  or  AMEs,  as  I  will  call  them  –  contracted  rapidly,  at  paces 
comparable  to  during  the  1930s  Great  Depression.  The  lessons  learned  from  the  Great 
Depression, and from eighty years of macroeconomic research, were however not wasted. 
Active  and  concerted  policy  efforts  were  deployed  by  major  economies, with  extraordinary 
monetary easing and fiscal stimulus undertaken together with financial bailouts. And thanks 
to these efforts the world economy was able to avoid another Great Depression, although not 
the Great Recession.  
Major AMEs do appear to be pulling themselves out of the recession at present, but only at 
paces much slower than seen in the past. It is currently taking them four years or longer to 
return to their pre-crisis peak GDP levels, whereas in the past it took on average only one or 
two years. And AMEs’ post-crisis recoveries appear even further from complete when viewed 
against the  GDP  levels  implied  by  their  long-term  growth  trends. The  US  economy  is  well 
behind  its  long-term  trend  growth,  despite  positive  signs  of  recovery  such  as  falling 
unemployment  and  improving  consumer  sentiment.  And  Germany  seems  to  be  doing  only 
slightly  better.  Both  countries’  GDP  levels  remain  far  below  where  they  would  have  been 
absent the global financial crisis. In this respect, we can see how the real cost of the crisis 
has been truly enormous. 
As we enter the fourth year since the global crisis, I believe it is time that we all think about 
how to revive growth (and I don’t mean just a more rapid recovery here, but truly sustainable 
long-term growth) while at the same time working to consolidate the gains we have made on 
the  financial  front  thus  far.  And  it  is  of  course  undeniable  that  avoidance  of  disorderly 
sovereign  defaults  is  a  must  for  financial  stability  and  economic  recovery.  But  it  is  at  the 
same time true that sovereign debt sustainability will be at serious risk if the current anemic 
growth continues. In light of this one may argue, and I agree, that financial resources have 
until now been directed too much toward the financing of unsustainable fiscal deficits and too 
little toward productive investment and growth. Financial resources are not unlimited, and for 
the sake of growth they should flow toward where productivity growth is high.  
In what follows, I will expound my  views on the  multi-faceted challenges faced by the world 
economy, as it struggles to exit the current crisis and embark on a path of sustainable growth 
going forward. I will then move on to highlight the importance of finding a global solution for 
growth,  with  some  supporting  preliminary  evidence.  Finally,  I  will  touch  upon  central  banks’ 
crucial role in our search for this global solution, before I finally conclude.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Challenges ahead for revival of growth 
I. 
Let  me  begin  by  discussing  the  fiscal  challenges  faced  by  AMEs,  and  the  implications  of 
these challenges to them for growth. 
As we all know, the troubled public finances of many AMEs – particularly those in Europe – 
are at the heart of the slow and tepid post-crisis recovery. The unsustainable sovereign debt 
and depleted fiscal space have not only limited the scope for provision of real and financial 
safety nets via fiscal policy, but also become the major source of financial uncertainty. Fiscal 
contraction  has  been  forced  at  a  time  when  stimulus  is  most  needed,  and  banks  have 
undertaken balance sheet deleveraging at a time when lending to the private sector is critical 
for investment and consumption. The combined results have been highly contractionary for 
the economy.  
The  IMF  projects  that  the  average  public  debt  ratio  among  G7  countries  will  rise  to  over 
110 percent  by  2016,  with  shrinking  but  still  substantial  fiscal  deficits  in  the  US  and  other 
countries over the projection horizon. Such high levels of public debt should be expected to 
crowd out productive investment for growth and distort resource allocation. Indeed, several 
recent  studies  have  found  that  high  public  debt  at  or  above  85  percent  of  GDP  begins  to 
affect economic growth negatively.  
For many debt-ridden AMEs, therefore, public debt reduction has obvious merits. But such 
fiscal  consolidation  may  unfortunately  bear fruit only  after  a  long  spell  of  painful  economic 
contraction. And it could even defeat its purposes, at least in the short run, and result in a 
higher, rather than lower, public debt ratio – especially in an economy where the public debt 
ratio is already high and the fiscal multiplier large. To illustrate this possibility, consider an 
economy in which the public debt is currently 100 percent of GDP, and the government is 
considering a one percent of GDP fiscal tightening. A simple, albeit speculative, calculation 
shows that such fiscal tightening will decrease the debt ratio by one percentage point if the 
fiscal multiplier is small enough, but push it up one percentage point if for example the fiscal 
multiplier is 1.5.  
Of course, the possibility of a negative or non-Keynesian fiscal multiplier is not totally unreal – 
some  anecdotal  evidence  of  so-called  expansionary  fiscal  consolidation  is  available.  This 
evidence is difficult to generalize, however, given its limited control for other factors that could 
have driven the expansions observed, such as expansionary monetary policy, income policy 
to curb wage increases, or currency depreciation (Perotti, 2011).  
If  the  Keynesian  fiscal  multiplier  is  taken  as  the  rule,  the  case  for  debt  reduction  through 
fiscal  tightening  could  be  further  challenged  by  the  behavior  of  the  risk  premium  in 
government  bond  yields.  To  be  specific,  preliminary  evidence  suggests  aggravation  of  the 
prospects  for  growth  to  cause  this  risk  premium  to  rise.  The  combination  of  a  higher  risk 
premium and lower growth would then worsen the autonomous debt dynamics. Indeed, the 
interest  rate-growth  rate  differential  has  widened  significantly  in  many  Eurozone  countries 
since  the  global  crisis.  Moreover,  historical  decomposition  of  the  changes  in  debt  ratios  – 
using  a  simple  debt  dynamics  equation  –  shows  that  the  worsening  of  autonomous  debt 
dynamics driven by interest rate-growth rate differentials accounts for debt ratio increases of 
between 5 to 15 percentage points for Eurozone countries.  
In these respects, the latest IMF World Economic Outlook for the Eurozone is alarming. Italy 
and  Spain  are  both  projected  to  register  negative  growth  for  this  year  –  at  –2.2  and  
–1.7 percent, respectively. And this outlook and the Keynesian multiplier story might explain 
why  government  bond  yields  in  the  southern  periphery  remain  elevated  despite  the 
significantly improved market liquidity seen in recent months. 
If  fiscal  tightening  alone  cannot  solve  the  problem,  one  may  turn  to  the  possible  role  of 
monetary policy. And despite the arguments to the contrary, I agree that the unconventional 
and  extraordinary  monetary  policies  adopted  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  have  certainly 
been pivotal in calming the markets and preventing even worse sovereign debt dynamics – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
at least up until now. And even more importantly, that monetary policy has bought us time for 
necessary fiscal adjustment and financial restructuring.  
But the welcome role of these policies in crisis management is now rapidly approaching its 
limit.  As  Chairman  Bernanke  has  put  it,  monetary  policy  is  not  a  panacea,  and  further 
monetary  easing  could  do  more  harm  than  good  when  the  financial  markets  are  already 
flooded with cheap liquidity but remain nonetheless timid in their lending to the private sector. 
Financial  repression  –  a  dosage  of  low  nominal  interest  rates  combined  with  moderate 
inflation – was the key driver of the post-war debt reduction in AMEs (Reinhart and Sbrancia, 
2011). But its relevance for the world of today should be discounted, given the current high 
cross-border  mobility  of  capital  and  the  relatively  short  average  maturity  of  the  sovereign 
debt of AMEs, at 5 to 6 years. A final, but not less significant, concern is that the continued 
availability of cheap money may also offer fertile ground for unhealthy speculation and moral 
hazard. 
Moving on now, how about emerging market economies? What challenges do they face?  
Emerging market economies – or EMEs in short – were largely innocent bystanders during 
the  global  crisis.  And  they  weathered  the  crisis  relatively  well,  based  upon  their  strong 
fundamentals  including  their  sound  fiscal  positions.  They  remain  vulnerable  to  real  and 
financial developments in AMEs, however, simply because of their close interconnectedness 
with AMEs – in both international trade and finance. More than 40 percent of EME exports go 
to  the  European  and  US  markets,  while  50  to  90  percent  of  their  external  funding  is 
intermediated by European banks. Given these linkages, the stagnant growth and financial 
retrenchment in AMEs have direct implications for EMEs. And the financial deleveraging by 
Eurozone  banks  has  indeed  been  a  major  source  of  uncertainty  in  the  foreign  exchange 
markets of EMEs in recent years.  
Cross-border linkages are at work even on the policy front. The monetary policies of the ECB 
and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  have  been  the  key  determinants  of  the  level  and  volatility  of 
global liquidity. EMEs do also of course contribute to the creation and destruction of global 
liquidity.  But  their  contribution  is  dwarfed  by  that  of  the  AMEs.  And  of  particular  note, 
negative  financial  spillovers  have  always  been  unidirectional,  from  AMEs  to  EMEs, 
manifesting themselves in the forms of acute surges of capital inflows followed ultimately by 
sudden stops. Data suggests the recent monetary easing by the ECB and the Fed to have 
been highly correlated with the capital flows to and exchange rate volatility in EMEs. Finally, 
negative  spillovers  are  also  felt  by  EMEs  through  the  financialization  of  commodities,  a 
nontrivial factor behind the recent hikes in the prices of oil and other commodities.  
Before proceeding further, let me summarize my discussion of the key challenges to revival 
of  growth  thus  far  as  follows.  First,  AMEs  now  face  a  very  difficult  dilemma  in  that,  while 
putting their public finances in order is the first priority for resumption of growth, this is less 
likely  to  be  achieved  unless  and  until  they  find  additional  sources  of  growth.  Further 
monetary  easing  could  do  more  harm  than good,  by  offering fertile  ground  for  speculation 
and moral hazard and also because financial repression is at this time less of an option as a 
means for debt reduction. Second, while EMEs are generally better positioned to lead world 
economic growth they remain highly vulnerable to the global liquidity cycle and to stagnant 
growth  in  AMEs,  given  their  heavy  dependence  on  external  demand  and  on  international 
financial  resources.  Faced  with  weak  external  demand,  they  also  need  to  find  additional 
sources of growth from domestic demand.  
Seeking a global solution for growth 
II. 
What then would our solution be for growth as a way out of the Great Recession?  
To  be  honest  with  you,  I  do  not  have  an  absolutely  certain  answer.  But  I  may  offer  a 
speculative  solution  to  the  problem  of  achieving  sustainable  growth,  which  I  believe  has  a 
good chance of achievement if we agree to cooperate toward this end. The solution that I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
envisage  is  a  global  one,  in  which  cross-border  real  and  financial  externalities  are 
appropriately internalized.  
As  I  noted  earlier,  revival  of  growth  would  require  additional  sources  of  growth  –  for  both 
AMEs and EMEs. At the national level, therefore, center stage should be given to structural 
reforms  that  can  enhance  growth  in  productivity.  For  AMEs,  for  example,  labor  market 
reforms geared toward greater labor market flexibility should be a top priority. EMEs should 
meanwhile focus on reforms to foster domestic demand-driven growth. One example would 
be pension reform, which could help to reduce precautionary saving. Financial reforms and 
integration could also yield better resource allocation and productivity growth.  
But national efforts alone are not sufficient, and may take time to yield results. In this highly 
interconnected  world,  the  economic  growth  of  an  individual  nation  is  no  longer  a  purely 
domestic issue. Rather, it is an international issue, that deserves attention from a general-
equilibrium perspective. Indeed, the biggest challenge for the world economy at this juncture 
is  that  of  avoiding  local  and  unstable  solutions,  and  of  instead  seeking  a  solution  that  is 
global and sustainable.  
I  would  argue  that  EMEs  can  and  should  play  a  larger  role  than  ever  before  in  the 
achievement of a global solution. EMEs are better positioned to lead world economic growth 
than  AMEs,  and  their  economic  size  is  sufficient  to this  purpose  as  well.  Specifically,  they 
accounted for 54 percent of the growth in world GDP during the 2000–05 period, and over 
the  past  five  years  have  accounted  for  72  percent.  Their  share  in  total  world  GDP  has 
increased significantly – from 37 percent in 1999 to 49 percent in 2011. And these numbers 
are expected to become even larger going forward. The latest projections by the IMF indicate 
EMEs’ contribution to global economic growth as likely to remain at about 70% over the next 
five years, and their share in world GDP to be as high as 54 percent by 2016.  
To better illustrate the role that EMEs can play, allow me to briefly discuss the findings of my 
staff  at  the  Bank  of  Korea.  They  have  recently  estimated  growth  equations  that  take  into 
account the real linkages between AMEs and EMEs while controlling for the effects of other 
macroeconomic  and  institutional  variables.  The  panel  data  used  covers  G20  and  OECD 
member countries and spans the period from 1980 to 2010. The study focuses on long-term 
growth by using non-overlapping observations of five-year average per capita GDP growth 
rates. All equations are estimated using GMM, to control for simultaneity bias.  
The estimation results indicate spillover effects in long-term growth between the two groups 
of economies that are broadly symmetrical. Specifically, a one percent increase in AME GDP 
stimulates EME GDP growth by 0.4 percentage points, while the same increase in EME GDP 
leads to a similar 0.3 percentage point increase in AME GDP growth. The study also echoes 
the findings of previous research on the growth-enhancing effects of structural reforms and 
fiscal  prudence  among  both  groups  of  economies.  For  AMEs,  fiscal  prudence,  financial 
reforms and trade openness are on the list of factors serving to enhance growth. For EMEs, 
meanwhile, in addition to these variables, financial deepening and labor market flexibility also 
help to promote growth.  
These  positive  growth  spillovers  and  growth  effects  of  structural  reforms  together  suggest 
that the contributions to growth of any single country’s reforms can go well beyond its own 
national borders. World economic growth can obviously thus be more significantly enhanced 
if  reforms  are  undertaken  simultaneously  in  both  groups  of  economies,  and  their  trade 
openness expanded. These findings imply that EMEs’ growth can be an effective source of 
growth  for  AMEs,  as  well  as  AMEs’  for  EMEs.  When  Asia  was  hit  by  its  crisis  in  the  late 
1990s,  it  was  the  solid growth  in  AMEs  that  pulled  it  out  of  recession. And  EMEs’  healthy 
growth can and should likewise now be a blessing for AMEs faced with the difficult short-run 
tradeoff between debt reduction and growth promotion.  
Theory tells us that the competitive or non-cooperative Nash equilibrium will be suboptimal in 
the  presence  of  externalities,  and  also  that  a  social  planner,  if  one  exists,  can  achieve  a 
better outcome. By the same token, the positive growth spillovers between AMEs and EMEs 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
suggest the need for a global jurisdiction, that can internalize such externalities in order to 
maximize growth. But the reality is very far from one characterized by existence of a global 
jurisdiction, and better described as one of a non-cooperative equilibrium. This is why I argue 
for better and more international cooperation, for the sake of growth and financial stability.  
Let me elaborate on this point further. I believe that EMEs, and particularly large EMEs, need 
to shift from external demand-driven growth to more domestic demand-driven growth. This 
latter type of growth will not only be less prone to drive a buildup of global imbalances but 
also contribute more to world economic growth, through positive spillovers. Such a shift may 
however be constrained – at least during the transition period – by the financial vulnerabilities 
of these countries to external shocks, particularly shocks related to the volatile global liquidity 
cycle. During their transitions, the current accounts of EMEs may be in deficit for extended 
periods  of  time  before  they  return  to  balance.  And  given  their  limited  and  often  uncertain 
access to the international capital markets, such deficits are a latent but serious risk to EMEs 
that can materialize abruptly. Even at present, the financial spillovers from AMEs to EMEs 
pose serious risks to investment and growth for many EMEs, including Korea. Prudent and 
coordinated  management  of  global  liquidity,  and  enhanced  surveillance  of  capital  flows, 
could  in  this  regard  I  think  have  significant  growth  effects,  by  removing  the  constraints  on 
investment and growth now faced by many EMEs.  
Having said all of this, I would like now to offer my short “To-do” lists for AMEs and EMEs. 
These  lists  are  of  course  incomplete,  and  not  tailored  to  individual  country  circumstances. 
Nevertheless, I think they will be useful to us in organizing our thinking as to what we need to 
do to lift the world economy out of the Great Recession. 
First, I think major AMEs need to put their fiscal houses in order, by putting credible fiscal 
plans on the table. Where available, fiscal space should be used wisely, to promote growth 
and financial stability. Even in countries with no fiscal space currently left, space for growth 
can be created by the undertaking of tax and pension reforms and switching of expenditures 
toward pro-growth activities. Fiscal devaluation could also be an option for highly indebted 
Eurozone countries (Cottarelli, 2012).  
Second,  negative  financial  spillovers  should  be  minimized,  if  not  prevented  altogether.  To 
this end, Eurozone countries need to establish a backstopping framework to ensure financial 
stability, and devote sufficient public resources to the recapitalization of banks and to ring-
fencing them from contagion. In addition, an orderly withdrawal of the current excess liquidity 
should be pre-planned by major central banks.  
Third, trade and financial protectionism must be decisively rejected by all. The analysis by 
the Bank of Korea clearly shows increased trade to promote growth in both EMEs and AMEs, 
and that financial deepening is a plus for EMEs. Korea has long been a leader in promoting 
free trade in goods and services. It has completed FTAs with a total of 45 countries in eight 
regions  including  the  EU  and  the  US  in  the  2000s,  and  is  currently  in  the  process  of 
negotiating additional FTAs with 12 countries including Canada and some in the Middle East.  
Fourth,  more  research  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  new  international  financial  regulatory 
framework  does  not  discourage  even  adequate  risk  taking  for  growth.  Some  unintended 
consequences of the new regulations could be quite damaging to growth, as seen from the 
fact that the higher capital requirements for Eurozone banks have resulted in deleveraging 
rather than capital replenishment.  
Fifth,  the global financial  safety  nets  need  to  be  strengthened.  Bilateral central  bank  swap 
lines  can  be  an  effective  mechanism  in  this  regard.  At  the  national  level,  EMEs  with 
liberalized  capital  accounts  may  also  introduce  macro-prudential  frameworks.  And  Korea’s 
experience in this regard would I think perhaps be useful to other EMEs.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Role of Central Banks 
the  unconventional  measures  deployed 
III. 
Now let me briefly touch on the role of the central bank.  
There is no doubt that central banks have thus far played a pivotal role in crisis management. 
Henceforth,  by  quickly  overcoming  the  on-going  crisis,  their  role  needs  to  be  returned  to 
normal.  More  precisely, central  banks  can  best contribute  to growth  by securing  price  and 
financial  stability  and  developing  effective  macro-prudential  frameworks  for  systemic  risk 
control.  A  gradual  withdrawal  of 
for  crisis 
management  should  be  planned  in  advance,  to  guide  market  expectations  smoothly.  And 
major central banks should be always mindful of the possibility of negative financial spillovers 
to EMEs. I believe that, at the margin, the benefits for a global solution of preventing negative 
spillovers outweigh the costs that might be incurred from a domestic perspective.  
In this respect, cooperation among central banks is crucial. In the current setting, the G20 
and other international forums could serve as venues for such cooperation. In the long run, 
central  banks  may  aim  higher,  to  form  a  more  formal  institution  such  as  the  International 
Monetary Policy Committee (IMPC) suggested by many renowned scholars. Such an IMPC 
might serve as an effective mechanism for evaluating the overall effects on global liquidity of 
individual  central  banks’  monetary  policies,  and  thereby  lead  toward  introduction  of  a 
multilateral perspective in policy-making. It can also be a way to make up for the absence of 
an international lender of last resort.  
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Let me conclude now with a few short remarks.  
The global economy stands at a crossroads at present. We have managed the global crisis 
relatively well but are yet to leave it behind. The sovereign debt crisis in Europe, a legacy of 
the global crisis, is threatening economic recovery and financial stability, and even posing the 
risk of another global crisis. Without growth, however, successful resolution of the sovereign 
debt crisis seems only remotely possible.  
I am hopeful that EMEs can play a greater role in pulling the world economy out of the Great 
Recession and returning it to a path of sustainable growth. Taking maximum advantage of 
positive  growth  spillovers  would  be  the  way  forward.  And  this  premise,  together  with  the 
absence  of  a  global  jurisdiction  for  economic  policy,  is  the  basis  of  my  argument  for 
international  cooperation  to  achieve  a  global  solution.  However,  we  should  always  bear  in 
mind that the benefits of positive growth spillovers can only be reaped if negative financial 
spillovers are at the same time prevented.  
Danke Schoen.  
References 
Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  (2011),  “Rethinking  Central 
Banking”, Brookings Institution, Washington. 
Cottarelli, Carlo (2012), “Fiscal Policy in Advanced Economies: Fiscal Adjustment, Efficiency 
and Growth”, Presentation at the Milan Catholic University, March 13. 
Perotti,  Roberto  (2011),  “The  ‘Austerity  Myth’:  Gain  Without  Pain?”,  BIS  Working  Papers, 
No. 362.  
Reinhart, Carmen M. and M. Belen Sbrancia (2011), “The Liquidation of Government Debt”, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 16893.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
