Jörg Asmussen: Stability guardians and crisis managers – central 
banking in times of crisis and beyond 
Distinguished lecture by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at 
the  House  of  Finance,  Goethe  University,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
11 September 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today at the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability and 
I  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Siekmann  and  Prof. Wieland for their  invitation.  I know  that  the 
Institute was founded in November 2007, only three months after the outbreak of what would 
become the worst financial and economic crisis of the post-war period. Truly timely, I would 
say. The Institute’s objective to highlight the significance of monetary and financial stability 
impressively  reflects  the  practise  and  the  challenges  of  monetary  policy  over  the  last  five 
years. 
Let me in today’s remarks take the opportunity to reflect on the double role of central banks 
as  stability  guardians  and  crisis  managers.  Had  I  been  here  before  August  2007,  this  title 
would have mainly implied discussing the central banks’ role as guardian of price stability. 
But there cannot be stability without adequately managing the crisis. 
So,  why  have  central  banks  assumed  such  an important role  in  crisis management? Well, 
responding to the sudden financial tensions, central banks crisis measures have contributed 
to calming and avoiding highly detrimental feedback loops between financial markets and the 
real economy. These measures needed to be implemented rapidly and central banks were in 
an  advantageous  position  for  acting  swiftly  due  to  their  vicinity  to  financial  markets,  their 
operational  framework  and  their  clear  and  independent  decision  structure.  But  these 
measures  ultimately  have  their  limits  in  terms  of  effect  and  legitimacy.  The  risk  of 
undermining the primary mandate of central banks needs to be taken into account. Yet, I will 
argue that indeed crisis management and, hence, the preservation of financial stability is an 
integral part of our role as central bank, serving ultimately to fulfil our mandate. The Treaty 
commits the ESCB primarily to maintain price stability in Article 127/1 and confers the task 
on  the  ESCB  to  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  Article  127/5.  Our 
mandate is clear, it is comprehensive, it is adequate and it should not be questioned.  
Clearly,  central  banks  should  not  be  overburdened.  In  the  ECB’s  case,  short-term 
stabilisation measures were important and necessary. However, structural problems require 
a structural response. These deficits need to be addressed by reinforcing the available policy 
instruments  outside  the  purview  of  the  central  bank.  The  work  for  the  report  by  the  four 
presidents of the European Council, the Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB, which will 
be submitted to the Heads of State and Government at the end of this year, is an important 
step to address the economic misalignments and institutional shortcomings in the euro area. 
Still, we have to reflect on the future role of central banks, both as stability guardians and 
crisis managers. This crisis has somewhat shaken up our pre-crisis understanding of the role 
central banks have for both monetary policy and financial stability. Central banks will not be 
able to just switch back to the status quo ante of before August 2007. I will therefore first take 
a  step  back  and  briefly  review  the  pre-crisis  consensus  on  the  role  of central  banks. I  will 
then discuss the ECB’s role as crisis manager and guarantor for stability in the current crisis, 
before  reflecting,  in  the  final  part,  on  the  future  role  of  the  ECB  for  both  monetary  and 
financial stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The pre-crisis consensus 
Before reflecting on where we have to go, let me start by reviewing where we stood ahead of 
the crisis regarding the role of central banks.  
By the 1980s, the global economy had experienced two oil price shocks and found itself in a 
stagflationary  environment.  The  academic  literature  and  policy  watchers  concluded  that 
monetary  policy  could  not  contemporaneously  control  both,  inflation  and  the  level  of 
unemployment. In this environment a consensus on the role of central banks emerged with 
two key elements.1  
The first element: central banks should focus on maintaining price stability. As you know, for 
the  European  Central  Bank  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  is  the  primary  objective. 
Other  central  banks  –  though  with  differing  emphasis  in  their  mandate  –  clearly  follow  the 
same  understanding.  Only  recently,  the  Fed  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  have  announced  a 
numerical inflation goal.  
The second element: central banks should be independent on legal and operational grounds. 
Indeed,  the  independence  of  central  banks  is  enshrined  into  primary  law  in  a  number  of 
advanced and emerging countries and has been key for a stability oriented monetary policy. 
For  crisis  management,  the  so-called  Jackson  Hole  consensus2  of  the  1990s  and  early 
2000s  foresaw  only  a  limited  role  for  central  banks.  Following  the  logic  of  the  consensus, 
monetary policy should  react to financial imbalances only to the extent that they affect the 
inflation forecast. Yet, as asset price build-ups are often accompanied by relatively contained 
inflation rates,3 “ex-ante” monetary policy reactions were considered difficult. Effectively the 
consensus  implied  that  central  banks  would  only  intervene  “ex-post”  to  counter  potential 
deflationary risks and risks to financial stability. The dot-com bubble of the beginning of the 
century was an illustration of such strategy. 
The ECB with a special emphasis on monetary developments 
The  ECB’s  standpoint  differed  from  the  Jackson  Hole  consensus.  We  have  always 
emphasised  that  focusing  on  money  and  credit  developments  provides  for  a  medium-  to 
long-term perspective. It was believed that the monetary pillar would release warning signals 
and  hedging  against  the  building  up  of  financial  imbalances.4  Indeed,  as  of  2005,  on  the 
basis of its monetary pillar, the ECB has repeatedly  warned on the observed strong credit 
growth and the accompanied under-pricing of risk.5 
                                                
1   An additional element has been exchange rate targeting which was based on an external anchor. Effectively, 
this represents an intermediate objective if domestic credibility of the central bank may be weak. 
2   See  Greenspan  (2002),  Blinder  (2005),  Mishkin  (2007)  and  Bean,  Paustian,  Penalver,  and  Taylor  (2010), 
“Monetary  Policy  after  the  Fall”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Annual  Conference,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, August. 
3   See  the  discussion  in  Christiano,  Ilut,  Motto,  and  Rostagno  (2010)  on  “Monetary  policy  and  Stock  Market 
Booms.” 
4   See  “A  Monetary  Policy  Strategy  in  Good  and  Bad  Times:  Lessons  from  the  Recent  Past”  Fahr,  Motto, 
Rostagno, Smets and Tristani, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1336, May 2011. 
5   See  the  evidence  in  Fischer,  Lenza,  Pill  and  Reichlin  (2008):  “Money  and  monetary  policy  –  the  ECB 
experience  1999–2006”  and  Trichet  (2008):  “Risk  and  the  Macro-economy”,  Keynote  address  at  the 
conference “The ECB and its watchers X”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Nonetheless, I think it is fair to say that nobody – including central bankers – has expected a 
crisis  of  the  dimension  that  we  have  been  experiencing  since  five  years.6  The  overall 
favourable  macroeconomic  constellation  from  the  Great  Moderation,  with  low  volatility  and 
robust growth, has certainly induced some benign neglect – also on the policy side. 
While the main ingredients for successful central banking – clear mandate and independence 
– have proven highly effective for central banks to become guardians of price stability, they 
were  not  sufficient  to  ensure  the  more  general  stability  of  our  economic  systems.  I  would 
therefore  like  to turn to the  ECB’s  policy  reaction,  its  challenges  and  limits  to  stabilise  the 
euro area. 
The ECB’s policy during the crisis 
The  financial  crisis  erupted  in  summer  2007,  was  magnified  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008 and eventually precipitated the global economy into recession. It 
was  characterized  by  a  drying  up  of  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market,  plunging  asset  and 
security  prices  as  well  as  a  sharp  increase  in  risk  premia  for  banks’  unsecured  lending. 
Extreme  risk  aversion  and  contagion  across  numerous  markets  were  the  consequences, 
revealing a substantial fragility of the financial system and also shattering confidence in the 
self-correcting mechanisms of financial markets.  
At  the  beginning  of  2010,  the  interaction  of  adverse  conditions  in  financial  institutions  and 
their  sovereigns  brought  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  to  new  levels.  The  financial  crisis  first 
weakened banks’ balance sheets, reduced their lending capability and led to an economic 
slump.  In  turn,  the  fiscal  support  to  the  economy  substantially  worsened  public  finances.7 
The mutual weakening of private and public finances ultimately undermined the possibilities 
for a fast healing of the financial system. Also, insufficient financial sector policy reaction on 
the side of governments exacerbated the detrimental dynamics and represented itself as a 
source of risk and uncertainty during the crisis, ultimately fostering dynamics of self-fulfilling 
prophecies. 
The ECB’s non-standard measures 
In  this  environment  the  ECB  took  bold  and  decisive  action.  The  disruptions  in  banks’ 
short-term  funding  led  to  a  strong  tightening  of  credit  standards  to  both  businesses  and 
households. This threatened to undermine bank lending to the real economy with risks of a 
severe credit crunch. In turn, the transmission of monetary policy became seriously impaired. 
And, central banks were less effective in steering term money market rates via the setting of 
their policy rates. Ultimately, the interest rate set by the central bank did no longer reach the 
real economy across the euro area in the same way. 
The  size  of  the  shocks  and  the  extent  of  global  and  intra  euro  area  adjustments  required 
exploiting the ECB’s full toolkit to implement a wide range of non-standard measures. Here, 
we always had to keep in mind the importance of the banking system for the financing of the 
economy.  In  the  euro  area,  two-thirds  of  external  financing  –  and  even  a  larger  share  for 
small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises  –  originates  from  banks.  Our  measures  included  the 
provision of unlimited funding support to banks at maturities up to three years, the extension 
                                                
6   The Japanese experience since the 1990s was widely seen as an exception. Although it helped understanding 
the potential risks and developments during the crisis, it did not serve to identify the imminence and the depth 
of the global financial crisis. 
In Greece it were public finances that placed a burden on the domestic banks. In a later stage, due to the 
deteriorating valuations of Greek sovereign bonds, financing of the government become more difficult due to 
impaired bank balance sheets. 
7  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to 
relaxed  banks’ 
funding  constraints  and  –  owing 
of the list of eligible collateral, and outright purchases of covered bonds and debt securities 
through the Securities Markets Programme.  
The  two  long-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  with  a  maturity  of  three  years 
implemented in December 2011 and February 2012 allowed banks to satisfy their additional 
liquidity  needs.  They 
their 
long  maturity  –  addressed  impairments  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  to 
longer rates. Beyond the direct effect of averting a major credit crunch, the full effects of the 
three-year operations will unfold over time and may be gauged only as time proceeds due to 
the usual lags in monetary policy. 
The Securities Markets Programme was initiated back in May 2010 and offered necessary 
support to the monetary transmission but did not address the incentives for governments to 
engage  in  the  necessary  reforms  and  to  rebalance  their  public  finances.  While  the  SMP 
counts for a significant share of the ECB’s balance sheet, it did not stabilise the situation in a 
sustainable  way.  In  addition,  the  SMP  had  unintended  side  effects  such  as  a  perceived 
preferred  creditor  status  of  the  ECB  vis-à-vis  other  creditors.  The  Governing  Council 
therefore decided last Thursday to terminate the SMP. 
Nevertheless, the current situation in sovereign bond markets continues to be characterised 
by 
a)  
heightened aversion of non-resident investors to hold sovereign bonds of some euro 
area countries,  
extreme illiquidity and yield volatility in these bond markets and  
widespread concerns over redenomination risks. 
b)  
c) 
This all reflects a general fragmentation in financial markets; but excessively high and volatile 
risk  premia  hinder  the  effective  working  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  environment,  monetary 
policy signals do not reach all parts of the euro area in the same way.  
In light of these continued severe malfunctionings and to counter the risks of redenomination, 
last  Thursday  the  Governing  Council  established  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  –  or 
OMT – as an additional monetary policy tool.  
The  OMT  is  introduced  to  contribute  in  safeguarding  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism to the entire euro area to ensure the singleness of monetary policy.  
The  OMT  is  in  no  way  a  substitute  for  continued  efforts  in  structural  reforms  and  fiscal 
consolidation  on  the  side  of  governments.  They  are  essential  steps  to  regain  trust  and  to 
ensure the sustainability of the euro area in the long-run. This is also the reason why strict 
and effective conditionality and adherence to an appropriate EFSF or – later hopefully – ESM 
programme  is  a  necessary  condition  to  activate  the  OMT  purchases.  For  the  ECB, 
conditionality  is  key  in  order  to  ensure  long-term  sustainability  of  the  fiscal,  structural  and 
macroeconomic adjustment path and to minimize concerns of moral hazard.  
Let me elaborate on the main elements of the Outright Monetary Transactions programme.  
• 
The programme has been designed to ensure full compatibility with European law, 
and  in  particular  with  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing.  The  Programme  will 
operate exclusively on the secondary bond markets and the ECB’s primary mandate 
to  ensure  price  stability  over  the  medium-term  remains  entirely  untouched.  To 
ensure transparency, the aggregate OMT holdings and their market values will be 
published  on  a  weekly  basis  and  the  average  maturity  together  with  the  country 
breakdown  of OMT  holdings  will  be  published  on  a  monthly  basis.  On a  personal 
note  I  would  like  to  add  that  I  am  convinced  that  central  banks  more  generally 
should further increase transparency of their actions and decisions as a means to 
enhance credibility and confidence.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    In order to be effective, the Programme will only operate if a country first adheres to 
the strict and effective conditionality of an EFSF or ESM macroeconomic adjustment 
or  a  precautionary  programme  and  provided  that  they  include  the  possibility  of 
EFSF/ESM  primary  market  purchases.  The  ECB  may  subsequently  intervene  in 
bond markets. I say may, because monetary policy remains fully independent and 
the Governing Council decides independently when to activate the OMT, entirely on 
the basis of monetary policy considerations. 
To  avoid  possible  issues  related  to  a  preferred  creditor  status,  securities  bought 
under the OMT will accept the same treatment (pari pasu) as purchases by private 
or  other  creditors,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  such  bonds. This  ensures  that 
any interventions via the OMT do not impinge on the status of private investors. The 
aim  of  the  programme  is  to  accompany  countries  and  their  sovereign  to  regain 
stable access to capital markets. 
The  programme  focuses  mainly  on  the  shorter  end  of  the  yield  curve  and  in 
particular on sovereign bonds with a maturity between one and three years. Steering 
short-term  market  rates  falls  squarely  into  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  The 
interventions  address  disorderly  market  conditions  and  are  aimed  at  reducing 
excessive market volatility.  
The Governing Council will monitor the conditions for interventions based on a large 
set of indicators and will assess their effectiveness to decide on the continuation of 
interventions. 
I am convinced that the new elements in sum make the OMT a much better programme than 
the SMP previously was. This new programme is a clear example of how far the ECB fulfils 
contemporaneously the role as a stability guardian and as crisis manager. By guarding the 
stability  of  the  euro  in  the  entire  euro  area  and  countering  redenomination  risks,  the  ECB 
plays a central role in managing expectations in the crisis.  
A question remains: What will be the role of central banks after the crisis? 
The role of central banks after the crisis 
From a central bank’s perspective three lessons can be drawn that appear to be crucial for 
its future role in crisis prevention and resolution. 
First,  in  a  financially  integrated  market  like  the  euro  area,  contagion  risks  are  large  with 
financial instability rapidly spreading to other market segments. 
Second, the sudden materialisation of financial instabilities can lead to strong recessionary 
forces  that  carry  downside  risks  for  medium-term  price  stability.  This  has  taught  policy 
makers that “cleaning” rather than “leaning” against financial imbalances can simply become 
a very costly strategy. 
And  third,  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  with  stable  prices  –  though  being  a 
necessary condition – is not a sufficient one for the preservation of financial stability. Neither 
the implemented “ex-ante” policy measures by national authorities nor those by central banks 
were enough to deal with the build-up of risks and imbalances that led to the current crisis. 
So, what does this imply for the future role of central banks as stability guardians and their 
role as crisis managers? 
The future role of central banks: financial stability and supervision 
The  importance  of  financial  stability  for  central  banks  has  been  acknowledged  in  the 
European Treaty. Article 127/5 reads: “The ESCB shall contribute to the smooth conduct of 
policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit 
institutions and the stability of the financial system”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  ECB  has  already  taken  over  some  tasks  in  European  macro-prudential  supervision 
which was established with the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in January 2011. The 
ECB  is  an  integral  part  of  the  ESRB,  providing  analytical,  statistical  and  administrative 
support. This is a clear recognition of the important role that central banks have gained over 
time in monitoring financial stability and the acquired stock of financial market expertise. In 
principle,  the  active  use  of  macro-prudential  policy  could  provide  a  new  array  of  “ex-ante” 
policy instruments which can lean against financial imbalances and asset bubbles. As it may 
require  time  to  unfold  its  strength  and  it  is  yet  too  early  for  a  thorough  assessment,  the 
impact of the ESRB, as far as I perceive it, seems rather limited so far. 
The recent events in the crisis have revealed vulnerabilities in the monetary union, reflecting 
an  incomplete  financial  architecture.  Two  prominent  examples  are  the  sudden  and  large 
reversals of financing flows and the degree by which banks and their own sovereign have 
become  intertwined.  Effectively,  these  developments  endanger  the  financial  stability  in  the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Neither  the  financial  resources  of  some  member  states  nor  the 
institutional framework proved adequate to solve the problems on the level of the member 
states.  Therefore  we  are  invited  to  rethink  elements  of  the  financial  architecture  at  the 
European level, including the tasks of the central bank. 
In my view, a future European financial architecture should include a fully-fledged financial 
market union which rests on three pillars. 
• 
First,  a  European  banking  supervisory  authority  with  sufficient  instruments  and 
competencies to implement on a level playing field the regulatory framework in the 
euro  area.  This  authority  should  in  particular  have  the  competence  to  order  the 
closure  and  the  resolution  of  non-viable  institutions.  The  resolution  of  non-viable 
banks should no longer be a rare exception in Europe. Here we can learn a lesson 
from the US where 464 banks were closed since 2008.8 
Second,  a  resolution  authority  and  a  coherent  regulatory  framework  for  the 
resolution of systemically important banks. The costs of a resolution shall ultimately 
be borne by a fund. This fund needs to be financed by the financial sector itself to 
unwind systemically relevant financial institutions without relying on public finances 
and ultimately taxpayers’ money.  
Third, deposit insurance should be organised or at least further harmonised at the 
European level.  
  While it is clear that moving towards a financial market union cannot be achieved overnight, it 
is  important  to  stress  that  we  need  all  of  the  just  mentioned  three  elements.  The  banking 
supervision can only work efficiently if it has access to the relevant information, for example 
on the deposits. It can only act effectively if it has the adequate instruments in its toolbox, 
such as the closure of a non-viable bank.  
As you all know, Commissioner Barnier will present the Commission’s proposal for a banking 
supervision in Europe tomorrow and it is no secret anymore that the ECB will be tasked with 
an important role. 
The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  have  made  it  clear  that  they  stand  ready  to  take 
over responsibilities in banking supervision. However, we have made it also very clear that 
certain conditions have to be fulfilled:  
• 
Firstly, any new task in banking supervision may not prejudice price stability as our 
primary  objective.  Monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision  have  to  be  kept 
separate. This calls for separate decision making bodies and Chinese Walls within 
the  institution.  14  out  of  17  national  central  banks  in  the  euro  area  engage  in 
                                                
8   http://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banking  supervisory  today  already  without  any  negative  impact  on  their  monetary 
policy mandate. 
Secondly, the ECB’s independence may not be impaired by the new task. Monetary 
policy by definition is independent. Banking supervision by its very nature is not. It 
must be subject to parliamentary and judicial control. We’re open to this request to 
show accountability to the European parliament and the council of ministers. 
Thirdly, the ECB must be equipped with all instruments it needs to perform banking 
supervision  effectively  and  efficiently.  The  ECB  will  only  engage  in  banking 
supervision  if  it  gets  a  comprehensive  tool  box,  because  the  reputational  risk  lies 
only with one institution, it lies with the ECB.  
These and many more questions need to be addressed in the months to come. Let me only 
mention the most obvious: 
• 
A  European  banking  supervisor  only  for  the  euro  area  or  for  the  EU  27?  A 
well-functioning  financial  market  union  is  primarily  in  the  interest  of  the  monetary 
union. Nevertheless, non-euro area member states should be welcomed to put their 
institutions under the control of the European banking supervisor. 
A European banking supervisor for all banks or for the systemically important banks 
only? From my personal perspective, the European banking supervisor should only 
be  entrusted  with  the  supervision  of  the  systemically  important  institutions  on 
European  or  domestic  level,  at  least  at  the  beginning.  Anything  more  is  neither 
feasible nor desirable at the beginning of 2013. 
What shall be the division of labour between the ECB and the European Banking 
Authority (EBA)? From my perspective, EBA could be tasked with any future work 
on the Single Rulebook in the single market, ie for the EU 27. 
And finally, what shall be the division of labour between the ECB and the national 
supervisory authorities? It will be key to strike the right balance between relying on 
local know-how and expertise while safeguarding a single standard of supervision 
and a level playing field. 
   The implementation of a European banking supervision is closely linked to the possibility of 
direct  banking  recapitalisation  via  the  ESM  in  the  future  and  should  not  least  therefore  be 
advanced  without  undue  delay.  However,  the  task  is  complex  and  banking  supervision  in 
itself is too important to present solutions under time pressure that will not work in practice. 
We should therefore take the time it takes to get it right.  
Financial stability and monetary policy 
Having reviewed the additional tasks that central banks are asked to take over, a question 
regards  the  implications  for  the  practice  of  monetary  policy.  I  will  hence  explain  in  the 
following  how  the  two  responsibilities  will  complement  each  other.  The  crisis  has  clearly 
demonstrated how essential financial stability is for the effective conduct of monetary policy. 
Financial  market  developments  have  always  been  an  integral  part  of  our  monetary  policy 
considerations and have influenced the design of our non-standard measures. Nonetheless, 
in my view and looking forward, monetary analysis and financial market analysis should play 
an even greater role for the conduct of monetary policy – particularly with regard to financial 
imbalances and financial fragilities. Here I would see three main areas in which further work 
is needed to incorporate the lessons from the crisis. 
First, we are faced with the fact that the smooth functioning of the financial sector is key for 
macroeconomic outcomes and monetary policy transmission. We saw that adverse financial 
conditions  can  have  strong  and  impairing  effects  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy. 
Academia  and  central  banks  have  already 
this  research  agenda  and 
taken  up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
into 
introducing  central  bank  balance  sheet  considerations 
macroeconomic  models  and  monetary  policy  assessments  are  refined  in  that  regard.  For 
instance, the work by Cúrdia and Woodford (2010) has provided an important advancement 
by 
the  New-Keynesian 
framework.  Corsetti  et  al.  (2012)  complemented  this  with  interlinkages  between  the 
sovereign and the real economy. Moreover, many new modelling approaches now account 
for liquidity and credit constraints in macroeconomic models.9 Still, the links and the channels 
between  the  financial  sector,  the  real  economy  and  their  ultimate  impact  on  output  and 
inflation still leaves many questions open. This is for central bankers and academics to work 
on in the years to come.  
Second,  as  you  know,  our  two-pillar  monetary  policy  strategy  foresees  that  we  take  into 
account  monetary  and  credit  developments  –  particularly  to  ensure  a  medium-  to  long-run 
orientation.  Over  time  monetary  analysis  at  the  ECB  has  been  continuously  refined  and 
deepened. In the crisis it was crucial to better gauge short-term risks from financial flows and 
imbalances. And also in the future, its scope and methodology needs to be kept continuously 
updated.  
In  particular,  the  analysis  should  encompass  not  only  a  detailed  understanding  of  banks’ 
behaviour, but also developments in the shadow banking sector as provider of private sector 
liquidity.10  In  order  to  conduct  these  types  of  analyses  detailed  data  on  financial 
intermediaries and their transactions is crucial.  
And third, a flexible framework to implement monetary policy has allowed us to react swiftly 
to the instabilities during the crisis. In fact, most of our non-standard measures have focused 
on  providing  adequate  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  and  did  not  require  changes  to  our 
operational  framework.  The  adjustments  were  merely  on  the  parameters  of  the  existing 
framework.  
Yet, the provision of liquidity by central banks needs to be linked to a clear assessment of 
solvency  of  the  counterparties.  Only  by  being  able  to  distinguish  solvent  from  insolvent 
financial institutions can central banks continue to fulfil their mandate of being lenders of last 
resort to the financial system. Detailed information on the health of financial institutions and 
the  capacity  of  the  central  bank  to  resolve  insolvent  banks  would  ensure  that  liquidity 
provision is kept to the circle of solvent banks. 
Conclusion  
Let me conclude.  
During  the  financial  crisis  central  banks  assumed  an  active  role  as  crisis  managers.  The 
ensuing episodes from the subprime crisis with the collapse of Lehman Brothers to the debt 
crisis has left the ECB as one of the few actors in guaranteeing stability over the past five 
years. One may argue that central banks are in an extremely difficult position, that they may 
suffer from the outcome of the recent crisis and that “paradise is lost”.11 If paradise is lost, it 
may however be the right time to take on a new and a pro-active role in “the real world” or in 
the “new normal”. We will not turn the clock backwards. 
                                                
9   The  contribution  by  Kyotaki  and  Moore  on  credit  cycles  in  1997  served  only  recently  to  numerous 
macroeconomic  extensions.  Gertler  and  Kiyotaki  (2009),  Gertler  and  Karadi  (2011),  Queralto,  Gertler  and 
Karadi  (2012)  are  recent  examples  of  this  work  stream  with  empirical  applications  as  in  del  Negro, 
Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Kiyotaki (2010). 
10   A thorough understanding of the generation and provision of liquidity by the private sector’s own means is still 
at the stage of infancy. First promising conceptual frameworks appear to emerge. Important work has been 
made  by  Adrian  and  Shin  (2010)  on  “Financial  intermediaries  and  monetary  economics”  and  a  promising 
example of theories for liquidity is “The I Theory of Money” by Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011). 
11   O. Issing, Central Banks – Paradise Lost, CFS Working paper No. 2012/06. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The new normal requires a new communication policy of central banks (in the past it was not 
always  clear  that  central  banking  and  communication  should  be  mentioned  in  the  same 
sentence). The crisis was a game-changer in the communication of central banks: We now 
are faced with the potentially explosive interplay between markets and politics, we have to 
actively  communicate  with  a  broader  public,  we  have  to  face  up  to  the  public  and  market 
discourse.  We  must  argue  with  counterfactuals  and  navigate  the  short-term  versus  the 
long-term.  To  sum  our  new  communication  strategy  up:  We  have  to  listen,  explain  and 
convince. 
Given  the  complexities  of  today’s  financial  markets,  a  deeper  and  more  detailed  financial 
market analysis is an important contribution to the conduct of monetary policy in the pursuit 
of maintaining price stability. This requires to further expand the monetary pillar to include a 
thorough analysis of the financial sector as a whole. In particular, monetary analysis should 
encompass not only an understanding of banks’ behaviour, but also detailed developments 
in the shadow banking sector as provider of private sector liquidity. 
The crisis has exposed the shortcomings of the European governance framework, reflecting 
an incomplete architecture of the monetary union, both in terms of crisis prevention and crisis 
resolution. The institutional setup – enshrined in the Treaty – allocated the mandate for price 
stability to the ECB. Instead, the responsibility for financial stability is not uniquely allocated. 
While  the  ECB  has  crisis  management  tools  at  hand,  financial  stability  was  originally 
envisaged  as  a  national  task.  But  the  crisis  has  shown  that  it  has  a  clear  euro  area 
dimension.  
The ECB will gain in importance for financial stability in the context of the current institutional 
overhaul of the euro area. This process needs to be democratically legitimised and the ECB 
needs  to receive  the full  set  of  instruments  and authority  to fulfil  its  new  responsibilities  in 
independence and without risks to its reputation.  
Today, we are called to  work on a longer-term vision for Europe, to rectify the recognised 
shortcomings  and  to  implement  a  fully  functioning  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  I  am 
convinced that we will succeed to ensure that EMU can provide the stability and prosperity to 
the citizens of Europe for which it was created. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
