Thomas Jordan: Challenges facing the Swiss National Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, to the General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, 27 April 2012. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council  
Dear Shareholders  
Dear Guests  
Also from a monetary policy perspective, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has experienced 
another difficult year. In 2011, the escalation of the European sovereign debt crisis triggered 
a  very  substantial  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  In  order  to  avert  major  damage  to  the 
Swiss economy, and work against the threat of a deflationary trend, the SNB had to react 
fast with exceptional measures.  
I would like to begin by giving you a review of economic developments and monetary policy 
in  2011.  Then  I  will  present  our  assessment  of  the  international  economic  outlook  and  its 
impact on the Swiss economy. I will also outline the outlook for price stability. I will conclude 
by  explaining  the  SNB’s  reflections  on  current  monetary  policy.  First,  let  me  begin  by 
reviewing the events of last year.  
Review of 2011  
In terms of the economic cycle, the year 2011 certainly began well. Overall, economic activity 
was lively, and the situation on the labour market improved further. Despite the appreciation 
of the Swiss franc in 2010, goods exports were robust during the first few months of the year.  
However, in spring 2011, the international economic recovery stalled. This was attributable to 
several  different  factors.  In  major  advanced  economies,  stimuli  from  fiscal  policies 
diminished.  Moreover,  in  the  second  quarter  in  particular,  international  economic  growth 
suffered  from  the  effects  of  the  Japanese  earthquake  and  tsunami.  The  destruction  of 
production  plants  for  important  intermediate  goods  for  the  electronics  industry  led  to 
substantial  supply  problems  worldwide,  which  resulted  in  production  losses.  Finally,  the 
concerns  about  fiscal  problems  in  many  advanced  economies  increased.  In  particular,  the 
risk that the European sovereign debt crisis might escalate hung like a sword of Damocles 
over the outlook for the entire international economy.  
The debt crisis did indeed escalate in the second half of the year. While, initially, it was only 
the small peripheral states of the euro area that encountered problems because of their high 
levels of debt, the loss of confidence increasingly affected the larger economies of Europe as 
well. At the same time, there was growing concern about the stability of European banks.  
Given these developments, uncertainty in financial markets increased sharply in the second 
half of the year. At the same time, the demand for safe-haven investments soared. As we all 
know, these investments include those in the Swiss franc. The Swiss currency had already 
gained in value in the second quarter. However, between July and the beginning of August, it 
appreciated  very  substantially  within  a  very  short  period.  In  August  2011,  the  Swiss  franc 
reached an all-time high against both the euro and the US dollar, in both nominal and real 
terms.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  August  2011,  the  Swiss  franc  was  massively  overvalued, 
according  to  any  yardstick.  In  addition,  in  practically  the  same  period,  the  international 
economic environment had become noticeably gloomier. This situation presented an acute 
risk to our economy, as well as carrying the threat of a deflationary trend. Consequently, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
SNB  reacted  fast  and  announced  an  unscheduled  interest  rate  reduction  on  3  August.  In 
addition,  from  this  moment  onwards,  it  increased  the  supply  of  Swiss  franc  liquidity  by  a 
hitherto  unprecedented  amount,  in  several  steps,  with  the  aim  of  weakening  the  Swiss 
currency.  
Overall,  the  liquidity  measures  achieved  the  expected  results.  They  brought  about 
significantly lower interest rates in the Swiss franc money market – interest rates that were, 
at  times,  even  negative.  This  tended  to  weaken  the  attractiveness  of  Swiss  franc 
investments. Thus the upward trend of the Swiss franc against the euro was checked for the 
time  being.  However,  the  exchange  rate  remained  very  volatile,  due  to  the  persistence  of 
negative reports from abroad, and at the end of August the Swiss franc appreciated again. In 
this  market  environment,  which  was  extremely  uncertain  and  nervous  because  of  the 
European  debt  crisis,  the  liquidity  measures  were  ultimately  insufficient  to  halt  the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc.  
In recognition of this fact, the SNB decided to introduce a measure which was exceptional in 
every  respect.  On  6  September,  the  SNB  set  a  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  per 
euro. It stated that it would enforce this minimum rate with the utmost determination and was 
prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. This policy is still in 
force, without any restriction.  
The  impact  on  the  Swiss  economy  of  the  deterioration  in  the  international  environment  as 
well  as  the  exchange  rate  movements  in  July  and  August  had  been  steadily  increasing. 
Economic activity weakened significantly over the course of 2011 and the pressure on profit 
margins intensified further in many industries. However, in the past few months there have 
been growing signs that the economic situation in Switzerland has stabilised as a result of 
the minimum exchange rate.  
Thus the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro has, to date, proved to be effective. 
It has reduced the very substantial overvaluation of the Swiss franc. Moreover, the extreme 
exchange rate fluctuations which had been experienced previously have been lessened. This 
has given business leaders a better basis for planning, thereby clearly limiting the damage 
inflicted by the appreciation of the Swiss franc on the real economy.  
However,  apart  from  the  exchange  rate,  future  economic  growth  in  our  country  will  once 
again depend on developments in the international economy. That is why I will now present 
to you our assessment of the international economic outlook.  
Economic outlook and outlook for price stability  
The latest economic statistics suggest that the international economic recovery will continue, 
although growth rates are likely to be on the low side by comparison with typical recovery 
phases.  The  debt  reduction  process  which  private  households  in  the  US  are  currently 
undergoing and the consolidation of government finances in several European countries, in 
particular,  are  dampening  economic  activity  in  the  short  term.  Nevertheless,  the  recovery 
should gradually gain some strength.  
However, it is by no means certain that this moderately positive scenario for the international 
economy will become reality. The international environment continues to be highly uncertain. 
The European sovereign debt problem still presents the biggest risk. It is unclear whether the 
measures 
the  situation  permanently. 
Consequently,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  still  has  the  potential  to  seriously  affect  the 
international financial system as well as international economic development.  
What does this international environment mean  for the Swiss economy? The year 2012 is 
likely  to  be  another  difficult  one.  At  CHF  1.20  against  the  euro,  the  Swiss  currency  is  still 
overvalued  and  presents  major  challenges  to  our  economy.  Many  companies  have  been 
forced to reduce their prices, which has lowered their turnover in nominal terms. Companies 
far  will  really  succeed 
in  defusing 
taken  so 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exposed to international competition, with considerable depth of production in Switzerland, in 
particular,  are  facing  pressure  on  their  profit  margins.  An  additional  factor  is  the  muted 
outlook for the international economy. Combined with the continued high level of uncertainty 
with respect to the European debt problem, this is likely to limit the willingness to invest in 
Switzerland.  
However,  there  are  reasons  for  a  certain  degree  of  confidence  as  far  as  our  economy  is 
concerned. For instance, the low level of interest rates is still having a stimulating effect on 
the economy. Domestic demand continues to be supported by high immigration. In addition, 
the repercussions of the high Swiss franc value are not only negative. For example, imported 
preliminary  products  for  companies  and  consumer  goods  for  households  have  become 
cheaper. Finally, Swiss firms and their employees have made huge efforts to deal with this 
difficult situation.  
Overall, the SNB expects moderate economic growth of close to 1% for the year 2012. This 
modest  economic  momentum  is  likely  to  be  reflected  in  a  moderate  increase  in 
unemployment over the course of the next few quarters. The expected economic activity is 
lower  than  would  be  the  case  for  normal  capacity  utilisation.  This  means  there  will  be  no 
inflationary pressure from this source. Our conditional inflation forecast of mid-March 2012 
shows that there is no risk of inflation in Switzerland in the foreseeable future. The forecast 
also makes it clear that the threat of a deflationary trend has been kept in check. Inflation 
rates are only temporarily negative.  
Nevertheless, the monetary policy challenges for the SNB remain very considerable. I would 
now like to go into a little more detail on our reflections on monetary policy, particularly with 
respect to the minimum exchange rate.  
Reflections on Swiss monetary policy  
After  being  announced  on  6  September  2011,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  rapidly 
attained. When our press release was issued, at exactly 10 am, the euro was trading at a 
little over CHF 1.12. Within minutes, the exchange rate exceeded the CHF 1.20 mark. Seen 
from the outside, this may have created the impression that a minimum exchange rate can 
simply  be  generated  by  pressing  a  button  and  that  such  an  exchange  rate  is  a  normal 
monetary policy measure which is straightforward to implement.  
That is far from being the case. A minimum exchange rate is an extreme measure, only to be 
introduced  in  a  situation  of  massive  overvaluation,  with  the  aim  of  averting  the  worst 
developments. It is neither a panacea capable of solving all the problems facing the Swiss 
economy, nor can it simply be implemented for  any desired level, free of any risk. On the 
contrary. A minimum exchange rate can only be successfully implemented if there is a clear 
economic  justification  for  its  introduction,  such  as  a  massive  overvaluation  resulting  from 
adverse developments on the foreign exchange market. Within the framework of a system of 
flexible exchange rates, it is also important that it be internationally accepted, and that it is 
not  seen  as  a  competitive  depreciation.  Finally,  a  vital  element  in  the  successful 
implementation of such an exchange rate is the central bank’s credibility, in other words, the 
belief that the central bank will indeed defend the minimum exchange rate, if need be.  
Financial  markets  are  constantly  changing  their  assessment  of  risks.  A  situation  may  also 
occur  in  which  the  market  decides  to  test  the  defence  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate. 
Consequently, the SNB is present in the foreign exchange market at all times and is always 
prepared to purchase unlimited quantities of euros at CHF 1.20 per euro, in order to enforce 
the minimum exchange rate. When trading took place at less than CHF 1.20 per euro, it was 
only for a few seconds and resulted from market idiosyncrasies. Since 6 September, the best 
rate  in  the  market  for  the  sale  of  euros  against  Swiss  francs  has  never  fallen  below 
CHF 1.20. The SNB was thus able to successfully enforce the minimum exchange rate even 
under extremely difficult conditions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
These  considerations  clearly  show  that  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  exchange  rate  is 
associated with risks. Under certain circumstances, implementing such a rate can lead to a 
very considerable expansion of foreign currency reserves. The SNB is prepared to bear the 
risk. Indeed, in summer 2011, the situation had become so acute that, by early September, 
the  SNB  felt  that  there  was  no  longer  any  alternative  to  introducing  a  minimum  exchange 
rate. Doing nothing would have had an extremely negative impact on our economy.  
Even at a rate of CHF 1.20 per euro, the Swiss franc remains overvalued. We are acutely 
aware that considerable challenges still remain for the Swiss economy, despite the minimum 
exchange  rate.  One  particular  reason  for  this  is  the  fact  that  the  international  economy  is 
recovering at only a moderate pace. In addition, there is a very high level of uncertainty in the 
international environment. An appreciation of the Swiss franc at the current time would again 
expose Switzerland to considerable risks and, once more, endanger both price stability and 
the  stabilisation  of  the  economy.  Given  this  situation,  the  SNB  will  enforce  the  minimum 
exchange rate with the utmost determination. If developments in the international economy 
are worse than foreseen, or if the Swiss franc does not weaken further as expected, renewed 
downside risks for price stability could emerge. Should the economic outlook and the threat 
of deflation require it, the SNB is prepared at any time to take further measures.  
As  you  will  probably  have  deduced  from  this  account,  seen  from  today’s  vantage  point, 
interest  rates  in  Switzerland  are  likely  to  remain  low  for  a  while  yet.  This  expansionary 
monetary policy is indispensable from the point of view of the economy as a whole. In that it 
has significantly reduced the threat to the economy and the threat of a deflationary trend, the 
current monetary policy is also contributing to financial stability – in the short term. Both a 
deep recession and a deflationary trend would pose a threat to the banking system.  
In the longer term, a period of low interest rates carries the risk that imbalances will build up. 
In Switzerland, the current low-interest-rate period has now lasted for over three years. We 
are  –  in  fact  –  currently  observing  increasing  signs  of  adverse  developments  in  the  Swiss 
mortgage  and  real  estate  market  for  residential  property.  The  explanatory  power  of 
fundamental  factors  in  explaining  the  developments  in  residential  real  estate  prices  is 
decreasing steadily, while the volume of mortgage loans in comparison to GDP has never 
been  so  high.  Should  these  imbalances  increase  further,  considerable  risks  to  financial 
stability could emerge.  
Given  this  situation,  the  SNB  has  strongly  advocated  the  introduction  of  a  countercyclical 
capital  buffer  in  Switzerland.  This  buffer  would  not  be  a  permanent  increase  in  equity 
requirements for banks. It is only to be activated temporarily in the event of excessive growth 
in domestic mortgage lending. As soon as lending growth weakens again, the buffer can be 
deactivated. An instrument of this kind was examined in detail last year by a working group 
headed  by  the  Federal  Department  of  Finance,  to  which  both  FINMA  and  the  SNB  also 
belonged.  The  group  proposed  that  the  buffer  be  introduced  rapidly  so  that  a  suitable 
instrument would be in place, in case the imbalances in the Swiss mortgage and real estate 
market increased further.  
Concluding remarks  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  will  have  gathered  from  my  remarks  today,  the  challenges 
facing the SNB have not diminished. Consequently, it is all the more important that we are 
able  to  devote  our  complete  attention  to  our  tasks,  now  and  in  the  future.  The  SNB’s 
monetary policy decisions are directed purely and solely at fulfilling its statutory mandate. It is 
our responsibility to ensure price stability. In doing so, we take account of the development of 
the economy and make a contribution to the stability of the financial system.  
The SNB pursues a monetary policy that serves the interests of the country as a whole, and 
we fulfil this mandate as an independent central bank. To do this, we continue to rely on the 
total commitment of our staff, whom I would like to thank – also in the name of my colleague, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Jean-Pierre Danthine – for their hard work and their solidarity with the SNB. We thank our 
shareholders  for  their  continuing  support.  And  we  thank  you  all  for  taking  such  a  great 
interest in the activities of the SNB. Finally, we would also like to thank our former colleague 
and Chairman of the SNB Governing Board, Philipp Hildebrand, for the good collaboration 
we  enjoyed  over  the  years.  We  very  much  regret  his  resignation  and  the  circumstances 
leading up to it.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
