Andreas Dombret: Foreign banks between financial crisis and financial 
stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to mark the 30th anniversary of the Association of Foreign Banks in Germany, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 22 August 2012. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Let me begin by offering the Bundesbank’s warm congratulations to you, Mr Winter, and all 
the members of the Association of Foreign Banks in Germany on its jubilee 30th anniversary. 
Thirty years is quite a long period of time – nearly one-third of a century – and something of a 
landmark. As the old saying used to go, “Never trust anyone over 30”. That catchphrase was 
popularised by the 1968 student movement – the students who used it are now themselves 
over 60!  
Trust  is  indeed  the  key  word.  Its  importance  is  being  learned  by  governments  and  banks 
alike as the sovereign debt and financial crisis tightens. So it is a good thing that the day-to-
day dealings between the banking associations and individual banks, on the one hand, and 
central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities,  on  the  other,  are  characterised  by  mutual 
confidence  and  trust  –  notwithstanding  the  necessary  arm’s-length  relationship  between 
central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities,  on  the  one  hand,  and  banks  and  their 
associations, on the other.  
I can say that because I have worked in both camps. I was once a foreign banker myself. 
Since  joining  the  Bundesbank  in  2010,  I  have  had  a  chance  to  see  things  from  the  other 
perspective. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the constructive cooperation 
I have been privileged to enjoy with all banking associations over the past two years.  
I  hope  that  this  cordial  relationship  will  continue  in  future  –  including  after  the  possible 
emergence  of  a  new,  overarching  single  European  supervisory  body.  If  it  is  carefully 
conceived and constructed, it could make an important contribution to safeguarding financial 
stability.  And  it  might  well  refashion  the  current  triangular  relationship  between  banks, 
supervisors  and  central  banks.  Let  me  nail  my  colours  to  the  mast  right  away:  I  do  not 
believe  that  it  is  absolutely  essential  for  the  central  bank  to  have  ultimate  supervisory 
responsibility 
the  synergies  provided  by  central  banks’ 
macroeconomic  and  macroprudential  expertise.  The  crucial  requirement  is  the  efficient 
exchange of information.  
to  capitalise  on 
in  order 
Stimulating competition 
2 
In his book Fault Lines – How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy, former 
IMF chief economist Raghuram Rajan argues that a fault line is created when two different 
financial  systems  based  on  different  principles  interact.  He  is  referring  to  the  contrasting 
cultures  of  the  capital  markets  and  relationship  banking.  Financial  market  integration  has 
certainly  increased  the  possibilities  of  contagion.  However,  I  do  not  believe  that  the  “fault 
line” necessarily runs along the border between the capital market and relationship banking. 
Seen  from  the  perspective  of  a  universal  bank,  drawing  a  rigid  distinction  between  capital 
market  orientation  and  a  banking  philosophy  seems  a  huge  oversimplification.  Germany’s 
universal banks came through the financial crisis pretty well on the whole. And the contacts 
between  foreign  banks  and  German  banks  have  stimulated  and  enlivened  competition, 
benefiting  both  groups  of  banks.  Moreover,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  foreign  banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
operating  in  Germany,  which  each  bear  the  specific  hallmarks  of  their  home  country,  are 
probably the most heterogeneous group of banks included in the Bundesbank’s statistics. 
How  important  are  foreign  banks  in  Germany’s  banking  system?  For  many  foreign  banks, 
traditional banking activities account for just a small part of their business. This makes their 
market share – currently 12.9% measured in terms of total assets – all the more remarkable. 
This trend has been driven by the arrival of new banks through mergers as well as growth, 
particularly in deposit business and instalment loans. The approximately 30,000 members of 
staff employed by foreign banks at the German financial centre do make quite a meaningful 
impact on employment. These figures point to a significant influence.  
In some business lines, especially those involving the capital markets, foreign banks have a 
much more prominent position than in traditional banking fields. Today, it is hard to imagine 
M&A  activity  in  Germany  without  the  influence  of  the  Anglo-American  banking  culture. 
Foreign banks play an important role in advising and assisting on German corporate bond 
issues; the same goes for IPOs and capital increases.  
The financial crisis has naturally also led to the market withdrawal of individual foreign banks. 
On the whole, however, it has thankfully not triggered a mass exodus of foreign banks from 
Germany – unlike in some other countries.  
For a long time, foreign banks struggled to gain a foothold in the German market. Banks that 
accept deposits and grant loans normally had to begin by setting up a branch network as a 
prerequisite for winning new customers.  
The  creation  of the  single  market  in  Europe  has  made things  much  easier. The  European 
Passport made it possible to set up branches anywhere in the EU without requiring additional 
authorisation.  However,  barriers  to  market  entry  still  remained.  These  included  the  high 
overhead  costs  of  creating  a  branch  network,  the  challenge  of  finding  skilled  staff,  the 
continued strong importance of brand names, and the justifiably high reputation of German 
banks among German clients.  
In this tough business environment, foreign banks wanting to expand into Germany had to 
rely on innovation and cost-efficiency. They were given a helping hand by liberalisation and 
the technological advances of the internet in the 1990s; this gave foreign banks a fast and 
low-cost channel for communicating with customers.  
And they seized their chance. Some foreign banks therefore set up shop as online banks to 
conduct deposit business but also to engage in business with standardised consumer loans. 
For retail customers this translated directly into a larger product range at lower prices. That is 
good both for customers and for competition.  
Providing advice and expertise to enterprises is a key investment banking service, and one 
from  which  German  firms  have  benefited.  That  requires  putting  down  roots  in  the  real 
economy  and  offering  a  real  service.  And  the  last  few  years  have  taught  us  that  foreign 
banks with roots in the real sector are unlikely to pull out in times of financial crisis.  
Integrated  financial  markets  per  se  enhance  economic  growth  and  our  prosperity.  Foreign 
banks  in  Germany  constitute  a  part  of  this  financial  market  integration.  The  downside  of 
integration  is  that  market  players  are  much  more  interconnected,  which  means  that  crises 
spill over more quickly from one country to another. This can lead to dislocations. However, 
that is simply the reality of today’s financial world. 
Capital: the key to greater trust 
3 
Having, or building up, sufficient capital is essential, particularly in the current climate. And it 
is also crucial to restoring confidence and trust.  
In its last Financial Stability Review, the Bundesbank wrote that, in times of systemic stress, 
“the task of restoring confidence is not merely the responsibility of an individual bank but also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
a call to arms for the system as a whole”. This demands not just adequate capitalisation of 
national banking systems but also convincing Europe-wide solutions.  
I’ll make no bones about it: a level of capitalisation that just meets the minimum supervisory 
requirements  would  fall  far  short  of  what  is  needed,  in  my  view.  I  think  it  was  the  UK 
economist Charles Goodhart who told the following tale to illustrate the dangers of minimalist 
compliance.  
A weary traveller arrives at a rural railway station. To his delight, he sees exactly one taxi 
waiting  there  and  asks  the  driver  to  take  him  to  his  destination.  To  his  amazement,  the 
cabdriver tells him: “I would love to take you there but cannot, I’m afraid”. 
“Why not?”, he asks, flabbergasted.  
“There is a local bye-law that says a taxi has to be here at all times.” 
“But a taxi is here.” 
“Ah  yes,  but  if  I take  you  home, there would  no  longer  be  a  taxi  waiting  here.  That would 
violate the bye-law.”  
This is what can happen with statutory minimum requirements. Only capital in excess of the 
minimum  requirements  is  available  to  truly  and  independently  absorb  business  risk.  In  an 
actual crisis, it is only this capital that can be used to buy the time needed, for instance, to 
write down impaired assets, adjust portfolios or restructure business units.  
In an ideal world, of course, such buffers should be built up before systemic events occur. 
That is the rationale behind capital cushions. They provide a certain breathing space before 
institutions  are  forced  to  unload  risky  assets  and  curb  their  lending.  If  the  buffers  are  too 
small, however, the pressure to deleverage during a shock can become overwhelming and 
cyclical movements may be amplified. 
This is where public capital assistance comes into play. In theory, it provides a counterweight 
and reduces deleveraging pressure. 
4 
Getting the basics right: aspects of a European system of banking 
supervision 
The reality can be much rougher, however, for a euro-area country that is struggling to cope 
with  the  close  interlinkages  between  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  banking  crisis.  The 
stability of the banking sector is then called into question because the country is no longer 
regarded as being fully  capable of resolving its banking crisis unassisted. For such cases, 
the EFSF has clear rules according to which other euro-area countries can step in to help 
that country. The affected country remains the partner for the donor countries’ assistance. 
By providing such assistance, the donor countries are already taking on considerable risks. 
Extending this risk-sharing role, as is being proposed in connection with a banking union – in 
the  form,  for  example,  of  a  European  restructuring  fund  or  a  European  deposit  insurance 
scheme  –  would  necessitate  far  more  extensive  intervention  in  countries’  national 
sovereignty and in their fiscal and economic policies. I hope you will agree with me that joint 
liability must not be allowed to be introduced covertly through the back door. 
Instead, joint liability must be predicated on two basic principles. One is the unity of liability 
and control. As long as control rests with nation-states, liability must rest there, too. This is 
important  to  avoid  promoting  excessively  risky  business  models  that  threaten  financial 
stability.  Moreover,  no  incentives  should  be  created  to  build  a  bloated  financial  industry  in 
individual countries that is way out of proportion to the size of the real economy. 
The other principle that must be observed is taking the appropriate steps in the right order. 
The logical sequence requires, first, further moves towards European control, which in turn 
necessitate democratic legitimacy and accountability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I am firmly convinced that all concrete proposals must be informed by these considerations 
and guided by these principles.  
Moreover, many important details remain to be clarified. These remaining uncertainties have 
perhaps contributed to the intensity of the recent public debate on this topic. In a situation 
marked by uncertainty it can even happen that one or two economics professors sign both a 
petition  and  the  corresponding  counter-petition.  And  this  does  not  even  have  to  be  a 
contradiction if the two countervailing positions depart from different assumptions concerning 
the principles and the details of their implementation.  
One  of  the  questions  regarding  a  possible  pan-European  banking  supervision  regime  that 
still needs to be clarified is the range of countries that will be subject to it: should it cover all 
EU  member-states  or  only  the  euro-area  countries?  Given  the  interlinkages  between 
financial  institutions throughout the  EU  and  against the  background  of  the  single market, I 
see  merits  in  integrating  all  EU  member-states  in  a  European  supervisory  structure.  This 
would strengthen the single market, it would be consistent with the Single Rule Book, and it 
would help to create a level playing field.  
Taking this logic further, it would make sense in principle for all banks to be supervised by 
this  European  authority.  In  line  with  the  principle  of  subsidiarity,  the  European  supervisory 
authority could then delegate the supervision of systemically unimportant banks to national 
authorities, subject to the proviso that such banks could then be brought back into the fold of 
European  supervision  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  I  believe  a  Europe-wide  prudential  regime 
would  definitely  benefit  from  the  operational  involvement  of  national  supervisory  agencies. 
Such involvement, in fact, may well be essential.  
A key issue for central banks is the precise nature of their involvement in European banking 
supervision.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  ought  to  play  a  role,  given  their  wealth  of 
macroeconomic and macroprudential expertise, as this is the only way to exploit synergies. 
The question, however, is how this can be best accomplished. I believe that central banks do 
not necessarily need to assume ultimate responsibility for supervision. The key imperative is, 
rather, for supervisory agencies and central banks to cooperate efficiently and, above all, to 
exchange information.  
In my view, this would be consistent with central bank involvement in operational supervision. 
In this manner, potential conflicts with ensuring the independence of monetary policy can be 
avoided and the credibility of central banks maintained.  
It follows from this that an agency other than the ECB could be given ultimate responsibility 
for  supervision.  Supervisory  powers  imply  extensive  rights  of  intervention  which,  in  turn, 
require direct democratic legitimacy and accountability. Thus if the central bank were to have 
ultimate sovereign responsibility, its independence would have to be constrained. And let us 
not forget either that monetary policy decisions can also impact on banks’ robustness. This 
might well cause a conflict of objectives. 
All of these arguments are, I believe, sound reasons not to transfer ultimate responsibility to 
the ECB but, instead, to a different authority headed by a council in which the banks’ home 
countries  are  adequately  represented.  Such  representation  should  reflect  the  size  of  each 
country’s banking industry. In such a set-up, the ECB would undoubtedly play a particularly 
important and wide-ranging advisory role.  
Whatever solution is ultimately implemented, I am firmly convinced that monetary policy and 
prudential supervision should be kept as far apart as possible.  
If a European supervisory regime is based on the right principles and its detailed workings 
are well thought out and implemented, it has a good chance of making a major contribution 
to financial stability.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusions 
5 
Those are a few thoughts that I wanted to share with you going forward. Your anniversary 
has undoubtedly come at a critical juncture for the world of finance. The sovereign debt and 
banking crisis will probably keep us occupied for quite some time to come. The problems are 
deep rooted. The future will tell how well we have been able to cope with the challenges of 
our  time.  However,  of  this  I  am  convinced:  if  the  right  measures  are  taken,  a  very  good 
solution will emerge in the end. 
On this note, I would like to congratulate you once again on your landmark anniversary and 
thank you for being such an attentive audience.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
