Peter Praet: The role of the central bank and euro area governments in 
times of crisis 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the German Federal Ministry of Finance, Berlin, 19 April 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Maximilian  Freier  and  Gianluigi  Ferrucci  for  their  contribution  in  the  preparation  of  this 
speech. 
Introduction 
Since  2007,  we  have  constantly  been  confronted  with  exceptionally  tense  financial  and 
economic conditions. When the tensions in the financial markets first emerged in the summer 
of 2007, they were perceived as a liquidity shock. However, the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in September 2008 – the first climax of the crisis – revealed more fundamental fragilities in 
the global financial system.  
The  accumulated  credit  excesses,  paired  with  the  complex  cross-country  linkages  in  the 
financial markets, quickly exacerbated the financial market tensions on the other side of the 
Atlantic, transforming them into a crisis of global dimensions.  
The  resulting  Great  Recession  of  2009  affected  virtually  all  industrialised  countries  and 
caused  other  weaknesses  in  the  economic  and  financial  system  to  be  crystallised. 
Specifically, the severe economic contraction worsened the fiscal positions in many countries 
around  the  world,  particularly  in  those  that  already  had  sustained  public  or  private  debt 
imbalances before the crisis.  
The subsequent tensions in some sovereign debt markets have spilled back into the financial 
markets.  As  safe  assets,  sovereign  bonds  play  a  key  role  in  financial  systems.  The 
weakening of this status of being a safe asset in some countries added renewed fragility to 
financial institutions. 
Five years into the crisis, there remain manifold challenges to global financial and economic 
stability.  The  situation  continues  to  be  extraordinarily  complex,  and  there  are  no  easy 
solutions on offer.  
The exceptional dimension of the crisis – the real threat it presents for the prosperity of the 
people  in  Europe  and  around  the  world  –  requires  a  forceful  response  by  national  and 
international  authorities.  However,  several  factors  are  limiting  the  capacity  of  authorities  to 
react  around  to  world.  Most  importantly,  the  weak  fiscal  positions  of  many  countries  are 
placing severe constraints on the capacity of governments to – somehow – spend their way 
out of the crisis.  
In some cases, this has led to calls on monetary authorities to act more. In addressing the 
crisis,  we  should  not  forget  that  policy  responses  shape  future  expectations.  We  cannot 
afford  to  take  measures  that  entail  the  risk  of  adverse  economic  consequences,  such  as 
moral hazard in fiscal policies or an unanchoring of inflation expectations.  
In my remarks, I will focus on the euro area’s framework for economic governance and on 
the crisis resolution measures taken in there. In view of enormous challenges that had to be 
dealt  with,  both  the  ECB  and  the  euro  area  governments  have  taken  important  policy 
measures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The euro area economic governance framework and the crisis 
Let me first briefly review the economic governance of the euro area at the outset. 
The most distinctive feature of EMU is that it combines a single monetary policy with largely 
decentralised fiscal and economic policies. In such a framework, a key challenge is to ensure 
a  high  degree  of  self-responsibility  or,  expressed  in  other  words,  to  ensure  that  unsound 
national policies do not even materialise and do not, in any event, undermine the stability of 
the common currency.  
These  challenges  were  abundantly  clear  to  the  founding  fathers  of  EMU:  rules  on  fiscal 
spending  were  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  and  supplemented  by  systems  for  the 
coordination  of  economic  policy.  Together,  they  are  now  generally  referred  to  as  the 
European economic governance framework. 
The fiscal constraints in EMU – given the two reference values, namely the ceilings of 3% of 
GDP  on  budget  deficits  and  of  60%  of  GDP  on  government  debt  –  are  probably  the  best 
known  elements  of  the  fiscal  framework.  But  the  framework  was,  in  fact,  far  more 
comprehensive,  even  before  the  recent  reform  of  economic  governance.  A  set  of  rules 
imposed  preventive  limits  on  government  borrowing,  requiring  Member  States  to  achieve 
close-to-balance budgets over the business cycle. These rules were meant to place debt on 
a sustainable footing and, at the same time, to create fiscal room for manoeuvre for “rainy 
days”.  
A surveillance procedure was also put in place to verify that all the parties involved complied 
with  the  agreed  fiscal  targets.  And  in  the  case  of  non-compliance,  a  “corrective  arm”  was 
envisaged, starting with warnings and ultimately culminating in sanctions, in order to ensure 
that governments would quickly reduce any excessive deficit through progressive corrective 
steps. 
The  fiscal  rules  were  complemented  by  additional  elements,  such  as  the  Broad  Economic 
Policy  Guidelines,  which  were  introduced  as  a  tool  to  ensure  a  convergence  of  economic 
policies  and  performance  across  Member  States  and  to  foster  economic  growth  and 
employment, as well as to attain the ambitious goals set in the “Lisbon Agenda”. 
How has the European framework for economic governance been applied and how well has 
it served Europe? 
It is true that the euro area has fared reasonably well in macroeconomic terms. For instance, 
real GDP growth per capita in the euro area has not lagged behind that in the United States. 
Over  the  same  period  under  review,  more  jobs  were  created  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the 
United States.  
However, the European governance framework was unable to ensure fiscal soundness and 
macroeconomic stability in all euro area Member States. Some Member States had already 
accumulated large fiscal imbalances in good times. The fiscal policy framework suffered from 
weak implementation, in particular after the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) in 
2005.  
Other  macroeconomic  imbalances,  particularly  divergences  in  competitiveness,  were  also 
allowed to develop over a number of years prior to the crisis. In some Member States, wage 
increases significantly exceeded productivity gains and this, in turn, caused unit labour costs 
to rise substantially. 
When  the  global  financial  crisis  hit  the  real  economy  in  2009,  the  budgetary  effects  of 
automatic stabilisers in the tax and benefit systems, the fiscal stimulus packages introduced 
by governments and the support provided to the financial sector led to a sharp deterioration 
in the fiscal positions of all euro area countries. External and domestic imbalances mounted, 
especially in weaker euro area countries. This led to severe tensions in financial markets and 
to the emergence of risks of adverse spillovers to the rest of the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One  could  divide  into  four  categories  the  ways  in  which  countries  could  have  addressed 
sovereign debt problems in the past. First, and most naturally, governments pursue a course 
of fiscal consolidation. Second, as tended to be the case in some countries, central banks 
can  monetise  public  debt,  i.e.  finance  government  debt  and  deficits  by  issuing  additional 
money. Third, governments can decide not to honour their obligations and simply default on 
their  outstanding  debt.  Finally,  as  occurred  in  a  few  exceptional  cases,  third  parties  can 
decide  to  assume  the  debt  and  deficits  of  their  vulnerable  counterparts,  thus  typically 
transferring resources from economically stronger to weaker entities. 
European Union legislation clearly rules out the monetisation and bail-out options. Article 123 
of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  prohibits  any  form  of  monetary 
financing  of  public  debt  or  deficits;  Article 124  forbids  privileged  access  to  financial 
institutions by the public sector; and the “no-bail-out clause” in Article 125 precludes that one 
Member State becomes liable for the liabilities of another Member State.  
These articles are based on sound economic principles. Monetisation would inevitably lead 
to higher inflation, with the well-known costs to economic prosperity. Transfers between euro 
area  Member  States  would  –  particularly  in  the  absence  of  far  more  rigid  fiscal  rules  and 
sanction mechanisms at European level – risk creating significant moral hazard effects in the 
beneficiary countries, and would thus further undermine the long-term economic stability in 
the euro area. 
Also, the ECB has long warned against the third option – the restructuring of sovereign debt 
in the euro area. The exchanging of debt, as in the case of Greece, should remain a unique 
event.  In  this  respect,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  contagion  effects  of  such  measures  are 
difficult to control, as has been demonstrated by the high volatility of financial markets over 
the  past  year.  In  addition,  debt  restructuring  does  not  in  itself  address  the  underlying 
economic fiscal and structural imbalances. 
There  is  only  one  way  of  solving  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area  countries: 
governments should pursue policies of strict fiscal consolidation and far-reaching structural 
reforms  so  as  to  address  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  return  their  countries  to 
sustainable paths of growth. The ECB should support the adjustment process in the Member 
States in the best manner possible, namely by providing price stability in the euro area as a 
whole. 
The ECB’s response to the crisis 
Let me now address the measures taken by the ECB in response to the crisis, before turning 
to the response by the euro area governments. 
During  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  been  confronted  with  unprecedented  threats  to  monetary 
stability  in  the  euro  area.  Broadly  speaking,  these  have  come  from  two  sources:  first,  the 
deflationary  forces  stemming  from  the  economic  downturn  and,  second,  the  impairment  of 
the transmission of its monetary policy, which reflected to the growing tensions in financial 
markets.  
The ECB had to react decisively to these challenges.  
First, we used our standard monetary policy measures to address the downward pressures 
on price stability that resulted from the sharp slowdown in economic activity in the crisis. In 
full consistency with our mandate, we reduced our key policy interest rate rapidly between 
October 2008 and May 2009, from 4.25% to 1%. In other words, we reduced our policy rate 
faster than any euro area country has ever done in recent history. 
Given  that  the  ECB  has  ensured  that  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole 
remain very solidly anchored, we have been able to maintain an accommodative monetary 
policy stance over the past four years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Second, we took additional non-standard measures to ensure that our interest rate decisions 
were transmitted effectively to the broader economy, despite the volatilities in the financial 
sector.  If  banks  cannot  easily  access  the  money  market  or  other  sources  of  finance,  they 
may not extend credit to households and companies, to the detriment of economic growth 
and employment. 
At  the  outset  of  the  crisis  in  2007,  the  ECB  reacted  immediately  to  the  rapidly  worsening 
liquidity conditions and heightened credit risk, particularly in the interbank markets.  
When stress in the financial markets re-emerged in the autumn of last year, the Governing 
Council of the ECB again took a series of measures to enhance the provision of liquidity to 
the banking system and to actively support lending, notably introducing two very long-term 
refinancing operations with a maturity of three years, which were conducted in December last 
year  and  in  February  this  year.  The  exceptionally  long  maturity  of  these  operations  gave 
banks a longer horizon for their liquidity planning. It is also helping them to deleverage in a 
balanced and orderly manner over the medium term, thereby avoiding “fire sales” of assets 
and a downscaling of longer-term lending. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  crucial  that  all  the  crisis  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  to  ensure 
monetary  stability  in  the  euro  area  –  the  standard  and  the  non-standard  –  do  not  create 
adverse  incentives  for  market  participants  or  unanchor  inflationary  expectations.  For  this 
reason,  the  ECB  has  been  very  clear  that  the  measures  it  has  taken  are  designed  to  be 
temporary in nature.  
Let me also emphasise that our non-standard measures do not in any way impinge upon our 
capacity to tighten our monetary policy stance in response to inflationary pressures.  
In  all  our  actions,  we  have  been  careful  to  keep  inflation  expectations  well-anchored  and 
have remained faithful to our mandate to preserve price stability in the euro area over the 
medium term. Our mandate is what has guided, and will continue to guide, all our monetary 
policy decisions.  
But the success of the ECB’s crisis measures in maintaining monetary stability in the euro 
area should not let anyone believe that monetary policy is the medicine that can solve the 
underlying, more structural problems in the euro area. The lasting resolution of the crisis is 
the responsibility of the euro area governments. 
The euro area governments’ responses to the crisis 
Euro area governments face three main challenges. First, they need to address the internal 
and external macroeconomic imbalances. Second, they have to restore confidence in, and 
stability  to,  the  European  financial  system.  Third,  they  must  deal  with  the  remaining 
shortcomings in the institutional design of EMU. Let me elaborate on these factors in turn. 
First,  the  rebalancing  of  the  euro  area  economies  requires,  first  and  foremost,  that  public 
sector  expenditure  is  brought  back  to  a  sustainable  path  and  that  the  debt  overhang  is 
reduced. This is, of course, particularly true for those euro area countries that are currently 
under an EU/IMF programme or are experiencing disruptions in their sovereign debt markets. 
Much  remains  to  be  done,  but  we  should  not  forget  the  steps  that  have  already  been  
taken – although there is no room for complacency.  
Based on a direct estimation of revenue and spending (rather than on the cyclically adjusted 
primary balance), the cumulative fiscal consolidation achieved thus far is in excess of 10% of 
GDP in each of the three countries under EU/IMF programmes. While some countries have, 
most regrettably, fallen behind the targets in their programme, the consolidation efforts are 
significant in absolute terms.  
One of the reasons why countries did not reach their headline deficit targets is to be found in 
the economic headwinds they are experiencing. Negative economic growth, higher interest 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
payments  and  higher  social  security  spending  have  led  to  quasi-automatic  increases  in 
expenditure and obscure the fiscal consolidation efforts. This stresses the importance of the 
implementation  of  well-designed  and  ambitious  fiscal  adjustment  programmes  being 
accompanied by growth-enhancing structural reforms. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  long-term  effects  of  fiscal  consolidation  on  growth  and 
employment  are  positive  and  significant.  Whereas  fiscal  consolidation  may  have  a 
dampening  effect  on  economic  activity  in  the  short  run,  the  extent  to  which  it  does  so 
depends  on  several  factors,  such  as  the  composition  of  the  fiscal  adjustment.  National 
authorities  need  to  set  ambitious  and  credible  targets,  and  to  stick  to  them.  Even  small 
deviations  from  the  targets  can  quickly  jeopardise  the  progress  made  and  undermine 
confidence. 
To  address  imbalances,  countries  also  need  to  take  structural  measures  and  deal  with 
market  rigidities.  Suitable  structural  reforms  can  have  a  positive  impact  on  growth  and 
employment  already  in  the  relatively  short  term,  and  can  thus  also  help  to  mitigate  the 
negative effects of consolidation. Structural adjustment nevertheless remains difficult, but not 
impossible. This is proved by the experience in the Federal Republic of Germany over the 
past years. Losses in competitiveness after the reunification boom in the early 1990s were 
effectively addressed by means of moderate wage growth over extended periods of time.  
At  the  same  time,  the  German  experience  shows  how  well-targeted  structural  reforms 
strengthen  potential  growth  and  boost  employment.  The  labour  and  welfare  reforms 
contributed significantly to positive economic developments in Germany over past years.  
In  the  remaining  time,  let  me  also  briefly  address  the  other  two  challenges  faced  by  euro 
area  governments,  namely  the  instability  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  remaining 
deficiencies in the European economic governance framework.  
Banks should continue to strengthen their balance sheets. The financial system has to return 
to fulfilling its primary task of providing credit to the real economy. But, as I have said before, 
euro  area  governments  also  have  to  do  their  part.  Sound  fiscal  positions  across  the  euro 
area will contribute significantly to strengthening confidence in a banking sector that relies 
heavily on government bonds as safe assets and for use as collateral.  
At the same time, euro area governments need to further  strengthen the macro-prudential 
framework at the national and the European level. As you know, the European Systemic Risk 
Board is developing tools to identify and address potential future sources of systemic risk in 
the EU. And the three new European supervisory authorities – for banking, for insurance and 
occupational  pensions,  and  for  securities  and  markets  –  are  strengthening  our  focus  on 
spillovers within the EU’s financial system. However, one important element in the framework 
for  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  euro  area  is  still  missing.  We  still  have  no  clear 
mechanism  in  place  to  deal  with  the  systemic  risk  emanating  from  large  cross-border 
financial institutions. We should intensify ongoing work on the establishment of a mechanism 
for the resolution of bank failures at the European level. 
This  brings  me  to  the  third  challenge  that  euro  area  governments  face:  the  elimination  of 
remaining institutional deficits in the euro area governance framework.  
European  governments  have  made  considerable  progress  on  this  front.  In  particular,  they 
have  reinforced  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  with  more  “automaticity”  and  less  room  for 
discretion in the application of the preventive and corrective arms. In addition, the European 
fiscal  compact  will  ensure  strong  national  budgetary  frameworks  in  order  to  facilitate 
compliance with the government’s obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact. And EU 
Member States have introduced a surveillance mechanism that aims to prevent and correct 
macroeconomic imbalances within the EU. 
It  is  now  essential  that  the  new  governance  framework  is  implemented  to  the  letter.  Our 
governance framework has lost much credibility that must now be carefully reacquired.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Here, particular responsibility rests with the national authorities. In particular, the European 
governance framework will function best if national finance ministries conscientiously perform 
their role with respect to multilateral surveillance.  
The sovereign debt crisis has taught us unequivocally that – in spite of the no-bail-out clause 
in Article 125 of the Treaty – the euro area countries are not insulated from one another. In 
an integrated single European market with a single European currency, spillover effects from 
one  Member  State  to  the  other  should  make  us  all  take  a  strong  interest  in  the  pursuit  of 
sound fiscal and structural policies by our European partners. 
Because of the close integration of the European economies, governments have also set up 
a European crisis resolution mechanism, the European Stability Mechanism. Its purpose is 
not, as some have argued, to bail out euro area countries that have failed to pursue sound 
economic  policies.  Its  stated  purpose  is  to  safeguard  financial  stability  if  one  or  more 
countries endanger the euro area as a whole.  
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  ECB’s  policies  have  been  guided  by  price  stability  considerations,  with 
policies targeted at those elements of the crisis that threatened to prevent it from fulfilling its 
mandate. 
Responsibility for the resolution of the sovereign debt crisis rests with the governments of the 
euro  area  Member  States.  Major  progress  has  been  made  in  terms  of  fiscal  consolidation 
and the enhancement of the euro area governance framework.  
But we are not there yet. Governments need to urgently implement their fiscal consolidation 
programmes and to accompany these with well-designed structural reforms in the labour and 
product  markets.  The  new  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  rules  of  the  European  governance 
framework need to be implemented to the letter. And the crisis management mechanisms at 
the euro area level need to be designed so as to ensure financial stability in the euro area. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
