William C Dudley: Job polarization in the region 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York, 
30 May 2012. 
 Good afternoon  and  welcome  once  again  to  the  New  York  Fed’s  Quarterly  Regional 
Economic  Press  Briefing.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  talk  with  the  journalists 
covering our region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will focus 
on regional economic conditions, with particular attention to job polarization, which I would 
define as the expansion of the number of jobs at the upper and lower ends of the wage and 
skill distribution and a shrinking of job opportunities for those in the middle. We will see how 
these trends are playing out in our region. As always, what I have to say reflects my own 
views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
National economic conditions 
The U.S. economy is continuing to slowly recover from the after-effects of the housing boom 
and bust and the financial crisis. But the recovery has been disappointing. Indeed, when we 
look  back  at  economic  forecasts  made  over  the  past  three  or  four  years  it  is  notable  that 
growth  has  systematically  fallen  short  of  both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  private-sector 
forecasts. 
Despite what has been an unusually accommodative monetary policy by historical standards, 
the economy has grown at only a 2.1 percent pace over the last four quarters and the Blue 
Chip consensus forecast only anticipates a modest acceleration to a 2.4 percent rate over 
the next four quarters. 
The  headwinds  retarding  recovery  are  well  known.  Consumers  have  been  deleveraging  in 
response to the large losses in wealth generated in large part by the collapse in home prices. 
Housing  activity  remains  depressed  for  many  reasons.  These  include  the  large  shadow 
inventory  making  its  way  through  the  foreclosure  pipeline,  tight  underwriting  standards  for 
new mortgage origination, and the sharp slowdown in household formation. 
Although the corporate sector as a whole is now reasonably healthy, there still is a significant 
constraint on the availability of credit to small business. Fiscal policy has become restrictive 
as state and local governments have cut expenditures in response to revenue shortfalls; and 
the  uncertainty  about  how  Congress  and  the  Administration  will  address  the  2013  federal 
“fiscal cliff” is likely to inhibit hiring and investment by business. Global economic growth has 
slowed as European activity has stagnated and this is capping the demand for U.S. exports. 
On the brighter side, some of these headwinds appear to be subsiding. Employment growth 
has  picked  up  somewhat,  which  should  eventually  lead  to  faster  household  formation  and 
more demand for housing. U.S. banks are healthier so that credit conditions, while still tight, 
are gradually easing. And, households appear quite far along in the deleveraging process by 
a number of important measures. For example, the ratio of household debt service relative to 
income is back to levels last seen in the early 1990s. 
For  these  reasons,  I  expect  that  growth  will  gradually  strengthen  over  the  next  few  years. 
Nevertheless, significant downside risks remain, especially those related to the challenges in 
Europe and how the potential “fiscal cliff” in the United States will be resolved after the fall 
elections. Even if these risks do not materialize, I anticipate only slow progress toward full 
employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
On the inflation side, in recent years our forecasts have been noticeably more accurate than 
on the growth side, and we have succeeded in delivering inflation very close to our 2 percent 
price  stability  objective.  Through  March,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures  deflator,  overall  consumer  prices  have  risen  2.1  percent  over  the  past 
12 months, and prices excluding food and energy have risen 2.0 percent. 
But  price  trends  have  been  a  bit  stickier  than  one  might  have  anticipated  given  the  large 
amount of slack in the economy. To some degree, this likely reflects the anchoring exerted 
by stable inflation expectations. But some of the price pressures can be attributed to other, 
more temporary, factors:  
 
Higher oil and gasoline prices and their pass-through into the costs of other goods 
and services.  
Upward pressure on imputed homeowners rents due to increased demand for rental 
housing. 
Higher import prices for goods, such as apparel. This reflects many factors including 
commodity prices pressures and higher wage inflation in countries such as China.  
  Some  of  these  upward  pressures on  inflation appear  to  be  fading.  Oil  and  gasoline  prices 
have fallen in recent months. Apparel price inflation should gradually ease, given the sharp 
drop  seen  in  cotton  prices.  Owners’  equivalent  rent  should  also  eventually  stabilize  as 
multi-family  construction  picks  up  and  programs  that  shift  real  estate  owned  by  banks  to 
investors so they can be rented gear up.  
More  generally,  there  are  several  reasons  to  think  that  inflation  will  remain  moderate  and 
close  to  our  objective.  First,  and  most  obviously,  the  economy  continues  to  operate  with 
significant  slack.  Second,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  show  little  upward  pressure.  In 
fact, one – the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Underlying Inflation Gauge – is turning 
down.  This  measure  uses  a  very  wide  set  of  variables  to  forecast  the  underlying  inflation 
trend.  Third,  it  is  hard  to  be  very  concerned  about  inflation  risks  when  the  growth  rate  of 
nominal labor compensation is so low and stable. It is noteworthy to me that the employment 
cost  index  has  risen  only  2.1  percent  over  the  past  four  quarters  and  has  shown  no 
acceleration. Fourth, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. This is critically important 
because  inflation  expectations  are  an  important  driver  of  actual  inflation  outcomes.  Taking 
into  account  the  current  stance  of monetary  policy,  I  anticipate  that  inflation  will  decline to 
slightly below our 2 percent long-run objective over the next few years. 
So  what  does  this  all  imply  for  monetary  policy?  I  currently  anticipate  that  the  Federal 
Reserve’s federal funds rate target will remain exceptionally low – that is at the current level 
– at least through late 2014. 
Given our forecast of stable prices and a still slow path back to full employment, there is an 
argument for easing further. But, unfortunately, our tools have costs associated with them as 
well as benefits. Thus, we must weigh these costs against the benefits of further action. 
As  long  as  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  grow  sufficiently  fast  to  cut  into  the  nation’s 
unused economic resources at a meaningful pace, I think the benefits from further action are 
unlikely  to  exceed  the  costs.  But  if  the  economy  were  to  slow  so  that  we  were  no  longer 
making  material  progress  toward  full  employment,  the  downside  risks  to  growth  were  to 
increase  sharply,  or  if  deflation  risks  were  to  climb  materially,  then  the  benefits  of  further 
accommodation  would  increase  in  my  estimation  and  this  could  tilt  the  balance  toward 
additional easing. 
Under  such  circumstances,  further  balance  sheet  action  might  be  called  for.  We  could 
choose between further extension of the duration of the Federal Reserve’s existing Treasury 
portfolio  and  another  large-scale  asset  purchase  program  of  Treasuries  or  agency 
mortgage-backed securities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conversely,  I  would  be  willing  to  consider  tightening  policy  at  a  somewhat  earlier  stage  if 
growth  strengthened  sufficiently  to  materially  improve  the  medium-term  outlook  and 
substantially reduce tail risks, or if there was evidence of a genuine threat to medium-term 
inflation, including a rise in inflation expectations. In such a case, I would anticipate that the 
first step would be to bring in the late 2014 date of the policy guidance. This would effectively 
tighten  financial  conditions  not  only  by  changing  the  expected  path  of  short-term  interest 
rates, but also by bringing forward the expected start of balance sheet normalization. 
Regional economic conditions 
Let me turn now to the regional economy, the focus of our presentations today. Since our last 
briefing, the recovery in the region has picked up some steam. 
As  attendees  at  previous  regional  press  briefings  may  recall,  the  New  York  Fed  produces 
economic activity indexes to help monitor the performance of the regional economy. Based 
on these measures, activity in New York State and New York City has expanded at a healthy 
clip,  while  New  Jersey’s  growth  continues  at  a  more  moderate  pace.  In  Puerto  Rico,  the 
activity index produced by the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico shows that 
the  Island’s  downturn  appears  to  have  ended,  but  the  pick  up  that  we  noted  at  our  last 
briefing has not persisted and the level of activity there has stalled. 
Looking  at  payroll  employment,  however,  the  pattern  of  recovery  is  a  bit  more  positive, 
though mixed across the region. New York State and New York City saw faster job growth 
than the nation since our last briefing. Job creation in the city has been particularly robust 
and employment in the city is now above its pre-recession peak. In New Jersey, however, 
employment stands only slightly above where it was at our last briefing and still is well below 
its previous peak. In Puerto Rico, employment continues to fluctuate near its lows, with no 
sign of a pickup. 
Job polarization 
Our special topic today is the issue of job polarization. As I have visited different parts of the 
district – most recently trips to Long Island, Syracuse and Buffalo – employers have told me 
that they are beginning to add jobs, particularly in high-tech fields. These jobs can best be 
characterized as high skilled and technologically advanced. I have heard similar stories from 
our small business advisory council, our upstate advisory council and even our community 
banks. These anecdotes are reflected in our research on labor market dynamics. Over the 
past  three  decades,  job  opportunities  have  become  increasingly  concentrated  in  high 
wage/high  skill  occupations  and  low  wage/low  skill  occupations,  while  job  opportunities  for 
those in the middle have been shrinking. At the same time, there has been a growing gap in 
wages  between  jobs  that  pay  the  most  and  those  that  pay  the  least.  Taken  together,  this 
phenomenon is often referred to as job polarization.  
The root causes of job polarization appear to be technology and globalization, which have 
displaced  many  jobs,  particularly  those  involving  routine  tasks.  This  loss  of  jobs  has  been 
especially  pronounced  for  what  we  often  think  of  as  traditional  middle-skilled  workers.  Its 
impact is perhaps most evident in the manufacturing sector, where so many jobs have been 
lost  in  recent  decades.  Given  the  strong  history  of  manufacturing  in  our  region,  job 
polarization has been an important feature in our local economy. 
No doubt, the widening wage gap and loss of job opportunities for middle-skilled workers has 
contributed  to  a  rise  in  economic  inequality  and  created  challenges  for  many  workers  and 
their families. More than ever before, jobs are requiring a greater degree of knowledge and 
skill. In order to adapt to these changes, it is increasingly important for workers to acquire 
and  upgrade  their  skills,  whether  through  formal  education  or  other  forms  of  training.  In 
addition, it is important for employers to communicate their needs to educational institutions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
so  that  they  can  offer  the  coursework  and  programs  so  that  people  can  develop  the  right 
skills  to  fill  the  available  jobs.  For  these  reasons,  we  think  it  is  particularly  important  to 
highlight these trends in today’s briefing. 
Conclusion 
In summary, recent data are consistent with the expectation of moderate growth in 2012 and 
stronger, but still not robust, growth in 2013. I also expect both headline and core inflation 
rates should moderate over the next few months. In our region, the recovery of activity and 
employment has continued, though the data indicate relatively stronger performance in New 
York State and New York City than in New Jersey, while Puerto Rico has yet to show any 
meaningful improvement. Our special topic shows a trend toward job polarization both in the 
nation  and  the  region,  which  focuses  our  attention  on  the  ever-growing  importance  for 
workers to acquire skills and upgrade their skills on an ongoing basis.  
I will now ask Jim Orr to present the update of economic conditions in our region. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
