Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Maximising the benefits of remittances from 
overseas Filipinos 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the signing of the Memorandum of Agreement between 
the  Commission  on  Filipinos  Overseas  (CFO)  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  on  the 
Remittance for Development Council, Manila, 26 March 2012. 
 Secretary Imelda Nicolas; officers and staff of the Commission on Filipinos Overseas; fellow 
advocates  in  promoting  the  interest  of  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  families;  distinguished 
stakeholders; fellow BSPers; special guests; friends from the media; ladies and gentlemen, 
good afternoon. 
Welcome.  What  we  have  today  is  a  short  and  simple  ceremony  for  the  signing  of  the 
Memorandum of Agreement between the Commission on Filipinos Overseas and the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas covering the Remittance for Development Council. Short and simple; …. 
but full of significance.  
To the  Bangko  Sentral, this  partnership  with  the  CFO  on  the  Remittance for  Development 
Council, is yet another step forward in our continuing efforts to maximize the benefits from 
remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos….  not  only  for  themselves  and  their  dependents  in 
particular, … but also for our country in general. 
As  a  multi-stakeholder  advisory  and  policy  recommending  body,  the  Remittance  for 
Development  Council  can  address  the  matter  of  channeling  individual  and  collective 
remittances to productive use and … at the same time…..serve as a venue for discussing 
issues related to the remittance environment affecting overseas Filipinos.  
Over the past decades, the steady growth of migrant remittances has become a dependable 
and major source of foreign exchange for the Philippines. In fact, the World Bank reports that 
in 2011… the Philippines ranked as the world’s fourth largest remittance-receiving country. 
Remittances from overseas Filipinos coursed through banks was up 7.2 percent in 2011 and 
reached  over  $20  billion;  this  is  equivalent  to  about  9  percent  of  the  country’s  Gross 
Domestic  Product.  Clearly,  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos  are  a  major  driver  of 
consumption activity in the Philippines, which in turn has supported economic growth. 
Nevertheless,  while  remittances  boost  domestic  consumption,  their  impact  on  the  financial 
security of households and on the country’s long-term economic development has not been 
utilized to its full potential. An IMF study in 2009 finds that remittances indeed help lift people 
out  of  poverty;  in  most  countries,  however,  its  potential  as  driver  for  investment  and 
economic growth has yet be fully explored.  
Together with other members, stakeholders, and partners of the Remittance for Development 
Council,  we  can  explore  new  projects  and  expand  our  existing  initiatives  to  create  a  more 
enabling environment to harness remittances for more savings and productive investments.  
For  your  information,  the  Bangko  Sentral  continues  to  work  on  lowering  bank  remittance 
charges  further….  and  to  provide  an  environment  for  safer  and  faster  remittance  services 
through  our  banking  system.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bangko  Sentral  has  been  conducting 
lectures  on  saving,  investing  and  money  management  for  overseas  Filipinos  and  their 
dependents in the last three years.  
This  financial  education  program  has  brought  us  to  places  with  heavy  concentration  of 
overseas Filipinos – such as Japan, Europe, and the Middle East – in cooperation with the 
Department of Foreign Affairs. In the Philippines, our partnership is with the Department of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Labor  and  Employment  and  its  agencies  in  prioritizing  areas  where  many  dependents  of 
overseas Filipinos reside.  
We look forward therefore to forging new avenues of cooperation and deeper alliances within 
the  Remittance  for  Development  Council  to  realize  our  shared  goal  of  delivering  a  better 
quality of life for our modern day heroes – our overseas Filipinos and their dependents. 
In the meantime, palagi nating tandaan ang sumusunod na tula:  
Perang padala, talagang mahalaga  
Ipunin, palaguin, pag-yamanin  
Para magkasama-sama muli pamilya natin  
At patuloy lumakas ang mahal natin … ang bansang Pilipinas 
Mabuhay ang ating overseas Filipinos! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
