Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Facing the crisis in Europe 
Opening address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
Conference in memory of Luis Ángel Rojo, Madrid, 21 February 2012. 
 thought 
transform  macroeconomic 
Good  morning,  and  many  thanks  for  having  accepted  our  invitation  to  participate  in  this 
Conference in memory of Ángel Rojo. Presiding over this tribute by the Banco de España, to 
which  Ángel  Rojo  devoted  much  of  his  peerless  personal  and  professional  calibre,  and  in 
which he developed many of his analytical and intellectual contributions, is frankly a privilege 
I  would  have  preferred  never  to  have  taken  up.  It  was  in  the  Bank  where  he  was  able  to 
successfully 
into  economic  policy  design  and 
implementation,  heightening  the  reputation  of  the  Bank  itself  and  no  doubt  contributing  to 
enhancing the well-being of Spaniards.  
The Bank wanted this tribute to be as solemn an occasion as the key role Ángel Rojo played 
within  it  merits,  and  that  it  should  be  worthy  of  the  deep  impression  he  made  and  the 
valuable  legacy  he  bestowed  upon  us,  which  all  his  followers  have  sought  to  preserve. 
Fortunately for future generations, the guiding principles of his thinking as Governor can be 
found in numerous written texts taken from conferences and speeches that greatly impacted 
Spanish  society  and  the  economic  policy  debate  in  a  singularly  important  phase  for  the 
modernisation of our economy. One of the first means of paying tribute to him that occurred 
to us was to publish a book with a broad selection of these texts. On reading it you will see 
how many of the subjects he tackled over the course of his term of office, from 1992 to 2000, 
remain fully valid in today’s economic debate.  
Along  with  the  publication  of  this  book  we  decided  to  hold  this  Conference  as  a  tribute, 
structuring it around a discussion of the pivotal areas of Ángel Rojo’s economic thought. We 
are  joined  by  a  select  group  of  speakers  whose  common  denominator,  in  addition  to  their 
professional standing, is to have shared concerns and experiences with him at different times 
in  his  life  and  in  his  various  fields  of  academic,  institutional,  domestic  and  international 
activity. The Conference comprises four sessions that turn on subjects which largely reflect 
the  main  areas  in  which  he  developed  his  body  of  academic  work  and  his  best  economic 
policy contributions. The first session addresses monetary and fiscal policy; the second, the 
challenges of European integration; and the third and fourth, the Spanish economy and the 
role Ángel Rojo played in the design of Spain’s economic policy.  
Ángel Rojo’s main achievement as Governor was his contribution to Spain joining the euro 
as a founding member. In this tribute to his memory, I  would like to dedicate this opening 
address to sharing with you some reflections on the difficult and complex situation the euro 
area  is  now  facing,  on  the  economic  policy  lessons  we  should  draw  and  on  some  of  the 
measures  adopted  and  those  yet  to  be  taken,  all  of  which  show  that  we  are,  I  believe, 
learning something.  
We are all mindful of the critical times European integration is facing; times so different from 
the first 10 years of the euro, in which the single currency provided all Member States with 
extra stability and defences against all types of shocks. Today we face a large-scale crisis, a 
situation in which we could well use the analytical quality and rigour of figures like Ángel Rojo 
to correctly gauge the economic policy measures needed to exit the crisis.  
Various causes have led to this situation. But, if you will excuse my simplification, these may 
be grouped in two main blocks. On one hand, a lack of understanding by the Member States 
of the consequences of belonging to a monetary union, which translated into the adoption of 
national economic policies inconsistent with the framework adopted in 1999. On the other, a 
series of weaknesses in the European governance structure which have been progressively 
highlighted as the crisis has widened and deepened.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The diagnosis of the relative role played by national economic policies in the unfolding of the 
euro crisis is still subject to some controversy. But it would be reasonable to say that the lack 
of fiscal discipline has been a central factor, given the leading role the debt markets have 
played in the origin and transmission of tensions. As we learned, the fiscal discipline rules of 
the Stability and Growth Pact were insufficient to ensure the budgetary rigour needed for the 
normal functioning of a monetary union without fiscal union, and accorded governments an 
excessive degree of discretionality. Hence, there was a failure during the expansion years to 
adopt  fiscal  measures  that  would  have  provided  greater  room  for  manoeuvre  to  face  the 
crisis.  
The crisis also highlighted the interrelatedness which, at times of tension, arises between the 
three sides of the triangle comprised of sovereign risk, banking risk and the economic fragility 
stemming  from  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Once  one  of  these  factors  is 
activated, there is a serious danger feedback loops will be set in train that do but exacerbate 
and deepen the crisis. From this standpoint, the current strains are also attributable to the 
excessive  complacency  with  which  high  levels  of  private  debt  were  run  up  in  several 
countries  during  the  boom  years  and  which,  without  the  counterweight  of  sufficiently  strict 
fiscal policies, ultimately led to a series of burgeoning current-account deficits.  
The  source  of  these  imbalances  is  not  unrelated  to  the  asymmetries  that  prevailed  in  the 
opening years of the monetary union. Germany, the main economy in the area, was then in 
the  throes  of  digesting  the  structural  changes  caused  by  reunification  and  by  the 
wage-deflation policy underpinning its competitive adjustment. Along with some uncertainty 
over the sustainability of its welfare state, this prompted a loss of confidence that translated 
into notably sluggish expenditure. By contrast, in other economies in the area the reduction 
in funding costs and the favourable growth expectations generated in the wake of the euro 
fired euphoria, providing for a strong and lengthy expansion of demand and spending.  
Swept  along  by  the  boom  climate,  much  of  the  complacency  that  detracted  from  the 
importance of these trends gained ground. High levels of foreign debt were seen as a natural 
counterpart to the convergence process triggered following euro area entry. Attempts were 
made to prove that this benign interpretation was the correct one, drawing support from the 
fact that spending decisions were extremely easy to finance amid the exuberance prevailing 
not  only  on  European  but  also  global  financial  markets.  Against  this  background,  the 
enhanced  financing  possibilities  provided  by  monetary  union  membership,  owing  to  the 
disappearance  of  exchange-rate  risk,  allowed  external  imbalances  to  be  financed  without 
difficulty. Regrettably, we now know that capital inflows to these economies, far from funding 
investment projects likely to generate the returns in the future that would have enabled the 
loans to be comfortably repaid, were largely geared to financing spending components that 
have not sufficiently increased the recipient economies’ productive potential.  
The relative passivity shown by all economic agents in the face of the build-up of imbalances 
is also due to excess confidence in the adjustment mechanisms that were assumed to be 
inherent in the functioning of the euro. For instance, it was assumed that relative price and 
wage rises and the changes in competitive positions, induced by the demand and spending 
excesses  in  those  countries  showing  signs  of  overheating,  would  prompt  the  necessary 
adjustments  to  move  demand  back  onto  a  more  sustainable  path  and  to  redress  the 
differences in competitiveness.  
We  now  have  proof  that  the  effectiveness  of  this  adjustment  channel  depends  on  the 
flexibility of price- and wage-setting processes. Regrettably, virtually no progress was made 
during  the  expansion  in  eliminating  the  frictions  and  structural  rigidities  that  distort  the 
operation of labour and product markets in many countries. This lack of reforming ambition 
has  inhibited  the  functioning  of  this  adjustment  channel,  leading  to  the  divergences  in 
competitiveness not being promptly corrected.  
It  was  also  assumed  that  financial  market  discipline  would  contribute  to  correcting  the 
imbalances  since,  on  the  basis  of  a  proper  risk  assessment,  those  public  and  private 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
borrowers  that  were  accumulating  excessive  debts  should  have  been  penalised.  But  we 
know  today  that  the  first  decade  of  the  single  monetary  policy  coincided  with  a  period  of 
excess  liquidity  and  credit  worldwide,  widespread  underestimation  of  risk  and  generalised 
laxity  on  the  part  of  the  regulatory  authorities,  who  trusted  financial  markets  and 
intermediaries  to  regulate  themselves,  which  proved  to  be  a  very  serious  error.  In  this 
climate,  the  financial  markets  did  not  exert  effective  discipline  on  economies  that  ran  up 
excessive debts, and whose borrowers benefited from risk premia similar to those enjoyed by 
other economies with more sustainable debt growth. 
Yet neither the lack of economic policy responses, lax regulation nor the inoperativeness of 
the automatic adjustment mechanisms suffice to explain the virulence of the crisis, and much 
less so the systemic dimension it has acquired in recent months, in which the problems have 
spread to euro area countries with sound economic fundamentals.  
At  present  everybody  accepts  that  the  slowness  in  resolving  the  crisis,  and  indeed  the 
worsening  of  the  crisis,  is  also  due  to  the  fact  that  the  institutional  arrangements  for 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  lacked  suitable  instruments  to  identify,  prevent  and,  where 
necessary,  force  through  the  correction  of  the  imbalances  that  might  arise  in  the  Member 
States’ economies. Concern over the destabilising force of the fiscal imbalances within EMU 
led the Maastricht Treaty to envisage a formal budgetary discipline surveillance procedure, 
the Stability and Growth Pact, with ceilings or benchmark levels for budget deficits and public 
debt  which,  as  we  have  seen,  have  proven  absolutely  insufficient.  As  to  other  economic 
policies,  these  were  subject  to  even  laxer  oversight  procedures,  and  proved  worthless  in 
redressing other imbalances.  
The list of structural weaknesses in the area’s governance framework would not be complete 
without  mentioning  the  failure  to  design  any  crisis-management  mechanism  capable  of 
making  a  rapid  and  forceful  response  in  the  initial  stages  of  tensions,  preventing  the 
problems from becoming protracted and untreatable.  
These  shortcomings  in  the  original  design  of  Monetary  Union  have  played  an  increasingly 
greater role as the crisis has advanced. Currently, investors have become fully aware of the 
particular  fragility  of  the  euro  area  countries’  sovereign  debt  markets,  which  differentiates 
them  substantially  from  the  debt  markets  of  other  developed  countries  with  their  own 
currency and central bank. I refer, naturally, to the fact that the euro area combines a single 
central  bank  and  single  currency  with  17  independent  States  and,  therefore,  17  different 
sovereign risks.  
that  countries  with  monetary 
Under 
sovereignty  have  to  counter  potential  liquidity  problems  on  their  national  sovereign  debt 
markets are blocked by the fact that the action needed would entail some transfer of income 
between States, action that the institutional arrangements of the euro area not only do not 
envisage,  but  which,  it  is  assumed,  must  be  avoided.  This  constraint  paves  the  way  for 
scenarios  characterised  potentially  by  self-fulfilling  expectations  and 
to 
unfavourable outcomes in which funding suddenly dries up and the country affected may find 
itself  bound  to  default  on  its  debts,  irrespective  of  the  soundness  of  its  economic 
fundamentals.  
Euro  area  governments  have  spent  almost  two  years  trying  to  construct  some  mutual 
insurance mechanism that will perform a market-stabilising role, so far unsuccessfully.  
While waiting for them to achieve this, a disproportionate part of the task of defending the 
stability of the euro area has fallen on the European Central Bank. Since the sovereign debt 
crisis  broke,  we  have  on  the  ECB  Governing  Council  adopted  numerous  non-conventional 
measures to restore the workings of specific financial market segments – namely the money 
and public debt markets – that have proven crucial to bringing the operation of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism back onto a more normal footing.  
the  well-known  mechanisms 
these  conditions, 
lead 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Early  in  the  crisis  the  ECB  adopted  a  generous  liquidity-providing  policy  vis-à-vis  financial 
institutions, implementing it over these years using far-reaching measures. For example, the 
change to a full-allotment system for all applications for liquid funds submitted by institutions; 
the extension of the assets eligible as collateral for these funds, precisely to prevent potential 
bottlenecks in this area that might ultimately make the full-allotment arrangement inoperative; 
and an extension of the maximum terms over which liquidity is granted, which in the recent 
December  meeting  was  set  at  three  years,  a  horizon  that  clearly  goes  beyond  what,  in 
normal times, should act as a reference for the pursuit of monetary policy.  
The Securities Market Programme for the purchase of assets on secondary markets is also 
playing a significant role in restoring the normal functioning of the sovereign debt markets. 
That said, the ultimate causes of the tensions in place are due to underlying problems over 
whose resolution the monetary authority can exert little or no influence.  
These policies respond to the need to ensure the correct functioning of the monetary policy 
transmission  mechanism,  without  which  the  Eurosystem  could  not  meet  its  objective  of 
maintaining price stability in the euro area. But it should nonetheless be acknowledged that 
such conduct gives those responsible for the other areas of economic policy valuable time in 
which to pursue the design and implementation of the measures needed in those areas. 
The ECB’s conjunctural measures are of no use, however, in resolving the central problem 
revealed by the crisis: the need for mechanisms that help counter the risks arising from the 
fact that countries with heterogeneous structural features share a common currency and that, 
therefore,  they  can  no  longer  resort  to  their  own  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  as 
macroeconomic stabilisation instruments.  
At  the  various  summit  meetings  held  in  recent  years,  the  euro  area  Heads  of  State  or 
Government  have  reaffirmed  their  unequivocal  political  commitment  to  keeping  the  EMU 
project  on  track  and  to  completing  monetary  union  and  moving  towards  greater  economic 
integration.  Evidently,  though,  in  this  process  it  will  be  necessary  to  share  substantial 
sovereignty in sensitive areas such as fiscal policy or banking system oversight, and to set in 
train  mechanisms  allowing  some  degree  of  risk  mutualisation,  without  this  potentially 
discouraging economic discipline in the various countries.  
The  steps  taken  so  far  are  along  the  right  lines.  But  without  wishing  to  speak  out  of  turn, 
there is notable room for improvement in the pace at which decisions are being taken.  
On  the  fiscal  front,  reforms  to  date  have  translated  into  a  significant  strengthening  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. Key factors in this reinforcement have been the greater attention 
to debt ceilings and the establishment of greater automaticity in the procedures to evaluate 
potential non-compliance and to activate the necessary corrective mechanisms, along with 
the requirement to revise national legal frameworks.  
Elsewhere,  the  new  framework  for  the  prevention  and  correction  of  domestic  and  external 
macroeconomic  imbalances  has  also  been  designed.  This  so-called  Excessive  Imbalance 
Procedure  uses  an  early-warning  mechanism  based  on  a  broad  set  of  indicators  which, 
together  with  timely  economic  analysis,  should  help  detect  sufficiently  in  advance  those 
situations of vulnerability that may endanger financial stability in the euro area and give form 
to the measures needed to correct them.  
Progress  in  designing  a  permanent  crisis-management  mechanism  has  been  considerable 
but  clearly  insufficient.  First,  temporarily,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  was 
introduced, and later, now on a permanent basis, the European Stability Mechanism was set 
up,  which  it  is  assumed  should  start  operating  next  July.  The  complexities  involved  in  the 
design  of  these  devices  are  evident,  since  they  must  combine  strength  and  flexibility  to 
provide financial assistance to ailing countries, while ensuring that incentives are maintained 
to  pursue  the  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform  programmes  needed  for 
laying the foundations for sustained growth in the medium term.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But exiting the crisis will not be possible unless a stronger European governance framework 
is accompanied by a far-reaching revision of national economic policies, enabling them to be 
fully adapted to the conditions under which a monetary union can operate. It is imperative 
that  the  authorities  and  economic  agents  should  fully  assume  the  consequences  derived 
from sharing a single monetary policy. The soundness of public finances and the flexibility of 
economic structures are vital requirements in this framework.  
Taking  a  shorter-term  perspective,  the  need  to  lower  the  high  levels  of  public  and  private 
debt  accumulated  in  the  past  makes  improving  competitiveness  the  key  to  restoring 
confidence  and  the  growth  of  output  and  employment.  With  no  possibility  of  currency 
devaluation, internal devaluation, i.e. the adjustment of prices and remuneration, along with 
productivity gains stemming from better work management, is the only alternative available in 
the immediate future to promote and restore lost competitiveness.  
Almost 12 years back, Ángel Rojo marked his departure from the Banco de España with his 
speech on the 1999 Annual Report. In a climate of exuberant optimism, he made a warning 
about credit growth which, he said, “continues to rise at very high rates”, the result being “a 
heightening of demand pressure on trend output, with worrying effects”. Our problems now 
are not excess demand or a surfeit of credit, but how to correct these “worrying effects” Rojo 
warned us about. Let me close my address with his recommendations, as I am sure they will 
be of interest to you: 
“Under these conditions, the Spanish economy needs to restrain the expansion of demand 
and increase the degree of flexibility in labour and product markets in order to sustain high, 
stable  growth  rates  in  the  future.  Specifically,  it  requires  a  policy  to  further  reinforce  fiscal 
consolidation,  to  push  through  greater  labour  market  flexibility  in  industrial  relations 
bargaining  and  to  forcefully  pursue  deregulation  and  the  infusion  of  greater  competition  in 
product and service markets”.  
Thank you. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
