Jörg Asmussen: Building deeper economic union: what to do and what 
to avoid 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Policy Briefing at the European Policy Centre, Brussels, 17 July 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The crisis has made us all a few experiences richer. The question is whether we can draw 
the right lessons from those experiences. After all, “experience is the name everyone gives 
to their mistakes” [Oscar Wilde]. And there have been a few mistakes in the way economic 
policies  and  governance  were  managed  inside  monetary  union.  Policies  and  governance 
clearly needed to be strengthened. What is less clear is how best to do it. What to do and 
what  to  avoid  is  what  I  would  like  to  discuss  today.  Thanks  for  inviting  me  to  share  my 
thoughts with you here at the European Policy Centre.  
Without  a  doubt:  over  the  past  two  years,  much  has  happened  in  the  field  of  economic 
governance. There have been a lot of proposals; the number of suggested Pacts, Compacts, 
Agreements and Treaties is almost inflationary. We are having a healthy debate about the 
future of EMU. But it is not only talk. 
The  report  “Towards  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  presented  to  the  June 
European Council by the four Presidents van Rompuy, Barroso, Juncker and Draghi sets out 
a shared vision for EMU over the next decade. Its content will be fleshed out over the coming 
months. But the devil is, of course, in the detail. Let me structure my thoughts around three 
main themes: 
• 
• 
• 
Are we on the right path with the reforms so far? 
Are we tackling the right issues with reflections currently underway?  
What does this imply for the ECB? 
Are we on the right path with the reforms so far? 
1. 
Here  in  Brussels,  much  of  the  attention  is  naturally  focused  on  European  institutions  and 
processes.  But  we  should  not  deceive  ourselves:  The  proper  management  of  euro  area 
economy needs both EU and national action.  
Any governance process at European level is only as good as its record of actual application. 
That  needs  determined  action  by  those  responsible  at  the  EU  level  –  notably  the 
Commission and the Council. And of course, implementation at national level.  
On paper, significant progress has been achieved at EU level with the “six pack”, the Fiscal 
Compact  and  the  2012  European  Semester.  This  package  of  reforms  has  the  potential  to 
fundamentally  change  the  way  we  conduct  mutual  surveillance.  Common  oversight  of 
national  economic  policies  is  broader  and more  intrusive.  Take  the  Commission’s  in-depth 
studies which revealed the existence of various degrees of imbalances in 12 countries. Or 
the  new  more  automatic  decision-making  rules,  in  particular  the  “new  comply  or  explain 
procedure”  for  the  Commission’s  country-specific  recommendations.  These  were  all 
premieres.  
This  procedure  puts  a  great  responsibility  on  the  Commission  to  present  accurate 
recommendations. It also reinforces the collective responsibility of the Council. 
Last but by no means least, the European Parliament introduces a degree of openness into 
the  policy  discussion.  It  has  conducted  two  economic  dialogues  with  national  finance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ministers.  Our  democracies  require  and  deserve  this  additional  layer  of  common  public 
scrutiny of the economic policies.  
So  far,  so  good.  But  none  of  this  is  worth  the  great  fanfare,  if  it  remains  without 
consequences. Member States have to address the identified problems through determined 
reforms.  
Unfortunately, the past track record of implementation of recommendation has not been very 
good  in  this  regard.  Many  Member  States  accumulated  large  fiscal  and  economic 
imbalances.  Essential  structural  reforms  had  been  postponed  because  of  resistance  of 
vested  interests. The  political  costs  were  seen  as  too  high,  and the  pressure from the  EU 
level as too intangible. Multilateral efforts, such as the Lisbon Strategy or the Europe 2020 
programme have been not effective in stimulating reforms.  
Why was this? I see two main weaknesses: First, excessive politeness and the principle of 
non-intervention.  Second,  a  misunderstanding  of  the  principle  of  equal  treatment.  Let  me 
take them in turn. 
Much has been written about the “excessive politeness” and the culture of non-intervention 
among Ministers. And, indeed also on “preemptive obedience” on the part of the Commission 
when presenting its proposals and recommendations. But this lack of peer pressure among 
decision-makers  has  real  costs  –  as  we  had  to  learn  painfully  during  this  crisis.  And,  it 
seems,  the  lesson  still  has  not  been  learnt  completely:  deadlines  for  the  correction  of 
excessive deficits are being relaxed; the corrective tools that are available even under the 
new procedures, are simply not being used as the cases of Spain and Cyprus in the recently 
conducted macroeconomic imbalance procedure illustrate. If mutual surveillance is meant to 
be effective, this needs to change.  
Second, differentiation among countries is still largely a no-go area in economic surveillance. 
And  this  despite  the  fact  that  the  crisis  has  amply  demonstrated  the  detrimental  effect  of 
excessive divergence and heterogeneity. Countries are different. The severity of imbalances 
varies,  and  so  does the  urgency  to  address those  vulnerabilities.  They  need  to  be treated 
differently under the governance procedures. It is self-defeating to treat all countries similarly, 
for sake of alleged consistency, equal treatment or avoidance of stigma effects.  
We  all  know  that  inappropriate  policies  in  some  euro  area  countries  create  negative 
externalities  for  the  rest  of  the  monetary  union.  And  we  cannot  afford  to  allow  some  euro 
area countries to run policies which create a burden on others and destabilise the whole of 
EMU.  
This begs the most important question in the debate: Are we at the end of the road with EU 
coordination? Do we need a qualitative leap forward? Is it time for a transfer of competencies 
to the European level? This leads me to my second point:  
Are we tackling the right issues in the ongoing reflections?  
2. 
The  report  “Towards  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  presented  to  the  June 
European Council provides an answer to this question implicitly. The report recognises that 
we are at a crossroads and states upfront: “national policies cannot be decided in isolation if 
their effects quickly propagate to the euro area as a whole [and that] there have to be ways 
on ensuring compliance when there are negative effects on other EMU members.” The vision 
for  the  future  of  EMU  is  built  around  four  building  blocks:  integrated  financial  market, 
budgetary  and  economic  policy  frameworks  as well  as  strengthened  democratic  legitimacy 
and accountability.  
This is very much what we at the ECB had been suggesting, motivated by three reasons:  
1. 
First, a shared vision of EMU ten years down the road will anchor expectations. The 
euro is here to stay. This should mitigate doubts about the survival or integrity of our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2. 
3. 
currency.  It  is  a  clear  signal  to  the  markets:  underestimate  the  degree  of  political 
commitment to the single currency at your own risk.  
Second,  the  four  building  blocks  present  a  holistic  view.  Policy-makers  have 
understood  that  the  time  for  partial  solutions,  for  tinkering  at  the  edges,  is  over. 
“Muddling through”, with hesitant and incomplete steps at each and every summit, 
will no longer do the trick. Progress needs to be achieved on all four fronts.  
Third,  it  is  acknowledged  that  euro  area  countries  need  a  strong  institutional 
framework which is commensurate with their high degree of economic and financial 
interdependence.  The  problems  in  Greece  did  not  spill-over  to  its  geographically 
closest EU neighbours in southeastern Europe. The contagion channel from Greece 
did not lead to Bulgaria or Romania but the western Mediterranean were affected. 
The deeper union in the euro area is necessary and is not in contradiction with the 
process of integration among all 27 EU Member States.  
This  longer-term  vision  has  now  to  be  turned  into  a  fully-fledged  roadmap.  Matters  are 
moving  forward,  in  a  very  concrete  manner,  especially  with  regard  to  the  creation  of  a 
financial  market  union  with  a  unified  supervisor,  involving  the  ECB.  This  brings  me  to  my 
third point: 
What does it imply for the ECB? 
3. 
The  Commission  will  present  proposals  on  the  basis  of  Article  127(6)  after  the  summer. 
Naturally, also the ECB Governing Council has started its own reflections. But here again, 
there are things to do, and things to avoid. 
The  ECB  stands  ready  to  play  a  role  of  supervisor  for  the  banks  of  the  euro  area  as 
requested.  But  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  this  framework  allows  the  ECB  to  act  with 
effectiveness, independence and without risks to its reputation.  
We  will  need  strict  arrangements  to  safeguard  the  independence  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy. Moreover, with the new tasks, higher standards of democratic accountability will have 
to be fulfilled. We are fully aware of that and stand ready to satisfy them.  
Carrying out of the new supervisory task will be challenging. But its implementation will be 
greatly facilitated by the fact that the ECB can count on the central banks of the Eurosystem. 
Most of them are already responsible for banking supervision in their own countries and have 
a full wealth of expertise and knowledge.  
To say that the task ahead is complex is probably the understatement of the year. But we 
have to get it right. Even if it means that we need more time.  
Let  me  also  stress  that  unified  supervision  is  only  the  starting  point  of  a  financial  market 
union.  The  latter  should  also  provide  for  common  mechanisms  to  resolve  banks  and  to 
guarantee customer deposits. This is necessary to break the vicious circle between banks 
and sovereigns which is at the source of the fragility of the euro area financial system.  
You are surely aware of the public debate about banking union that is currently raging: we 
see open letters by economists for example, which can be very influential on the public at 
large. Although it is not always clear, if these academics are aware of the responsibility they 
have  in  public  debate,  because  they  seem  to  either  deliberately  or  light-heartedly  blur  the 
facts and play with clichés. The steps we are about to take are very significant. This is why it 
is good to have this debate. But there should be no hesitation that – ultimately – we need to 
take those steps.  
This leads me to my conclusion. 
The core of the current debate about the future of economic union has a name: the further 
sharing of sovereignty. It means endowing the euro area with the power to effectively prevent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and correct unsustainable policies in every euro area Member State. Concretely, this would 
imply  that  a  euro  area  authority  would  have  competence  to  limit  countries’  ability  to  issue 
debt  and  have  intervention  rights  into  national  budgets,  and  to  compel  Member  States  to 
correct their policies, be that in the fiscal, structural and financial fields.  
Intervention  rights  into  national  policies  would  be  confined  to  cases  where  policies 
substantially deviate from agreed reform commitments and pose a serious risk to the smooth 
functioning of the EMU. 
Those powers would have to be strongly legitimised. Whatever we do as further integrative 
steps, we need to strengthen democratic legitimacy. Deeper euro area integration can only 
be  sustainable  with  corresponding  progress  on  democratic  legitimacy  and  accountability. 
Incidentally, it should not be the central bank that continuously emphasises this point.  
Already  now,  steps  could  be  taken  to  better  involve  the  national  parliaments.  Domestic 
parliamentary debate and political decision-making needs to internalise what it means to be 
part of monetary union. If one looks at any of the national media, and the discourse of the 
domestic debates, one can see how sorely this is missing. EU recommendations are often 
perceived as a “Brussels diktat”.  
This must be overcome. One idea to ensure that would be for the Commission to present the 
country-specific  policy  recommendations  to  national  parliaments  and  social  partners.  This 
would foster a political debate and national ownership. Another one would be to disentangle 
more  clearly  in  communication  that  reform  requested  by  Brussels  are  actually  improving 
social justice, for example, more efficient tax system, or the end to rent-seeking by vested 
interests.  Those  policy  prescriptions  are  not  only  about  austerity,  which  gives  them  a 
negative connotation. When governments implement the Commission recommendations they 
do this not only to “comply with Brussels” but for the good of their own countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Thank you very much for your attention. I look forward to a stimulating debate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
