Peter Praet: Monetary policy at crisis times 
Lecture by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 20 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a real pleasure for me to share my thoughts before such a distinguished gathering here 
at the Centre International d’Etudes Monétaires et Bancaires.  
Advanced  economies  have  all  lately  witnessed  a  “sequence”  of  crises  which  had  a 
considerable impact on the state of the financial system and the global economy at large. For 
the euro area, the last few years have been especially turbulent. The sovereign debt situation 
in some euro area Member States is at the heart of concerns about financial and economic 
stability in the euro area.  
The sovereign debt crisis pointed to an imperfect implementation of economic – but clearly 
not monetary – governance in the euro area. As a currency, the euro has been a success. At 
the same time, it has become clear that continued success hinges crucially on overall sound 
economic and financial policies in the euro area Member States. 
With this in mind, I will structure my remarks under two main headings. First, I would like to 
briefly  review  some  key  elements  of  the  institutional  framework  governing  monetary  and 
fiscal  policy  in  European  Monetary  Union.  Thereby,  I  will  point  to  the  root  causes  of  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  but  also  to  the  considerable  progress  made  more  recently  in  putting 
fiscal governance on more solid footing.  
Second, I will more closely review the role of monetary policy in the mist of what turned out to 
be the worst crisis since the Great Depression, arguing that the ECB has boldly reacted to it 
with a series of both standard as well as non standard measures, in full preservation of its 
medium-term oriented mandate of price-stability.  
The crisis, institutional framework and policy responses 
The  crisis  has  reinforced  the  insight  that  monetary  union  needs  to  be  based  on 
fundamentally solid institutional anchoring. So let me take the occasion to revisit some of the 
institutional rationale behind the construction of European Monetary Union. 
One main anchor of this framework is an independent monetary authority primarily entrusted 
to  deliver  price  stability.  However  –  as  we  have  witnessed  –  appropriate  monetary  policy 
strategy  and  actions  by  the  central  bank  are  not  necessarily  sufficient  to  maintain 
macroeconomic  stability.  Stability  also  requires  appropriate  fiscal  policy,  namely  a  credible 
commitment  by  the  government  to  ensure  that  any  temporary  increases  in  deficit  will  be 
eventually offset by corrective measures.1 Hence, the second anchor of a monetary union is 
governments that are committed to maintaining solid public finances.  
The institutional framework governing EMU reflects these insights. On the central bank side, 
the maintenance of price stability over the medium-term is the most important contribution 
that monetary policy can make to sustainable growth, employment, and social cohesion. On 
the fiscal side, the institutional framework reflects our long-standing experience that sound 
                                                 
1  See  e.g.  Michael  Woodford,  2001,  “Fiscal  Requirements  for  Price  Stability”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and 
Banking 33, pp. 669–728. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  sustainable  fiscal  policies  are  in  turn  fundamental  to  fostering  longer-term  sustainable 
economic growth.  
Following these principles, monetary and fiscal policies are mutually re-enforcing. Solid fiscal 
policy  is  conducive  to  a  macroeconomic  environment  that  facilitates  the  task  of  a 
stability-oriented  central  bank.  At  the  same  time,  credible  monetary  policy  contributes  to  a 
smooth  conduct  of  fiscal  policies  by  guaranteeing  stable  inflation  expectations  and  low 
inflation  risk  premia,  which  is  in  turn  beneficial  for  the  level  and  volatility  of  long-term 
government bond yields and therewith sovereign financing costs.  
For  both  policies  to  successfully  do  their  jobs,  a  clear  assignment  of  their  objectives  and 
reign of action is warranted in a monetary union. While fiscal policy is ideally suited to absorb 
country-specific shocks, monetary policy safeguards price stability in the monetary union as 
a whole.  
This is what the “founding fathers” of EMU had in mind when they assigned the responsibility 
for monetary policy to the Eurosystem endowing it with the primary objective of safeguarding 
price  stability  across  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Such  assignment  was  flanked  by  the 
provision of a high degree of independence to the ECB – institutional, financial as well as 
functional.  
As a core component of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB has from its start announced a 
quantitative definition of price stability to be maintained over the medium term. In 2003 the 
Governing  Council  has  clarified  that  it  aims  to  keep  HICP  inflation  below,  but  close  to, 
2% over the medium term to achieve its objective. This decision was intended to serve also 
as a hedge against the risk of deflation occurring. 
As  another  component  of  its  strategy,  the  ECB  has  announced  a  clear  framework  for 
assessing the risks to price stability. Within its “two-pillar” strategy, the short-to-medium term 
indications  on 
its  economic  analysis  are 
“cross-checked” with the signals extracted from the monetary analysis.  
More  than  thirteen  years  after  its  inception,  we  can  state  that  the  Eurosystem  and  its 
monetary policy have delivered upon their responsibilities. The policy measures by the ECB 
Governing  Council  have  resulted  in  an  inflation  rate  which  is  in  line  with  our  quantitative 
definition of price stability. 
On the fiscal side, the picture has been less positive, though. The fiscal stimulus measures in 
response  to  the  financial  crisis,  large-scale  government  support  programmes  for  ailing 
domestic banking systems, the working of automatic stabilizers and eroding tax bases in the 
face  of  weakening  growth  have  put  government  budgets  in  the  euro  area  countries  under 
intense pressure. However, let me emphasise that for some euro area countries government 
budgets  had  already  suffered  from  lax  fiscal  policy  before  the  crisis.  Governments  which 
entered  the  crisis  with  significant  fiscal  imbalances  exited  the  recession  with  the  highest 
deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios recorded in times of peace. The aggregate fiscal balance of 
the euro area increased from a close-to-balanced budget in 2007 to a deficit of more than 
6% of GDP in 2010, with a debt ratio rising from about 66% in 2007 to more than 85% in 
2010  –  and  still  increasing.  This  already  drastic  aggravation  of  public  finances  in  the 
aggregate masks much more extreme developments for some individual countries.  
The sovereign debt crisis has shown that sound public finances are all the more important in 
a  monetary  union  where  a  large  number  of  independent  fiscal  policy-makers  share  the 
benefits of a single currency, gaining access to a large pool of savings and being immunized 
against exchange-rate risk.  
Originally,  it  was  expected  that  financial  market  pressures  as  well  as  Treaty  obligations 
would  provide  strong  disciplining  devices  for  Member  States  to  maintain  sound  public 
finances and to engage in structural reforms. 
inflationary  developments  stemming 
from 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Firstly,  financial  markets  were  expected  to  discriminate  between  sovereign  borrowers, 
leading to differentiated long-term bond yields across issuers with differing degrees of fiscal 
soundness.2  
However, as we have seen during several years before the crisis, markets did not come up 
with differentiated pricing, but rather with a fairly complacent pricing of risk across the board. 
In the wake of the financial crisis, these – one might say, “falsely comforting” – steady states 
have abruptly turned around. On the one hand, the government bond yield increases that we 
saw  over  the  last  years  certainly  contained  episodes  of  overshooting,  not  fully  reflecting 
economic fundamentals. On the other hand, the re-pricing served as an important wake-up 
call  that  strongly  pushed  for  consolidation  of  public  finances  and  urged  policymakers  to 
re-think fiscal governance in Europe.  
Secondly,  euro  area  countries  were  bound  by  the  “no-bail-out”  rule  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. They were supposed to implement the necessary structural and fiscal policies 
to ensure sound and sustainable economic positions within EMU.  
However, when we look backwards, the joint responsibility for effective surveillance too often 
took the form of “peer support” instead of “peer pressure”. It became also clear – and the 
ECB  had  warned  several  times  –  that  the  intended  “more  intelligent”  interpretation  of  the 
SGP  ultimately  failed  to  produce  the  desired  increase  of  ownership,  which  can  only  be 
gained  if  all  agents  internalise  the  rationale  behind  sound,  simple  and  easily  monitorable 
rules. The role of such rules was, and remains, to provide credible incentives for sound fiscal 
and macroeconomic policies in a monetary union.  
In this sense, it is encouraging to see that important steps have recently been taken. One 
step was the governance reform package (the so-called “six pack”), which came into force in 
December  2011.  It  strengthens  both  the  preventive  and  the  corrective  arm  of  the  Stability 
and Growth Pact and establishes minimum requirements for national budgetary frameworks. 
It was also important that the Heads of State or Government have further agreed on a new 
“fiscal compact” with a view to achieving a more effective disciplining of fiscal policies. Major 
elements of the fiscal compact are the strengthening of the role of the balanced budget rule 
and a further tightening of the excessive deficit procedure. It is of utmost importance, that the 
rules are now fully implemented in  the spirit  of this agreement. All these measures aim to 
ensure that individual countries live up to their responsibilities to bring their public finances in 
order.  
In  addition  to  imbalances  in  public  finances,  the  crisis  has  also  brought  to  the  fore  two 
additional  key  issues:  first,  cross-country  differences  in  competitiveness  and  economic 
growth; and second, the importance of interlinkages between banks and sovereigns.  
As regards the first issue, in some euro area countries – as I said before – the incentives to 
engage in structural reforms have been obviously insufficient. For these member states it is 
now all the more urgent to undertake structural reforms to regain competitiveness, thereby 
strengthening  growth  prospects  and  job  creation.  This  includes  fostering  competition  in 
product  markets,  particularly  in  services  sectors,  and  the  reduction  of  rigidities  in  labour 
markets.  
As  regards  the  second  issue,  let  me  stress  the  importance  of  a  more  sound  and  resilient 
financial system. In this respect, recent steps like the Basel III framework mean some good 
progress  in  this  direction.  Nonetheless,  further  bold  policy  actions  need  to  be  taken.  This 
includes in particular the establishment of effective bank resolution schemes for systemically 
framework  with  new 
important 
improved  supervisory 
institutions  and  an 
financial 
                                                 
2  See e.g Rudi Dornbusch, 1997, “Fiscal aspects of monetary integration”, American Economic Review Papers 
and Proceedings 87, pp. 221–223. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
macro-prudential  tools.  The  establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the 
three European Supervisory Authorities are only first steps.  
Finally, while the reforms of economic and financial governance that I mentioned are vital, it 
is crucial that all these measures are complemented by a set of instruments that can directly 
address financial market tensions. In other words, we need firewalls that tackle the threats to 
financial stability and the risk of contagion – both between different sovereign debt markets, 
but also between sovereign debt markets and other financial market segments. Therefore, 
the  setting  up  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  and  its  successor,  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM),  represent  important  additions  to  the  architecture  of 
EMU.  In  this  context,  I  very  much  welcome  the  decision  by  the  Heads  of  State  or 
Government to let the ESM enter into force already by July 2012, that is, one year earlier 
than originally planned.  
Monetary policy at the crisis: framework and recent measures 
Having identified the need for reforming the framework for  fiscal governance, the question 
arises whether the institutional framework governing euro area monetary policy would also 
benefit  from  some  changes  or  finetunings.  My  view  here  is  that  our  framework,  with  the 
important institutional elements – that I have mentioned earlier – has in fact served us rather 
well in conducting monetary policy both in turbulent and more tranquile times.  
Nevertheless, recently some calls have been made on euro area monetary policy to adapt its 
set of rules and to concede to the needs of other policy areas. Before I come back to this, let 
me  take  a  step  back  and  look  at  the  experience  of  other  central  banks,  which 
have – compared to our own relatively young institution – a longer history. 
In the period after the Second World War in the United States, the Federal Reserve had to 
completely  accommodate  the  debt  management  policies  of  the  Treasury.  With  inflationary 
pressures rising, the conflict between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury escalated and 
ended  with  the  Fed-Treasury  Accord  of  February  1951,  which  provided  to  the  Federal 
Reserve 
interest  rate  policy.  Central  bank 
independence  has  become  a  paradigm  that  is  considered  an  essential  element  of  any 
stability-oriented monetary policy frameworks until today.3  
Since  the  mid-sixties,  the  professional  climate  on  monetary  policy  making  was  gradually 
changing: monetary policy came to be more and more regarded as ancillary to fiscal policy or 
was at least urged to coordinate closely with it. Loose policies during downturns failed to be 
offset  by  tightened  conditions  over  upswings.  The  result  was  a  creeping  public  debt  and 
ratcheting inflation.  
This example points to the risk of watering down established principles of monetary policy. 
The important lesson to draw is that monetary policy makers need to be highly alert when 
vested interests start to question the central bank’s mandates, responsibilities and operating 
frameworks. This holds in particular around crisis times.  
Currently, one of the most pressing challenges is the idea that a central bank – and the ECB 
in particular – should act as a “lender of last resort”. The traditional definition of lender of last 
resort  typically  refers  to  a  reserve  financial  institution,  most  often  the  central  bank  of  a 
country, which directly intervenes in the market or via the extension of credit lines to avoid 
independence 
to  conduct 
its  own 
the 
                                                 
3  See, e.g., Michael Bordo, “Central Bank Independence and Financial Crises in History”, Paper prepared for 
the  Austrian  National  Bank  Conference  “Central  banking  after  the  crisis:  responsibilities,  strategies, 
instruments”, Vienna, 2010; and Frederic S. Mishkin, “Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?” in 
Deutsche Bundesbank, ed., Monetary Policy Over Fifty Years: Experiences and Lessons (Routledge: London 
2009), pp. 81–107. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
bankruptcy of banks or other institutions deemed solvent.  Provision of funding is therefore 
direct, albeit temporary in nature.  
Different is the notion that the central bank should act as the lender of last resort vis-à-vis 
sovereigns, as it has recently been advocated. When calls are made for a central bank to 
play  the  role  of  “lender  of  last  resort”  in  government  bond  markets,  such  calls  effectively 
amount to the central bank being asked to directly fund illiquid sovereigns, either via direct 
interventions on the primary market or by extending direct credit lines. Such activities are not 
legally  within  the  reach  of  the  ECB,  since  the  Treaty  clearly  imposes  the  prohibition  of 
monetary  financing  (Article  123  TFEU).  There  must  not  be  any  circumvention  to  this 
prohibition.  Again,  this  Treaty  provision  was  not  chosen  arbitrarily.  It  is  based  on  the 
experiences  in  many  countries  over  several  decades,  which  taught  us  that  a  central  bank 
that bows to the needs of public finances cannot ultimately be successful towards delivering 
upon  its  medium-term  oriented  price-stability  objective.  In  particular,  moral  hazard  could 
weaken  incentives  for  governments  to  pursue  fiscal  consolidation  to  safeguard  or  restore 
fiscal sustainability. This will ultimately endanger price stability, and macroeconomic stability 
more generally.  
As  a  further  complicating  factor  in  the  current  crisis,  the  problems  of  public  finances  and 
financial  stability  are  closely  intertwined.  Here,  we  have  to  be  especially  vigilant  to  shield 
monetary  policy  from  attempts  to  engross  it  into  inappropriate  financial  stability  tasks;  for 
such  attempts  may  turn  out  to  be  disguised  aspirations  to  drag  the  well-established 
paradigms of monetary dominance towards the realm of fiscal dominance.  
Against  this  background,  how  should  one  interpret  the  ECB’s  interventions  in  euro  area 
public  debt  markets  through  its  Securities  Markets  Program?  As  we  explained  at  various 
occasions,  the  SMP  is  purely  founded  on  a  monetary  policy  rationale.  When  we  observed 
that  tension  in  some  euro  area  sovereign  debt  markets  were  threatening  a  smooth 
functioning of the transmission of our monetary policy, we set up the SMP in order to support 
depth  and  liquidity  in  those  market  segments  which  had  become  dislocated.  This  was 
essential so that we can optimally pursue our task of guaranteeing price stability in the euro 
area. 
Overall, it is essential that the clear demarcation lines provided in the Treaty are not violated 
or  shifted.  This  would  constitute  in  fact  a  lasting  damage  and  institutional  regress  to  our 
well-serving  monetary  policy  framework,  which  would  be  intricate  or  even  impossible  to 
reverse.  
I  will  now,  in  the  final  part  of  my  speech,  conclude  with  a  brief  review  of  the  main  policy 
decisions more recently adopted by the ECB in response to the crisis. I will not take you on a 
full tour through our non-standard monetary policy measures that we started to take with the 
onset of the financial crisis in 2007. I would rather like to focus on the more recent decisions, 
addressing what we decided at the Governing Council meetings of last year’s December and 
last week.  
An important part of the ECB’s response to the crisis comes in the form of our “standard” 
policy measures. In November 2011 the ECB cut its main policy rates by 25 basis points in 
response to mounting downside risks to the growth outlook of the euro area and the global 
economy, ultimately threatening price stability. These downside risks were also related to an 
intensification of financial market tensions. Additional 25 basis points were cut in December, 
since intensified financial market tensions continued to dampen economic activity in the euro 
area. Since then, the rate on the main refinancing operations has been at the historically low 
1%. 
From  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  also  embarked  in  a  series  of  non-standard 
measures  –  as  they  are  usually  labelled  –  aimed  at  preserving  the  proper  transmission  of 
monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Among the measures announced in December, I recall that the Governing Council decided 
upon  two  very  long-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  three  years,  the  first  of 
which was already conducted last December. This duration is an innovation in ECB monetary 
policy operations. It serves to give banks a longer horizon in their liquidity planning. It also 
helps banks to a balanced and orderly deleveraging over the medium term, thereby avoiding 
“fire-sales” of their assets and avoiding a downscaling of longer-term lending.  
A second measure was to expand the set of available collateral. This allows banks to use 
certain types of loans as collateral, which was unavailable for banks before. The broadening 
of  collateral  standards  will  ensure  that  the  liquidity  provided  under  the  three-year  LTRO 
operations  will  reach  not  only  the  large  banks  but  also  small  and  medium-sized  institutes. 
These tend to finance the small and medium-sized enterprises, which are the backbone of 
the euro area economy.  
The third measure was to reduce the required reserves ratio from 2% to 1%. This measure 
releases liquidity of the banking sector of about 100 billion euro. In combination with other 
measures,  the  reduction  in  the  reserve  requirements  should  likewise  help  revive  money 
market activity and support lending. 
Again,  the  goal  of  all  these  measures  is  to  maintain  the  appropriate  credit  supply  to 
households and firms, to ultimately guarantee price stability in line with our mandate. 
At our recent meeting in February, the Governing Council decided to keep key interest rates 
unchanged.  According  to  our  assessment,  inflation  is  likely  to  stay  above  2%  for  several 
months  to  come,  before  declining  to  below  2%.  Regarding  economic  activity,  available 
survey indicators confirm some tentative signs of a stabilisation at a low level around the turn 
of the year, but the economic outlook remains subject to high uncertainty and downside risks. 
For  the  temporary  acceptance  of  additional  credit  claims  as  collateral,  upon  which  the 
Governing Council had decided last December, it approved specific national eligibility criteria 
and risk control measures.4 This measure will facilitate a more uniform transmission of the 
single monetary policy across the euro area.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  brought  to  the  spotlight  the  weakness  of 
economic  governance  in  the  euro  area.  Important  steps  forward  have  been  taken  for 
improving fiscal governance and redressing the public finance situation in several member 
countries. At the same time, macroeconomic imbalances across the euro area need to be 
addressed  by  suitable  policies  geared  towards  fostering  competitiveness  and  spurring 
economic growth. In drawing the right lessons from this recent episode, the euro area has 
the chance to emerge strengthened from this crisis.  
As  regards  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  response  to  the  challenges  has  been  swift  and 
resolute.  Besides  the  reduction  in  policy  rates,  the  Eurosystem  has  implemented  several 
non-standard measures that ensure the proper working of monetary policy transmission and 
the provision of liquidity to the euro area banking system. In particular with its most recent 
measures since December last year, the Eurosystem has crucially helped maintain the credit 
flow to the real economy.  
At  this  stage  it  is  essential  to  counteract  any  attempts  that  aim  to  burden  monetary  policy 
with tasks that are beyond its mandate of maintaining price stability or violate the principles 
                                                 
4  The Governing Council approved a first wave of seven NCBs adopting frameworks for accepting “additional 
performing  credit  claims”  (ACC)  as  collateral.  A  minimum  quality  threshold  should  apply  to  all  ACC 
frameworks. However, each NCB may decide to set a stricter minimum quality threshold. See also the Box 
“Implementation  of  new  collateral  rules  and  reserve  requirements”  in  the  February  2012  issue  of  the  ECB 
Monthly Bulletin. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
enshrined by the Treaty. This is a key condition for monetary policy to remain an anchor of 
stability in turbulent times.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
