Jörg Asmussen: Lessons from Latvia and the Baltics 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, to the panel “Lessons from Latvia and the Baltics” at the High-level conference 
on Latvia, Riga, 5 June 2012. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here today in Riga to discuss the lessons from the Baltic recovery. In 
the Hanseatic League, to which Riga and other Baltic cities belonged, commerce and politics 
went hand in hand. And history is never far away from the headlines of the day. The ongoing 
financial  and  sovereign debt  crisis  illustrates  yet  again  how  closely  economics  and  politics 
interact – for good or for bad. 
I would like to structure my intervention around the following three main questions: 
• 
• 
• 
What makes the Latvian experience so special in the context of the current crisis? 
What can euro area countries learn from the Baltic recovery? 
What can Latvia itself learn from its adjustment? 
When good economics coincides with good politics 
I.  
It is said that “good economics is often bad politics” and vice versa. The experience of Latvia 
and  more  generally  the  Baltics  is  worth  exploring  precisely  because  it  defied  this 
conventional wisdom – both economically and politically. 
First,  it  disproved  the  frequently  made  claim  that  an  internal  devaluation  strategy  cannot 
work. From 2008, Latvia was faced with the deepest recession in the world. The cumulative 
output  decline  was  24%;  unemployment  peaked  at  20%.  Compared  with  this  economic 
collapse,  even  some  of  the  euro  area  peripheral  countries  were  faring  relatively  better. 
Keeping  the  euro  peg  was  considered  by  many  as  a  “mission  impossible”.  External 
devaluation  was  presented  as  the  only  way  forward.  But  Latvia  did  not  choose  the  easy 
“quick fix”. It embarked on a courageous fiscal consolidation path and structural reforms.  
Two years later, the speed of the economic rebound is as extraordinary as the depth of the 
recession.  Against  all  the  odds,  Latvia  recorded  a  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  5.5%  in  2011. 
While domestic demand was the main driver of growth last year, exports have also recovered 
very  strongly.  Evidently,  Latvia’s  competitiveness  has  improved,  even  though  many 
challenges still lie ahead. The economic dynamics behind this swift stabilisation and recovery 
merit close examination. 
Equally  interesting  is  the  political  economy  of  the  Baltic  adjustment.  Jean-Claude  Juncker 
once said: “we all know what to do but we don’t know how to get re-elected afterwards”. This 
saying,  often referred  to  as  “Juncker’s  curse”,  unfortunately  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
crisis  in  vast  segments  of  the  euro  area.  Italy,  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal:  in  all  of  these 
countries the government fell directly as a result of its handling of the economic crisis. Latvia 
seems to be the exception to the rule. Despite harsh austerity measures the Prime Minister 
managed to get re-elected twice. Many ruling politicians in Europe these days may look upon 
this with incredulous admiration.  
Why  was  the  internal  devaluation  strategy  effective  in  Latvia  and  the  Baltics,  while  other 
countries are still struggling with a deep economic and political crisis?  
It is worth drawing lessons from the Baltic experience for euro area member countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Lessons for euro area member countries 
II.  
Let me start with fiscal consolidation. The Baltic experience shows clearly that speed is of 
the essence. In all three Baltic countries, the government reacted swiftly to the deterioration 
of public finances and frontloaded fiscal adjustment. With a budget consolidation of around 
9% of GDP in 2009 alone, Latvia’s effort is unparalleled in Europe.  
Undertaking the necessary austerity measures at an early stage had a triple beneficial effect. 
First,  it  allowed  the  Baltics  to  benefit  from  positive  confidence  effects.  Second,  it  allowed 
Latvia to return to the financial markets well ahead of schedule. Third, it allowed growth to 
bounce back after exceptionally severe output contractions. In 2011 the Baltic countries were 
the three best performers in the EU in terms of GDP growth. At a time when all euro area 
policy-makers urgently seek ways to relaunch growth, this is a remarkable achievement. The 
concept  of  “expansionary  contraction”  has  been  used  and  criticised  in  the  ongoing  debate 
about growth and austerity. The Baltic experience provides an indication that this need not 
be  an  oxymoron:  even  if  fiscal  consolidation  weighs  on  the  growth  prospects  in  the  short 
term, it has sizeable positive effects in the medium to long term.  
But  this  frontloading  approach  also  proved  effective  from  a  political  perspective.  By  acting 
with  speed  and  determination,  the  Latvian  government  was  able  to  capture  the  sense  of 
urgency  prevailing  among  the  population  and  mobilise  it  to  support  adjustment.  This  way, 
most  of  the  required  painful  budgetary  decisions  could  be  passed  before  the  so-called 
“adjustment fatigue” kicked in.  
The bottom line is this: when adjustment is inevitable, it is better to take the medicine right 
away  than  to  let  the  fever  rise  for  months.  This  is  undoubtedly  an  important  factor  that 
explains the different trajectories of the Baltics and certain southern European countries. But 
fiscal consolidation alone would not have allowed the Baltics to exit the crisis so swiftly. The 
ECB has long argued that the potential trade-off between fiscal discipline and growth can be 
mitigated  if  consolidation  is  accompanied  by  growth-enhancing  structural  reforms.  The 
case of the Baltics confirms this.  
From a political economy perspective, the Latvian experience also shows that a critical mass 
of structural reforms is helpful to overcome vested interests. Education, health care, central 
administration: hardly any public sector category was spared by the reforms. Combined with 
targeted social safety net measures, this comprehensive approach helped the government to 
foster public acceptance of change.  
At  the  same  time,  the  quality  and  long-term  sustainability  of  the  reforms  may  –  at  least 
initially – have suffered from this approach. Structural reforms are not just about across-the-
board cuts but are much more complex and multifaceted. Their overarching objective should 
be to create a favourable policy environment for growth and wealth creation. But they should 
also bear in mind equity considerations. In that regard, the IMF, the European Commission 
and the World Bank provided valuable advice and support to Latvia.  
I am convinced that we Europeans can and should also step up our technical assistance to 
countries in need. The Fiscal Compact and the two-pack can provide a good basis for that. 
To be effective, they should be implemented in a spirit of mutual trust by the Member States 
and the European Commission.  
Last but not least, an important lesson from the Baltics relates to the existence of a broad 
consensus  in  society.  In  my  view,  beyond  economic  specificities,  the  key  difference 
between, say, Latvia and Greece lies in the degree of national ownership of the adjustment 
programme – not only by national policy-makers but also by the population itself. I cannot but 
emphasise this again: national ownership and public support for the adjustment programme 
– these are key lessons from the Latvian experience which are of the utmost relevance to the 
current situation in Greece. 
In that regard, the communication policy of the government plays a crucial role. This is what 
a responsible government ought to do: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  state  that  the  adjustment  is  for  the  country’s  own  good,  and  not  just  to  please 
international lenders;  
to tell the hard truth;  
to explain what needs to be done;  
to  be  clear  what  the  consequences  of  non-action  or  of  alternative  policy  choices 
would be.  
All this is conducive to public acceptance of the programme and, therefore, its success. And 
this is also in the enlightened self-interest of the government, as the electoral reward of the 
Latvian Prime Minister demonstrates.  
Beyond economic considerations, the adjustment programme has to be put into a broader 
context.  Political  factors  can  also  be  key  justifications  for  undertaking  difficult  economic 
measures. In the case of the Baltics, the ultimate objective of adopting the euro also has a 
geostrategic  dimension,  namely  completing  their  firm  anchoring  in  a  Union  based  on 
freedom, democracy and human rights.  
In fact, sharing a currency is more than just drawing economic benefits; it means being part 
of  a  community  with  a  shared  destiny.  This  project  of  political  integration  justifies  making 
short-term sacrifices to join – or stay within – the euro area.  
To  sum  up,  a  speedy  fiscal  adjustment,  a  critical  mass  of  structural  reforms  and  a  strong 
national  ownership:  these  were,  in  my  view,  the  key  ingredients  of  the  Baltic  recipe  for  a 
quick economic rebound. There is, of course, no silver bullet that could be applied universally 
to  all  countries.  Nevertheless,  euro  area  policy-makers  should  look  closely  at  the  recent 
experience of the Baltic countries and draw the appropriate lessons.  
I  see  at  least  one  encouraging  take-home  message:  if  properly  designed  and  effectively 
communicated,  if  fully  supported  by  international  lenders,  economic  adjustment  does  not 
necessarily imply political suicide.  
Lessons for Latvia 
III.  
Being  here  in  Riga,  let  me  conclude  with  a  few  observations  about  the  lessons  for  Latvia 
itself.  The  end  of  the  programme  should  not  mean  the  end  of  the  adjustment  efforts.  Key 
challenges remain also for this country to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal adjustment, to 
strengthen  the  fundamental  drivers  of  sustainable  and  balanced  growth  and  to  prevent 
macroeconomic imbalances from building up again.  
As regards euro adoption, the challenges that some euro area countries are currently facing 
illustrate  clearly  the  importance  of  sustainable  convergence.  Very  careful  preparation  is 
required  to  make  sure  that  convergence  continues  also  after  euro  adoption.  Measures  to 
reduce  inflation  temporarily  or  easily  reversible  measures  to  lower  the  fiscal  deficit  do  not 
represent  sustainable  convergence.  The  decision  to  adopt  the  euro  is  a  very  fundamental 
one and should not be taken lightly. 
The ECB published its Convergence Report 2012 last week and we came to the conclusion 
that Latvia does not yet fulfil all convergence requirements. So there is still a way to go for 
Latvia and the euro will not come for free. But let me state very clearly that the euro area is 
not a closed club. It is open to any EU Member State that fulfils the convergence criteria on a 
sustainable basis.  
Conclusion 
IV.  
The Baltic experience demonstrates that euro membership is not just about economics. The 
economics alone make only for a partial analysis of the failure or success of an adjustment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
programme. The political motivations – such as the determination to join the euro area or to 
safeguard the political capital invested in EMU – have often been underestimated by markets 
during  the  crisis.  I firmly  believe  that  both  economic  and  political  arguments  will  ultimately 
also  prevail  in  countries  currently  in  the  middle  of  an  adjustment  process  that  is  similarly 
painful to Latvia’s experience.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
