Rodrigo Vergara: The Central Bank of Chile and the external crisis 
Presentation  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  a  special 
session  held  by  the  Honorable  Senate  to  “analyze  and  evaluate  the  economic  policy 
measures that have become indispensable to confront the severe symptoms of international 
recession and with the purpose of becoming familiar with the Contingency Plan announced 
by the Supreme Government”, Santiago de Chile, 31 January 2012. 
 Mr. President of the Senate, Senator Guido Girardi, Honorable senators. 
Thank  you  for  your  invitation  to  discuss  the  international  economic  situation  and  the 
measures that can be adopted in our country to address an external crisis. These instances 
are  important  for  communicating  the  vision  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  (CBC)  on  these 
issues.  
In the past several years, the advanced economies have gone through a severe crisis. The 
causes and consequences of the Great Recession of 2008–2009 have not yet been resolved 
and we are again enduring periods of external stress that put to the test the strength of our 
economy and its fundamentals. This forces us to carefully evaluate the current environment, 
its implications on the performance of our economy, and the measures we can implement if 
deemed necessary. 
During  the  past  year,  the  biggest  tensions  have  originated  in  the  frail  fiscal  and  financial 
conditions of some economies in the Eurozone. This situation has persisted for a long time 
and no definitive solution is foreseen in the near term. Progress has been made in several 
areas, but the problems’ complexities and the political difficulties to deal with them are huge. 
This,  coupled  with  the  delicate  position  of  consumers  and  firms,  has  translated  in 
deteriorating economic expectations in the region, anticipating a recession during this year. 
The situation in the United States, while less severe than that in Europe, is also complex, 
especially  because  of  the  slow  recovery  and  little  room  for  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  to 
stimulate the economy. The emerging world, Chile included, will undergo a period of slower 
growth than in the past few years. Market consensus forecasts, last week’s IMF projections, 
and also those in our December 2011’s Monetary Policy Report point in the same direction 
(table 1). 
Most recently, the information coming from the U.S. shows a somewhat better performance 
than was forecast some weeks back, but does not modify medium-term problems and risks 
affecting  its  economy.  In  fact,  last  week  the  Federal  Reserve  extended  from  mid-2013  to 
end-2014 the period during which it would hold the fed funds rate at the minimum level where 
it is today, which reflects the magnitude of the problem. Meanwhile, information from China 
reveals its economy is growing strongly. It also shows a relief of inflationary pressures in that 
country,  providing  more  space  for  policy-making.  The  prices  of  commodities,  especially 
copper,  have  recovered  significantly  in  the  past  few  weeks.  Actually,  today’s  price  of  this 
metal is substantially higher than we had forecast for the year. 
The  baseline  scenario  in  our  December  Monetary  Policy  Report  is  still  totally  valid.  Our 
aforementioned report and the market expect a moderate deceleration of Chile’s growth. Our 
economy  is  forecast  to  grow  in  the  range  of  3.75%  to  4.75%  in  2012,  with  y-o-y  rates  for 
every  expenditure  component  below  those of  2011.  This  would  be the  response  both  to  a 
normal,  sound  convergence  of  the  economy  to  trend-consistent  growth  rates,  and  to  the 
effects of a less favorable external environment. 
The  latest  data  show  our  economy  gradually  adjusting  to  lower  growth  rates,  at  the  same 
time that expenditure indicators are still showing substantial growth. Sure enough, there are 
differences  across  sectors.  In  some  branches  of  manufacturing,  especially  export-oriented 
ones, dynamism is milder. In other sectors, such as retail, there is some degree of higher 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
caution  in  inventory  management.  By  contrast,  the  consumption  of  durable  and  capital 
goods, which are normally the first to react to a change in the agents’ expectations, remains 
strong, the same as the construction sector. Meanwhile, various indicators signal a tight labor 
market. It has been recently reported that in December, the unemployment rate as measured 
by the Universidad de Chile survey for Greater Santiago dropped to a 15-year low, and that 
the creation of new jobs has, for the most part, been accounted for by salaried employment.  
Turning to the debt burden of households and firms, as we noted in our Financial Stability 
Report  of  the  second  half  of  last  year,  the  financial  indicators  of  the  corporate  sector  look 
favorable,  with  a  stable  and  limited  currency  mismatch.  The  household  average  shows  no 
financial deterioration because the increase in private consumption has been accompanied 
by an increase in labor income. However, households as well as firms must keep a watchful 
attitude facing possible risk scenarios. As for banks, the sector has adequate capital levels to 
absorb the materialization of a severe risk scenario. As shown in our last Financial Stability 
Report, stress tests indicate that the banking system’s current levels of capitalization would 
permit it to absorb an episode of sharp GDP slowdown, an increase in the cost of credit in 
pesos  and  an  exchange  rate  depreciation.  Meanwhile,  the  State  keeps  a  net  creditor 
position, contributing to the access to external loans at low spreads. 
Our terms of trade, although lower than some months ago, are high by historic standards, 
and  our  external  credit  access  conditions  are  good,  also  by  historic  standards  as  well  as 
compared  with  other  emerging  economies.  Annual  inflation  is  somewhat  above  4%.  The 
latest monthly CPI figure was unexpected, but given its characteristics it does not change our 
evaluation  of  the  medium-term  inflation  trend,  which  remains  centered  on  3%,  just  as  we 
stated in our Monetary  Policy Report. Private inflation expectations are also stable around 
3% y-o-y. This body of information leads us to establish that our baseline scenario remains in 
full force.  
But  still  in  this  conjuncture,  which  looks  fairly  favorable  for  the  Chilean  economy  and  the 
Chileans’ financial situation, it is necessary to warn about the high risks that persist and that 
is why the CBC keeps risks for growth biased towards more negative scenarios. In particular, 
among these risks there is the possibility of new episodes of international financial volatility 
ultimately  affecting  the  agents’  expectations,  global  demand  and  international  credit.  The 
possibility is still there of a deeper than forecast recession in the Eurozone, as well as of a 
disorderly evolution of the continent’s problems or even of  a fragmentation. And one must 
also  consider  the  possibility  of  a  sharper  adjustment  of  growth  in  China.  Neither  should 
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East be overlooked, with its potential implications on the 
oil price. All these external contingencies are part of the preoccupations we monitor closely 
at the CBC in cooperation with the Finance Ministry and superintendences of the financial 
sector, within the framework of our coordination meetings and those of the Financial Stability 
Committee. 
The  preoccupation  motivating  this  session  is  which  measures  we  could  take  to  confront  a 
further worsening of the global situation that could wash over our domestic economy. The 
Central Bank of Chile has the necessary tools and policy space to act to mitigate the effects 
of adverse external scenarios over the Chilean economy. The capacity of the Bank to react 
to a global worsening has been already proven during the episode of 2008–2009. The Board, 
as  has  been  said  time  and  again,  has  the  flexibility  and  disposition  to  use  these  tools  as 
needed. 
In  this  scenario,  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  assumed  that  a  somewhat  more 
expansionary monetary policy would be necessary in order to accommodate and reduce the 
negative effects of the forecast external developments. The 25 basis point reduction in the 
monetary policy rate we applied in our last monetary policy meeting goes in this direction. At 
present our policy rate is at normal levels, and projected inflation and expectations two years 
ahead are aligned with the target for this variable. This situation grants us the flexibility we 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
need to conduct monetary policy in the eventuality of a sharper deterioration of the external 
scenario with significant consequences to the Chilean economy. 
The financial markets have exhibited an increase in external credit premiums paid by Chilean 
banks  and  firms  abroad,  offset  to  some  extent  by  base  rates  in  record  lows.  In  the  local 
money  market  we  have  seen  some  frictions.  As  a  response,  the  Bank  has  applied  more 
active management of liquidity in domestic currency, in order to make sure that the money 
market operates in consistency with the orientation of our monetary policy. In fact, with the 
measures  adopted  last  year  and  specific  factors  cleared  out,  the  money  market’s  interest 
rates have shifted toward levels in line with the current and forecast levels of the policy rate 
(figure 1). 
Beyond the recent measures, the Bank has at its disposal a toolkit it can use when the need 
arises. On one hand, in the years 2008 and 2009 we devised new ways to provide domestic 
and  foreign  currency  liquidity  which  can  be  activated  quickly  but  which  in  the  present 
conjuncture have not been thought necessary. In case of a worsening of external financial 
conditions, the Central Bank has to possibility of alleviating its effects by using a number of 
guaranteed  financing  instruments,  such  as  swaps,  long-term  REPOs  and  collateral 
extension, among others. Moreover, there are reserves available of close to 40 billion dollars, 
augmented with the reserve hoarding plan we carried out in 2011 and which has helped to 
strengthen the liquidity position of the Chilean economy. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  these  measures  are  an  alternative  for  providing  subsidiary  support, 
whose  adoption  is  warranted  only  in  the  presence  of  major  distortions  in  monetary  and 
financial markets. In this complex environment, agents, banks, financial intermediaries and 
firms  need  to  carefully  evaluate  the  associated  risks  and  take  prudent  action  to  properly 
manage their liquidity and financial risks. Any hasty behavior of the authority may mistakenly 
signal bad conditions to a market that is operating normally. 
Similarly, keeping a floating exchange rate policy points in the same direction, as it provides 
the  proper  incentives  for  prudent  management  of  external  liquidity  and  borrowing.  It  also 
helps in the economy’s process of real adjustment when facing a deterioration in the external 
scenario. In terms of both the exchange rate and access to credit, it is of high importance not 
to distort the incentives of financial institutions and firms to prudently administer their risks in 
a complex environment.  
To sum up, I would like to point out once again that the Board of the Central Bank of Chile 
strongly  believes  that  as  a  country,  and  particularly  as  a  Bank,  we  are  well  prepared  to 
confront periods of stress. We are certainly not immune to the events outside our borders, 
and risks are very high today. We have at our disposal the necessary tools to mitigate the 
effects of more adverse external conditions but, most importantly, we can and will use them 
whenever the situation calls for it. Solid proofs of this are the measures we have taken in the 
last weeks. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Table 1 
World growth 
(annual change, percent) 
World at PPP (1)
World at market exchange rate (2)
United States
Eurozone
Japan
China
Rest of Asia
Latin America (excl. Chile)
Commodity exporters
Trading partners
Terms of trade
LME copper price BML (US$cent/lb)
Gasoline price (US$/m3)
Average
00-07
2010
(e)
2011 (f)
Dec.11      
MP Report
Jan.12 
WEO
2012 (f)
Dec.11      
MP Report
Jan.12 
WEO
2013 (f)
Dec.11      
MP Report
Jan.12 
WEO
4.2
3.2
2.6
2.2
1.7
10.5
5.1
3.5
3.1
3.6
8.1
 5.0
3.9
3.0
1.9
4.4
10.4
7.8
6.3
2.9
6.1
23.8
342
598
3.8
2.8
1.7
1.6
-0.7
9.1
4.5
4.2
2.0
4.2
-2.9
401
804
3.8
2.8
1.8
1.6
-0.9
9.2
4.9
4.2
2.1
4.2
-
 3.5
2.7
1.8
-0.1
2.0
8.2
4.4
3.6
2.5
3.8
-6.7
(levels)
350
784
3.3
2.5
1.8
-0.5
1.7
8.2
5.0
3.6
2.4
3.8
-
 4.1
3.2
2.2
1.0
1.6
8.5
4.8
4.0
2.8
4.2
-3.5
340
748
3.9
3.2
2.2
0.8
1.6
8.8
5.0
3.9
2.6
4.3
-
 (e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.
(1) Assuming average economic growth for the rest of the world of 3.2% in the three-year period 2011-2013.
(2) Assuming average economic growth for the rest of the world of 1.7% in the three-year period 2011-2013.
Sources: Central Bank of Chile based on a sample of investment banks, Consensus Forecasts, the IMF and statistics bureaus of respective countries.
Figure 1 
Conditions of 90-day rates in CLP market(1) (2) 
(percent) 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
08
09
10
11
12
(1) Prime deposit rate. 
(2) Dotted vertical line marks date of CBC's REPOS purchase announcement.
Source: Central Bank of Chile.
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4 
 