Stefan Gerlach: Monetary policy after the crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Stefan  Gerlach,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the 
44th Annual  Money,  Macro  and  Finance  Conference,  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  8  September 
2012. 
 The views expressed in this address are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the Central 
Bank of Ireland or the ESCB. I am grateful to Colin Bermingham, León Fernández Brennan, Lars Frisell, Rebecca 
Stuart and, in particular, Allen Monks for help in preparing these remarks. 
Introduction 
1. 
In recent years, in particular following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, 
central banks across the world have adopted a very expansionary monetary policy stance. In 
most economies, the main factor triggering the relaxation of policy has been the very weak 
outlook  for  economic  activity  stemming  from  a  combination  of  balance  sheet  adjustments 
following  housing  bubbles,  financial  markets  seizing  up,  banks  facing  funding  difficulties, 
firms and households experiencing challenging borrowing conditions, and severe strains in 
some sovereign debt markets.  
The relaxation took two forms. First, central banks responded to the crisis by cutting policy 
rates  to  an  unprecedented  extent  and  by  adopting  a  range  of  “unconventional”  or 
“non-standard”  policy  measures.  These  initially  focussed  on  providing  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions and systemically important markets but, over time as traditional monetary policy 
became constrained by the “zero lower bound”, central banks also aimed to reduce longer-
term interest rates to support the economy.1 To illustrate, the ECB responded by increasing 
the size, frequency and  maturity of its liquidity-providing operations and later intervened in 
the  markets  for  covered  and  sovereign  bonds.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of 
England  also  engaged  in  purchases  of  private  and  public  financial  assets.  The  Federal 
Reserve also adopted a forward guidance policy, providing additional information to market 
participants about the expected path of its policy rate, and explicitly targeted the level of the 
yield  curve  through  large-scale  asset  purchases  with  the  intent  of  shifting  down  the  entire 
term structure of interest rates.2  
At  some  future  date  economic  conditions  in  the  economies  most  exposed  to  the  financial 
crisis will recover and central banks will need to tighten monetary conditions. While there is 
still a debate on the question of how the exit from the current highly accommodative policy 
stance is best conducted, here I will focus on what monetary policy might look like after the 
process of normalising policy has been started.  
To  reflect  on  these  changes,  it  is  useful  to  briefly  consider  the  pre-crisis  approach  to 
monetary  policy.  Somewhat  simplified,  it  involved  central  banks setting  a  single  short-term 
interest  rate  on  the  basis  of  forecasts  of  inflation  (relative  to  an  explicit  target  or  informal 
objective)  and  of  economic  activity.3  With  money  markets  functioning  well  and  banks 
responding to interest rate changes, the financial system played an important but subsidiary 
role in setting policy. Will this approach be retained? How will monetary policy frameworks – 
                                                
1  Stone et al. (2011) provides a useful overview of the various facilities adopted by major central banks over the 
course of the financial market crisis. 
2  The  actions  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  are  largely  in  line  with  the  economic 
literature of how central banks can further ease the monetary policy stance when faced with the zero lower 
bound. See, for example, Krugman (1998), Svensson (2000) and Bernanke et al. (2004). 
3  Svensson (1997) presents a simple but instructive model of the conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the goals, information variables and tools central banks use – evolve? What changes to the 
framework  are  most  likely  to  be  adopted?  Will  inflation  objectives  be  increased  to  allow 
central banks more leeway to cut interest rates if another shock occurs? How will financial 
stability  considerations  be  integrated  in  the  monetary  policy  process?  The  questions  are 
many.  
Monetary policy might change for at least three reasons. First, the economic environment in 
which it is set has changed dramatically. Most notably, public debts have increased sharply 
since  2007  and  sovereign  risk  premiums  are  in  some  cases  large.  As  a  consequence, 
interactions between fiscal and monetary policy have grown stronger. Furthermore, financial 
systems in some countries, in particular those that experienced large housing bubbles such 
as Ireland, have become impaired, limiting the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism. 
While  central  banks  potentially  may  respond  simply  by  adjusting  policy  by  more  than  they 
would  otherwise  do,  it  raises  the  question  whether  other  policy  tools,  such  as  asset 
purchases,  can  be  used  to  support  aggregate  demand.  Finally,  unemployment  rates  have 
risen sharply and risk putting central banks under strong pressure to pursue expansionary 
policies.  Public  debts,  the  state  of  the  financial  system  and  the  level  of  unemployment 
change only slowly over time, so there are good reasons to believe that these changes will 
impact on monetary policy for many years to come. 
A  second  reason  why  monetary  policy  may  change  stems  from  the  adoption  of 
unconventional  policy  instruments  during  the  crisis.  For  instance,  central  banks  introduced 
additional liquidity facilities to address funding stress in various markets, engaged in foreign 
exchange swaps to provide foreign currency to domestic banks, and intervened directly in a 
number of markets. Many of these innovations have been effective, raising the issue whether 
they should be used also after the crisis.  
Of course, changes to the monetary policy framework need not be limited to the choice of 
policy instruments. The exact design of the rest of the framework – the inflation objective or 
target and the choice of information variables – is also likely to be reconsidered and changes 
are possible.  
The  third  reason  why  monetary  policy  may  evolve  because  of  the  crisis  is  the  growing 
consensus  that  central  banks  need  to  guard  against  the  development  of  financial 
imbalances. However, no consensus has emerged about how to best do so. One view is that 
central  banks  should  “lean  against  the  wind”  when  asset  prices  and  credit  are  increasing 
rapidly. Whether that is desirable depends on several factors, in particular on what the costs 
might  be  in  terms  of  lower  economic  activity.  The  competing  view  is  that  solely  macro 
prudential instruments should be relied on in preventing the formation of bubbles. If so, how 
would  they  interact  with  monetary  policy  and  is  there  a  need  for  explicit  coordination  of 
monetary and macro prudential policy? Finally, there may a reason to use macro prudential 
measures but to let monetary policy play a secondary role. 
In this speech I will review all three areas.  
The monetary policy environment 
2. 
What monetary policy can achieve and how it should be conducted depend crucially on the 
broader economic environment. This has changed in three ways since the onset of the crisis: 
debt-to-GDP  ratios  have  risen  markedly,  unemployment  has  risen  sharply  and  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  has  deteriorated.  These  factors  are  likely  to  impact  on 
monetary policy for some time to come.  
Large public debts 
2.1. 
The most worrisome change in the economic environment in recent years is the very large 
expansion of public debt in some countries. That should not have come as a surprise: there 
is ample historical evidence that financial crises are typically followed by large increases in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
public debt and, frequently, by sovereign debt crises (Reinhart and Rogoff 2010). Figure 1 
shows  that  debt-to  GDP  ratios  have  risen  sharply,  and  are  projected  by  the  OECD  to 
continue to rise, in many economies.  
A number of developed countries have lost access to market funding over the course of the 
crisis, with three euro countries (Greece, Ireland and Portugal) entering EU-IMF programs in 
order to obtain official external funding.4 All three countries are currently under programmes 
monitored by the “Troika” consisting of the IMF, European Commission and the ECB.  
To  think  about  the  relationship  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  it  is  useful  to  start  by 
considering the standard debt equation (Dornbusch 1996): 
b' = (r - g)*b + d 
where b denotes the debt-to-GDP ratio, r the real interest rate, g the growth rate of real GDP, 
d  the  primary  (or  non-interest)  budget  deficit  (including  unusual  expenses  such  as  bank 
support) as a fraction of GDP, and b' = db/dt the change of the debt-to-GDP ratio. Thus, the 
debt-to-GDP  ratio  will  grow  whenever  the  interest  rate  exceeds  the  growth  rate  of  the 
economy – both measured either in real or in nominal terms – and unless the government is 
running a sufficiently large primary surplus. 
The increase in debt-to-GDP ratios in a number of countries since the start of the crisis has 
mainly been due to slower growth of tax revenue, a rise in expenditures through automatic 
stabilisers  and,  in  some  countries,  the  cost  of  support  packages  from  the  financial  sector, 
which implied a large primary budget deficit (d > 0). A second reason is that GDP growth has 
declined, which has led to a large wedge between the interest rate and the growth rate of the 
economy (r >> g).  
How  might  debt-to-GDP  ratios  evolve  in  coming  years?  There  is  much  evidence  that 
economic  growth  and  inflation  recover  only  slowly  in  the  aftermath  of  a  financial  crisis. 
Kannan  et  al.  (2009)  show  that  recessions  associated  with  financial  crises  tend  to  be 
particularly severe and recoveries tend to be slower than otherwise. These effects are further 
aggravated when recessions are globally synchronised, as in the present situation. Helbling 
and Terrones (2003) highlight the longer and deeper effect of financial crises that follow the 
bursting of a housing market bubble, compared to other types of financial crisis. In particular, 
such crises last nearly twice as long (5 years) and are associated with output losses that are 
almost twice as large (8 per cent of GDP) as equity market crashes.5 This loss of output is 
due, in part, to greater effects on consumption and on banking systems, which are typically 
heavily exposed to real estate.  
I  therefore  expect  nominal  GDP  growth  to  be  low  in  many  countries  in  the  coming  years, 
implying that the high debt-to-GDP ratios are likely to decline more gradually than otherwise.6 
Another  factor  impacting  on  the  evolution  of  the  debt  is  the  level  of  interest  rates.  The 
restructuring  of  the Greek  public  debt  and  concerns that  other governments might  also  be 
forced to restructure their debts has led investors to demand a risk premium to hold the debt 
                                                
4  At  the  time  of  writing,  Cyprus  had  requested  external  assistance  and  was  in  negotiations  with  the  EU-IMF 
Troika  in  order  to  agree  a  memorandum  of  understanding,  while  Spain  had  been  granted  access  to  EFSF 
funding in  order  to support  the  recapitalisation  of its  banking  sector.  EU  countries  outside  of  the euro area 
have  also  sought  external  support.  IMF  arrangements  have  been  put  in  place  for  Romania,  Latvia  and 
Hungary, while a flexible credit line was put in place for Poland, although funds have not been drawn down. 
5  Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) find that unemployment rises for nearly five years following a banking crisis, by an 
average of 7 percentage points, although the peak-to-trough in output takes just 2 years. 
6  Reinhart and Rogoff (2012) find that once a debt-to-GDP ratio exceeds 90 per cent, it tends to stay above this 
level  for  an  average  of  23  years.  They  also  find  such  debt  levels  are  associated  with  a  mean  growth  rate 
1.2 percentage points below those observed in periods of lower debt. The cumulative effect of this growth rate 
disparity can be quite large given the length of time it tends to persist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of  the  most  indebted  countries.  While  such  risk  premiums  in  principle  are  desirable  since 
they  provide  governments  with  incentives  to  reduce  debt,  the  fact  that  interest  rates  have 
risen dramatically and unexpectedly has complicated the management of the crisis in many 
countries.  
A  particular  concern  arises from the  risk  of  vicious  circles  developing. Suppose  long  bond 
yields rise. Since treasury yields serve as reference points for many other interest rates, this 
would lead to a generalised increase in interest rates and therefore a slowing of the economy 
(Smets and Trabandt 2012). In turn, lower growth will worsen further the outlook for public 
debt, and risks triggering additional increases in yields. The fact that self-fulfilling prophesies 
are  possible  is  one  reason  why  it  is  crucial  to  prevent  risk  premiums  from  becoming  too 
large. 
To conclude, unfortunately there are good reasons to believe that the coming years will be 
marked  by  a  combination  of  low  growth,  subdued  inflation  and  high  interest  rates  that  will 
make it difficult for governments to reduce debt rapidly. What does that imply for monetary 
policy? Smets and Trabandt (2012) note three consequences.  
First, it increases the burden of monetary policy. Large increases in deficits and debt have 
led fiscal policy to be tightened considerably, particularly in countries where the government 
has  faced  problems  with  their  access  to  financial  markets.  Tighter  fiscal  policy  slows  the 
economy,  requiring  central  banks  to  cut  interest  rates  to  maintain  inflation  at  the  desired 
level. Of course, large contractions in fiscal policy are particularly difficult to offset if interest 
rates have already been reduced to very low levels.  
Second, large public debts risk ending in high inflation. In its most extreme form, there is a 
risk that governments finance their spending by borrowing directly from the central bank, as 
has been the case in number of historical episodes of hyperinflation.7 But the effect can be 
more indirect. Suppose that the public comes to worry about the inflation consequences of 
large public debts, leading inflation expectations and long interest rates to rise. If the central 
bank maintains its low inflation polices, ex post real interest rates will rise, slowing economic 
activity  and  raising  unemployment.  It  may  therefore  be  tempted  to  accommodate  these 
inflation expectations, at least partially, in order to support economic activity.  
Of  course,  episodes  of  hyperinflation  have  little  if  any  relevance  to  the  current  situation. 
Central banks typically enjoy legal protection that prevents government from using them as 
sources of funding. Moreover, most central banks in advanced economies conduct monetary 
policy with some form of explicit inflation target or, equivalently, a definition of price stability, 
making it difficult for them to aim suddenly for higher inflation in response to shifts in inflation 
expectations.  Finally,  central  banks  have  spent  decades  building  up  their  credibility  and  it 
seems unlikely that they would be willing to compromise this achievement. Even if they were, 
inflation expectations and nominal interest rates would rapidly adjust as market participants 
become aware of a changed inflation environment.   
To my mind, the main problem with large public debts is not that they result in high average 
inflation  rates  but  that  deviations  from  the  central  bank’s  inflation  objective  become  larger 
and  more  protracted.  To  understand  this,  suppose  that  inflation  rose  unexpectedly, 
warranting a tightening of monetary policy to reduce the risk that it would stay permanently 
above the objective or target. Since higher interest rates would reduce economic growth and 
tax revenues, increasing the primary deficit and worsening debt dynamics, monetary policy 
makers may therefore hesitate to raise interest rates in the hope that inflation would return to 
its previous level on its own accord. Thus, large public debt risks leading to a worsening of 
inflation control. 
                                                
7  See  Dornbusch  (1996)  and  Reinhart  and  Sbrancia  (2011)  for  a  discussion  of  historical  episodes  of  debt 
monetisation  and  debt  liquididation  through  financial  repression,  respectively.  Eichengreen  et  al.  (2011) 
highlight how high levels of government debt can pose a threat to central bank independence. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Finally,  high  public  debt  increases the  perceived  riskiness  of government  debt,  which  may 
impact  on  the  functioning  of  both  financial  markets  and  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy. Indeed, in the euro area, we have seen a strengthening of the link between 
banks and sovereigns over the course of the crisis through an increase in banks’ holdings of 
domestic  sovereign  debt  relative  to  foreign  public  debt  (see  Figure  2).  This  may  impede 
banks’ ability to provide credit to the real economy during times of stress in sovereign bond 
markets. 
High unemployment 
2.2. 
A  second  legacy  of  the  financial  crisis  is  a  large  increase  in  unemployment  in  many 
economies.  While  unemployment  can  rise  rapidly,  as  illustrated  by  the  current  episode,  it 
tends to decline slowly and will be a feature of the economic landscape in some countries for 
many years. Indeed the OECD forecasts unemployment in the US to decline very gradually 
over  the  next  two  years, falling  to  7.6  per  cent  in  2013,  while  euro  area  unemployment  is 
expected to continue to rise in 2012 and 2013 (see Figure 3). 
This increase in unemployment is also likely to impact on monetary policy. While no central 
bank has an objective for the unemployment rate as a part of its strategy8, the deviation of 
unemployment from the  non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  plays  an 
important  role  in  the  inflation  process,  as  suggested  by  standard  Phillips  curve  analysis. 
Achieving  an  unemployment  rate  equal  to  the  NAIRU  is  therefore  commonly  seen  as 
essential for stabilising inflation even if the central bank has no objective for unemployment.9 
Indeed, one way to think of the central bank's problem in to set interest rates to influence 
aggregate demand, as captured by the unemployment rate, in such as a way as to control 
inflation.  
Of course, to the extent that it signals weak demand for goods and services and therefore 
low inflation pressures, high unemployment merely indicates a need for more expansionary 
policy.  However,  the  NAIRU  is  likely  to  rise,  perhaps  sharply,  after  the  collapse  of  a 
financial bubble. Guichard and Rusticelli (2011) conclude that the NAIRU has increased in 
a number of countries since the start of the crisis, particularly those that have been most 
affected by financial and construction sector crises. The collapse in the construction sector 
in Ireland, for example, has probably contributed to an increase in the Irish NAIRU.10 In the 
US, various authors have highlighted the role of factors such as the housing market crisis 
and  the  extension  of  unemployment  benefits  as  having  possibly  increased  structural 
unemployment.11 More generally, the increase in long-term unemployment in a number of 
countries  indicates  that  the  NAIRU  has  most  likely  increased  in  these  countries  (see 
Figure 4).12  
An increase of the NAIRU may be problematic for two reasons. Most obviously, it makes it 
more  difficult for  central  banks to  determine  how  much  slack  there  is  in  goods  and  labour 
markets and therefore the appropriate level of interest rates to set. The risk of policy errors, 
                                                
8  A possible exception is the Federal Reserve, which has “maximum employment” as a formal objective. 
9  Of  course,  if  the  central  bank  did  have  an  objective  for  unemployment,  this  would  be  a  second  reason  for 
monetary policy to respond to it. 
10  The OECD estimates the Irish NAIRU to have increased to around 10 per cent in 2011. It is difficult, however, 
to accurately estimate the NAIRU in the Irish context due to the high levels of labour market openness and 
migration. 
11  Evans (2011), for example, considers the possibility that structural changes in the US labour market has kept 
unemployment  at  high  levels,  concluding  that  such  factors  have  likely  increased  the  NAIRU,  at  least 
temporarily. 
12  The literature in this area highlights the strong link between long-term unemployment and the NAIRU. See, for 
example, Blanchard and Summers (1987) or Ball (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
leading  to  an  amplification  of  cyclical  fluctuations  and  a  delay  in  the  return  to  stability, 
therefore  rises.  Furthermore,  the  public  may  not  realise  that  the  NAIRU  has  increased, 
leading  to  strong  pressures  for  more  expansionary  monetary  policy.  Given  the  rise  in 
unemployment  rates  after  the  crisis,  pressures  for  central  banks  to  “do  more”  will  be 
common. As Dornbusch (1996) warns, monetary policy makers may come under pressure 
not  to  raise  interest  rates  in  response  to  rising  inflation  in  an  environment  of  high 
unemployment, be it structural or cyclical. 
Financial system weakness 
2.3. 
A  third  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis  is  wide-spread  worsening  of  financial  sector 
functioning. Credit risk has led to large spreads emerging in unsecured money markets and 
liquidity to fall abruptly, particularly at longer maturities. In the euro area, interbank markets 
have segmented across national boundaries, with banks in some countries effectively locked 
out of these markets and forced to rely on the Eurosystem for liquidity. This has contributed 
to increased divergence in funding costs for banks across the region. Credit risk concerns 
have also made it more difficult for financial intermediaries to obtain funding in bond markets, 
while other key funding markets have also seen a significant reduction in activity.  
These  developments  have  complicated  monetary  policy  in  several  ways.  Most  obviously, 
banks’ problems obtaining funding has raised the cost and reduced the availability of credit 
for  firms,  in  particular  small  firms,  and  households.  Data  from  the  Eurosystem’s  Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) have shown that credit conditions have tightened considerably since 
the  start  of  the  financial  market  crisis  as  a  consequence  of  limited  access  to  wholesale 
funding markets. Hempell and Kok Sorensen (2010) show that these supply constraints have 
affected credit growth, even when changes in loan demand are taken into account. Ciccarelli 
et al. (2010) demonstrate that credit supply constraints in the euro area contributed to the fall 
in GDP growth in the early part of the crisis and a similar effect can be observed in the US. 
While  actions  by  the  ECB  have  mitigated  the  impact  of  the  most  recent  turmoil  on  credit 
conditions,  balance  sheet  constraints  may  continue  to  impact  on  the  ability  of  banks  to 
provide credit in a number of euro area countries.  
Tensions  in  the  financial  sector  have  also  blunted  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism 
(Svensson  2010).  While  central  banks  have  cut  interest  rate  to  levels  unprecedented  in 
recent monetary history, the outlook for economic activity remains weak. To further support 
the economy, many central banks have adopted non-standard monetary policy measures. To 
my mind, these are arguably less effective than interest rates changes and more difficult to 
calibrate  in  light  of  central  banks’  very  limited  experience  using  them.13  Thus,  it  seems 
plausible that the ability of monetary policy to control demand at the zero lower bound is now 
lower than previously.  
Problems in the banking sector may also make it difficult for central banks to exit from the 
currently highly accommodative monetary policy stance. For example, an increase in interest 
rates could damage household’s balance sheet directly, and banks’ balance sheets indirectly 
by slowing down economic growth, and increasing loan losses.14  
The use of financial markets variables as information variables for monetary policy purposes 
has also become more complicated. While interest rate spreads have been used by many 
central banks as measures of financial market participants’ growth and inflation expectations 
and as indicators of the likelihood of recessions, reduced liquidity and large risk premiums in 
many markets now make their interpretation more complicated. This makes it more difficult 
for central banks to judge whether the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate.  
                                                
13  Bernanke (2012) discusses the Federal Reserve’s recent experience with unconventional policy instruments. 
14  Conversely,  BIS  (2012)  highlights  the  dangers  to  the  financial  system  of  maintaining  very  accommodative 
monetary policy for an extended period of time. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The framework of monetary policy 
3. 
Next  I  turn  to  the  question  of  how  monetary  policy  frameworks  might  evolve  as  a 
consequence of the crisis. The framework, or strategy, is normally viewed as consisting of 
four  components:  the  goal(s)  of  monetary  policy;  any  intermediate  targets  that  are  used; 
information or indicator variables; and monetary policy instruments.  
The objectives of monetary policy  
3.1 
Price  stability  is  the  overriding  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  most  advanced  economies, 
although central banks frequently, if not typically, have a secondary objective of smoothing 
the business cycle. Precisely how the price stability objective is pursued varies, but in many 
cases a numerical definition of price stability or an explicit inflation target plays a key role. 
Indeed, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan, which have neither, have recently 
communicated what inflation rates they consider to be consistent with their mandates. 
There is much agreement that price stability should remain the overriding goal of monetary 
policy. This reflects the view that the financial crisis was not principally caused by monetary 
policy but rather by weaknesses in the financial system.15 Furthermore, high inflation is costly 
and there is no exploitable trade-off between inflation and growth. Moreover, price stability, 
while neither necessary nor sufficient for achieving financial stability, is conducive to that end 
(IMF  2010).  Nevertheless,  important  questions  concerning  the  framework  remain.  One  of 
these concerns is whether financial stability should be a separate goal of monetary policy, 
which I discuss in the next section.  
Another  broad  question  concerns  whether  the  design  of  inflation  objectives  should  be 
reconsidered. Blanchard et al. (2010) suggest that there are reasons to consider aiming for 
higher inflation than most central banks did before the crisis. Suppose that the central bank’s 
inflation objective is 2 per cent, that the equilibrium real interest rate is 2.5 per cent, and that 
inflation  is  at  the  objective  and  output  at  potential  (or  the  unemployment  rate  equal  to  the 
NAIRU). If a large contractionary shock occurred, the central bank could then reduce interest 
rates  by  at  most  450  basis  points.16  If  the  inflation  target  was  raised  by  1  per  cent,  the 
argument  goes,  central  banks  would  have  been  able  to  cut  interest  rates  by  an  additional 
100 basis points, which, given that many central banks have reduced rates to (almost) the 
zero lower bound, would have enabled them to provide more stimulus.  
While  true,  most  observers  do  not  find  this  argument  compelling.17, 18  Raising  inflation 
objectives  would  increase  average  inflation  rates  and  therefore  inflation volatility  and  price 
dispersion,  which  is  costly.  Seeking  to  achieve  more room for  large  interest rate  cuts  also 
presumes that there are no other policies that can be used to stimulate demand if the zero 
lower bound it reached. However, during the crisis central banks have shown great ingenuity 
in  designing  new  policy  tools,  although,  admittedly,  uncertainty  remains  about  their 
                                                
15  Bean  (2008)  lists  a  number  of  causes,  including  a  failure  by  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  to 
appreciate  the  risks  inherent  in  the  ‘originate-to-distribute’  model;  opacity  in  risks  underlying  complex 
structured  finance  assets;  excessive  reliance  on  statistical  models  of  risk  based  on  past  behaviour; 
overdependence on ratings by investors and a failure to observe due diligence; excessive closeness of the 
ratings  agencies  to  those  who  were  issuing  debt;  compensation  schemes  in  financial  institutions  that 
stimulated risk-taking; and a focus on short-term returns. 
16  As a point of comparison, the peak rates during the last interest rate cycle were 4.25 per cent for the ECB 
(July 2008 - October 2008), 5.75 per cent for the Bank of England (July 2007 – December 2007) and 5.25 per 
cent for the Federal Reserve (June 2006 – September 2007). 
17  See Bean et al. (2010) and Kohn (2010). 
18  When asked by a journalist for his thoughts on the issue, Jean-Claude Trichet (then ECB president) described 
the idea of a 4% target as “plain wrong”. (http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2010/html/is100304.en.html) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
effectiveness and how best to apply them. Nevertheless, it is difficult to argue that short term 
interest rates are the only policy instrument available to policy makers.  
Moreover,  the  argument  that  central  banks  need  more  leeway  to  reduce  interest  rates 
implicitly assumes that the zero lower bound will be reached frequently. A number of authors 
have studied this hypothesis using simulations, concluding that an inflation objective as low 
as 2 per cent did not impose much constraint on monetary policy (e.g., see Reifschneider 
and Williams 2000). Given how rarely the zero lower bound has been reached in practice, 
having some extra room to cut interest rates appears to be of limited value. 
Some  observers  might  be  tempted  to  argue  that  raising  inflation  objectives  is  desirable 
because it would help reduce the burden of the public debt. However, this would only happen 
if  the  change  in  policy  was  not  known  to,  or  perceived  by,  bond  holders.  In  the  current 
situation of high transparency, neither of those conditions holds. Indeed, raising the inflation 
objective  is  likely  to  trigger  expectations  of  higher  inflation  and  increase  long-term  interest 
rates precisely at a moment when economies remain vulnerable to contractionary shocks.19 
Moreover,  if  inflation  objectives  were  changed  once,  they  could  surely  be  changed  again. 
Raising them could consequently damage the credibility of monetary policy, reduce central 
banks’  control  of  long  term  inflation  expectations,  potentially  making  longer  interest  rates 
more volatile and raising inflation risk premiums.  
While there is still broad consensus that the level of central banks’ inflation objectives before 
the  crisis  erupted  remain  appropriate,  a  number  of  authors  have  argued  that  inflation 
objectives  could  be  changed  in  other  ways.  For  instance,  the  range  compatible  with  price 
stability  could  be  broadened.  As  discussed  in  the  next  section,  this  would  enable  central 
banks to attach greater weight, temporarily, to financial stability objectives. A closely related 
idea is to target the average inflation rate over some period of time rather than a range that 
must be held at all times, as does the Reserve Bank of Australia.  
Others  have  argued  that  targeting  a  (rising)  price  level  may  be  preferable  to  targeting 
inflation.20 Under this framework, a decline in the price level due to a contractionary shock 
such as a financial crash must be offset by higher inflation in the future. In contrast, under an 
inflation target,  such  a  price  level  shock  has  no implications for future  inflation.  Price-level 
targeting  consequently  raises  near-term  inflation  expectations  and  therefore  reduces 
expected short-term real interest rates to a greater extent than is possible with an inflation 
target. But targeting the price level is not unproblematic. After a large contractionary supply 
shock,  central  banks  would  be  required  to  run  tighter  monetary  policy  than  under  inflation 
targeting, which seems undesirable.21  
There are several possible changes to inflation objectives and no consensus has emerged 
whether any would be desirable. My suspicion is that the benefits of further refinements of 
the inflation objective are small in practice and the potential difficulties arising from a change 
of the objective substantial. I would therefore not expect widespread redefinitions of inflation 
objectives in the near future, although of course individual central banks may decide to do 
so. 
Intermediate targets and information variables  
3.2 
The practice of gearing monetary policy directly to the achievement of price stability has led 
central banks to abandon intermediate targets or, in some cases, to replace them by model-
                                                
19  See Bean et al. (2010) and Kohn (2010). 
20  See Svensson (2009), Woodford (2003), Vestin (2006). The Bank of Canada has also explored the idea, see 
Carney (2009). 
21  Kohn (2010) also fears that compared to a simple inflation target, price level targeting could leave the general 
public “perplexed”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
based forecasts of inflation. Nevertheless, in setting monetary policy, central banks continue 
to  rely  on  information  variables,  that  is,  variables  that  are  viewed  as  containing  important 
information  about  financial  and  economic  conditions  but  are  not  fully  captured  in  the 
forecasting models used.  
One consequence of the crisis has been that central banks focus much greater attention on 
the  state  of  the  financial  sector,  since  weaknesses  in  it  has  been  a  drag  on  aggregate 
demand  and  has  blunted  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.22  Since  macroeconomic 
models typically incorporate few, if any, financial variables from the sector (IMF 2010), much 
of  this  analysis  is  conducted  using  a  range  of  financial  variables.  To  mention  but  a  few, 
central  banks  look  at  variables  such  as  the  spread  between  secured  and  unsecured 
interbank rates as a proxy for credit risk in the banking sector, the level of trading in various 
money market sectors, and activity in key credit markets.  
While  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  models  used  for  forecasting  and  analysis  will 
increase  over  time,  the  use  of  information  variables  to  capture  the  state  of  the  financial 
sector, which has increased sharply during the crisis, will surely continue, with the range of 
indicators relied on depending on country-specific features of the financial system.  
The instruments of monetary policy 
3.3 
The most notable change brought by the crisis has been a number of innovations in the way 
in  which  central  banks  implement  monetary  policy.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether 
central  banks  will  retain  some  of  the  new  instruments  after  the  crisis  has  abated. 
Furthermore, what will be the lasting impact of the crisis on the functioning of money markets 
and how will this effect central banks’ operational frameworks? 
Before  the  crisis,  central  banks  implemented  money  policy  largely  by  setting  a  short-term 
policy  rate  or  by  influencing  short-term  interbank  rates  (Stone  et  al.  2011).  Of  course, 
changes  in  short-term  interest  rates  do  not  on  their  own  have  much  of  an  impact  on 
aggregate demand, which is much more sensitive to long-term interest rates. However, long 
term  interest  rates  are  influenced  by  market  participants’  expectations  of  future  monetary 
policy. It therefore becomes important for the central bank to influence these expectations. 
This can be done in many ways, in particular by the central bank being transparent about its 
objectives  and  how  it  views  the  macro  economic  outlook.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  many 
central  banks  publish  forecasts  for  inflation  and  economic  activity.  Some  central  banks  in 
smaller economies also publish forecasts for their own policy rates.  
During the crisis central banks have undertaken a wide range of operations. While there is no 
single way to categorise them, Stone et al. (2011) distinguishes between operations whose 
main  intent  is  to  maintain  financial  stability,  in  particular  through  the  smooth  provision  of 
liquidity to the banking system, and those that aim at providing macroeconomic stimulus.23  
There is much agreement that the new liquidity enhancing policies have been successful in 
reducing  stress  in  interbank  markets,  as  evidenced  by  spreads  between  LIBOR  and 
Overnight  Indexed  Swap  rates  or  T-bill  yields.  These  policies  involved  extending  the 
frequency  and  maturity  of  market  operations,  broadening  the  range  of  counterparties 
involved,  and  adopting  a  much  wider  definition  of  acceptable  collateral.  Since  these 
operations have been generally over-collateralised, the credit risk has been negligible (Bean 
et al. 2010).24 A number of central banks engaged in large foreign exchange swap operations 
in order to provide the domestic banking system with foreign currency. Finally, some central 
                                                
22  See Kohn (2009), Svensson (2010) and Woodford (2010). 
23  See Borio and Disyatat (2009) for another classification. 
24  Furthermore, haircuts on collateral are adjusted in line with credit quality. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
banks  undertook  operations  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  specific  dysfunctional 
market segments.  
After  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  central  banks  cut  interest  rates  sharply,  in  many 
cases to the zero lower bound.25 With interest rate policy exhausted, central banks attempted 
to  ease further  monetary  policy  by  undertaking asset  purchases,  in  particular  of  sovereign 
debt. The Bank of England and the Federal Reserve purchased both public and private debt, 
while the Fed also adopted a policy of forward guidance on policy rates.26  
Which  of  these  innovations  will  be  retained  after  the  crisis  has  subsided?  A  number  of 
observers have argued that at least some those aiming at improving the provision of liquidity 
to  banks  may  remain  in  use.  One  reason  for  that  is  that  the  financial  system  will  remain 
under  stress  in  many  countries  for  some  considerable  time.  For  example,  banks  that  hold 
large quantities of domestic sovereign debt could be exposed to renewed funding stress if 
there was a further deterioration in the euro area sovereign crisis. To ensure that banks can 
fund themselves if strains in interbank markets return, it is desirable to retain some of these 
tools.  
In addition to retaining greater flexibility in liquidity management, IMF (2010) argues in favour 
of requiring banks to hold greater liquid reserves to help them absorb better liquidity shocks. 
It also argues that the stigma associated with banks’ borrowing from the central bank needs 
to be reduced and that many of the fund-absorbing tools adopted during the crisis should be 
maintained. This is particularly important in the near future since central banks will need to 
absorb large amounts of liquidity during the process of normalising monetary policy. 
During the crisis central banks also intervened in a number of dysfunctional markets on an 
emergency basis.27 It seems unlikely that these interventions will continue after the crisis has 
abated.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that  these  interventions  occurred  and  were  perceived  as 
successful  suggests  that  central  banks  will  be  less  hesitant  to  intervene  if  these  markets 
were to face renewed stress. Perhaps the greatest lesson for monetary policy makers from 
the crisis is that in an emergency, they should think more expansively of their role in ensuring 
market functioning.  
During  the  crisis  central  banks  engaged  in  large  scale  asset  purchases,  in  particular  of 
government  bonds,  which  were  undertaken  to  depress  long-term  interest  rates.  While  the 
evidence  indicates  that  yields  declined,  the  transmission  mechanism  of  such  purchases  is 
poorly understood. Given the paucity of episodes in which large scale asset purchases have 
been used, it is likely to remain so (Stone et al. 2011). A further reason why central banks 
are unlikely to be keen to engage in asset purchases in normal times is that they unavoidably 
raise concerns about fiscal dominance and increase risk on the central bank’s balance sheet. 
It  therefore  seems  plausible  that  after  the  crisis  central  banks  will  only  engage  in  such 
operations if policy rates have already been reduced to the lower bound.  
A final question concerns what money markets will look like in the aftermath of the crisis. The 
crisis  brought  a  significant  reduction  in  money  market  activity,  due  to  a  combination  of 
perceptions  of  credit  risk  and  large  amounts  of  excess  liquidity  arising  from  central  bank 
crisis  measures.  Going  forward  it  appears  likely  that  there  will  be  a  shift  towards  secured 
interbank  activity.  This  raises  the  question  whether  central  banks  should  change  their 
operational  target,  which  is  generally  a  short-term  unsecured  rate,  to  a  secured  rate. 
                                                
25  In the textbook, that bound is given by zero. In practice, however, the bound may arise at low but non-zero 
interest rate. 
26  While the ECB also purchased of government bonds, this was done in order to improve the functioning of the 
monetary transmission mechanism in the euro area. 
27  There  has  been  a  growing  literate  on  the  “market-maker  of  last  resort”  function  of  central  banks  in  recent 
years. See, for example, Buiter and Sibert (2007). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Furthermore, would it make sense for central banks to move further out the money market 
curve  and  target,  for  example,  a  three-month  interbank  rate,  as  the  SNB  currently  does? 
Again, I would suggest that this will be a function of how money markets look after the crisis, 
in  particular  the  extent  to  which  longer-term  interbank  rates  are  affected  by  credit  risk 
premiums. 
interest  rates. 
Financial stability considerations 
4. 
Before the onset of the crisis, there were two main views about how central banks should 
deal  with  asset  price  bubbles.28  The  first  was  that  in  setting  interest  rates,  central  banks 
should  lean  against  large  and  sustained  increases  in  asset  prices,  in  particular  housing 
prices.29 This view  was based on evidence that booms, in particular those associated with 
rapid  credit  expansion,  have  tended  to  precede  financial  crashes,  and  the  proposition  that 
tighter monetary policy would reduce asset price and credit growth.  
While conducting monetary policy in this way  would push inflation below the objective and 
slow  the  economy,  these  effects  are  believed  to  be  of  limited  significance  relative  to  the 
benefit  of  avoiding  a  financial  crisis.  Moreover,  the  occasional  deviations  of  inflation  from 
target  resulting  from  this  policy  can  be  dealt  with  by  simply  extending  the  policy  horizon. 
Indeed, since the objective of this policy is to prevent inflation from falling below the objective 
when the bubble bursts, it was seen as fully compatible with a price-stability oriented policy 
strategy, although one that operates with a longer policy horizon. 
The competing view is that central banks should not attach any special significance to asset 
prices, unless they are accompanied by inflation pressures that, in any case, would warrant 
higher 
the 
consequences  of  the  collapse  of  an  asset  price  bubble  (Greenspan  2002).  This  approach 
reflects  the  opinion  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  in  real  time  whether  the  economy  is 
undergoing a boom and to predict an asset price bust and, furthermore, that in order to slow 
an asset price boom, monetary policy has to be tightened so much that economic growth is 
severely affected. 
The  financial  crisis  has  led  to  a  broad  rethinking  of  these  issues.  Given  how  costly  the 
financial crash has been, it is not surprising that there is now greater support for the view that 
central banks have a role to play in preventing asset price bubbles. However, doubts remain 
whether monetary policy should play the primary role. While rapid and sustained growth in 
credit  and  asset  prices  play  crucial  roles  in  financial  crashes  and  could  be  mitigated  by 
tighter monetary policy, the size of the interest rate increases needed to slow a bubble would 
be so large that the consequences for inflation and economic activity would be too severe.30 
Moreover,  in  the  specific  case  of  the  euro  area,  monetary  policy  is  particularly  blunt 
instrument to address national risks to financial stability.  
Rather,  the  view  that  with  objectives  for  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability  policy 
makers  need  two  (sets  of)  tools  has  gained  widespread  acceptance.  Under  this  view, 
monetary  policy  is  used  to  ensuring  price  stability  and  macro  prudential  tools  are  used  to 
safeguard financial stability.31  
Instead,  monetary  policy  should  respond  vigorously 
to 
                                                
28  See Kohn (2006, 2008). 
29  See Borio and White (2003), ECB (2005) and White (2006, 2009). 
30  See Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2009), Bernanke (2010), and Dokko et al. (2009). 
31  Bank of England (2011) contains a discussion of possible macro prudential instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Monetary and macro prudential policy 
4.1 
The  combined  use  of monetary  and  macro  prudential  policy  raises  a  number  of questions 
regarding whether they may interact. Since macro prudential policy aims at influencing the 
behaviour  of  the  financial  sector,  which  plays  a  central  role  in  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism, one would expect them to do so.32 But what can monetary policy do to deal with 
financial stability risks?  
Too little focus was attached to financial sector developments before the crisis, which is best 
seen  as  reflecting  weaknesses  in  financial  regulation  and  supervision  (IMF  2010).  While 
central banks responded effectively by increasing the resources devoted to monitoring and 
analysing vulnerabilities in the financial sector, more work on understanding macro-financial 
linkages is needed. In particular, a better quantitative understanding of how financial factors 
impact on forecasts for inflation and economic activity, and how they influence the effect of 
interest rates changes on the economy is desirable. That process of integrating the financial 
sector and variables in macroeconomic models is currently underway. A further conclusion 
arises from the fact that the financial system is opaque. The experiences of the last decade 
suggest that financial regulators’ and supervisors’ ability to prevent excessive risk taking in 
the financial sector is limited. A particular worry is that it can be overwhelmed by a  virtual 
explosion of financial activity if interest rates are reduced to very low levels, as central banks 
will be required to do from time to time for price stability reasons.  
While first-best  policy  in  the  ideal  world  calls for  monetary  policy  to  be focussed  solely  on 
price stability, it might be used to support macro prudential policies on second-best grounds. 
The  use  of  monetary  policy  would  then  be  tied  directly  to  difficulties  managing  macro 
prudential policy. Central banks that felt that the macro prudential regime was effective would 
thus  continue  to  focus  monetary  policy  solely  on  price  stability,  whereas  monetary  policy 
makers operating in a less favourable environment might consider attaching some weight to 
asset market developments in setting interest rates. However, the use of monetary policy on 
second  best  grounds  must  recognise  that  any  benefits  this  policy  may  bring  in  terms  of 
greater  financial  stability  will  come  at  a  cost  of  weaker  control  of  inflation  and  economic 
activity.  Since  there  consequently  is  a  trade-off  between  financial  and  macroeconomic 
stability, central banks should move interest rates in response to perceived risks to financial 
stability less than they would do in the absence of such a trade-off.  
Since monetary policy and macro prudential policies both impact on aggregate demand and 
risk taking in the financial sector, the issue arises of whether they should be set separately or 
in  some  form  of  coordination.  However,  this  issue  should  not  be  overemphasised.  For 
instance, a tightening of macro prudential policy will restrict bank lending, leading aggregate 
demand  to  slow.  To  ensure  that  inflation  stays  at  the  objective,  the  central  bank  will  thus 
relax  monetary  policy  even  in  the  absence  of  any  formal  coordination  mechanism. 
Furthermore, financial cycles appear of longer duration than business cycles suggesting that 
macro prudential policy is likely to be changed much less frequently than monetary policy. In 
practice,  macro  prudential  policy  may  be  best  thought  of  as  providing  a  backdrop  to 
monetary policy (Beau et al. 2011). Given that changes in macro prudential policy changes 
can have large impacts on the behaviour of financial institutions, it seems likely that they will 
be  announced  with  long  lead  times  in  order  to  prevent  abrupt  adjustments  in  the  financial 
sector. 
Coordination  may  be  particularly  important  in  a  situation  in  which  monetary  and  macro 
prudential policy are in conflict. Since asset price booms are typically associated with rapid 
growth  and  rising  inflation  pressures,  they  may  warrant  both  tighter  macro  prudential  and 
monetary policy. As noted by Beau et al. (2011), a conflict between the two policies is most 
likely to arise in the case of positive supply shocks, which tend to reduce inflation pressures 
                                                
32  See Beau, Clerc and Mojon (2011). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and thus permit a relaxation of monetary policy, and increase asset prices and raising the 
risk of a bubble forming. To the extent that such events are rare, the coordination problem 
may be of limited practical significance.  
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Public debt and unemployment are likely to remain very high, and the current problems in the 
financial sector will persist, for some years to come, making for the most hostile environment 
for  monetary  policy  since  the  1970s.  While  the  conduct  and  framework  of  policy  will  be 
permanently altered by the crisis, it is difficult to judge precisely how they will evolve. I see 
three likely changes. 
First, central banks will attach much greater significance to the state of the financial system 
in  conducting  policy  than  before  the  crisis.  Policy  makers  will  continue  to  look  at  various 
measures  of  tensions  in  the  financial  markets  and  of  banks’  funding  situation.  And 
forecasting models will incorporate the financial sector in increasingly realistic ways.  
Second,  monetary  policy  makers  will  be  concerned  that  macro  prudential  policies  may  be 
inadequate, in particular if interest rates have to be reduced to low levels for macroeconomic 
reasons. But they will not lean against the wind, except in rare circumstances. Instead, they 
will press for macro prudential policy action. 
Third, they will conduct monetary operations in much the same as before the crisis. But they 
have been forced to think in innovative ways about how to interact with money markets and 
they have adopted a broad range of new instruments. While some of these innovations will 
no doubt be discontinued, others will become part of monetary policy makers’ tool box.  
But much will remain the same. Central banks will continue to focus on stabilising inflation 
rates at the same low levels as before the crisis, although perhaps some central banks with 
explicit inflation targeting may adopt a longer time horizon for policy, effectively targeting an 
average  inflation  rate.  And  movements  in  short-term  interest  rates  will  once  again  be  the 
main tool of monetary policy.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
