Agustín Carstens: The importance of confidence in macroeconomic 
stabilization efforts 
Speech by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the High-Level Public-
Private Sector Conference, organized by the Institute of International Finance, Mexico City, 
24 February 2012. 
 Introduction  
Good afternoon. First of all, I would like to warmly welcome you to Mexico and thank you for 
attending this conference co-sponsored by the IIF and the Mexican Financial Authorities. In 
particular, I would like to express my appreciation to Charles Dallara and his team at the IIF 
for their dedication and effectiveness in putting this outstanding event together in a very short 
period  of  time,  and  to  Grupo  Financiero  Banamex  and  BBVA  Bancomer  for  their 
sponsorship. 
During the last four years, the financial crisis, which started in advanced economies and then 
spread  to  most  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  has  captured  the  attention  of  policymakers  and 
market participants around the globe. Given the magnitude and severity of the crisis and its 
adverse impact on economic activity, it has been characterized as the worst financial crisis 
since the Great Depression. Unfortunately, the world economy has not been able to pull out 
of it and authorities’ capacity to use traditional policy instruments to support economic activity 
has diminished over time.  
In this context, during the second half of 2011 two unprecedented events led to a period of 
heightened  uncertainty  in  financial  markets  and  significantly  deteriorated  global  economic 
prospects:  first,  the  downgrade  of  the  U.S.  sovereign  debt  by  one  credit  rating  agency  in 
early August, and second, the worsening of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, combined 
with a heightened perception of weakness in the European banking system, followed by the 
increasing  risk  of  contagion  across  markets  and  countries.  These  events,  along  with 
authorities’  inability  to  implement  credible  and  timely  policies  to  address  the  fiscal  and 
financial  problems  in  advanced  economies,  led  to  a  significant  deterioration  in  confidence 
among economic agents.  
Therefore, the perceived risk of a catastrophic event, such as a sovereign default episode in 
Europe with great disruptions in financial markets and economic activity, sharply increased. 
This situation has led firms in advanced economies to postpone or even cancel investment 
projects  and  households  to  further  reduce  consumption  expenditures.  Under  these 
circumstances,  the  absence  of  confidence  has  contributed  to  decreasing  the  growth 
prospects for most advanced countries and, for that matter, for the world economy. In turn, 
weak economic dynamism has further deteriorated fiscal positions and financial conditions in 
some  European  countries,  leading  to  an  even  worse  situation,  generating  an  adverse 
feedback loop. Moreover, given increased trade and financial linkages across countries the 
decoupling between advanced and emerging economies disappeared.  
During early December, the European Central Bank adopted powerful unprecedented policy 
measures,  as  it  implemented  the  long-term  refinancing  operation  program  and  broadened 
the  scope  of  acceptable  collateral.  This  program  has  averted  a  full-blown  liquidity  crisis, 
given that it eased rollover funding pressures on many banks. However, this welcomed policy 
action by the ECB can only provide temporary breathing space, since by itself the program 
does  not  solve  the  underlying  weaknesses  of the  banking  system,  which  to  a  large  extent 
respond to the weak growth prospects and difficult fiscal position in many Eurozone member 
countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Under  this  scenario,  in  order  to  break  in  a  definite  and  conclusive  fashion  the  adverse 
feedback  loop  between  the  deterioration  of  economic  activity  and  the  fiscal  and  financial 
conditions in Europe, it is crucial for authorities to implement urgently policy actions aimed at 
restoring  confidence  as  soon  as  possible  among  economic  agents.  In  particular,  it  is 
necessary to adopt credible measures in order to consolidate fiscal accounts, to assure the 
sustainability of public debt, to recapitalize troubled financial institutions and to facilitate the 
deleveraging  of  households.  This  would  generate  a  virtuous  circle,  where  firms  would  be 
more willing to invest, households would increase their spending, and investors would renew 
their  interest  in  European  sovereign  debt  and  bank  issued  debt,  leading  to  stability  and  a 
rebound in economic activity. In turn, a strong economic recovery would further strengthen 
fiscal  positions  and  improve  financial  conditions,  reinforcing  confidence  among  market 
participants. The bottom line is how can we transit from a vicious cycle in expectations to a 
virtuous one.  
For  decades,  Latin  America  suffered  from  recurring  financial  crises  that  brought  about 
hovering economic, political and, above all, social costs. These recurring crises have proven 
to  be  devastating  for  affected  nations.  Recurrence  undermines  the  hopes  of  generations, 
causing discouragement and, if the basic solutions are postponed or applied only partially, 
the end result is a downward spiral of mistrust and confusion. A hesitant attitude increases 
the costs related to adjustment, often exponentially.  
Financial  crises  usually  involve  fiscal  dislocations,  restrictions  on  bank  lending  and  /  or 
imbalances  in  the  external  accounts,  all  of  which  reflect,  in  one  way  or  another,  an 
overspending in the economy financed in an unhealthy way. The measures to solve the crisis 
will  definitely  imply  generating  a  new  balance  between  spending  and  financing.  The 
unavoidable remedial measures in the short term can deepen the impact of the crisis over 
economic activity, unemployment and poverty, but these costs tend to be much higher if the 
adjustment measures are postponed or adopted only partially.  
Precisely because of the huge costs involved it is necessary for all advanced economies to 
devote themselves immediately to resolve the crisis and lay solid foundations to prevent new 
crises from taking place. This attitude has been crucial for countries like Mexico in the past. 
Having laid the foundations during the last 15 years for macroeconomic stability is what has 
allowed  us  to  grow  in  today´s  turbulent  times,  despite  the  magnitude  and  intensity  of  the 
external shocks that we have faced.  
Mexico and other Latin American countries not only overcame that stage of great economic 
and  financial  vulnerability  during  the  seventies,  eighties  and  part  of  the  nineties,  but  also 
focused  on  creating  institutional  arrangements  capable  of  preventing  and  avoiding  the 
reemergence of those crises.  
Every financial crisis is particularly different; however, there are certain stylized facts inherent 
in all of them that can help us identify some elements that could be extremely useful in the 
resolution  process.  Allow  me  to  present  to  you  the  stylized  facts  drawn  from  the  Latin 
American experience, that I think could represent guidelines for solving the current crisis in 
Europe.  
Stylized facts of the resolution of financial crises  
First, during financial crises, expectations must be stabilized as soon as possible. In other 
words:  the  immediate  goal  should  be  to  move  from  a  vicious  to  a  virtuous  cycle  in 
expectations. For example: buying now medium-term debt of a country in crisis at spreads of 
450  basis  points  can  be  very  unattractive,  but  it  could  be  quite  the  opposite  if  the 
destabilizing  expectations  disappear  rapidly,  thereby  inducing  significant  reductions  in 
interest rates.  
Lower interest rates stimulates GDP growth, which in turn facilitates the stabilization process 
by increasing tax collection and payment capacity of debtors, and consequently reducing the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
social and political costs inherent to the adjustment. By improving the fundamentals of the 
economy, expectations keep improving, thus strengthening the virtuous circle.  
Second,  in  order  to  adjust  expectations  the  necessary  measures  must  be  adopted  in  a 
credible  way.  The  perception  of  markets  and  society  must  be  that  the  effort  is  not  only 
serious  but  that  it  will  be  enough  to  reverse  the  situation.  In  order  to  achieve  this  it  is 
essential to:  
 
 
 
Rely on an intellectually honest diagnosis.  
Respond quickly and decisively.  
Be aware – and know how to convey this conviction to society – that the stabilizing 
measures are inevitable.  
Assure  that  the  government  will  not  fall  short  on  the  adjustment,  as  it  would 
seriously  damage 
the  costs  would  grow 
exponentially.  
its  credibility  and,  consequently, 
 Third,  once  a  country  is  immersed  in  a  crisis,  governments  often  lack  the  necessary 
credibility, thus making it imperative to “import” such credibility. At the beginning of a crisis, it 
would be very difficult for the government in charge to have the credibility needed to make a 
strong economic adjustment if it failed to prevent the crisis when it had the opportunity to do 
so.  How  can  this  be  achieved  in  the  short  term  without  changing  the  government?  The 
answer  lies  in  mobilizing  the  external  financial  support  and  accepting  that  this  support  be 
subject  to  conditionality.  Credibility  indeed  increases  directly  according  to  the  amount  of 
financial support, which is recommended to be plentiful, and to the quality of conditionality, 
which  normally  consists  of  corrective  measures  the  country  must  adopt  in  any  case. 
Credibility  would  continue  to  increase  to  the  extent  that  the  adjustment  program  is 
implemented in a timely fashion.  
It  is  for  this  that  it  would  be  useful  at  this  time  to  strengthen  international  and  multilateral 
cooperation bodies, such as the International Monetary Fund, and that currently being built 
by  Europe,  for  the  time  being  represented  by  the  European  Financial  Stability  Fund.  The 
strengthening  of  the  IMF’s  lending  capacity  will  be  an  issue  that  will  be  discussed  in 
tomorrow’s G20 Meeting.  
Fourth, debtor countries should engage in a constructive relationship with creditors, following 
the  “Principals  for  Stable  Capital  Flows  and  Fair  Debt  Restructuring”  that  have  been 
developed under the auspices of the IIF.  
Fifth, it is very important to implement various programs to mitigate, to the extent possible, 
the  social  consequences  of  adjustment.  These  programs  should  seek  to  maintain  a  basic 
support  network,  for  instance  in  health  and  education,  focusing  specifically  on  the  most 
vulnerable and poorly equipped population to withstand shocks and adjustments.  
Sixth, an adjustment program without subsequent economic growth is ephemeral, especially 
if  the  country  is  not  able  to  do  a  correction  in  the  exchange  rate  regime.  Therefore,  the 
adjustment program should be accompanied by quick structural reforms that generate rapid 
advances in productivity and foster a more rapid recovery of competitiveness.  
Certainly,  these  general  principles  are  applicable  to  Europe  today.  They  stem  from 
experience,  which  means  that  they  work  even  though  each  crisis  has  its  own  singularities 
and the political and social environment is different in each country.  
Concluding remarks  
By sharing these ideas born from experience, my ultimate objective is not to teach lessons 
but to convey a message of optimism and hope: the problems many European countries are 
facing today have a solution, if they act decisively and on time. If this is done, sooner rather 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
than later we will see a promising future in the global economy. No one wants the crisis from 
dragging on indefinitely, or that every time expectations of a solution emerge they are quickly 
refuted by new shocks or setbacks. In order to reach as soon as possible a definite solution, 
the countries must first take strong, painful but necessary actions, as indeed they have been 
doing  in  many  cases,  and  second,  the  international  community  must  join  these  efforts, 
support them, and thereby facilitate the solution.  
It is this spirit of collaboration and cooperation in solving global problems that Mexico wants 
to  build and  consolidate  during  its  period  of  leadership  in G-20.  These  are  no  times  to  be 
enclosed behind borders, waiting illusory for the end of the storm. It is a time for collaboration 
and cooperation, for free trade, and for enhancing globalization.  
An  essential  condition  for  sustainable  economic  growth  in  advanced  economies,  mainly  in 
the  U.S.  and  the  Euro  zone,  is  the  recovery  of  confidence.  Therefore,  these  economies 
should invest their energy and political capital in pursuing macroeconomic stabilization in the 
short  run  through  well  designed  and  decisive  measures.  To  the  extent  that  confidence 
among economic agents is reestablished the negative feedback loop between low economic 
growth, the deterioration of fiscal accounts, and the fragility of banking systems, finally will be 
broken. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
