Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the Monetary Policy Decision of the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council, Tirana, 28 March 
2012. 
 following  discussions  on 
Today,  on  28  March  2012,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved the Monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the analysis of Albania’s latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and 
their 
performance outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to cut 
the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, bringing it down to 4.25%. This decision 
was motivated by the further decline of the balance of inflationary pressures as well as the 
need for increased macroeconomic stimulus to the economy under the conditions of a more 
prudent fiscal policy for the period ahead.  
The  Supervisory  Council  deemed  that,  following  the  successive  easing  of  the  monetary 
policy, the latest key interest rate cut will provide more appropriate monetary conditions to 
meet the inflation target and stimulate economic activity in Albania.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues discussed 
in today’s meeting.  
 Annual  inflation  in  February  was  0.6%,  recording  sharp  decline  from  1.6%  recorded  a 
month  earlier.  The  rapid  deceleration  of  inflation  was  a  result  of  the  annual  drop  of  food 
prices during this month and the high base of comparison with the corresponding month a 
year  earlier.  Overall,  factors  that  affect  inflation  showed  low  activity  intensity  and  prices  of 
other goods of the basket do not signal for inflationary pressures on the economy. 
From the macroeconomic perspective, the downtrend of annual inflation is dictated primarily 
by rapid decline of pressures on the supply side, notably: slowdown of commodities price rise 
in international markets and low inflation in our main trade partner countries; cancelling out of 
the  administered  price  rise  effect;  and  stability  of  the  national  currency.  Although  these 
developments  had  been  factorised  by  our  analyses  and  projections,  their  influence  was 
higher  than  expected.  On  the  other  hand,  inflationary  pressures  originating  from  the 
aggregate demand continued to be low, in the context of below-potential economic growth 
and anchored expectations on inflation. 
Figures on real economy developments in early 2012 are scarce. Indirect statistical data, 
available for the monetary, fiscal and trade sectors of the economy, signal for slow economic 
growth in the first quarter of the year.  
As expected, aggregate demand was sustained less by the fiscal stimulus, in response to the 
prudent fiscal behaviour for 2012. Similarly, the contribution of foreign demand, during this 
period,  is  assessed  as  low,  owing  to  economic  activity  slowdown  in  our  partner  countries. 
Moreover, despite signals for its recovery, the domestic private demand remains slow, given 
the consumers and private business hesitation to spend and invest. 
Fiscal  sector  data  for  January  reveal  positive  budget  balance  for  this  year,  about  ALL 
1.6 billion.  The  fiscal  surplus  has  reflected  the  simultaneous  decline  of  public  income  and 
expenditure,  respectively  5.3%  and  5.5%,  year  on  year.  As  regards  expenditures,  capital 
expenditures decreased whereas current expenditures increased during this period. 
Foreign trade data point to about 8.7% annual contraction of Albanian exports, in January, 
while imports annual growth rates slowed down to 4.5%. These developments in the foreign 
trade were materialised in wider trade deficit, which expanded by about 13.8% from a year 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
earlier.  The  performance  of  this  indicator  during  the  first  two  months  of  the  year  may  be 
subject to temporary factors. Its dynamic and developments in the future will be monitored. 
Foreign demand has been the main driver of our aggregate demand over the last two years 
and, in Bank of Albania’s view, will continue to provide small positive impact in 2012. 
Monetary  developments  were  in  line  with  the  performance  of  the  real  economy.  Their 
analysis  confirms  the  existence  of  low  monetary  inflationary  pressures  on  the  economy. 
Broad money, monetary aggregate M3, decelerated its annual growth to 8.1% in January. 
On the demand side, this performance has been affected by low demand for funds by the 
public  and  private  sectors  in  January.  Annual  private  sector  credit  pursued  the  downtrend 
that had started in the last quarter of 2011, settling at 9.9% in January. Its performance has 
reflected lower demand for credit by both businesses and households. Private sector credit is 
oriented towards funding the working capital and consumption, illustrating the private agents’ 
reluctant  behaviour  to  make  investments  and  banks’  high  prudence  to  lend.  Furthermore, 
deposits  in  the  system  have  shifted  towards  longer  maturity  terms,  thus  illustrating  the 
Albanian consumers’ disposition to save. 
Latest  developments  in  financial  markets  have  reflected  contained  liquidity  and  inflation 
premiums.  In  the  interbank  market,  short-term  interest  rates  were  downward,  following 
successive cuts of the key interest rates.  
Furthermore,  government  security  yields  in  the  primary  market  were  slightly  up.  This 
increase  is  mostly  due  to  the  interaction  of  demand  and  supply  factors  in  this  market  and 
does not signal for risk premiums increase in the economy. Interest rates in the deposit and 
credit  markets  followed  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  easing  monetary  policy  over  the  last  six 
months, while its transmission is expected to be more complete in the future, conform to the 
time lag that characterises the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Projections  for  the  expected  economic  outlook  in  the  future  sustain  our  earlier 
assessments for positive, but below potential, growth of the Albanian economy in the period 
ahead. However, risks about this scenario have increased, mainly as a result of unfavourable 
developments in the global economy and financial markets.  
Overall, the economy in our trade partner countries is expected to be sluggish and lending 
terms in the euro area are expected to be tight for the period ahead. Moreover, the space for 
fiscal  stimulus  has  narrowed,  as  a  result  of  the  orientation  of  the  fiscal  policy  towards 
maintaining  fiscal  parameters  stability.  Under  these  circumstances,  Albania’s  economic 
growth will be determined mainly by the performance of consumption and private investment. 
The  latter  is  expected  to  be  driven  by  eased  domestic  lending  terms  during  2012,  but  will 
suffer,  at  the  same  time,  from  the  uncertainty  and  hesitation  of  consumers  and  private 
businesses. The Bank of Albania deems that the second half of 2011 marked a turning 
point towards a more normal consumer behaviour, which should be encouraged and 
supported in 2012.  
 Taking  into  consideration  the  information  set  out  above,  the  Supervisory  Council 
holds  that  pressures  on  consumer  prices  at  home  remain  low  over  the  monetary 
policy relevant horizon and they have shifted on the down side over the past months. 
On  the  demand  side,  below-potential  economic  growth  will  continue  to  generate  low 
inflationary pressures as shocks from the supply side are expected to be moderate.  
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  cut  the  key 
interest rate by 0.25 percentage points bringing it down to 4.25%. This decision aims to 
provide  the  appropriate  monetary  conditions  to  meet  the  medium-term  inflation  target.  In 
addition, the easing of monetary policy provides higher support for the development of the 
private sector’s demand in our economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
