Barry Whiteside: “Financing Day” in Fiji 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Official 
Opening of the Financing Day, Lautoka, 9 August 2012. 
 Welcome  
Mr Ropate Ligairi – The Permanent Secretary for Agriculture,  
Distinguished Guests  
Students, Teachers  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Cola Vina, Namaste and thank you very much for joining us here at the inaugural “Financing 
Day” organised in conjunction with the Crest Agriculture Show. It is a pleasure and an honor 
for  me  to  be  here  today.  I  grew  up  as  a  primary  school  student  in  Lautoka  in  the  sixties, 
attended Drasa Avenue Primary School and have many fond memories of this place.  
I thank the organisers, the Department of Agriculture, for the excellent arrangements. I also 
thank all our fellow stakeholders from the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Lautoka 
City Council, Association of Banks in Fiji, other financial institutions, Department of Energy 
and renewable energy companies for their participation and warm hospitality.  
We  are  proud  to  be  part  of  the  Crest  Agriculture  Show.  This  year,  the  Reserve  Bank 
significantly  increased  its financial  sponsorship for  this  event  in  what  we  see  as  our  wider 
role in helping develop Fiji’s economy.  
Recently the RBF Board and Executive Management visited some industries and projects in 
Vanua Levu as part of our on-going efforts to get down to the “grassroots” level, or “coalface” 
as  some  might  say.  We  were  able  to  see  first-hand  the  challenges  faced  by  rural 
communities in the North. But we also witnessed a lot of optimism about what was evolving 
on  our  second  largest  island.  Our  team  met  with  the  business  community  and  saw  the 
exciting  new  developments  that  are  in  progress  to  improve  roads,  create  more  jobs  and 
support  income  generating  opportunities.  This  general  positiveness,  I  feel,  is  not  just 
restricted to the North, but is seeping through the whole economy. We at the Reserve Bank 
have witnessed it from our recent face to face discussions with people from both the private 
and public sectors.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, boys and girls, apart from issuing the currency notes and coins that 
you have in your pockets today, let me explain a little about the other important things we do 
at the Reserve Bank. One of our major roles, like many other central banks, is to ensure that 
the economy is on a stable growth path. We do this by ensuring that inflation is under control; 
that we have sufficient foreign reserves (or foreign currency) to meet Fiji’s external payment 
obligations; and that our financial system is sound.  
You may ask how do we do this? The Reserve Bank independently sets monetary policy by 
managing the  nation’s  money  supply  to  achieve  a  set  policy  interest  rate. In  doing so,  we 
indirectly  influence the  interest rates  of  commercial  banks, that  is,  the  deposit  and  lending 
rates.  These  in  turn  will  lead  to  changes  in  the  amount  of  money  that  is  circulating  in  the 
financial system and the availability of credit in the economy.  
Our  presence  here  at  the  Crest  Agriculture  Show  is  a  testament  of  our  commitment  and 
support to grow what we see as critical sectors of our economy. We are trying our best to 
raise awareness and bring about unity and support, from all stakeholders, to work together to 
improve the conditions and living standards of all our fellow citizens in Fiji.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  main  focus  of  today’s  Financing  Day  is  to  raise  awareness  and  understanding  of  the 
different products and facilities that are available from our various financing institutions that 
have  been  targeted  to  assist  the  agriculture  and  the  renewable  and  sustainable  energy 
sectors.  
You might be asking, why are we facilitating finance to these sectors?  
As a resource-based economy, our greatest competitive advantage lies in the development 
of our resource-based sectors. This means that we need to continue to work together as a 
nation to grow Fiji and increase the production and utilisation of our own natural resources 
for both domestic consumption, as well as exports.  
As such, the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors will continue to play an integral role in 
Fiji’s overall development.  
The  agriculture  sector,  which  includes  sugar  cane,  other  cash  crops,  livestock  and 
subsistence farming, is vital to Fiji’s economy, contributing notably to Fiji’s Gross Domestic 
Product  (GDP).  The  sector  provides  food  and  livelihood  security,  promotes  community 
development  in  rural  areas,  generates  income  for  approximately  65  percent  of  our 
population, and earns foreign exchange for the country.  
Unfortunately, Ladies and Gentlemen, boys and  girls, the sector has been performing well 
below par in recent years. As an illustration, for 2010, total agriculture exports were around 
$581  million  with  sugar  earnings  accounting  for  12  percent  or  $70  million.  Back  in  2008, 
agricultural  exports  were  much  higher  at  $670  million  and  sugar  earnings  accounted  for 
37 percent or $248 million.  
Over  the  past  decade,  the  contribution  of  the  agricultural  sector  to  Fiji’s  GDP  has  also 
declined from 12.3 percent in 2001 to 9.2 percent in 2011. The decline in performance in our 
agricultural sector is the result of a combination of factors, including the vulnerability it has to 
natural  disasters,  minimal  private  sector  investment,  inadequate  infrastructure,  marketing 
deficiencies, soaring production costs and the limited access to finance.  
Apart  from  agriculture,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  also  committed  to  help  grow  the  renewable 
energy  sector.  At  the  national  level,  we  are  aware  that  any  increase  in  economic  activity 
means  higher  energy  demand;  a  substantial  portion  of  which  comes  from  fossil  fuels.  Fiji 
imports  all  its  mineral fuels  and  this  dependence  on  imports  has  huge  implications for  our 
current account.  
Over  the  five  years  from  2006  to  2010,  the  current  account  deficit  averaged  around 
13.4 percent  of  GDP.  Over  the  same  period,  domestic  mineral  fuel  imports  accounted  for 
around  25  percent  of  total  retained  imports,  on  average  per  year.  Given  the  hikes  and 
volatility in international crude oil prices, the need to lessen our dependence on mineral fuels 
is  critical.  Policy  development,  macro  monitoring  as  well  as  creating  greater  public 
awareness and support for projects involving renewable energy, are thus essential to rein in 
Fiji’s high fossil fuel usage and import bill.  
The associated environmental cost also has a direct impact on the economic well-being of 
our country. In this regard, investment in renewable and sustainable energy is important to 
mitigate all the allied risks.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  are  also  promoting  local 
value adding, which basically means using our own local resources where-ever and when-
ever we can. This also means that we work towards conserving energy and developing and 
supporting  greater  use  of  renewable  energy  sources  such  as  hydro,  solar,  biomass,  bio-
diesel  and  wind  farms,  where  feasible.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  working  with  various 
stakeholders  in  exploring  opportunities  to  incorporate  more  local  value-added  content  into 
food and beverages, renewable energy and handicraft to name just a few. The Fiji National 
University  (FNU)  is  one  of  these  stakeholders,  given  its  critical  role  in  training  a  skilled 
workforce for both the domestic and international markets.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In 2010, the Reserve Bank sponsored a local chef from the FNU for training in Malaysia to 
support  and  develop  innovative  new  ways  of  using  local  foods  and  produce  in  our  hotel 
industry,  and  on  resort  menus.  Additionally,  in  March  this  year,  we  sponsored  three  local 
chefs to attend the inaugural South Pacific Food and Wine Festival in Denarau. In the past, 
this was an area of concern to the Bank as a lot of the food used in the tourism industry was 
imported. At this point, I must commend the Department of Agriculture which has been at the 
forefront in working with various players in the industry. As a result, most of the hotels and 
resorts now use a lot more local produce. In fact a number of hotels have developed their 
own backyard gardens and are now linked with local suppliers to ensure a steady supply of 
quality and fresh produce. Complementing this is the growing trend and awareness amongst 
chefs and travellers on the diversity and the richness of our local cuisine and diet.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, all too often access to affordable finance has been cited as a major 
challenge to growth in the sectors I have highlighted this morning. The Reserve Bank, as the 
financial sector regulator, is taking a more proactive approach to this issue. Our most recent 
efforts include the streamlining of our Export Finance Facility and Import Substitution Facility 
into a single entity called the Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility (or ISEFF). The 
Facility  will continue to focus on improving Fiji’s balance of payments position by assisting 
exporters, large scale commercial agricultural farmers and renewable energy businesses to 
obtain credit at concessional rates of interest. In addition, the Bank has further reduced the 
administrative  requirements  and  streamlined  the  approval  process  for  funding  under  the 
scheme.  
In February this year the RBF issued a policy to commercial banks’ which required them to 
lend  at  least  four  percent  of  their  deposits  to  businesses  in  the  agriculture  sector  and  a 
further two percent to the renewable energy sector.  
In addition, the Reserve Bank recently required all banks to establish Local Advisory Boards 
to  guide  senior  expatriate  management  to  better  understand,  and  align  their  strategies  to 
Fiji’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment,  as  well  as  national  development  objectives, 
which will include the provision of financial services to the wider community.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the RBF will continue to play a proactive role in ensuring accessible 
finance is provided to these key sectors with a view of creating opportunities for farmers and 
families to improve their livelihood and contribute to economic growth.  
We  hope  that  you  will  also  make  the  most  of  the  opportunities  that  the  Crest  Agriculture 
Show  has  to  offer  and take the  time  to  visit  the finance  providers  and find  out  about their 
available services and products.  
This morning I would also like to introduce and launch a new recipe book that was compiled 
by  a  local  chef  –  Mr  Simione  Toanikeve,  whom  the  Reserve  Bank  sponsored  in  2010  for 
training in Malaysia. This scholarship came about through the support of the Intercontinental 
Hotel Group here in Fiji and the Crowne Plaza Mutiara Hotel in Kuala Lumpar, Malaysia.  
This recipe  book  is  a  product  of  lessons from  Simi’s  Malaysian  experience,  as  well  as  his 
many years of work experience in the tourism industry both in Fiji, and abroad. The book has 
been written for every chef, whether you work in a large commercial kitchen, small restaurant 
or home kitchen. It has been designed to promote the innovative use of locally grown foods 
and  produce.  The  book  titled  “Kana  Mada  –  Fiji  Style”  was  produced  through  the 
collaboration of the Fiji National University and the Reserve Bank. We hope that you will buy 
a copy today and continue to support our farmers, market vendors and manufacturers in Fiji 
by buying their produce.  
Finally,  I  do  urge  you  all  to  visit  the  booths  and  stalls  set  up  by  the  various  financial 
institutions,  and  indeed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  other  stakeholders.  This  is  your  golden 
opportunity  to  learn  more  about the facilities  and  various  products  that are  available.  I  am 
sure our staff and colleagues will be more than willing to assist you and perhaps do some 
business!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  with  these  words,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  officially  opening  our 
inaugural “Financing Day” at this year’s Crest Agriculture Show, and in Launching the “Kana 
Mada Fiji Style” Recipe Book.  
Vinaka. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
