Paul Tucker: National balance sheets and macro policy: lessons from 
the past 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the Society of Business Economists’ Annual Dinner, London, 28 February 2012. 
 The spectre hanging over the world economy these past years – the drag on our recovery – 
has  been  deleveraging.  Around  the  world,  households,  some  firms,  banks,  governments, 
whole  economies  are  acting  to  reduce  their  debt  overhang.  By  selling  assets,  cutting 
spending, deferring investment. 
What  gets  delevered  –  as  the  ugly  phrase  goes  –  is  a  balance  sheet.  Balance  sheets 
became stretched. Sectorally. Nationally. Through much of the industrialised West. 
The idea of over-borrowing, of overstretched balance sheets, is hardly novel. Economists are 
taught about the importance of stocks of debt; about “budget constraints”, beyond which a 
borrower’s  expected  future  income,  their  wealth,  is  insufficient  to  service  and  repay  their 
accumulated debts. But, by and large, economic commentary focuses on flows – the path of 
output, consumption, and investment and the current account balance.  
I exaggerate, of course – not least because cumulative flows create stocks. Nevertheless, it 
is  salutary  to  remind  ourselves  that  less  than  a  decade  before  our  crisis  broke,  we  –  the 
West  –  had  been  preaching  to  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  the  necessity  of 
monitoring,  and  even  managing,  the  national  balance  sheet.  That  was  in  the  wake  of  the 
Asian and Latin American financial crises of the 1990s. One of the many official reports on 
the lessons took a mandate about capital flows and turned it into a series of prescriptions on 
national  balance  sheets,  including  being  attentive  to  vulnerabilities  and  to  perverse 
incentives.1 
The emphasis of the Draghi Report was hardly surprising. Brazil, Mexico, and Russia had 
suffered from mismatches in the maturity and interest-rate structure of their public debt. For 
Korea, it had been mismatches in the external funding of the banking sector. In Indonesia, 
the  non-financial  corporate  sector  had  been  overly 
term, 
foreign-currency-denominated  external  debt.  In  each  case,  the  country’s  economy  was 
eventually brought to heel by a run.  
It might have been easy for “developed” economies to ignore the Draghi Report. But efforts 
were  made  to  draw  wider  lessons  amongst  advanced  economies.  Thus,  in  late  2000,  the 
Bank of England ran the first of a short series of annual articles that tried to draw out the 
implications  of  the  UK’s  balance  sheet  for  financial  stability.  It  is  worth  quoting  fairly 
extensively from that first article:2 
reliant  on  short 
“It  is  advisable  for  authorities  to  monitor  a  range  of  balance  sheet  indicators, 
focusing on variables and relationships that have in the past indicated financial 
fragility.....the  size  and  structure  of  the  economy’s  foreign  currency  debt  are 
particularly  relevant,  especially  for  countries  on  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime. 
Sound  risk  management  by  the  public  sector  warrants  particularly  high  priority. 
National authorities need to adopt prudent strategies and practices in managing 
their own debt liabilities and financial and other assets. They should identify the 
                                                 
1  See  “Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  Capital  Flows”,  available  online  at:  www.financialstabilityboard.org/ 
publications/r_0004.pdf. It was produced by a group chaired by Mario Draghi, and on which I served. 
2  See “The external balance sheet of the United Kingdom: implications for financial stability?”, Senior, S and 
Westwood, R, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, November 2000, pages 351–64. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
main economic risks to which they are exposed, either directly or indirectly (via 
the economy as a whole). Bank regulators should measure and monitor liquidity 
mismatches  in  banks,  in  the  domestic  currency  and  foreign  currencies.  If 
necessary,  governments  should  act 
to  strengthen  banking  systems  and 
prudential  regulation.  Other  parts  of  the  private  sector  are  generally  not 
regulated,  but  they  should  be  subject  to  accounting  and  disclosure  standards 
which require transparency about the structure of their financial obligations and 
claims.  An  adverse  signal  from  any  individual  indicator  does  not  mean  that  a 
country inevitably faces crisis. Rather, indicators should be employed as warning 
lights,  highlighting  potential  problems  and  prompting  further  investigation.  A 
series of warnings may reflect escalating risks.” 
My purpose this evening, in the spirit of drawing lessons, is to recapture those insights in the 
light of our own, advanced-economy crisis. I shall review whether it is enough to look only at 
current  account  imbalances  for  warning  signs,  or  whether  gross  capital  flows,  in  particular 
cross-border banking flows, matter too. I will repeatedly come back to the importance of risk 
premia and balance sheets. 
National balance sheets and the crisis 
Recently,  when  events  have  centred  on  the  euro  area,  the  focus  has  been  on  the  risk  of 
sovereign  default.  The  underlying  issue  is  the cumulative  loss  of  competitiveness  of  some 
economies,  and  the  consequent  strains  in  government  balance  sheets  resulting  from  their 
attempts  over  the  years  to  use  fiscal  policy  to  sustain  growth.  A  look  at  Spain’s  external 
balance sheet reveals (net) liabilities of around 100% of GDP (Chart 1). Italy’s net external 
liabilities are, perhaps, rather smaller than that (Chart 2). But in terms of total government 
debt, Italy’s new administration inherited the greater burden. Put those two facts together and 
it  becomes  clear  that  Italy’s  fiscal  problem  is  partly  about  the  distribution  of  debt  and 
resources within the country. Japan is, perhaps, not dissimilar. 
Go back four-five years, to the beginning of the crisis, and the problem was the mortgage 
obligations  of  US  households  –  subprime  households  in  particular  were  hugely  over 
borrowed. The commercial real estate sector too. Defaults there triggered the crisis. 
Every set of defaults and problems around the world has reverberated through the UK, due 
to  London’s  role  in  intermediating  international  capital  flows.  We  have  one  of  the  largest 
gross external  balance  sheets  (Chart 3).  Although  much  of  it  is  accounted  for  by foreign 
banking activity, the City is not an entrepôt. UK banking is linked to the wider City’s fortunes 
via complex counterparty-credit exposures and investments. Domestically,3 UK households 
had  accumulated  a  lot  of  debt  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis,  much  of  it  matched  by  an 
accumulation  of  assets.  But  households  were  dependent  on  economic  growth  being 
sustained and on house prices holding up. Property companies likewise, but with the added 
spice that there had been a boom in commercial real-estate construction. When crisis hit, the 
government’s  balance  sheet  deteriorated  dramatically,  because  the  public  finances  were 
highly  sensitive  to  taxes  from  finance  and  property  and,  most  important,  the  UK’s  fiscal 
“automatic  stabilizers”  are  strong.  Households  and  government  have  subsequently  cut 
spending to repair their balance sheets. The corporate sector has built up what amounts to a 
cash  mountain,  some  of  which  will  probably  find  its  way  into  investment  as  the  cloud  of 
uncertainty lifts, helping recovery. Sterling’s 2007/08 depreciation has softened the blow to 
demand. And if anything, that strengthened the country’s balance sheet because, in contrast 
to  the  EMEs  discussed  in  the  Draghi  Report,  the  UK’s  external  liabilities  are  largely 
denominated in sterling while our external assets are denominated in foreign currency. 
                                                 
3  See Annex 1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I could go through many other countries picking out ex ante vulnerabilities in their national 
balance sheets, and consequent ex post strains. Banking failures brought on a credit crunch, 
impaired economic growth, lowering wealth, and adding to the debt burden of borrowers, in 
what threatened to be a vicious circle. But this isn’t a speech about the need to reform the 
“rules of the game” for finance. However levered – and the financial system was obviously 
horribly over-levered – typically the house of cards collapses only when some over-indebted 
end-borrowers either default or look like defaulting on their obligations. The balance sheets 
of  borrowers  matter  too!  Which  poses  a  big  question  of  whether  there  were  common, 
macroeconomic  drivers.  Was  the  problem  sourced  in  global  savings  imbalances?  Did 
monetary policy play a part?  
International macro drivers of the crisis 
The role of net savings global imbalances 
The  leading  explanation  for  the  macro  drivers  of  the  crisis  starts  with  the  lessons  about 
national-balance-sheet management drawn by Asian countries in the wake of their crisis in 
the 1990s. Many decided that they should accumulate foreign exchange reserves in order to 
guard  against  external  shocks;  ie  self-insurance  rather  than  third-party  IMF  insurance  with 
conditionality.  National  saving  rose.  One  view4  is  that,  together  with  surpluses  in 
resource-rich  economies  as  global  demand  for  commodities  increased,  this  drove  a  lot  of 
what followed.  
Given that domestic investment in Asia could not keep up with burgeoning savings, global 
saving  and  investment  were  brought  into  equilibrium  through  a  fall  in  world  real  interest 
rates, across the yield curve (Chart 4). As the risk-free discount rate declined, asset prices 
rose,  including  property  prices  in  much  of  the  West.  Borrowing  for  house  purchases  rose 
accordingly;  and,  buttressed  by  higher  collateral  values,  equity  withdrawal  and  other 
borrowing for consumption accelerated too. Other things being equal, that relative dissaving 
in  the  West  would  have  reduced  any  global  savings/investment  imbalance.  In  terms  of 
international capital flows, the current account surpluses in the East found their counterpart 
in net external borrowing in the West.  
This  is  a  story  about  net  capital  flows.  And  that  is  what  my  world  has  in  mind  when  it 
expresses  concerns,  rightly,  about  persistent  global  macroeconomic  imbalances.5  Such 
cumulative imbalances eventually lead to macroeconomic adjustment, which can be painful. 
Deficit  countries  end  up  having  to  save  more  (relative  to  investment)  and  export  more 
(relative to imports). Exchange-rate regimes come under pressure.  
And surely there is a lot to this story. But an explanation resting solely on net flows seems 
insufficient.  Europe  provides  a  striking  case.  The  external  position  of  the  Euro  Area  was 
broadly flat through the mid-2000s, so if the net position were all that mattered, Europe would 
have been a bystander in the global elements of the crisis. In fact, the starting pistol for the 
crisis in international money markets was fired in Europe in mid-2007, when a Continental 
investment  fund  suspended  redemptions  following  the  decline  in  US  ABS  values.  Overall, 
even before the euro area’s distributional issues came to the fore, collective current account 
balance did not protect Europe from the early phases of the crisis.  
Nor had the fall in world real interest rates set off a boom in property prices and mortgage 
borrowing  in,  for  example,  Germany.  Yet  Germany’s  banking  system  was  not  remotely 
spared crisis.  
                                                 
4  Represented  by,  for  example,  Bernanke  (2005),  “The  Global  Savings  Glut  and  the  US  Current  Account 
Deficit”. 
5  See King (2011), “Global imbalances: the perspective of the Bank of England”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
So we need richer stories to make sense of what happened.  
It  is  precisely  in  that  spirit  that  colleagues  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements6  have 
stressed  the  importance  of  gross  capital  flows.  As  Cecchetti  has  emphasised,  whereas 
global current account balances (the counterpart of net capital flows) expanded in the twenty 
years  to  2007  from  about  1%  of  world  GDP  to  about  3%,  the  gross  capital  outflows  of  all 
countries increased from around 3% to over 15% of world GDP (Chart 5). And the aggregate 
international investment position of all countries7 increased from under 50% to over 150% of 
annual world GDP. Opening up the possibility that gross capital flows matter transforms the 
picture.  For  example,  as  Borio  points  out,  Europe’s  gross  capital  flows  were  enormous, 
accounting  for  around  half  of  gross  inflows  into  the  US  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis.  And 
sufficient  of  that  was  invested  in  US  ABS  for  the  US’s  mortgage  crisis  to  be  transmitted 
across  the  Atlantic,  including  to  France  and  Germany,  pretty  well  instantly  in  2007  –  and 
before the solvency of the banking system was in doubt. 
Even if gross and net flows had been equal, wouldn’t the composition of those flows have 
made  a  difference?  Had  the  West’s  current  account  deficits  been  financed  by  inflows  of 
equity, would the eventual “adjustment” have been less destructive?  
The  flows  were,  of  course,  of  debt.  The  accumulated  “excess”  savings  in  the  East  were 
largely  held  in  official,  risk-averse  portfolios,  notably  central  bank  fx  reserves.  Their 
investments concentrated on fixed-income instruments: initially government bonds, but later 
mortgage and some corporate securities (broadly matching the composition of capital flows 
into the US, Chart 6). Combined with demographic shifts in the West pushing pension funds 
into  fixed-income,  this  might  have  increased  global  demand  for  bonds  relative  to  equities, 
driving down credit and term premia (relative to equity risk premia). For a while there was 
probably excess – that is to say, unsatisfied – demand for bonds, and that in turn probably 
had  two  effects.  The  generation  of  new  types  of  supposedly  “safe”  bonds  through 
securitisation and, in particular, eventually synthetic securitisations.8 Separately, there was 
arbitrage across asset classes, effected by firms borrowing to buy back their own equity and 
to acquire others via leveraged buy-outs.  
In summary, while the ex ante global savings/investment imbalances plausibly drove down 
equilibrium world risk-free interest-rates, the precise composition of the resulting capital flows 
will have affected risk premia too.  
Monetary policy, international banking flows, and global liquidity 
The other story aired about macro drivers is the possible role of monetary policy and private 
sector credit creation. And that too points to a role for risk premia.  
Against the grain of established thinking, and now famously, Raghu Rajan argued at Jackson 
Hole in 2005 that the Federal Reserve’s commitment at the beginning of last decade to keep 
policy  rates  low  for  a  prolonged  period  had  fuelled  financial  risk  taking.9  While  this  is  now 
                                                 
6  See  Borio  and  Disyatat  (2011),  “Global  imbalance  and  the  financial  crisis:  Link  or  no  link”;  and  Cecchetti 
(2011), “Global imbalances: current accounts and financial flows”.  
7  The gross foreign assets of each country’s residents, summed across all the countries in the world. 
8  See Cabellero (2009), “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility”, American Economic Review Papers and 
Proceedings, Vol 99, No. 2, May 2009, pp. 584–588. 
9  See Rajan (2005) “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the future”. Speech given at a Symposium Sponsored by 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. August 27, 2005 He warned “persistent 
low interest rate can be a source of significant distortions for the financial sector, and thence for asset prices. 
Not only does this mean staying further away from deflation so that extremely low policy rates don't have to be 
used as a tool, it also implies exercising greater supervisory vigilance when those rates are in place to contain 
asset price bubbles”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
posited as the “risk channel” of monetary policy,10 there has until recently been relatively little 
empirical work bearing on whether it actually exists. 
That may be changing. Amongst other examples, recent work by Jeremy Stein and Samuel 
Hanson  at  Harvard  and,  subsequently,  by  a  Bank  of  England  team11  has  found  some 
evidence  that  changes  in  Federal  Reserve  and  Bank  of  England  policy  rates  are 
accompanied by material (similarly signed) changes in long-term real forward rates. This is 
striking given the usual assumptions about monetary policy being both credible (no effect of 
cyclical policy on long-term inflation expectations) and neutral (no effect on real magnitudes 
beyond cyclical horizons). While, I must stress, not proving anything, this is consistent with a 
group  of  investors  responding  to  lower  short-term  rates  by  moving  along  the  maturity 
spectrum in a “search for yield”. That interpretation is, to my mind, fortified by a finding, for 
the US, that the effect on long forward real rates is greater when short nominal rates are low. 
Imagine the behaviour of asset managers who have guaranteed a minimum nominal return 
to investors. This is the “carry trade” – perhaps mythical for many years to many economists 
as  there  is  a  flavour  of  “irrationality”  around  it,  but  part  of  the  fabric  of  the  world  for 
practitioners.  
Although current mainstream “structural” models of conventional monetary policy do not work 
like that, perhaps we should not be too amazed. The thought that injections of central bank 
money can be transmitted to the wider economy through risk premia, as well as through the 
risk-free  rate,  goes  back  at  least  to  Brunner  &  Meltzer.12  It  is  precisely  how  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee, and our international counterparts, regard Quantitative Easing as working 
– influencing term, liquidity and risk premia.13 And since prices are the “dual” of quantities, it 
is hard to see why there should be something special about injecting central bank money into 
the economy by buying assets rather than via our normal policy lever of the overnight interest 
rate (and expectations about its path).  
This prompts a number of conjectures. One is that maybe monetary policy did contribute to 
the widespread search for yield, not just along the yield curve but also, as Rajan suggested 
in 2005, into credit products to earn a spread compensating for illiquidity or complexity.  
Another conjecture, perhaps supported by other recent research,14 is that this may have a 
bearing on the phenomenon of cross-currency carry trades, and thus on the generation of 
“Global  Liquidity”.  That  is  a  nebulous  concept,  but  one  that  central  bankers  have  come  to 
think  of  as  intimately  tied  up  with  private  sector  credit  creation  (essentially  bank  lending) 
across borders.15 When cross-currency carry trades drive down risk premia, that pushes up 
foreign asset prices, and can fuel foreign credit growth, through a process that is akin to an 
                                                 
10  This channel is distinct from the standard channels working through the effect of a lower risk free rate on asset 
prices,  and  so  on  wealth  and  the  availability  of  credit,  eg  the  so-called  “financial  accelerator”  of  Bernanke, 
Gertler  &  Gilchrist.  On  the  “risk  channel”  see,  for  example,  Borio  and  Zhu  (2008),  “Capital  regulation,  risk-
taking and monetary policy ; a missing link in the transmission?” 
11  See Annex 2 
12  See “Money and the Economy: Issues in Monetary Analysis (Raffaele Mattiolo Lectures”, Brunner and Meltzer 
(1987).  It  was  also  discussed  by  Governor  King  in  “Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy:  New  and  Old”  (1999), 
discussing the operation of monetary policy when interest rates are low; and in “No money, no inflation – the 
role of money in the economy” (2002). 
13  See “Quantitative Easing: An Inflation Report”, Bean (2009); and “The State of the Markets”, Tucker (2009). 
14  See, for example, “Carry trades and risk”, Burnside (2011); Common Risk Factors in Currency Markets, Lustig 
et al (2011); Crash-neutral currency carry trades, Jurek (2009). 
15  See CGFS (2009), “Global Liquidity – concept, measurement and policy implications”. A report submitted by 
an Ad-hoc Group chaired by Jean-Pierre Landau. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
increase  in  risk  appetite.  It  is  not  far  fetched  to  ask  whether  excess  Global  Liquidity  can 
result.16 
We thus have two broad stories of what kicked off a period of pronounced credit growth and 
asset price appreciation. First, a fall in the world safe real rate, due to excess savings in the 
East.  Second,  increasing  Global  Liquidity,  transmitted  through  expansive  cross-border 
lending, kicked off by prolonged accommodative monetary policy. These stories are not at all 
mutually exclusive.17 And, most probably, both contributed to exuberance.  
But it is not my purpose this evening to revisit how asset-price appreciations that are initially 
fundamentally  warranted  can  get  out  of  control  through  the  “Minsky”  mechanisms  of 
extrapolation  of  past  returns  into  future  targets,  herding  and  myopia18  –  the  last  no  doubt 
aided by exaggerated market beliefs of what monetary policy can achieve following years of 
uninterrupted  growth.  Rather,  it  is  important  to  my  purpose  this  evening  that  both  stories 
involve shifts in risk premia driven by changes in the supply and demand for financial assets.  
Shifts in risk premia, gross capital flows, and balance sheet strains 
That story would hardly have interested most macroeconomists a few years ago. Financial 
asset prices were regarded as providing useful information because they are forward-looking 
and available at high frequencies, but no more; they were not seen as actors. Indeed, many 
of today’s macro models used in policy making embody an assumption that risk premia are 
either constant or do not exist; and that therefore asset prices, and so wealth and the cost of 
capital, are influenced only by changes in the expected path of the risk-free rate and in the 
cash flows expected from investments.  
For anyone who has spent time in markets, that seems at odds with their experience. It is, 
therefore, of some moment that some recent research has suggested that, for all major asset 
classes, the principal drivers of fluctuations in asset returns are shifts in risk premia rather 
than  in  expected  cash  flows19  (ie  dividend  growth  for  stocks;  the  path  of  monetary  policy 
rates  for  low-risk  bonds;  default  incidence  for  bonds  carrying  credit  risk;  rental  growth  for 
house  prices  etc).  Furthermore,  some  empirical  research  now  suggests  that  shifts  in  risk 
premia are key factors in macroeconomic fluctuations.20 This is a big deal.  
We  have  seen  massive  shifts  in  risk  premia  over  the  past  ten  years  (Chart  7)  –  first  a 
compression  and  then  a  blow  out.  Those  shifts  seem  to  be  associated  with  capital  flows, 
channelled through banks and shadow banks, that led to an expansion of Global Liquidity. 
Balance sheets were left at first fragile and then, when the balloon burst, enfeebled.  
In the case of continental Europe, for example, banks had increasingly borrowed short-term 
from US money funds, only to suffer a slow-motion run when their capital adequacy came to 
be questioned. And it was placed in doubt partly because banks in those countries spared a 
                                                 
16  See “Global Liquidity”, M Carney (2011), at the Canada-United Kingdom Chamber of Commerce. 
17  Both  play  a  role  in,  for  example,  Obstfeld  and  Rogoff  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  the  Financial  Crisis: 
Products of Common Causes” 
18  See “Reforming finance: are we being radical enough” Clare distinguished lecture in Economics and Public 
Policy, Turner (2011) and Discussion by Tucker (2011). 
19  See Cochrane (2011) “Discount rates”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, pages 1,047–109. 
20  For  example,  Justiniano  et  al  (2011)  decompose  the  drivers  of  US  macroeconomic  fluctuations  using  two 
different technology shocks: to the relative price of investment and to the transformation of savings into future 
capital input. They find that the latter shock is the most important driver of US business cycle fluctuations and 
is  almost  identical  to  the  observed  spread  between  high-yield  (non-investment  grade)  and  AAA-rated 
corporate  bond  yields.  This  echoes  work  a  generation  ago  by  Ben  Friedman  and  Ken  Kuttner  (1994), 
“Indicator Properties of the Paper-Bill spread. Lessons from recent experience.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
property  boom  had,  directly  or  indirectly,  financed  property  bubbles  or  over-indebted 
governments elsewhere around the euro area.  
In the US, as elsewhere, a supposed business model of “Originate & Distribute” – ie capital 
market intermediation – morphed into “Originate & Warehouse the large pieces that cannot 
be distributed, or at least tuck them away in shadow banks we can fund”. This provides a 
telling example of the perverse incentives that the Draghi Report had highlighted a decade 
earlier.  Booking  practices  and  pricing  were  distorted  by  lax  overall  regulatory  capital 
requirements,  a  zero-weighting  on  364-day  committed  lines  to  shadow  banks,  accounting 
regimes  that  recognised  unearned  profits  on  highly  illiquid  securities,  and  an  implicit  state 
subsidy  to  housing  finance  from  public  agencies  that  were  themselves  over-levered  and 
profit-maximising. 
Policy responses and lessons 
Looking back, armed with these conjectures, what could or should have been done as our 
economy and others accumulated debt? 
A  few  years  ago,  a  couple  of  us  discussed  this  in  the  margins  of  a  regular  gathering  of 
economists in London.21 One thought was that Western governments should have “gone on 
the biggest infrastructure splurge since Victorian times”, spending the inflows on investment 
rather than consumption. I can’t help wondering whether all the investment would have been 
well judged. Another thought was that the UK and others should have tightened fiscal policy, 
in  order  to  raise  national  saving  and  so  improve  our  external  position.  That  would  have 
added to global saving, possibly pushing the world real rate lower, asset prices higher, and 
so possibly further fuelling private sector borrowing.  
But were we trying to answer the right question that evening? As you will have gathered, in 
effect it was: “If Asia was going to be in surplus, and other things equal the West was going 
to run the counterpart external deficit, what should we have done?” 
As one looks back at the evolution of sectoral balance sheets and their role in the origins of 
the  crisis,  that  question  cannot  stand  alone.  The  crisis  was  not  rooted  simply  in  our 
economy’s external balance sheet, nor in that of the US. 
Does that mean that fiscal policy was and is irrelevant to national balance sheets? Hardly. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  would  be  odd  for  fiscal  policy  to  take  upon  itself  the  task  of  actively 
offsetting shifts in private sector saving through the government balance in order routinely to 
manage  overall  (net)  national  saving.  If  parts  of  the  private  sector  are  becoming 
overindebted,  the  authorities  should  use  other  tools  to  address  the  problem  at  source. 
Similarly,  if  the  composition  of  aggregate  demand  is  persistently  unbalanced,  government 
should perhaps at least see if it can rectify any microeconomic incentives that aggravate the 
imbalance.  
On  the  other  hand,  I  would  argue  that  the  management  of  a  government’s  balance  sheet 
cannot be indifferent to the balance sheet of the rest of the economy. It matters if, as was the 
case in the UK, the public finances are especially sensitive to the well being of highly levered 
sectors  of  the  economy  and  the  automatic  stabilisers  are  strong.  That  is  a  recipe  for 
government debt to rocket if banking sector problems choke off credit supply and economic 
growth.  The  1999  Draghi  Report  urged  authorities’  risk  monitoring  to  identify  that  kind  of 
vulnerability.  
                                                 
21  My conversation was with Martin Wolf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
This goes some way towards making the case for the “structural” element of macroprudential 
policy. We need a resilient financial system partly because governments cannot always take 
the full burden of supporting spending in the economy in the face of a credit crunch.  
Monetary policy 
But what about lessons for cyclical macro policy?  
As  I  have  discussed,  I  think  we  should  take  seriously  the  possibility  that  monetary  policy  
– and, indeed, impulses in the supply of broad money from bank lending – can affect risk 
premia.  And  we  need  to  go  the  further  step  of  not  ruling  out  that  this  could  sometimes 
exacerbate medium-term imbalances. That does not, however, drive me to a conclusion that 
monetary  policy  should  be  used  for  broader  objectives  than  targeting  inflation  over  the 
medium  term.  As  we  learn  lessons  from  one  terrible  crisis,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the 
hardship caused by the inflationary boom-and-bust episodes that occurred until the current 
monetary regime was developed during the 1990s. And we need to place some weight on 
there not having obviously been a boom in nominal demand in the run up to the crisis, either 
here or in the USA, although there were building booms in some countries. 
That being so, the question is what to do about the possibility that, occasionally, stimulating 
demand to offset macroeconomic damage from the crystallisation of one set of imbalances 
can fuel a new set of imbalances. The question is posed most pressingly about the US. But, 
in  the  UK’s  recent  monetary  history,  one  finds  a  parallel  in  the  debate  in  the  early  2000s 
about  whether  or  not  there  were  limits  to  a  strategy  of  stimulating  domestic  demand  
– principally household spending – in order to offset the effects on the medium-term outlook 
for inflation of pronounced weakness in external demand and business investment after the 
bursting of the Dot.Com bubble. 
Seen in that light, the central question becomes whether the authorities should have tools to 
check  the  evolution  of  stretched  balance  sheets,  particularly  in  the  financial  sector,  in  the 
face  of  robust  credit  growth  and  asset  price  appreciation.  This  goes  some  way  towards 
making the case for the “cyclical” elements of macroprudential policy. 
And that, of course, is a key destination for me this evening. When, more than a decade ago, 
the  Draghi  Report  exhorted  domestic  and  international  authorities  to  monitor  and  maybe 
manage  national  balance  sheets, 
term  “macroprudential”  was  used  only  by 
Andrew Crockett,  Claudio  Borio  and  their  colleagues  at  the  BIS.22  Now  it  is  a  buzzword  – 
planned in the West and used already in parts of Asia and Latin America.  
the 
Macroprudential policy: tempering but not obstructing financial liberalisation 
Plainly finance got out of hand. Not for the first time in history. For me, the most instructive 
chart in Reinhart and Rogoff’s already famous book is the one showing that truly big crises 
are  typically  preceded  by  financial  liberalisation (Chart 8)23.  This  reminds  me  of  what  was 
said  when  the  UK’s  Secondary  Banking  crisis  followed  not  so  shortly  after  1971’s 
Competition and Credit Control: “we had the competition but forgot about the control”. 
We  should  not  sacrifice  the  gains  to  global  trade  (and  to  freedom)  from  the  free  flow  of 
capital across borders and the capacity to innovate. But we obviously do need to be better 
equipped  to  contain  excess  and  to  ensure  resilience  as  economic  and  financial  conditions 
change. That is what macroprudential policy is about.  
                                                 
22  The term actually seems to originate in a late-70s Bank of England paper to the BIS about risks to stability 
from the recycling of petro dollars. See “The term ‘macroprudential’: origins and evolution”, Clement (2010). 
23  See Figure 3 of Reinhart and Rogoff (2008), “This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of 
Financial Crises”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One can think about this in a number of ways. And, consistent with my themes this evening, 
they revolve around risk premia and balance sheets.  
The Governor of the Riksbank, Stefan Ingves, has suggested that whereas monetary policy 
sets the path of the (short-term) risk-free rate, macroprudential policy (in its cyclical mode) 
will  work  on  credit  and  risk  premia.  In  that  light,  it  could  in  theory  be  cast  as  an  enriched 
Taylor Rule, where a single policymaker “sets” both the risk-free policy rate and the credit 
spread on bank lending.24  
This  is,  of  course,  an  elegant  and  illuminating  thought  experiment.  But  can  we  do  it?  The 
“cyclical”  macroprudential  tools  most  discussed  are  variations  of  capital  or  liquidity  or 
margin/haircut requirements. For now, I do  not think we know enough about how they will 
work to control spreads and risk premia. And nor would we know precisely where we wanted 
to put these premia even if we could control them. This is not remotely a counsel of despair 
given the goal here: to choke off tail risk.  
Instead, I find it easier to think about the broad goals of macroprudential policy in terms of 
balance  sheets.  The  regulatory  reform  Bill  currently  going  through  Parliament  enjoins  the 
Bank’s Financial Policy Committee to take heed of unsustainable levels of debt, leverage or 
credit  growth,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  the  financial  system  becomes  and  remains 
resilient. In other words, consistent with the theme of my remarks this evening, the FPC is to 
act  upon  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  intermediaries,  and  indirectly  to  influence  the 
balance  sheets  of  other  sectors  of  the  economy.  That  means  making  judgments  about 
incipient risk to the financial system from its own balance sheet and from borrowers. It means 
being  ready  temporarily  to  raise  regulatory  requirements  above  their  minimum  level  when 
risks from the economic and financial environment exceed anything remotely calibrated into 
the standards that apply in broadly normal conditions. And it means promptly relaxing those 
extra requirements once the risk to stability has passed.  
This is a massive step. No one is pretending that the policy community knows how to cast it 
in terms of a numerical target or a uniquely useful set of indicators, against which society can 
monitor us. And that underlines the importance of Parliament itself approving the instruments 
granted to the FPC, and of our being sufficiently transparent to enable public scrutiny of and 
debate  about  our  analysis  and  policy  decisions.  The  Bank/FSA  Discussion  Paper  on 
macroprudential instruments published last December was a contribution to that.25  
Back to current account imbalances: they do matter 
But  that  is  not  all  that  we,  policymakers,  should  be  modest  about.  If,  as  I  believe, 
macroprudential policy can prospectively fill a gap, we must not pretend that it can be a cure 
for everything. Even if we had avoided the worst consequences of seriously suboptimal gross 
capital flows – a badly overlevered banking system dependent on flighty wholesale funding – 
there would still have been the problem of unsustainable global current account imbalances. 
Whether the eventual adjustment would have been disorderly and how costly is hard to tell.  
Net imbalances do matter, and macroprudential policy will not solve the deep problems of the 
international  monetary  system;  nor  will  the  temporary  capital  controls  employed  by  some 
EMEs on “macroprudential” grounds. That question is still with us because those imbalances 
are,  broadly,  still  with  us.  And  if  the  surplus  countries  do  not  adjust,  that  poses  tough 
challenges for the rest of us. 
                                                 
24  See “Monetary policy and financial stability – some further challenges”, Ingves (2010). 
25  Bank  of  England  and  Financial  Services  Authority  staff.  December  2011.  “Instruments  of  macroprudential 
policy” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Lessons for the policy framework 
Where does that leave us? Summing up my analysis, it is that we must use financial asset 
prices,  in  particular  spreads,  alongside  quantities  as  indicators  of  risk  taking  and  risk 
appetite. It is through credit flows – domestically and across borders – that risk is built. But it 
is in balance sheets that those risks are housed and come home to roost.  
In terms of the policy framework, this leads me to suggest the following lessons:  
– 
We must not rely entirely on central banks “mopping up” after financial crises. Not 
only does it strain our capabilities ex post, it is counterproductive ex ante. If central 
banks are perceived as writing deep-out-of-the-money put options, then the market, 
believing  it  is  protected  by  those  tail-risk  puts,  will  itself  take  more  risks  than 
otherwise.  We  need  overall  macro  regimes  that  aim  to  make  chronic  imbalances 
and over-indebtedness less likely and less threatening. 
The transmission of monetary policy can be affected by risk appetite, and can itself 
affect risk-taking behaviour, domestically and globally. We need to be alive to that in 
forecasting the path of nominal demand, and in assessing global liquidity conditions.  
We also, therefore, need macroprudential regimes to ensure that these mechanisms 
do  not  lead  to  stability-threatening  indebtedness  or  otherwise  endanger  the 
resilience  of  the  financial  system.  We  need,  in  particular,  to  be  ready  to  contain 
private sector liquidity creation even when it is not driving excess nominal demand 
growth. That will amount to arresting occasionally the expansion or leverage of the 
banking system and shadow banking sectors. 
Given its special role in international finance, the UK owes a special responsibility to 
the  rest  of  the  world  to  maintain  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  UK-resident 
financial  system.  It  is  therefore  very  welcome  that  the  IMF  has  reached  precisely 
that view in its new work on Spillovers.26 The Fund must ensure that we stick at it.  
Reciprocally, the Fund  needs to go back to the Draghi Report and incorporate its 
lessons into Article IV and FSAP reports. 
As the Draghi Report stressed, we must try to identify and remove microeconomic 
incentives that distort risk-taking behaviour into dangerous channels. And given the 
interconnectedness of global finance, we – especially in the UK – must be alert even 
to such distortions elsewhere. US  housing finance was a domestic system whose 
structure led to problems with global spillovers.  
The public finances should be managed with an eye to the nature and extent of risk 
exposures elsewhere in the economy. 
It is the precise pattern of capital flows, and the resulting composition of the resulting 
balance  sheets,  that  matter  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  All  macro 
policymakers  –  monetary,  macroprudential  and  fiscal  –  should,  therefore,  pay 
attention to the national balance sheet; and to the pattern of gross as well as net 
capital flows.  
But,  in  doing  so,  we  and  our  peers  must  avoid  financial  protectionism  just  as  a 
previous generation learned to oppose trade protectionism. And we must not leave 
anyone thinking that we can eradicate economic problems. 
                                                         
26  The 
IMF’s  most 
recent  spillover 
found  at  http://www.imf.org/ 
external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr11225.pdf.  That  report  concluded:  “the  size  and  interconnectedness  of  the  UK 
financial  sector  make  it  a  powerful  originator,  transmitter,  and  potential  dampener  of  global  shocks.  The 
stability and efficiency of the UK financial sector is, therefore, a global public good requiring the highest quality 
supervision and regulation”. 
the  UK  can  be 
report  on 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
Around the Western world, excess indebtedness became legion during the opening years of 
the last decade. US subprime mortgages, perhaps the most egregious although by no means 
the  largest  example,  became  the  straw  that  shattered  the  camel’s  back.  In  this  metaphor, 
both  the  “straw”  and  the  “camel”  are  balance  sheets.  Sub-prime  borrowers  defaulted 
because they were living beyond their means: their stock of debt exceeded their ability to 
repay.  The  shattered  camels  were  bank  (and  shadow  bank)  balance  sheets  around  the 
world.  Government  balance  sheets  buckled  next  as  they  sought  to  sustain  demand  and 
employment. 
What should financial policy and monetary policy be doing right now? 
With  credit  conditions  so  tight,  it  has  been  asked  whether  the  Financial  Policy  Committee 
should be employing macroprudential tools to ease regulatory constraints on banks, with the 
aim  of  encouraging  them  to  loosen  lending  conditions,  helping  recovery  and  so  reducing 
threats to stability from default risk. The FPC concluded at its September 2011 meeting that 
such  a  step  would  in  fact  be  counterproductive,  endangering  stability  and  jeopardizing 
recovery. Given their precarious starting position when the crisis broke, the capital adequacy 
of UK banks is still being rebuilt. Worse still, the lingering threat of a severe crisis in the euro 
area  leaves  banks  operating  in  an  extraordinarily  risky  environment.  While  in  other 
circumstances  it  might  have  been  possible  to  relax  capital  requirements  if  the  worst  had 
passed,  it  is  not  a  sensible  course  when  the  worst  might  still  lie  ahead.  In  current 
circumstances, gradually building resilience through retained earnings is best for stability and 
recovery, because it helps preserve the capacity to lend “the day after tomorrow”. 
This  leaves  monetary  policy  with  its  classic  role  of  underpinning  demand.  Here  and 
elsewhere,  central  banks  have  injected  extraordinary  monetary  stimulus.  Exceptionally  low 
short-term interest rates have alleviated some of the burden borrowers face in servicing their 
debts. Low long-term interest rates – partly a consequence of Quantitative Easing – will have 
given a lift to asset prices, and so to wealth and the cost of capital. It is arguable that this 
defers some of the rebalancing needed in the real economy, but overall it reduces the risk of 
unnecessary  destruction  of  the  economy’s  productive  capacity.  That  stimulus  can  be 
sustained only so long as medium-term inflation expectations remain anchored to our target 
of 2%. We must be alert to the need gradually to withdraw stimulus as and when recovery 
builds. And we must be alive to the possibility that the alleviation of current macroeconomic 
problems  could  sow  the  seeds,  somewhere  in  the  financial  firmament,  of  the  next  set  of 
imbalances.  Where  risks  to  stability  do  emerge,  we  must  use  what  other  instruments  we 
have to try to temper them. This can never be perfect, but it can be better.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 1:  
Spain’s net external balance sheet 
Chart 2:  
Italy’s net external balance sheet 
Source: Eurostat 
  Source: Eurostat 
 Chart 3:  
Gross external liabilities  
Chart 4:  
10-year spot real interest rates 
Source: International Financial Statistics. 
Source: Bloomberg.  
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5:  
Gross and net global flows 
Chart 6:  
US external balance sheet 
 Sources:  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  IMF 
World  Economic  Outlook  (September  2011)  and 
Bank calculations. 
(a) Sum of global current account surpluses. 
(b) Sum of global current account deficits. 
(c) Sum of global net purchases of foreign assets by 
residents. 
(d) Sum of global net purchases of domestic assets 
by foreigners. 
Source:  Federal  Reserve,  US  Bureau  of  Economic 
Analysis. 
   Chart 7:  
UK credit spreads 
Source: Merill Lynch. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
Chart 8:  
Figure 3 from Reinhart and Rogoff 
Sources: Bordo et al. (2001), Caprio et al. (2005), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), 
and Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Notes: As with external debt crises, sample size includes all countries, out of a total of sixty six listed in Table 1 
that were independent states in the given year. On the right scale, we updated our favourite index of capital 
mobility,  admittedly  arbitrary,  but  a  concise  summary  of  complicated  forces.  The  smooth  red  line  shows  the 
judgmental index of the extent of capital mobility given by Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), backcast from 1800 to 
1859 using their same design principle. 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Annex 1: 
The UK balance sheet and the crisis 
Chart 1:  
Private saving and investment 
 to 
the  crisis 
the  private  sector 
Prior 
financial  balance  had  moved  from  small 
surplus of around 2% of GDP in 2003 to a 
slight deficit (Chart 1). Housing investment 
increased  by  around  1.5pp  of  national 
output;  but  private  sector  saving  fell  by 
around  the  same  amount.  That  was  the 
counterpart  of  a  doubling  in  the  UK’s  net 
borrowing 
the  current 
account  deficit,  to  reach  around  –3%  of 
GDP.  
from  abroad, 
 Chart 2:  
  Household saving and financial flows 
  to 
fell 
including 
The  household  sector  accounted  for  the 
fall  in  private  sector  saving  (Chart  2);  its 
just  3%.  Younger 
saving  rate 
households, 
first-time  home 
buyers,  accumulated  mortgage  debt  to 
acquire  properties  whose  value  was 
appreciating.  Older  households,  including 
“last- time sellers” and those scaling down, 
realised  housing  equity  and  invested  the 
proceeds in financial assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
Chart 3:  
UK household debt 
 Overall, household debt rose from 90% of 
income in 1997 to 160% by 2007 (Chart 
3);  and  from  30%  of  financial  wealth  to 
over  50%.  In  real  terms,  house  prices 
rose  to  nearly  2½  times  their  level  a 
decade  earlier;  and  the  ratio  of  house 
prices  to  earnings  almost  doubled  to 
approach 9x, up from around 5x in 1997. 
The  corporate  sector  was  a  net  saver  in 
the five years prior to the crisis, running a 
financial  surplus  of  2–3%  of  GDP. 
Outside  of 
real  estate  sector, 
companies  greatly  de-levered  after  the 
Telco boom and bust in 2001–2.  
 
 
 
the 
  Chart 4:  
PNFC capital and income gearing 
Per cent 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Interest payments/pre-tax profits
Net debt/capital stock (replacement  cost)
Net debt/capital stock (market value)
Overall  corporate  leverage  fell  to  around 
25% on a market value basis and to 0% 
at  replacement  cost  (Chart  4).  External 
fund  raising,  matched  by  investment  in 
oversees companies, was high peaking at 
around  7%  of  GDP,  with  bank  borrowing 
the  dominant  source.  Real-estate  sector 
debt,  quadrupled  as  a  share  of  nominal 
GDP,  as  commercial  property  prices 
soared.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 16 
 Chart 5:  
 UK-resident banks’ total assets 
increased 
to  around  5 
The UK-resident banking sector’s balance 
sheet 
times 
national output by 2007 (Chart 5). Banks 
also  increased  their  business  abroad. 
External  assets  increased  to  2.5  times 
GDP  by  2007,  nearly  double  the  level  of 
the  early  2000s.  Much  of  this  expansion 
was  financed  with  debt.  The  average 
leverage  for  large  UK  banks  increased 
from 20x in 2000 to 35x by 2007. 
  This  period  of  net  borrowing  increased 
the country’s net external liabilities to 25% 
of  GDP  from  around  10%  at  the  turn  of 
the  century  (Chart 6).  Much  of  this  was 
accounted for by higher borrowing by the 
government,  with  HMG’s 
external 
liabilities  trebling  to  reach  around  9%  of 
GDP.  The  country’s  gross  external 
balance sheet doubled in size, reaching 6 
times national output by the time the crisis 
struck.  And 
important 
mismatch in the maturity of those external 
assets  and 
the  UK 
borrowed  short  term,  through  deposits 
with  and  short-term  loans  to  the  banking 
sector,  with  the  counterpart  assets  being 
long-term and equity-like. 
there  was  an 
liabilities.  Net, 
 Chart 6:  
UK external position 
Gross
Net
% GDP
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
% GDP
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
L
A
2000
A
L
2007
Other
Loans
Currency and deposits
 2007
2000
Equity
Debt Securities
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
Monetary policy and long-term forward rates 
Annex 2: 
This Annex summarises recent work in the Bank for Paul Tucker’s speech to the Society of 
Business Economists on National Balance Sheets and Macro Policy: lessons from the past. 
The spot nominal interest rate on a ten-year zero-coupon government bond can be thought 
of as the average of the short-term interest rates expected to prevail over the ten year period, 
plus  a  term  premium  (which  is  often  thought  of  as  compensating  investors  for  uncertainty 
around those short-term interest rates). Comparisons between yields on government bonds 
of different maturities can be used to identify a sequence of forward rates (ie the expected 
short rates at each point in time plus a forward term premium associated with that maturity). 
Using the information from the yields on inflation-linked government bonds, expectations of 
nominal  short-term  interest  rates  and  forward  premia  can  be  broken  down  further  into  the 
expected  future  inflation  rate  (and  an  associated  forward  inflation  term  premium)  and  the 
expected  future  real  interest  rate  (together  with  the  associated  forward  real  term  premia), 
equation (1). 
ft
nominal(n) = (Et[rt+n] + RPt
Real) + (Et[πt+n] + RPt
π) 
Real and RPt
π the corresponding forward real and inflation term premia. 
nominal(n) denotes the n-period ahead forward interest rate prevailing at time t; Et[rt+n] 
; where ft
and Et[πt+n] the expectations for the real interest rate and the rate of inflation at that point and 
RPt
In principle, then, there are two broad channels through which a decision by monetary policy 
makers to change their policy rate could affect longer-term interest rates, such as the 10-year 
government bond yield.  
First, the decision could change market participants’ expectation of either real interest rates 
or inflation. It is worth noting two standard bedrocks of monetary economics here. First, long-
run neutrality: that, in the long run, monetary policy changes do not have a bearing on real 
quantities and relative prices (such as the level of economic activity or the real interest rate), 
but rather affect only nominal variables. Second, if a monetary regime is credible, those long-
term nominal variables should be “anchored” around a level consistent with policy-makers’ 
objectives. In a completely credible inflation targeting regime, there should not be a variation 
in long-term inflation expectations from the 2% CPI inflation target in the UK. 
The second possible channel is that monetary policy decisions could affect term or inflation 
risk premia. A simple test of the effect of monetary policy on long-term interest rates is to 
compare changes in forward interest rates with changes in short-term interest rates on policy 
decision  days.  Following  recent  work  by  Hanson  and  Stein  on  US  data,  an  unexpected 
innovation  to  short-term  interest  rates  is  identified  by  looking  at  the  change  in  “shock”  to 
3-month,  3-month  forward  rates  on  MPC  decision  days,  and  examining  the  reaction  of 
forward interest rates at various maturities. The sample is restricted to end on 31st May 2007 
to avoid effects from the financial crisis and QE as a monetary policy instrument. The change 
in  short-term  interest  rates  is  then  correlated  with  changes  in  forward  interest  rates  at 
different maturities across the yield curve.  
There is a significant positive relationship between changes in short rates and distant forward 
rates.  Further,  the  effect  on  forward  rates  is  accounted  for by  changes  in  the  real forward 
rate; there is no significant effect on forward inflation rates. At the ten-year point, the effect 
on  the  forward  real  rate  is  statistically  significant  with  a  100bps  increase  in  the  short-rate 
increasing the 10-year forward rate by around 7 bps (Chart 1). To put that into context, Bank 
Rate has been cut by around 5pp since 2007. Taking these results at face value that kind of 
movement in short rates becomes enough to reduce 10-year forward rates by around 35bps. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Looking across the full forward curve, there is a positive effect on very distant forward rates, 
with that effect significant up to around a 10-year horizon (Chart 2).  
 
Chart 1:  
Chart 2:  
Changes in short rates and 10-year 
forward real rates on MPC decision days 
Changes in real forward rates on MPC 
decision days following a 100bps 
surprise change in short rates 
Average
95% confidence interval
 5
10
15
Percentage points
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
20
  
It is not possible to distinguish from these exercises alone whether the identified movements 
in long-term real forward rates are driven by changes in long-term expectations or changes in 
term  premia.  Previous  empirical  work  examining  the  falls  in  US  and  UK  long-term  interest 
rates  over  the  2004–2006  period  foundfalls  in  term  premia  to  have  played  the  dominant 
role.27  Those  studies  put  forward  two  possible  explanations  for  their  finding:  lower 
perceptions  of  macroeconomic  uncertainty  or  an  effect  from  a  “search  for  yield”  in  a  low 
interest rate environment. The correlation found here between changes in short interest rate 
and distant real forward rates suggest that the possibility that monetary policy can affect risk 
premia should be taken seriously.  
                                                 
27  See Joyce et al (2011), “Understanding the Real Rate Conundrum: An Application of No-Arbitrage Models to 
the UK Real Yield Curve” and Backus and Wright (2007), “Cracking the Conundrum”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
