Masaaki Shirakawa: Issues facing the futures markets and the industry 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan 
Conference hosted by the Futures Industry Association Japan, Tokyo, 26 July 2012. 
Introduction 
 The futures market  is  a key  building  block  of the financial  structure  of  an  economy,  and  its 
efficiency  and  soundness  contribute  to  the  economic  well  being  of  the  public  at  large.  The 
Futures Industry Association has, I believe, provided important input into the evolution of this 
vital  market.  The  Bank  of  Japan  appreciates  your  efforts,  and  that  is  why  I  am  pleased  to 
appear as the keynote speaker for the FIA Japan Conference today. 
To  be  honest,  the  futures  market  in  Japan  is  falling  behind  those  in  other  international 
financial centers. If you were to ask a man or a woman on the street in Tokyo, what he or she 
knew  about  it,  you  would  in  all  likelihood  get  a  blank  face.  This  is  rather  unfortunate, 
considering that Japan was probably home to the world’s first organized futures exchange. In 
the  early  eighteenth  century,  rice  futures  began  trading  in  Dojima,  Osaka,  complete  with  a 
system of margining and cash settlement. The price of rice, which as you know is the staple 
food  in  Japan,  was  set  through  day-to-day  trading  at  the  exchange  in  Dojima,  called 
kome-kaisho,  and  the  trading  houses  lining  the  streets  around  the  exchange  provided 
essential financial services to the ruling warrior class, which relied on rice as its main source 
of income. The exchange was ingrained in the economic life of late-feudal Japan for almost 
two centuries. 
The fact that such a sophisticated market grew organically on its own makes me somewhat 
optimistic that, given  the  right  conditions,  the futures  industry  can flourish  in  Japan.  In fact, 
margin trading in foreign-exchange, which is quite similar to futures trading, is popular at the 
retail level in Japan. 
Today, I would like to offer you some thoughts on how to create or enhance the conditions 
that  would  be  conducive  to  increasing  public  welfare,  by  embracing financial  innovation,  as 
well as the advancement of futures markets in Japan. For this purpose, I need to reflect on 
our  experiences  of  the  recent  Great  Financial  Crisis.  While  almost  five  years  have  passed 
since the first dislocations in the U.S. mortgage securities market became evident, the global 
financial  system  has  not  yet  recovered  to  the  point  where  we  can  confidently  venture  out 
onto new frontiers. This is especially true on the European continent, where confidence in the 
outcome of the policies adopted by some euro area members to contain their debt dynamics 
has  not  been  rebuilt  sufficiently. We  are  still  in  the  process  of  tackling  issues  that  came  to 
light during the crisis, and my remarks will therefore reiterate this point. 
There  are  two  broad  themes.  One  is  to  pick  up  the  many  loose  ends  that  manifested 
themselves  while  we  frantically  dealt  with  one  emergency  after  another.  Broadly  speaking, 
financial  market  infrastructures  weathered  the  Crisis  relatively  well,  and  yet  they  have 
revealed many weaknesses. In my view, as I will explain later, Japan has done a fairly good 
job in this regard. Another theme is more philosophical. While it is very important to reinforce 
the structural integrity of our financial architecture, finance cannot function without the trust of 
the society. The Crisis has raised questions about the role of finance in the broader society. 
Given  the  public’s  displeasure  with  finance  in  general  and  speculation  in  particular,  the 
futures industry must articulate its case much more strongly if it hopes to thrive in the years 
ahead. Criticism against banks and bankers is not  as pronounced in Japan today as it was 
ten years ago or as we see it now in the United States or Europe, but that should not be an 
excuse for us gathered at this Conference to avoid reflecting on this important issue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I. 
Improving the infrastructure of financial markets 
Let me begin with the infrastructure issues. 
During the height of the Great Financial Crisis, especially in the second half of 2008, financial 
markets,  particularly  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  virtually  ceased  to  function.  Market 
participants  were  not  lending  to  each  other  even  in  secured  markets  such  as  the  repo 
market.  Households  and  non-financial  corporations  could  not  borrow  as  banks  stopped 
lending  to  preserve  cash  and  new  debt  issues  ground  to  a  halt.  Stock  markets,  while  they 
continued  to  function,  were  in  a  freefall  and  generated  much  anxiety.  It  is  not  an 
exaggeration to say that the global financial system, and hence the economy, was only one 
step  away  from  total  collapse.  Problems  with  U.S.  sub-prime  mortgages  were  exacerbated 
many-fold  by  the  lack  of  transparency  regarding  the  distribution  of  risk.  Another  important 
factor  that  amplified  uncertainty  was  the  buildup  of  transaction  backlogs.  There  were 
transactions worth billions of dollars and euros, but it was difficult to get any idea of who bore 
the  ultimate  risk.  Big  swings  in  market  prices  suggested  that  potential  losses  could  be 
enormous. Nobody would dare trade in the face of the fear that their counterparty might be 
on  the  losing  side  of  trades  and  therefore  could  be  teetering  on  the  brink.  The  issue  was 
especially  acute  in  the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivative  markets,  including  credit  default 
swaps (CDS), where the sheer volume and arcane processing systems conspired to hide the 
true state of affairs even from the most experienced observers. 
Thus, it is no wonder that, when the leaders of the Group of Twenty (G20) countries met in 
Pittsburgh in September 2009, they decided to do something about this state of affairs.1 As 
regards the OTC derivatives markets, the leaders drew heavily from the experiences of the 
futures  markets,  which  remained  relatively  unscathed  during  the  crisis.  They  decided  to 
enhance the transparency and resilience of the OTC derivatives market by encouraging the 
use of more standard instruments and moving them onto electronic platforms and centralized 
clearing. When the reforms are finally in place, which the leaders have promised will happen 
by  the  end  of  this  year,  the  OTC  derivatives  market  will  more  closely  resemble  the  futures 
market.  Even  those  instruments  that  could  not  readily  be  standardized  will  be  subject  to 
margining  and  reporting  requirements,  concepts  that  are  already  proven  in  the  futures 
markets. 
If  this  were  the  end  of  the  story,  I  would  not  have  brought  up  the  issue  today.  While  the 
futures  market  provides  us  with  a  good  off-the-shelf  model,  in  the  form  of  exchanges  and 
their associated clearing infrastructures, that model could be improved further. For example, 
although  centralized  clearing  will 
failure  of 
counterparties,  the  effectiveness  of  the  arrangement  depends  heavily  on  the  design  of  the 
system.  A  clearing  house  must  ensure  that  its  integrity  will  not  be  compromised  when  its 
members  fail.  This  is  easier  said  than  done.  How  should  it  set  the  initial  margin?  How 
frequently  and  in  what  form  should  it  collect  variation  margins?  How  much  of  an  additional 
buffer should it hold against the risk of margin shortfalls? There will not be a “one size fits all” 
solution, but a set of broad principles could be drawn up. 
insulate  market  participants 
from 
the 
That is why central banks and regulators have been working on the “Principles for Financial 
Market Infrastructures,” which were published by the Committee on Payment and Settlement 
Systems (CPSS) and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  back  in  April  this  year.  The  new  Principles  contain  24  elements, 
covering all aspects of financial market infrastructures including basic governance structures, 
day-to-day operations, risk management, and crisis resolution.2 They are designed to ensure 
 1  See Leaders’ Statement released after the G20 Pittsburgh Summit held on September 24–25, 2009. 
2  See  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  Technical  Committee  of  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), “Principles for financial market infrastructures, assessment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  the  infrastructure  supporting  global  financial  markets  is  robust  and  thus  well  placed  to 
withstand  financial  shocks.  Compared  with  existing  recommendations,  the  new  Principles 
introduce  new  or  more  demanding  requirements.  For  example,  clearing  houses  that  are 
systemically important and multi-jurisdictional and those that clear complex products  will be 
required, at a minimum, to withstand the simultaneous failure of the two largest participants, 
instead  of  the  largest  participant,  as  in  the  current  set  of  recommendations.  The  Principles 
will  apply  to  all  systemically  important  payment  systems,  central  securities  depositories, 
securities  settlement  systems,  central  counterparties,  and 
trade  repositories,  which 
collectively clear, settle, and record transactions in financial markets. The Bank of Japan, in 
close  cooperation  with  the  Japanese  Financial  Services  Agency,  has  participated  in  the 
international  discussions  leading  to  the  agreement  on  the  new  Principles  and  is  firmly 
committed to implementing them as soon as practicable. 
Along with this international push for more robust and resilient market infrastructures, there 
have  also  been  efforts  that  reflect  Japanese  domestic  experiences.  While  the  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers did not cause much disruption in Japan, and hence cross-border spillovers 
were  minimal,  it  was  found  that  the  crisis  resolution  mechanism  at  the  Japan  Government 
Bond  Clearing  Corporation  (JGBCC)  could  be  further  improved.  It  took  herculean  efforts  at 
the  JGBCC  to  come  up  with  securities  and  funds  that  Lehman  Brothers  could  not  deliver 
after its bankruptcy filing. It was a close call. Much progress has been made to reduce risk 
and  ensure  the  continuity  of  operations  even  in  extremely  stressful  situations,  especially  in 
the area of dealing with a large number of fails and raising emergency liquidity. 
As I have noted at the beginning, these efforts to strengthen market infrastructures in Japan 
are moving forward at  a good speed. For example,  with respect  to the G20 commitment to 
move OTC derivative trading onto centralized clearing by the end of this year, Japan has set 
up  the  necessary  legal  and  institutional  framework,  and  is  probably  the  first  market  of  any 
significant size to do so. On this basis, the clearing of CDS began from July 2011, and yen 
interest  rate  swaps  will  also  be  centrally  cleared  by  this  October.  Another  significant 
risk-reducing measure is the shortening of the settlement cycle for JGBs. Since this April, the 
settlement  cycle  of  JGBs  was  shortened  to  T+2  from  T+3,  thereby  reducing  unsettled 
positions.  Market  participants  have  also  decided  to  begin  laying  the  groundwork  for 
shortening the settlement cycle further to T+1. Working together, authorities in Japan and the 
industry are committed to enhancing the robustness and resiliency of the Japanese market 
infrastructure,  which  should  enable  Tokyo  to  thrive  in  the  increasingly  competitive  quest  to 
become a global financial center. 
Before  moving  on  to  my  second  theme,  let  me  add  a  few  footnotes  concerning  financial 
market infrastructures. 
One  is  the  tradeoff  that  arises  from  the  increasing  use  of  centralized  clearing.  Centralized 
clearing  has  unambiguous  advantages  –  for  example,  the  mitigation  of  counterparty  risk, 
better  collateral  management,  increasing  transparency,  and  enhanced  market  liquidity 
through  standardization.  These  positive  effects  should  augment  the  robustness  and 
resiliency  of  market  infrastructure. That  is  why  the  G20  has  aimed for  its  wider  adoption  in 
view of the lessons of the Great Financial Crisis. At the same time, centralized clearing has 
its  own  issues.  It  may  increase,  if  not  properly  designed,  moral  hazard  among  market 
participants,  who  will  be  less  concerned  with  counterparty  risk.  Centralized  clearing  also 
concentrates risk in the clearing entity itself, which might become “too big to fail.” The Bank 
of Japan has always been aware of such a tradeoff and has continually stressed managing it 
wisely. 
This brings me to the second and third footnotes. 
 methodology  and  disclosure  framework,”  April  2012.  The  original  text  is  available  on  the  BIS  website. 
http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss101.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
If  the  negative  effects  of  centralized  clearing  are  to  be  effectively  managed,  central  banks 
and  other  regulators  must  strengthen  the  oversight  and  supervision  of  clearing  entities.  As 
we  have  already  seen  with  the  new  Basel  banking  rules,  the  move  will  inevitably  result  in 
higher  contingency  buffers  at  the  clearing  entity  in  the  form  of  collateral  or  margining 
requirements,  loss-absorption  pools,  or  paid-in  capital.  Since  the  users  of  centralized 
clearing, who are going to face less risk, will not have the incentive to increase the costs of 
clearing  by  committing  more  financial  resources,  higher  buffers  must  be  imposed  by  the 
authorities. This may increase the costs of trading, but that is a necessary price to pay in light 
of our experiences of the Great Financial Crisis. 
Lastly, the access of clearing entities to central bank services must be well thought out in the 
context of wiser management of  centralized clearing. The advantages of using central bank 
money  for  settling  accounts  are  obvious.  In  Japan,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  long  had 
constructive  relations  with  various  domestic  financial  market  infrastructures,  including  the 
Japanese stock exchanges and the Tokyo Financial Exchange. At the same time, it must be 
stressed that an account at the central bank should not be confused with automatic central 
bank  liquidity  provision  in  times  of  stress.  The  Bank  of  Japan  wishes  to  see  operators  and 
members of all infrastructures further enhance their liquidity management arrangements. 
II. 
The role of the futures industry in the broader society 
Now, let me turn to the philosophical issue. 
Unless  it  has  provided  significant  services  to  public  welfare,  the  futures  industry  would  not 
have evolved to  where it stands today. Nevertheless,  even in the best of  times, the futures 
markets  face  some  skepticism  by  the  public.  Futures  trading  is  a  pure  transfer  of  risks. 
Participants trade on the basis of their outlook on the direction of prices. Some of them wish 
to  protect  themselves,  or  hedge,  against  adverse  price  movements.  Others  just  bet  on  the 
direction of prices, hoping to profit from it. In pure pecuniary terms, one participant’s gain is 
another’s  loss.  Although  in  terms  of  utility,  the  whole  process  is  not  zero  sum  because 
hedgers’ utility is greater in view of risk reduction, the zero-sum nature of the pecuniary gains 
and losses leads some people outside the industry to regard such activity as reprehensible, 
especially when it seems to encourage wild price swings. 
In some jurisdictions, hostility to speculation surfaces as outright bans on futures trading on 
certain products. For example, in the United States, the definition of commodities under the 
Commodity  Exchange  Act  explicitly  states  “except  onions,”  while  corn,  wheat,  frozen 
concentrated  orange  juice,  and  all  other  kinds  of  edible  products  are  included.  This 
idiosyncrasy could be traced to a cornering of the U.S. onion market in 1955, which then led 
to the enactment in 1956 of the Onion Futures Act. Potatoes failed to make the list of banned 
products  in  1964,  but  lawmakers  were  persuaded  enough  to  add  a  ban  on  the  trading  of 
“motion  picture  box  office  receipts”  in  the  recent  Dodd-Frank  Act.  Here  in  Japan,  the 
resumption of rice futures, notwithstanding their historic significance that I mentioned at the 
outset, has taken a long time. 
In  the  days  before  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  however,  the  futures  industry  could  still  find 
many sympathetic ears for its case. It was a widely shared credo that the pursuit of individual 
interest  in  financial  markets  would  result  in  the  transfer  of  various  risks  to  those  economic 
agents  who  were  most  willing  to  take  on  such  risks.  Given  the  different risk  preferences  of 
economic  agents,  the  resulting  redistribution  of  risks  to  those  who  were  most  capable  of 
managing  them  was  believed  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  whole  economy.  It  was 
believed  that  the  invisible  hand  would  inevitably  bring  about  a  good  outcome.  The  futures 
markets,  sometimes  regarded  as  the  closest  one  could  get  to  perfect  markets,  were  thus 
regarded as increasingly important links in the various chains of risk transfer in economies. 
The public could be persuaded that the speculative activities of the futures industry were not 
only  beneficial  to  the  direct  participants  but  also  an  essential  pillar  of  the  institutions  that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
realize  the  optimal  distribution  of  risks  within  the  broader  society,  and  thus  should  be 
encouraged with as few restrictions as possible. 
That belief, however, was badly shaken during the Crisis. Not a few people have now come 
to  believe  that  the  financial  industry  was  only  greedily  pursuing  its  self-interest  with  total 
disregard for the benefits to the broader society, and that the culmination of such a trend was 
the  bailout  of  the  industry  at  a  great  cost  to  taxpayers.  As  a  result,  while  draconian 
prohibitions  on  the  trading  of  certain  products  are  still  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule, 
regulations  to  curb  so-called  excessive  speculation,  such  as  restrictions  or  bans  on  short 
selling, have been strengthened during and after the Great Financial Crisis. The public is no 
longer willing to give the benefit of doubt to the view that what was good for the industry was 
good for the economy. 
Now,  it  is  not  sufficient for  the futures  industry  to  maintain  that  speculation  itself  is  good. It 
must make the case that speculation actually brings about good outcomes. In other words, it 
must explain why futures trading is an essential building block of the economy. 
Therefore,  the  industry  must  reflect  on  its  original  purpose.  The  futures  market  came  into 
being  so  that  economic  agents  could  protect  against  the  future  movement  of  prices.  For 
example, the price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil delivered at Cushing, Oklahoma in 
three months’ time could be influenced by many factors. If the U.S. economy were booming 
and people resumed driving huge pickup trucks, demand would skyrocket and so would the 
price for crude oil. On the other hand, if new sources of supply, such as oil sands and shale 
oil,  were  to  come  on  line  in  significant  quantities,  a  supply  glut  would  send  prices  of  oil 
tumbling down. If we knew the probability distribution of all possible outcomes, we could of 
course calculate one fair price, but this is never the case. No matter how hard we try to see 
the  future,  it  is  uncertain.  Protection  could  never  be  bought  unless  there  were  economic 
agents that were willing to speculate and take the other side of the transaction. 
This  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  all  futures  trading  must  be  underpinned  by  an  actual 
need for protection. Even if two speculators trade against each other, the cumulative effects 
of  such  activity  –  a  continuous  process  of  trial  and  error  –  should  ensure  that  the  resulting 
price would be the best-informed guess that society could make. Since each trade is backed 
by  a  financial  commitment,  there  should  be  little  incentive  to  misquote  prices.  Substantial 
speculative  activity  should  also  make  it  easy  to enter  and  exit  the market  with  the  smallest 
price impact, i.e., it should enhance market liquidity. Furthermore, such prices are formed in 
the  most  transparent  manner.  By  allowing  speculation  to  go  on,  society  could  ensure  the 
availability of protection against unwanted price movements and be confident  that the price 
charged for the service is fair enough. 
So, one can reasonably conclude that speculation should have a role to play in our economy. 
However, there may also be limits to speculation. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  a  futures  trade  between  two  speculators,  or  two  agents  without  any 
underlying positions to protect, is a zero-sum game. By itself, such a trade does not create 
any new value. A hundred million trades with a profit of one basis point will generate a profit 
of 1 million dollars, but that money must come out of the pocket of other market participants. 
It just does not make sense to put too many resources into such a venture. 
Herein  lies  a  paradox.  If  appropriately  conducted,  speculation  does  bring  about  useful 
outcomes  for  society.  Nevertheless,  if  there  were  only  speculation,  there  would  be  no 
economic  basis  for  sustaining  it,  because  the  expected  return  of  such  activity  is  zero  (or 
negative if one factors in the costs). The only reason why speculative activity can continue is 
that costs are in effect borne by agents that wish to obtain protection. That sort of structure 
suggests that there must be an inherent limit to the level of speculative activity  in a futures 
market. Growth for growth’s sake is not acceptable. Can market forces sort this out? This is a 
question  that  the  futures  industry  must  ask  itself,  and  I  hope  that  the  industry  takes  it 
seriously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In this regard, the fact that many commodity futures in Japan are not flourishing might lead 
us  to  conclude  that  any  market  that  fails  to  attract  a  sufficient  amount  of  non-speculative 
activity  will  languish.  The  market  might  take  care  of  the  balance  between  speculative  and 
non-speculative  activities.  In  the  case  of  financial  futures,  banks  have  legitimate  hedging 
needs, and such activity will support a certain level of speculation in the market. Meanwhile, 
the  depressed  levels  of  activity  in  financial  futures  for  short-term  instruments,  in  today’s 
ultra-low-interest-rate environment, might be consistent with the self-correcting forces of the 
markets. 
Concluding remarks 
Today,  I  have  reflected  on  how  far  the  industry,  especially  in  Japan,  has  progressed  in 
meeting the challenges arising from  the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  I have  also  pointed  out that 
the industry still needs to redefine its role in the post-Crisis environment. In order to end my 
remarks on a positive note, I would like to quickly outline two opportunities for the industry. 
One is that there are still many risks for which the introduction of a traded market could be 
beneficial  to  the  economy.  An  example  is  longevity  risks.  As  I  have  stressed  on  numerous 
occasions, Japan is facing acute challenges in terms of demography, which in turn weaken 
potential growth. A well-designed product that could deal with longevity risks could facilitate 
Japan meeting those challenges. 
Another opportunity is in terms of leveraging the advantages of the futures market structure. 
One feature that comes to my mind is the transparency of prices. There may be many areas 
in  which  prices  determined  on  futures  exchanges  could  become  benchmarks  for  related 
economic  activity.  The  recent  attention  over  the  setting  of  LIBOR  seems  to  confirm  such  a 
view. 
Such  positive  contributions  should  confirm  that  the  futures  industry  will  continue  to  perform 
useful and indispensable functions within the society. 
We are now in a period of great changes. Last night, we heard the remarks of the Minister of 
State  for  Financial  Services,  Mr.  Matsushita.  He  told  us  that  Japan  had  implemented  and 
was  planning  to  introduce  many  reforms  that  would  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  and 
strengthen  the  confidence  in  the  Japanese  financial  markets.  Considering  that  a  period  of 
change is a period of opportunities, I believe that the industry could potentially accelerate its 
growth by satisfying the unfulfilled needs of the Japanese economy. 
From a broader perspective, Japan’s headline growth figures over the last 20 years remained 
low,  and  the  period  is  often  described  as  the  lost  decade  or  decades.  Nevertheless,  the 
impact  of  the  bubble  bursting  in  the  1990s  was  well  contained,  relative  to  what  we  saw 
recently  following  the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  Weak  growth,  at  least  in  the  second  decade 
after the bursting of the bubble, can be explained, to some extent, by adverse demographic 
trends, or more precisely, a failure to adapt to such trends. As I have repeatedly pointed out, 
Japan’s per capita growth is about the average among the G7 economies, and the growth of 
output per working age population is the highest in the G7.3 Compared with most developed 
economies,  the  increase  in  unemployment  has  been  modest.  Japan  no  longer  offers  the 
low-hanging  fruits  found  in  fast-growing  emerging  economies,  but,  as  one  of  the  richest 
economies,  it  offers  tremendous  opportunities.  In  the  financial  sector,  most  Japanese 
financial  institutions  are  now  beginning  to  compete  from  a  position  of  strength.  Their  credit 
spreads  remain  more  stable  relative  to  their  global  peers,  and  they  are  gradually  and 
 3  See Masaaki Shirakawa,  “Demographic Changes and Macroeconomic Performance: Japanese Experiences” 
(Opening Remark at 2012 BOJ-IMES Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, 
the  Bank  of  Japan),  May  30,  2012.  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ 
ko120530a1.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
carefully filling the void created by the retreating European financial institutions. Since I see 
many  guests  from  overseas  in  the  audience  today,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  if  we  can 
combine the tremendous opportunities that I mentioned with a stable financial system, Japan 
could perhaps be one of the most promising markets. 
I do hope that the Bank of Japan can continue its dialogue with the industry to facilitate this 
process. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
