K C Chakrabarty: Mobile banking in India – regulations and rationale 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
International Banking Summit on “Regulation of cross-border mobile payments and regional 
financial integration”, Mumbai, 29 March 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri K Sivaraman and Ms Radha Somakumar in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Ms Moono Mupotola, Manager, African Development Bank Group, Mr Somak Ghosh, Group 
President,  Development  &  Sustainable  Banking,  YES  Bank,  distinguished  guests, 
participants, members of the print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. 
1. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  present  here  at  the  International  Banking  Summit  on 
“Regulation of Cross-Border Mobile Payments and Regional Financial Integration” and share 
my  thoughts  on  the  subject  of  mobile  phones  as  a  powerful  tool  for  enabling  financial 
services. I thank YES BANK and African Development Bank for extending the invitation to 
me. 
2. 
Technology  has,  for  better  or  worse,  undeniably  brought  about  a  change,  hitherto 
unimagined, in our life styles. The transformation brought about by technology in the area of 
delivery  of  financial  services  has,  thankfully,  only  been  for  the  better.  Internet  Banking 
complemented by core banking solutions implemented by banks, mobile banking, card based 
electronic transactions at any bank ATM and merchants locations (both physical and through 
e-commerce  sites)  have  offered  a  variety  of  channels  to  bank  customers  to  conduct  their 
payment transactions. 
Mobile as a medium 
3. 
In  this  context,  the  question  that  often  gets  debated  is:  how  and  why  is  a  mobile 
device the most appropriate delivery channel of financial services? Besides the technology 
capability to transmit financial information in an efficient, secure and cost-effective manner 
enabled by development of mobile based applications for banking, the most significant fact 
about  this  idea  is  the  ubiquity  of  the  mobile  phones.  The  number  of  mobile  phones  in  the 
country are said to be nearing a billion phones. Hence, banking and financial services, which 
have  already  come  a  long  way  from  the  branch  level  services  to  the  customer’s  home 
desktop and laptop, can now be reached to a much larger section of the society, including 
the  financially  excluded,  through  the  medium  of  the  mobile  phones.  Besides  the  reach  of 
mobile, there is another reason why mobiles are the most appropriate medium. What is after 
all a banking transaction? What purpose does the traditional cheque serve? In India, if you 
forget to carry your cheque book for withdrawal of funds, they provide you with what is call a 
withdrawal slip. A cheque or a withdrawal slip is a personalized direction to your banker to 
put through banking transactions on your behalf. The authentication is achieved through your 
signature.  But  this  traditional  method  is  expensive.  A  mobile  phone  achieves  the  same 
purpose  and  enables  you  to  send  personalized  secure  instructions  to  your  banker  to 
undertake transactions on your behalf. If your bank has achieved seamless integration with 
the  CBS,  then  the  transaction  gets  automatically  registered.  But  these  transactions  using 
mobile are far less expensive than its traditional alternatives. More importantly, you hold the 
key  since  mobile  is  in  your  pocket  and  you  need  not  depend  on  bank  timings  or  the  rush 
there to undertake banking transactions. This is perhaps the most important advantage of the 
mobile over other alternate payment methods. The mobile phone can, therefore, empower 
the  common  man  to  conduct  his  payment  transactions  any  time  and  from  anywhere.  It  is, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
therefore, no wonder that mobile payments and mobile banking are being hotly debated in 
various forums, in India and abroad. 
Bank-led technology neutral approach 
4. 
The  Reserve  Bank  recognized  the  potential  of  the  mobile  phone  as  a  channel  to 
conduct  financial  services  quite  some  time  back  and  the  first  set  of  guidelines were  taken 
way back in October, 2008. But the Reserve Bank consciously opted for a bank-led model 
although  our  approach  remains  technology  neutral.  Mobile  phones  as  a  delivery  channel 
have a great potential if the security and cost aspects are addressed for it has to serve a 
large  number  of  transactions  that  are  small  in  size.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that  use  of 
mobile for banking in financial inclusion cannot become a viable proposition on a standalone 
basis if the purpose is to achieve meaningful financial inclusion. To make it viable and attract 
volumes, it has to be provided as a package along with other products and services. This can 
be  achieved  only  by  entities  that  can  provide  add-on  services  like  emergency  and 
entrepreneurial  credit,  saving  facilities,  other  products  and  services  such  as  insurance, 
besides  remittances.  This  is  where a  mainstream  regulated  entity  like a  bank  fits in.  True, 
some of these alternatives are being provided by a few NBFCs but their scale and reach are 
not comparable with banks. They can serve niche markets but are not viable in the long run. 
But, they indeed will facilitate financial inclusion. So, the Indian model will remain a bank-led 
model with banks partnering MSPs (mobile service providers) and other entities to achieve 
the  national  goal  of  inclusive  growth.  In  our  endeavour  to  enable  enhancements  in  mobile 
banking both in terms of the nature of services offered and the value of transactions to be 
permitted under mobile banking, we have been in constant dialogue with the stake holders 
and intervened to liberalise the mobile banking guidelines in a phased manner. 
Steps taken by RBI in mobile banking 
5. 
The  mobile  banking  guidelines  have  been  modified  in  December  2011,  to  permit 
banks to facilitate funds transfer both for personal remittances and purchase of goods and 
services  without  any  ceiling.  In  other  words,  banks  are  now  free  to  decide  on  the  limits, 
based on their own risk perception. In respect of small value transactions fund transfers up to 
Rs  5,000/-  can  be  effected  through  the  mobile  phone  without  the  need  for  end-to-end 
encryption. 
6. 
In order to provide domestic money transfer facility especially to migrant population 
who  do  not  have  access  to  formal  banking  channels,  domestic  money  transfer  guidelines 
have been issued in October 2011. Remittance from a bank account for cash pay out to the 
beneficiary not having a bank account at an ATM/BC outlet has also been facilitated up to 
Rs 10,000/- per transaction subject to a monthly cap of Rs 25,000/- per beneficiary with the 
remitting bank obtaining only the full name and address of the beneficiary. Similarly cash pay 
in facility has been permitted up to Rs 5,000/- per transaction subject to a monthly cap of 
Rs 25,000/- per remitter for transfer of funds to a bank account. Remitter has to provide only 
minimum details (name and address). Bank need not take any document or proof of address. 
7. 
The Interbank Mobile Payment Services (IMPS) operated by the National Payments 
Corporation  of  India  (NPCI)  with  the  approval  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  enhanced  the 
efficiency of mobile banking by enabling real time transfer of funds between bank accounts 
and  providing  a  centralised  inter-operable  interbank  settlement  service  for  mobile  banking 
transactions with confirmation features. 
Current status of mobile banking in India 
8. 
Presently, 65 banks have been approved for conduct of mobile banking out of which 
47  banks  have  commenced  offering  these  services.  Transactions  in  mobile  banking  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
been showing an uptrend. During February 2012, more than 2.8 million transactions for close 
to Rs. 1961.23 million were transacted; a 300 % increase in volume and more than 200% in 
value  terms  as  compared  to  0.7  million  transactions  for  close  to  Rs  616.19  million  during 
February 2011. A little over 12.23 million bank customers have so far registered for mobile 
banking services. These numbers are not really heartening if we consider the following facts: 
At  the  end  of  January  2012,  the  total  wireless  subscriber  base  was  936  million, 
i. 
which included 313 million subscriptions in the rural areas. 
Only 55% of the people of India have deposit accounts. 
ii. 
It is evident that mobile phones have reached more households than basic banking services. 
Banks have not really made a significant penetration even among their existing customers to 
extend mobile banking services. However, for me, the most important concern is that there is 
a  significant  percentage  of  financially  excluded  population  and  the  potential  of  the  mobile 
phone to extend them financial services is still to be tapped. 
9. 
Reserve Bank has always been conscious of the need to bring every citizen of the 
country within the ambit of the banking system. Appreciating the difficulties of banks to viably 
operate  bank  branches  in  every  village,  we  had  permitted  them  to  appoint  Business 
Correspondents (BCs) to address this. On demand from the industry, we have also permitted 
“for profit” companies to be appointed as Business Correspondents, which would enable a 
healthy fusion of the expertise of banks and the communications and agency network of non-
banks, specially the MSPs. Though partnerships between banks and MSPs are happening, 
the pace is far too slow and the process needs to be expedited. 
Some generic issues 
10. 
which we are often quizzed. 
i. 
While  on  the  subject,  let  me  discuss  some  generic  issues  relating  to  e-money  on 
ii. 
Is e-money in India overregulated when elsewhere there is higher level of tolerance 
towards  anonymity  of  e-money  transactions?  Non-banks  in  India  can  issue  only 
semi-closed prepaid instruments, which do not provide for cash withdrawals. Is KYC 
requirement justified in such cases, when any usage of the card will only result in 
credits to the bank accounts of the merchants? 
Today, an overseas credit/debit card could be used to withdraw cash from any ATM 
and can be a potential source for money laundering and the international laws come 
in  the  way  of  sharing  complete  information  about  the  source  of  the  funds?  In  the 
light of such threat, is the RBI and the Government too obsessed with KYC and AML 
issues?  
11.  
As  you  know,  e-money  or  the  prepaid  payment  instruments,  whether  in  the 
e-wallets, m-wallets, prepaid cards or paper coupons, have been brought under regulation 
for the first time with the enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. The 
Act itself came into force from August 2008 and as mentioned earlier, the first guidelines on 
e-money  were  introduced  in  April  2009,  and  since  then  they  have  been  liberalized  in  a 
significant way. We have allowed issue of prepaid instruments up to Rs.10,000 for exclusive 
use  for  purchase  of  travel  tickets  without  the  need  for  KYC.  It  must,  however,  be 
remembered  that  there  are  certain  statutory  requirements  under  the  Prevention  of  Money 
Laundering  Act  which  need  to  be  met.  However,  within  the  existing  statute,  the  Bank  is 
constantly reviewing the position to identify the areas which impair the growth of e-money to 
initiate remedial measures. We have been on record that e-money is a more secure way of 
payments and needs to be promoted to ensure that our objectives of moving towards a less 
cash society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Should MSPs be allowed on a standalone basis? 
12. 
On  the  question  of  MSPs  being  allowed  to  do  money  transfer  service  on  a 
standalone basis, perhaps such a measure would help in providing an alternative mode to 
the  existing  Money  Order  /  Instant  Money  Order  being  offered  by  the  services,  though  it 
would be difficult for me to say which one would be a cheaper option. The Department of 
Posts also has over 1.5 lakh post offices for delivery of services, though the IMO is extended 
to  just  a  little  over  3000  post  offices.  The  MSPs  have  the  technology  and  an  impressive 
agent  network  to  deliver  the  service  with  efficiency.  It  was  against  this  backdrop,  that  the 
non-bank entities have been permitted to enable prepaid card to card transfers. The model 
would, therefore, benefit the financially excluded population both in urban and rural areas to 
send or receive money in a convenient way. 
It  is  still  not  clear  to  me  as  to  why  the  demand  for  standalone  MSP  model  is 
13. 
persisting  when  we  have  allowed  a  far  superior  model  where  collaboration  rather  than 
competition is expected to result in a win win situation for all? Why should the stake holders 
insist on an inferior alternative? Are there any insurmountable problems in the collaborative 
model? If yes, what are they? 
14. 
I  am  aware  that  some  of  the  issues  that  come  up  in  this  regard  relate  to  (i)  who 
owns  the  customer?  (ii)  who  controls  the  transactions?  Has  there  been  any  worthwhile 
attempt to resolve them in a mature way? I would urge upon the banks and MSPs to get their 
acts together very quickly. On behalf of RBI let me assure you that we stand committed to 
the success of this collaboration and would remove all genuine obstacles! 
Enabling cross border payments through the medium of mobile phones 
15. 
Should  mobile  initiated  cross  border  transactions  be  enabled?  To  my  mind  there 
cannot be a uniform standard for this. The issue is country specific and each country has to 
take its decision based on need, issues and threat perception. As far as India is concerned, 
even  during  the  worst  Forex  crisis,  the  country  was  careful  about  the  quality  of  inflows. 
Secondly, we have had rules that required all forex flows to be routed only through banking 
institutions  or  others  specifically  authorized  to  undertake  forex  transactions.  Given  this 
background, even if we had to agree mobile phones can only be used to trigger the transfer 
of  funds  from  overseas  by  a  non-resident  to  the  beneficiary’s  bank  account  in  India.  The 
banks will have to be responsible for ensuring quality of funds, KYC, etc. We have in fact 
permitted banks to enable cross border bank account to bank account remittance through the 
medium of mobile subject to clearance from the local regulator. At the beneficiary end, we 
have  enabled  loading  of  funds  received  from  overseas  under  the  Money  Transfer  Service 
Scheme (MTSS) scheme on to a prepaid payment instrument issued by a bank, which could 
include a mobile wallet, to the recipient of the funds. 
Conclusion 
Before I conclude, let me reiterate that the mobile phone is a potent tool to facilitate 
16. 
financial services and thus financial inclusion. It has the potential but the security and cost 
aspects have to be addressed. The medium of mobile has to sub-serve smaller transactions 
and must become cheaper. The Reserve Bank has for well considered reasons opted for a 
bank-led model as it is a complete model for delivery of a wide range of services. Just as you 
cannot have tele-medicine without a doctor, you cannot have mobile banking without a bank! 
The BC model would help to complement mobile banking, as customers need to approach 
BCs/ATMs only for hard currency requirements and conduct other banking transactions from 
anywhere from their mobile phones, provided of course, there are no tele-connectivity issues! 
As mentioned earlier, it is the social responsibility of everyone, who has the resources and 
the power, to contribute to the success of financial inclusion. While we have the guidelines to 
M-power financial services, it is necessary for us, the RBI, banks and the MSPs in particular, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to take this forward in the 4th gear by convincing the common man not only on the power of 
the mobile phone for doing financial transactions but also the safety and security aspects of 
mobile banking, to provide a level of comfort. I believe there are success stories of mobile 
banking in states like Bihar, thanks to the initiatives of the certain NGOs and banks, which 
has enabled not only financial inclusion but made less literate people mobile banking-savvy. 
This  needs  to  be  emulated  through  adequate  publicity  and  education  to  achieve 
M-powerment in a significant way. 
I thank you all for giving me this opportunity to address this august gathering. I hope some of 
the issues that I have raised will be discussed in this Summit and some solutions found. I 
wish you all the best. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
