Andreas Dombret: The European labour market during the crisis 
Welcoming  address  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the reception given by the Deutsche Bundesbank at the Annual 
Congress of the Verein für Socialpolitik, Göttingen, 12 September 2012. 
 Welcome  
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, members of the association, 
On  behalf  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  this 
reception.  
The  Bundesbank  is  a  true  friend  and  supporter  of  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik  –  and  not 
without  a  certain  degree  of  self-interest.  Scholarship  and  research  form  an  indispensible 
foundation for the work of central banks – this holds true now more than ever. Conversely, 
central  banking  issues  time  and  again  provide  impetus  to  new  research.  Thus,  the 
relationship between central banking and scholarship can be suitably described as symbiotic.  
But  central  banks  are  not  the  only  parties  with  a  strong  interest  in  the  Verein  für 
Socialpolitik’s research findings that are presented and discussed here and elsewhere. In the 
course  of  the  crisis,  the  need  to  present  and  categorise  information  in  a  scientific  and 
well-founded manner, yet at the same time in a way that is understandable for the general 
public, has increased enormously.  
Providing explanations and, even more, overcoming the crisis undeniably raise fundamental 
questions  in  many  areas  of  our  field.  You  are  probably  familiar  with  the  old  joke  that 
economics is the only field in which two researchers can receive the Nobel Prize for saying 
the exact opposite thing. So it is not surprising that various approaches to solving the crisis 
are the subject of contentious debate, indeed not just at symposia and research seminars, 
but also among the general public. Such debates are also raging among economists, most 
recently with regard to the need for a banking union.  
This has a positive spin-off effect as this type of friction can unleash the energy needed for 
promoting new insights. The Annual Congress provides the ideal forum for such productive 
contention.  Such congresses facilitate the  direct  exchange  and  debate of  ideas,  both  as  a 
public event and in private. 
in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  as  well  as  its 
Labour market reforms as an important part of adjustment processes 
2. 
The  subject  of  this  year’s  congress  –  the  labour  market  –  is  important  and  has  practical 
significance for central banks. This is relevant, of course, for the role that the labour market 
plays 
impact  on  prices. 
Well-functioning labour markets can make it that much easier to conduct a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. 
Additionally, the topic of this congress, “New Approaches and Challenges for Labour Markets 
of the 21st Century” is highly topical with regard to the euro area crisis, which is overarching 
everything else right now.  
The  crisis  can  also  be  seen  as  a  balance  of  payments  crisis  of  the  affected  countries, 
brought about by excessive public and private debt, combined with a lack of competitiveness.  
As  we  know  now,  the  existing  regulatory  framework  for  monetary  union,  the  “rules”  of  the 
European  economic  and  monetary  union,  did  not  prevent 
these  undesirable 
developments  –  the  fiscal  framework  was  not  implemented  consistently,  and  was  watered 
down, and the macroeconomic imbalances in individual member states, which are reflected 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in the high level of private sector debt, were not treated with due attention or were completely 
ignored. 
And  even  if  there  is  some  disagreement  within  the  profession  about  the  correct  pace  and 
timing: I have the impression that there is still a broad consensus that the crisis can only be 
resolved if these causes are eliminated and avoided in the future.  
Fiscal rules have been tightened at the European level; a new process to monitor economic 
imbalances has been created along with mechanisms for crisis prevention. Major changes in 
European  banking  supervision  are  also  imminent;  the  European  Commission  will  submit 
proposals in this regard tomorrow.  
Individual member states in particular are also called upon to take action. They must rein in 
their  public  finances  and  create  the  necessary  conditions  in  which  their  economies  can 
become more competitive again and enjoy sustained growth. 
The structure of national labour markets and their possible reform play a crucial role here. 
Such  measures  will  not  only  make  an  important  contribution  towards  increasing  growth 
potential,  but  also  represent  the  most  direct  way  of  reducing  the,  in  some  instances, 
dramatically high unemployment. This is borne out by events in Germany. Whilst one in four 
of  the  labour  force  is  seeking  work  in  Spain  and  Greece,  German  unemployment  was 
5.5% in  July  according  to  the  Eurostat’s  estimate.  The  labour  market  economists  amongst 
you  know  how  arduous  it  can  be  to  trace  the  path  of  how  certain  institutional  changes 
influence  the  situation  on  the  labour  market.  However,  several  studies,  including  those  by 
some  Bundesbank  researchers,  indicate  that  the  labour  market  reforms  of  recent  years 
played  a  crucial  role  in  contributing  to  the  turnaround  on  the  labour  market  and  to  its 
resilience during the crisis.1  
However,  the  German  example  also  shows  that  labour  market  reforms  need  time  to  take 
their full effect. The measures introduced in particular in Spain, Italy and Greece will not lead 
to full employment overnight, especially as the devil is often in the detail. It is therefore not 
certain  whether  the  changes  adopted  so  far  are  enough  to  increase  the  flexibility  and 
performance of the labour markets there sufficiently.  
However, the reforms must lead in the medium term to “light at the end of the tunnel” on the 
labour market. Pessimists who deny the possibility of a turnaround in the crisis countries are 
currently having a field-day. However, if we remember the state of the German labour market 
as  recently  as  the  middle  of  the  last  decade,  few  would  have  dared  to  hope  for  the 
development  emerging  in  subsequent  years.  The  external  environment  was  naturally 
favourable at that time and the starting point was not as serious as that currently faced by 
other  countries.  I  believe  that  the  crucial  lesson  is  that  with  appropriate  measures  the 
functioning  of  the  labour  market  can  be  changed  so  that  this  per  se,  in  a  very  broad 
economic  framework,  allows  more  opportunities  and  thus  also  a  more  favourable 
employment trend.  
 Germany’s contribution to reducing imbalances 
3. 
The  aim  must  be  for  Europe  as  a  whole  to  emerge  stronger  from  the  crisis.  But  in  the 
discussion on macroeconomic imbalances, there are often calls to force the core countries to 
actively reduce their current account surpluses – through interventions in the wage discovery 
process, for instance, or by way of additional fiscal stimuli – so as to bring relief for the deficit 
countries.  I  won’t  beat  around  the  bush  here:  besides  the  fact  that  narrowing  the  problem 
down to an analysis of current account balances is, in itself, unfortunate, to say the least, this 
                                                
1  Michael  Krause  and  Harald  Uhlig  (2011),  “Transitions  in  the  German  labor  market:  structure  and  crisis.” 
Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies No 34/2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
path would do a disservice to Europe. After all, the euro area is not an island but a region 
competing with the USA, Japan or China.  
What is more, fixing one’s sights on a greater contribution by Germany overlooks the reality 
of  the  situation.  Firstly,  Germany’s  trade  surplus  with  the  euro  area  is  less  than  2%,2  and 
secondly, boosting demand in Germany would trigger only negligible spillover effects in the 
periphery  countries.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  IMF  research.  On  top  of  this,  without  the 
rescue  packages  to  which  Germany  has  made  a  decisive  contribution,  the  adjustment 
process would inevitably be even more arduous and abrupt. 
The crucial factor is that this adjustment process is already underway: unit labour costs in the 
deficit countries are on the decline, considerably so in some cases, and Germany’s current 
account  surplus  with  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  at  the  end  of  2011  was  only  just  around 
one-half of the just over EUR 100 billion back in the year 2007.  
Structural reforms, including labour market measures, are a major underpin of this process. 
As the reforms usually affect large sections of the population, they initially often come at a 
high political and social cost. However, the answer to this problem cannot be to drip-feed the 
adjustments  over  time;  on  the  contrary  –  making  a  quick,  clean  break  is  better  for  swiftly 
reaping rewards and opening up prospects for the future. 
in 
Conclusion 
the  surplus  countries,  macroeconomic 
4. 
Efficient  labour  markets  are  a  key  factor  in  overcoming  the  crisis.  Decisive  action  must 
therefore be taken to tackle the prevailing deficits so as to enhance the growth potential of 
Europe as a whole.  
By  contrast,  calls  from  various  quarters  for  an  artificially  induced  deterioration  of 
competitiveness 
fine-tuning  or  a  simple 
redistribution of burdens would be of no help to Europe; in fact, quite the opposite. 
Policymakers are thus called upon to do their bit at European level and in the member states. 
And monetary policy is called upon – not to alleviate the failures of policymakers in resolving 
problems,  but  to  continually  reiterate  that  ensuring  price  stability  is  the  primary  and  most 
important  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to  the  stability  of  the  monetary  union.  It  must 
continually  reiterate  that  this  contribution  can  only  be  made  by  central  banks  that  are 
institutionally and de facto independent and have a clearly defined mandate. 
With  this  brief  and  –  some  will  certainly 
think  –  obligatory  warning  against  the 
misappropriation of central banks, I shall leave the matter there – as a Bundesbank official, I 
hope you will forgive me for this “ceterum censeo”, or mantra. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I now wish you a pleasant and stimulating evening 
at the Deutsche Bundesbank’s reception. 
                                                
2  Darvas,  Zsolt  (2012):  “Intra-euro  rebalancing  is  inevitable,  but  insufficient.”  Bruegel  Policy  Contribution 
2012/15, August. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
