Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 18 January 2012. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  January 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated and uncertainty has increased 
since the Bank released its October MPR. The sovereign debt crisis in Europe has 
intensified,  conditions  in  international  financial  markets  have  tightened,  and  risk 
aversion  has  risen.  The  recession  in  Europe  is  now  expected  to  be  deeper  and 
longer than previously anticipated. 
The  Bank  continues  to  assume  that  European  authorities  will  implement  sufficient 
measures  to  contain  the  crisis,  although  this  assumption  is  clearly  subject  to 
downside risks. 
In the United States, the rebound in real GDP during the second half of 2011 was 
stronger than anticipated. However, the Bank expects the recovery will proceed at a 
more modest pace going forward, owing to ongoing household deleveraging, fiscal 
consolidation and the spillovers from Europe. 
Chinese growth is decelerating, as expected, toward a more sustainable pace. 
Prices for most commodities are expected to remain relatively elevated, although at 
levels below those anticipated in October. 
The Bank’s overall outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from October. 
While there was more momentum than anticipated in the second half of 2011, the 
pace  of  growth  going  forward  is  expected  to  be  more  modest  than  previously 
envisaged, largely due to the external environment. 
Household  spending  is  now  projected  to  grow  at  a  steady  pace  through  2013. 
Reflecting  an  upwardly-revised  profile 
investment,  household 
expenditures are now expected to remain high relative to GDP over the projection 
horizon and the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further. 
While  dampened  somewhat  by  the  external  environment,  business  investment  is 
expected  to  grow  at  a  solid  pace.  Net  exports  are  expected  to  contribute  little  to 
growth, 
foreign  demand  and  ongoing  competitiveness 
challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
The Bank estimates that the Canadian economy grew by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and 
projects that it will grow by 2.0 per cent in 2012 and 2.8 per cent in 2013. While the 
economy  appears  to  be  operating  with  less  slack  than  previously  assumed,  given 
the more modest growth profile, it is only anticipated to return to full capacity by the 
third quarter of 2013. 
The dynamics for inflation are similar to those anticipated in October, although its 
profile is marginally firmer. Both total and core inflation are expected to moderate in 
2012 before reaching 2 per cent by the third quarter of 2013, as excess supply is 
slowly  absorbed,  labour  compensation  grows  modestly  and  inflation  expectations 
remain well-anchored. 
Several significant upside and downside risks are present in the inflation outlook for 
Canada. 
reflecting  moderate 
for  residential 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    The  three  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada  relate  to  the  possibility  of 
stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger-than-
expected  growth  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  stronger  momentum  in  Canadian 
household spending. 
The  two  main  downside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada  relate  to  sovereign  debt  and 
banking concerns in Europe and the possibility that growth in household spending 
could be weaker than projected. 
Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced over the projection 
horizon. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. With the target interest rate near historic lows and the 
financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in 
Canada.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of 
risks,  and  set  monetary  policy  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation 
target over the medium term. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
