Timothy Lane: Financing commodities markets 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA Society 
of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 25 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I want to thank the CFA Society of Calgary for inviting me to speak to you 
today. I would like to take this opportunity to share some thoughts on the role of the financial 
system in our natural resource economy. In particular, I would like to focus on the changing 
relationship between the financial system and commodities markets. 
Natural resources are of central importance to Canada’s economy and financial system, and 
nowhere  is  that  more  apparent  than  here  in  Calgary.  The  development  of  these  natural 
resources has been powering much of Calgary’s – and Canada’s – recent economic growth. 
Natural resource industries – including farming, forestry, mining, oil and gas extraction and 
related industries – are a key element of the Canadian economy, accounting for roughly one 
fifth of our gross domestic product.1 That share is roughly twice the share of natural resource 
industries  in  the  United  States  economy  and  higher  than  in  most  other  advanced 
economies.2 Resources are an even more important feature of Canada’s international trade, 
accounting for roughly half of our exports. 
We all have a strong stake, therefore, in ensuring that these resources are developed wisely 
and  sustainably  for  the  benefit  of  all  Canadians.  Doing  that  requires  several  elements:  an 
appropriate policy environment, flexible labour markets and a reliable transportation network. 
It also requires a sound and efficient financial system that meets the needs of the resource 
economy. 
The financial system is connected to resource development in two main ways. 
First, it channels the financing needed to develop those resources. Canada’s equity markets 
in particular are heavily weighted toward resources: the TSX Venture Exchange is one of the 
world’s primary listing destinations for resource firms, and even the Toronto Stock Exchange 
is sometimes referred to as “the world’s mining exchange.” Bank lending and other financing 
flows also play an important part. Many of you are directly involved in some aspect of this 
financing. 
Second,  the  financial  system  is  linked  with  the  commodities  markets.  Here,  I  mean  the 
intricate web of global markets in which commodities are bought and sold, prices determined, 
and the producers and end-users of commodities hedge against unexpected movements in 
those  prices.  These  markets  are  very  important  in  determining  the  returns  that  Canadian 
producers earn for their output, as well as the risks they face. 
In my remarks today, I would like to address this second aspect: the commodities market and 
its nexus with the financial system. My focus is the key trends related to financial innovation, 
deleveraging and regulation. 
                                                
1  Natural resource industries include the following: agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; mining and oil and 
gas  extraction;  wood  products;  paper  manufacturing;  printing  and  related  support  activities;  petroleum  and 
coal  products; chemicals,  excluding  pharmaceuticals;  non-metallic  mineral  products;  primary  and  fabricated 
metals; and utilities. 
2  J.  Murray,  “Commodity  Prices:  The  Long  and  the  Short  of  It,”  speech  to  the  Johnson/Shoyama  Graduate 
School of Public Policy, Regina, Saskatchewan, 10 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Complex global commodities markets 
The commodities markets are complex in several ways. There are spot markets and forward 
transactions,  as  well  as  other  derivatives  contracts  such  as  options.  There  are  organized 
exchanges and over-the-counter markets. There are physical and financial aspects. Trading 
takes  place  in  many  different  geographical  locations  and  many  different  commodities  and 
grades  of  those  commodities  are  traded.  There  are  also  many  players  in  these  markets: 
producers; end-users; major commodity trading houses; the commodity trading operations of 
the large global investment banks; exchange-traded funds (ETFs); various institutional and 
individual investors and, in some cases, government agencies. 
So what makes these markets global? Arbitrage is the glue that binds together markets that 
are  separated  by  distance  and  time,  as  well  as  markets  for  different  but  related  products. 
Arbitrageurs  take  advantage  of  price  differences,  buying  low  and  selling  high,  and  thus 
driving those prices together. They can also take advantage of differences between physical 
and  financial  commodity  markets,  tying  together  prices  across  those  markets.  Various 
market-makers  hold  inventories  and  stand  ready  to  buy  and  sell  commodities,  connecting 
suppliers and end-users. These arbitrage and market-making activities are often undertaken 
by the same firms and are difficult to disentangle. 
Of  course,  there  are  limits  to  the  extent  to  which  prices  converge  in  global  commodities 
markets. The recent behaviour of oil prices is a particularly telling example of these limits. 
Western Canadian crude oil has been selling at a deep and varying discount compared with 
the  world  price.  This  discount  is  due  to  the  limitations  of  our  transport  network  as  well  as 
differences  in  grade.  As  a  result,  Western  Canadian  producers  of  heavy  oil  have  recently 
been obliged to sell their output at as much as $54 per barrel below the world price of oil 
–  while  Eastern  Canadian  consumers  continue  to  pay  the  world  price.3  This  illustrates the 
point that when prices in different parts of the global commodities market diverge, Canadians 
may not reap the full benefits of their natural resources. 
Commodity prices 
I’ve  stressed  that  arbitrage  and  market-making  are  critical  to  tying  global  commodities 
markets together. These  activities  provide  significant  liquidity  to  commodities  markets  and, 
when  they  work  properly,  they  also  help  bring  commodity  prices  into  line  with  the 
fundamentals of supply and demand – by which I mean, not just current supply and demand, 
but  expectations  of  how  supply  and  demand  will  evolve  in  the  future.  There  is  strong 
evidence  that  broad  movements  in  commodity  prices  over  the  longer  term  indeed  reflect 
these fundamentals at a global level. 
Beginning in the 1990s, the robust resource-intensive growth of emerging market economies 
(EMEs) has propelled commodity markets into a supercycle. The number of people living in 
cities in China and India has risen by roughly 500 million since 1990. In parallel, the global 
middle  class  has  been  growing  by  70  million  people  each  year.  These  trends  are  widely 
expected to continue, with profound ramifications for a broad range of commodities.4  
Of  course,  there  have  been  significant  variations  around  the  upward  trend  in  commodity 
prices.  On  average,  commodity  prices  have  declined  over  the  past  year,  as  the  growth  in 
emerging-market  economies  has  been  moderating.  Nonetheless,  commodity  prices  as  a 
whole are still about 25 per cent above their historical averages in real terms. In particular, 
real prices for energy and metals have been well above their long-term averages for more 
                                                
3  World oil price refers to the price of Brent crude. 
4  M.  Carney,  “Dutch  Disease,”  speech 
to 
7 September 2012. 
the  Spruce  Meadows  Round  Table,  Calgary,  Alberta, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
than  seven  years  now,  and  real  food  prices  are  now  at  their  highest  level  in  35  years 
(Chart 1). 
Financing commodities trading 
I  have  stressed  the  role  of  commodities  markets  –  and  in  particular  market-making  and 
arbitrage  –  in  tying  together  the  global  markets  and  bringing  prices  into  line  with 
fundamentals. These  activities  inevitably  require financing  –  and the form  of  that financing 
has changed considerably over the past couple of decades. 
I would like to talk now about how that financing has changed and discuss the implications 
for the commodities markets and the financial system. There have been two countervailing 
trends: a strengthening of the links between the financial system and commodities markets 
during  the  decade  or  so  before  the  2008  global  financial  crisis,  and  an  element  of 
retrenchment and restructuring since then. Let me describe each of those trends in turn. 
A  central  element  in  the  financing  of  commodities  leading  up  to  the  2008  crisis  was  the 
increasing  participation  of  major  global  investment  banks.  Because  of  their  access  to 
wholesale funding markets, which provided them with cheaper funding than was available to 
other participants in commodity markets, the large banks became increasingly important in a 
range  of  commodity-related  activities.  They  provided  a  large  share  of  the  lending  to 
commodity  dealers.  They  also  themselves  came  to  play  a  central  role  as  dealers  in 
over-the-counter derivatives markets in commodities. More recently, they have become more 
and  more  involved  in  the  physical  trading  of  commodities:  holding  physical  inventories, 
making markets in commodities and even creating supply chains by providing shipping and 
commodity storage. 
In  parallel,  the  globally  active  commodity  trading  houses  assumed  a  large  and  expanding 
role.  These  institutions  hold  inventories  of  commodities,  store  them  over  time,  move  them 
around the world, and make markets in both physical commodities and their derivatives. As 
these trading houses grew, they played an increasingly important role in facilitating the trade 
in  commodities.  They  are  not  financial  institutions,  but  they  do  require  large  amounts  of 
financing.  Traditionally,  this  financing  was  mostly  in  the  form  of  syndicated  bank  lending 
secured by their commodities inventories, but recently that financing model has been shifting, 
as I will discuss. 
Alongside  the  increasing  role  of  these  large  institutions  was  the  trend  toward  the 
“financialization”  of  commodities.  Investors  –  both  individuals  and  institutions  such  as 
pension  funds  and  hedge  funds  –  stepped  up  their  interest  in  commodities  (Chart  2).  A 
combination  of  factors  may  have  contributed  to  this  trend.  To  some  extent,  investors  may 
have  been  seeking  higher  returns  associated  with  the  commodity-price  supercycle.  They 
may also have sought to diversify their portfolios by including commodities as a distinct asset 
class. 
Whatever  the  reason,  this  movement  of  investors  into  commodities  was  facilitated  by 
financial  innovations  –  notably,  the  emergence  of  index  funds  and,  later,  a  variety  of 
exchange-traded funds (Chart 3). More recently, high-frequency trading has also become a 
feature of commodity markets, as it has in financial markets. These developments together 
helped turn commodities into increasingly liquid financial assets, accessible to a wider range 
of  investors.  In  turn,  the  flood  of  investment  funds  into  commodities  helped  spur  further 
innovation. 
There  is  no  clear  evidence  that  this  trend  toward  greater  financialization  has  been  a 
significant determinant of the overall level of commodity prices. As I have already discussed, 
the preponderance of evidence indicates instead that commodity prices have been driven by 
fundamentals  –  primarily  by  rising  demand  from  EMEs.  Research  –  including  work  at  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Bank of Canada – that looked for a possible link between prices and the volume of financial 
activity in commodities markets showed that it is difficult to identify such a relationship.5  
It  is  possible  that,  under  some  circumstances,  financial  forces  may  have  amplified  price 
movements  that  were  primarily  driven  by  other  forces  and  may  thus  have  contributed  to 
volatility – for example, by exaggerating spikes in oil prices. In contrast, some have argued 
that  financialization  has  improved  the  efficiency  of  commodities  markets.  But  no  simple 
pattern emerges from the evidence. There is still a range of views on whether financial forces 
have, on the whole, contributed to or dampened volatility in commodity prices.6  
It does appear, however, that financialization has been associated with closer ties between 
commodity markets and financial markets. One indication of this relationship is the greater 
correlation between short-run movements in commodity prices and the prices of other risky 
assets, including stock price indexes and currencies (Chart 4). In part, this no doubt reflects 
common macroeconomic factors driving the prices of a number of risky assets – particularly, 
changing market assessments of the prospects for global growth. But it is also plausible that 
such movements partly  reflect investors’ changing perceptions of risk and, in some cases, 
changes  in  the  availability  of  liquid  financing  for  their  investment  positions.  (Ironically,  the 
increasing  correlation  between  commodity  prices  and  the  prices  of  other  assets  such  as 
equities  diminishes  the  benefits  of  diversification  that  investors  sought  by  investing  in 
commodities in the first place.) 
Developments in the wake of the crisis 
I have been describing stronger links between the financial system and commodity markets 
during the decade or two prior to the global financial crisis that came to a head in 2008. But 
in  the  wake  of  that  crisis,  the global financial  system  has  been  undergoing  a  sea  change. 
This in turn has introduced further important changes to the financing of commodities trading. 
Deleveraging  has  been  the  most  significant  trend  in  the  global  financial  system  since  the 
crisis – one that is likely to continue for some time to come.7 Particularly pronounced in the 
United States and Europe, the deleveraging process is being driven partly by the need for 
financial institutions to restore their balance sheets after the losses they incurred during the 
crisis  and  the  ensuing  worldwide  recession.  It  also  reflects  the  tightening  of  financial 
regulations to make the system more resilient, with a view to preventing a new crisis. Under 
the terms of Basel III, the minimum amount of capital that banks must hold has increased by 
about  five  times.  The  largest,  most  complex  firms  must  hold  even  more.8  Finally, 
deleveraging also reflects the shrinking of the shadow banking system – the complex web of 
securitized products, non-bank financial institutions, funding markets and other markets that 
created large amounts of leverage in some countries in the years preceding the crisis. 
On the whole, this deleveraging is a welcome correction – both by financial institutions and 
the regulatory authorities – to the excessive leverage that had built up in the global financial 
system  before  the  crisis.  As  this  process  is  completed,  it  should  result  in  a  more  resilient 
global  financial  system.  But  it  is  also  protracted  and  painful,  with  pervasive  effects  on  the 
                                                
5  R. Alquist and O. Gervais, “The Role of Financial Speculation in Driving the Price of Crude Oil,” Discussion 
Paper No. 2011-6, Bank of Canada, 2011. See also: Report of the G-20 Study Group on Commodities, under 
the chairmanship of Hiroshi Nakaso, Trade Finance Experts Groups (November 2011). 
6  A 2009 report by IOSCO also called for greater transparency in commodities markets, in part with a view to 
reducing the risk of market manipulation. See “Task Force Report on Commodity Futures Markets: Report to 
the G-20,” Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, March 2009. 
7  M.  Carney,  “Growth  in  the  Age  of  Deleveraging,”  speech  to  the  Empire  Club  of  Canada/Canadian  Club  of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 12 December 2011. 
8  T.  Macklem,  “Raising  the  House  of  Reform,”  speech  to  the  Rotman  Institute  for  International  Business, 
Toronto, Ontario, 7 February 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
global financial system and economy. Indeed, deleveraging by financial institutions as well as 
by households and governments is the main force that is keeping the global economy on its 
current path of gradual and unbalanced growth. 
How has this deleveraging affected commodities trading? 
Banks have been pulling back from the commodities sector, both in terms of their lending to 
commodities  traders  and  their  own  market-making  and  proprietary  trading  activities.  Until 
recently,  European  banks  provided  up  to  80  per  cent  of  the  financing  for  the  trading  of 
commodities worldwide. But, as those banks have had to repair their balance sheets, they 
have  scaled  back  their  lending,  bringing  their  share  down  to  about  50  per  cent.  To  some 
extent,  U.S.  and  Asian  banks  as  well  as  banks  in  the  Middle  East  have  stepped  into  the 
breach: they have increased their share of financing for commodity houses. However, in the 
current climate, that financing is more limited and has come at an increasing cost. For banks 
doing business in the United States, the anticipated impact of the Dodd-Frank legislation on 
their  commodity  trading  operations  has  been  an  important  additional  reason  for  curtailing 
these operations. 
The involvement of banks in the financial trading of commodities, including derivatives, has 
declined and some have pulled out of the sector altogether. We have also seen a marked 
decline in the commodity assets that banks have under management. As banks have been 
scaling  back  their  commodities-related  lending,  they  have  scaled  back  their  commodities 
operations  –  for  instance,  reducing  bonuses  and  remuneration  for  their  commodity 
specialists.  One  area,  however,  in  which  some  banks  have  been  maintaining,  or  even 
expanding,  their  activities  is  in  the  physical  side  of  the  commodity  business,  increasing 
holdings of physical products and investments in the supply chain. These activities are more 
akin to those traditionally being undertaken by the commodity trading houses themselves. 
Recently,  investors  have  also  grown  more  cautious,  pulling  back  their  commodity-related 
investments. Commodity-related assets under management have declined, reducing another 
financing flow into commodities trading (Chart 5). 
As  banks  have  scaled  back  their  involvement  in  commodities,  commodity  trading  houses 
have  grown  in  importance  and  have  changed  their  funding  models.  Some  commodity 
companies  have  begun 
time.  Sales  of 
investment-grade  bonds  by  commodity  companies  are  up  90  per  cent  over  last  year,  and 
commodity-linked junk bonds have risen by an estimated 40 per cent so far this year. 
As commodity traders have increasingly been funding themselves directly through the capital 
markets, they have been making greater use of innovative financing tools. Some have used 
hybrid or convertible structures, and (particularly in Asia) have been making broader use of 
collateralized financing. In Europe, some banks are using structured trade credit insurance 
as a means of deleveraging while also remaining active in the commodity trade in emerging 
markets.9  
Another development that partially reflects these changes in financing conditions is the wave 
of  mergers  and  acquisitions  that  has  been  sweeping  the  commodity-trading  sector.  In  a 
number  of cases, the  logic  of these  transactions  is  to  bring trading  houses  and  producers 
together. That’s not a new business model – indeed, the oil majors have had their trading 
operations for many years. But it is an increasingly attractive one in the current climate of 
dwindling bank financing for commodities. 
the  capital  markets 
tapping 
first 
the 
for 
                                                
9  The latter shift has also been encouraged by regulation: many European countries allow such insurance to 
count as regulatory capital under the Basel III rules. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Implications 
So  far,  I  have  given  you  a  thumbnail  sketch  of  the  changing  trends  in  the  financing  of 
commodities  markets.  But  why  do  these  developments  matter for the  world  economy,  and 
particularly for Canada? Here, I would like briefly to highlight three sets of issues. 
First, there may be implications for the pricing of commodities. As I have stressed, the broad 
trends  in  commodity  prices  is  determined  by  the  fundamentals  of  supply  and  demand 
– notably the long-term growth in demand from Asian emerging-market economies. But the 
functioning  of  the  markets  in  which  commodities  are  traded  has  the  potential  to  influence 
pricing in several ways. The flows of financing for commodity trading activities can affect the 
liquidity  and  efficiency  of  these  markets  and  thus  the  extent  to  which  prices  reflect  those 
fundamentals.  As  well,  the  financialization  of  commodities  has  the  potential  to  affect  the 
degree  of  short-term  volatility  of  the  markets.  Although  it  is  too  early  to  assess  the 
implications  of  the  recent  changes  in  financing  patterns  I  have  been  describing,  these 
developments bear watching. 
A  second  set  of  issues  pertains  to  systemic  risk.  In  particular,  the  large  trading  houses, 
together with the physical trading operations of some large investment banks, are playing an 
increasingly prominent role in a number of commodity markets. This raises the possibility that 
some  of these  institutions  are  becoming  systemically  important.  Just  as  the  2008 financial 
crisis revealed the need to assess the systemic importance of institutions that play a central 
role  in  particular  financial  markets,  we  should  be  asking  the  same  questions  about 
institutions that are interconnected with various commodity markets. Here, I have two general 
questions  in  mind:  Could  the  failure  of  one  of  the  large  trading  houses  cause  serious 
disruption in the commodities markets in which it played a market-making role? And, could 
the losses that a trading house incurs through the positions it has taken in commodities have 
significant  knock-on  effects  on  the  financial  system?  We  are  far  from  having  answers  to 
those questions, but they need to be addressed. 
Third, commodities trading can potentially be an important link between the financial system 
and the real economy. With the financialization of commodities, financial system stress has 
the potential to affect commodities markets. Commodities markets, in turn, have an important 
influence on the economic outlook of a commodity-rich country such as Canada. Moreover, 
movements  in  commodity  prices  may  pose  risks  to  the  financial  institutions  that  channel 
funding  to  commodity-trading  activities.  While  it  is  possible  that  the  recent  trends  toward 
deleveraging  are  actually  diminishing 
financial  system  and 
commodities markets, this is a development that it will take time to assess. 
links  between 
the 
the 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
A  sound  and  efficient  financial  system  –  both  in  Canada  and  globally  –  is  essential  for 
developing natural resources for the benefit of all Canadians. 
As  I  have  discussed,  the  relationship  between  the  financial  system  and  the  commodity 
markets  has  strengthened  over  the  past  couple  of  decades.  However,  in  the  wake  of  the 
global  financial  crisis,  new  trends  have  emerged  that  are  associated  with  the  broad  trend 
toward deleveraging by financial institutions. The overall level of commodity prices is driven 
by supply and demand, particularly the rising demand from emerging-market economies. But 
financialization may have important implications for the short-term volatility of prices and their 
co-movements  with  the  prices  of  other  financial  assets;  for  systemic  risk;  and  for  the 
channels through which stresses in the financial system can affect the real economy and vice 
versa. 
Given  the  importance  of  commodities  to  the  Canadian  economy,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is 
monitoring these developments, with a view to safeguarding the economic well-being of all 
Canadians. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
