Peter Praet: European financial integration in times of crisis 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Annual  General  Meeting  and  Conference  2012  of  the  International  Capital  Market 
Association (ICMA), Milan, 25 May 2012. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Ignazio  Angeloni  and  Stéòffphanie  Stolz  for  their  contribution  to  the  preparation  of  this 
speech. 
It is my pleasure to be here today at the annual ICMA General Meeting. In the last 40 years, 
ever since European capital markets acquired a global importance, the International Capital 
Markets  Association  has  played  an  important  role  in  promoting  contact,  information 
exchanges  and  initiatives  among  issuers,  managers,  dealers  and  investors  active  in 
international  financial  markets.  A  central  goal  of  ICMA  is  to  foster  the  openness  and 
competitiveness  of  financial  markets,  globally  and  in  Europe.  This  is  an  objective  that  the 
ECB wholeheartedly shares. In times of crisis, more than ever, we need effective action, so 
that we can achieve this goal. 
The  topic  of  my  talk  today  is  financial  integration  in  Europe:  its  meaning,  its  importance, 
recent developments, and – not least – why the ECB cares about it, and what the ECB does 
to preserve it. Well-developed capital markets are important – as we all know – because they 
channel  funds  from  savers  to  investors,  promote  the  efficient  use  of  resources  and  create 
more opportunities for individuals and firms, ultimately leading to higher growth. But this is 
not yet sufficient in a multi-country setting. A united Europe, especially one that has decided 
to have a single currency, needs united financial markets as well. Financial integration – that 
is the cohesion of financial markets and their ability to operate as a single entity – enhances 
these benefits and gives them a cross-country dimension. Not surprisingly, a single market 
for capital and financial services has been a central goal of the European Union for decades. 
Many  policy  initiatives  have  paved  the  way  to  greater  financial  integration,  the  most 
ground-breaking of which being, without a doubt, the introduction of the euro. This progress 
towards financial integration was interrupted and reversed by the global financial crisis and, 
more recently and dramatically, by the European sovereign debt crisis.  
I will first talk about why integrated financial markets are important, for Europe in general and 
for the conduct of the single monetary policy of the ECB in particular. I will then explain the 
role the ECB plays in this area. Next I will focus on developments during the first ten years 
after  the  introduction  of  the  euro  –  which  saw  continuous  and  significant  progress  in  the 
integration of European financial markets – and then on developments in more recent years, 
which have been marked by a dramatic reversal of this progress. I will conclude by indicating 
actions the ECB has taken to protect financial markets, including their integration, from the 
impact of the crisis, and what further actions, largely outside the control of the central bank, 
are needed to ensure integrated and functioning European financial markets going forward. 
The single European financial market and the euro 
Creating a single capital market has been a central European goal for several decades. In 
the 1980s, the Single Market Programme – which included financial services – set objectives 
and  started  the  ball  rolling,  mainly  with  Community  directives  which  were  subsequently 
implemented by national authorities. The impact of these regulatory changes was deepened, 
at  the  end  of  the  decade,  by  the  removal  of  all  capital  controls  across  borders.  Studies 
conducted  over  the  years,  which  are  summarised  in  a  special  chapter  of  the  recent 
ECB report on Financial Integration in Europe, have attempted to measure the impact that 
the removal of capital controls and the related harmonisation measures had on the European 
financial sector. Interest rates, for both borrowers and lenders, converged across countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and became more stable; new investment and diversification opportunities became available 
for households as well as firms. Estimates of the positive effects on growth and employment 
differ,  but  the  prevailing  opinion  is  that  they  were  significant  and  widely  spread  across 
Europe. 
The  launch  of  the  euro  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  and,  shortly  afterwards,  the  Financial 
Services Action Plan were major milestones in the integration process, aimed at tackling the 
remaining obstacles to integration stemming from currency and regulatory segmentation.  
The euro contributed to financial integration through a variety of channels. A single currency 
lowers transaction costs for consumers and firms, freeing up resources that can be used for 
business  investment,  both  domestically  and  across  borders.  In  addition,  a  single  currency 
removes all exchange risk among the participating countries and also lowers exchange rate 
volatility vis-à-vis third currencies. Less “noise” in currency markets means more certainty in 
conducting  international  transactions,  and  this  encourages  foreign  direct  and  portfolio 
investment  flows.  All  this  leads  to  a  more  efficient  international  allocation  of  capital  and 
therefore  higher  growth.  Moreover,  an  independent  central  bank,  firmly  focused  on 
maintaining  price  stability,  creates  a  favourable  environment  for  developing  new  financial 
instruments that are useful for the real economy – a case in point being the emergence of a 
euro area corporate bond market in recent years.  
A  highly  integrated  financial  system  is  also  necessary  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  the 
single monetary policy, because integrated financial markets ensure a smooth and balanced 
transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro area. For this reason in particular, the 
Eurosystem  decided  that  the  promotion  of  financial  integration  would  form  part  of  its 
“mission”.  The  Eurosystem  formally  defined  financial  integration  as  “a  situation  whereby 
there  are  no  frictions  that  discriminate  between  economic  agents  in  their  access  to  –  and 
their investment of – capital, particularly on the basis of their location”. In the early years of 
the  euro,  largely  under  the  direction  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  then  member  of  its 
Executive  Board,  the  ECB  set  up  a  new  internal  work  stream  dedicated  to  analysing  and 
monitoring  the  progress  in  financial  integration,  and  managing  a  set  of  indicators  that  are 
regularly updated and made available online. These indicators serve as an information base 
for the ECB’s Financial Integration Report, which has been published annually since 2007. 
The  report  describes  recent  developments  in  the  integration  indicators,  features  essays 
analysing specific aspects of financial integration, and concludes with a detailed description 
of  activities  through  which  the  Eurosystem  contributes  to  the  enhancement  of  financial 
integration. 
The crisis has shown that, in addition to the clear benefits, financial integration also carries 
financial stability risks in the absence of a strong institutional framework.  
Financial  integration  may  create  conditions  for  higher  volatility,  by  facilitating  an  abrupt 
reversal  of  capital  flows,  contagion,  and  the  cross-border  transmission  of  financial  shocks. 
This is particularly true when the institutional framework is incomplete in other respects, as is 
the case in Europe today. In order for capital markets to reap the benefits of integration, they 
require integration on other fronts as well: they require fiscal integration, first and foremost, 
but also integration in the areas of financial regulation and supervision. The deficiencies of 
the European institutional framework in these key areas have, it is now clear, played a key 
role in destabilising European financial markets. I will return to this shortly, but first, a brief 
overview of developments. 
The first ten years: swift progress towards euro area financial integration 
Financial  markets  progressed  steadily  towards  integration  in  the  years  following  the 
introduction of the euro. Let me show you some indicators that demonstrate the degree and 
pace of convergence in different market sectors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The money market was the financial market segment that was the most integrated prior to 
the  crisis.  Slide  2  illustrates  how  quickly,  and  almost  completely,  money  market  rates 
converged following the introduction of the euro. Note, in particular, that the convergence of 
unsecured interbank interest rates on all maturities was strong until 2007. 
Convergence was also strong and rapid in the sovereign debt markets. Slide 3 shows that 
after the launch of the euro, markets virtually priced the debt of different Member States as 
identical. During the period 2003–2007, the spreads were very small and did not reflect the 
differences  in  fiscal  positions  between  countries,  even  when  ratings  changed.  This  period 
was therefore characterised by a significant underpricing of risk, with investors searching for 
yield in an environment of abundant global liquidity.  
Slide 4 paints a similar picture for the retail banking sector. We can clearly see the gradual 
convergence  across  countries  in  the  rates  charged  for  new  loans  to  households  for 
residential mortgages (on the left) and to corporations (on the right).  
Unlike  convergence  in  price-based  indicators,  quantity-based  indicators  point  to  a  slower 
pace  of  financial  integration:  Slide  5  shows  that  outstanding  cross-border  loans  to  the 
non-financial sector in other euro area countries increased by only 3 percentage points over 
the last decade. Hence, overall, the process of financial integration in retail banking – though 
steady  and  significant  –  was  slower  than  in  the  sovereign  bond  markets  and  has  never 
reached completion. 
Despite  differences  in  the  degree  and  pace  across  market  segments,  before  the  crisis 
financial  integration  was  widely  assumed  to  be  a  structural  phenomenon,  and  as  such 
progressive and not easily reversible. However, the crisis has shown that gains in financial 
integration are vulnerable to market conditions: the dispersion in various market segments 
clearly indicates that the process of financial integration has been brought to a halt or even 
reversed. 
The reversal of financial integration since the crisis 
Allow me to examine separately the developments in different market segments, starting with 
the money markets. 
This  segment  was  the  most  integrated  one  before  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  one  most 
affected by the crisis. The functioning of these markets has become increasingly impaired, 
especially across national borders. For example, the standard deviation of EURIBOR rates 
across  frontiers  within  the  euro  area  has  moved  systematically  above  the  corresponding 
standard  deviation  within  domestic  borders.  It’s  a  sign  that  market  participants  are 
demanding an extra premium to lend to counterparties located in other countries, and that 
this premium rises when market conditions are tense. There’s a similar phenomenon in the 
secured  money  market,  which  is  usually  more  resilient  given  its  collateralised  nature.  A 
significant  increase  in  price  differentiation  in  repo  markets  has  occurred  as  market 
participants  have  increasingly  taken  correlation  risks  into  account:  the  pricing  of  risk  has 
become  much  more  dependent  on  the  geographic  origin  of  both  the  counterparty  and  the 
collateral,  in  particular  when  these  are  from  the  same  country.  An  additional  sign  of  risk 
aversion  has  been  the  tendency  of  market  participants  to  shift  from  the  unsecured  to  the 
secured market. 
Another segment that has been particularly affected by the crisis is the bond market. Both 
sovereign  and  corporate  bond  markets  have  been  dominated  by  sharp  differentiation, 
especially across borders. Bond holders are acutely aware of credit risks and price them in, 
taking into account the risk characteristics of the individual instruments and, increasingly, the 
country  risk.  However,  in  the  most  critical  phases  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  risks 
relating  to  some  euro  area  sovereigns  may  have  been  overestimated,  leading  to  an 
overshooting  of  the  respective  yields.  But  a  comparison  over  time  is  also  interesting: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
countries  with  increasing  bond  yields  are  facing  spreads  that  are  reminiscent  of  those 
recorded before the launch of the euro. 
The  financial  crisis  has  had  a  more  limited  impact  on  cross-border  integration  in  equity 
markets, compared with its effect on bond markets. In particular, cross-border holdings are 
not discriminating significantly according to the country of  origin. Also, national stock price 
indices seem to be reacting without any overwhelming country-specific influence. 
Finally, the indicators of the euro area banking market integration have generally signalled a 
deterioration, albeit slower than in other markets. However, in both the retail and wholesale 
euro  area  banking  markets,  there  is  evidence  of  a  slow  erosion  of  the  earlier  –  equally  
slow – progress toward financial integration. 
The  effects  of  weaker  financial  integration  and,  in  extreme  cases,  the  re-emergence  of 
separate national markets have considerably impaired the transmission of monetary policy. 
In  fact,  monetary  policy  has  ceased  to  convey  balanced  and  homogeneous  signals  to  the 
euro area economy as a whole. 
The impairment of transmission through banks is of particular concern, as they play a key 
role in financing the euro area economy. The left-hand chart on slide 10 indicates a strong 
differentiation  in  banks’  costs  of  deposit  funding  across  the  euro  area.  Banks  are  likely  to 
pass them on to their customers in the supply and price of credit. The right-hand chart shows 
the ongoing segmentation of various money market rates and the interest rates charged by 
monetary  financial  institutions  on  short-term  loans.  Consequently,  the  pass-through  of 
changes  in  key  interest  rates  to  money  market  rates,  and  along  the  money  market  yield 
curve  to  longer  maturity  rates  and  then  to  retail  interest  rates,  has  become  more 
differentiated. In addition, the market for sovereign debt, which is essential for the functioning 
of  the  interest  rate  channel,  has  become  severely  disrupted  in  a  number  of  euro  area 
countries. This implies that monetary policy impulses have been transmitted differently in the 
various euro area countries. 
Eurosystem market operations and financial integration 
The  Eurosystem  has  become  increasingly  active  in  its  market  interventions  since  the 
outbreak of the financial crisis. This is not unusual: history shows that financial crises tend to 
broaden  the  operational  boundaries  and  range  of  responsibility  of  central  banks,  as  these 
take on a larger share of financial intermediation in the economy. In doing so, central banks 
perform, in a centralised way, a function that decentralised private markets are incapable of 
or unwilling to provide, and consequently they take on greater risks in their balance sheets. 
The unconventional monetary policy measures taken by the Eurosystem were motivated by 
the  pressing  need  to  avoid  disruption  to  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  In 
response to the fragmentation of interbank markets, the ECB has adopted several measures 
to  temporarily  complement  impaired  intermediation  in  the  interbank  market  by  increasing 
intermediation via the central bank. These non-standard measures range from the fixed-rate 
full  allotment  tender  procedure  to  foreign  currency  operations  and,  more  recently,  to  a 
temporary  broadening  of  the  collateral  pool.  Most  notably,  the  ECB  introduced  12-month 
refinancing  tenders  and  subsequently  conducted  two  36-month  operations  at  a  time  when 
the sovereign debt crisis was hampering euro area banks’ access to market-based funding. 
The exceptionally long maturity of these operations provided banks with a longer horizon for 
their  liquidity  planning,  mitigating  the  funding  pressure  they  were  experiencing  around  the 
turn of the year. In addition, it gave them the necessary breathing space to deleverage in an 
orderly  manner  over  the  medium  term.  The  evidence  we  have  confirms  that  this  measure 
was critical in avoiding disorderly asset sales and a downscaling of longer-term lending. 
With  hindsight,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  has  proven  to  be  effective  and 
flexible during the crisis, adjusting well to difficult conditions. However, there is a limit to what 
market operations alone can achieve. They can neither address the underlying causes of the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
deterioration  nor  completely  offset  its  effects.  The  stability  and  functionality  of  financial 
markets,  and  notably  their  cross-border  integration,  will  depend  on  Europe’s  success  in 
giving itself a sounder, more complete and resilient economic governance framework. This 
effort is ongoing; some steps have been taken, others are under way, but more will need to 
come.  
Conclusions: restoring financial integration on a stable basis 
Let me conclude. Financial integration has made good progress in the EU, and particularly in 
the euro area, and has brought with it substantial benefits. However, recently, it has been 
severely  affected  by  the  crisis.  The  effect  is  unfortunately  proving  to  be  pervasive  and 
persistent.  The  ECB’s  measures  targeted  at  financial  markets  have  helped  to  mitigate  the 
problem, but the problem is far from solved. Hence, further action is needed. 
To  restore  and  preserve  financial  integration,  the  euro  area  financial  stability  framework 
needs an urgent overhaul. Despite important recent improvements, it is still marked by the 
cross-border openness of private financial markets and highly mobile capital flows on the one 
hand, and by the supervisory, regulatory and crisis management arrangements which, on the 
other  hand,  remain  essentially  national.  This  dichotomy  is  detrimental  in  two  ways;  it 
prevents,  in  normal  conditions,  a  reaping  of  the  full  benefits  of  the  removal  of  barriers  to 
cross-border  movements  of  capital  and  financial  services;  and  it  impedes,  in  crisis  times, 
even-handed action to maintain financial stability that is consistent across the euro area. The 
resulting  fragilities  become  more  apparent  under  stress.  It  is  now  clear  that  these 
weaknesses in the EU’s crisis management framework, exposed during the crisis, are largely 
responsible for the partial re-nationalisation of several important financial market segments.  
Significant reforms are already under way in the EU. The economic governance framework is 
being  overhauled  on  the  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  sides.  The  establishment  of  the 
European Financial Stability Facility and the European Stability Mechanism and the adoption 
of  the  “six-pack”  are  important  milestones.  Also,  financial  supervision  has  undergone 
significant,  though  still  partial,  reform:  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  were 
established,  and  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  now  adds  a  macroprudential 
perspective.  Regarding  financial  regulation,  the  current  reforms  address  the  need  for 
stronger  resilience,  better 
infrastructure,  and  greater  harmonisation  of  rules.  The 
Commission has also announced proposals in the area of crisis management and resolution. 
While these are important steps, more is needed for the euro area to break the link between 
fiscal  imbalances,  financial  fragmentation  and  financial  instability.  Europe  needs  to  move 
towards a “financial union”, with a single euro area authority responsible for the supervision 
and  resolution  of  large  and  complex  cross-border  banks.  This  authority  should  also  be 
responsible  for  a  euro  area  deposit  insurance  scheme.  With  bank  resolution  and  deposit 
insurance funded primarily by private sector contributions, taxpayers would be shielded from 
picking up the bill for future banking crises. Essentially, I envision an authority similar to the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the United States. 
Decisive  and  far-sighted  reforms  like  these,  unrealistic  until  a  short  while  ago,  are  now 
gaining support. Reacting to the pressure of events may seem unattractive, but it may also 
be  the  only  way  forward.  As  on  other  occasions  in  European  history,  this  crisis  offers  a 
chance  to  progress;  we  must  be  ready  to  act  on  it.  Let  us  not  waste  this  opportunity  to 
advance European integration. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Slide 2 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 3 
 7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Slide 4 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 5 
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Slide 6 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 7 
 11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Slide 8 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 9 
 13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Slide 10 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 11 
 15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 