Dimiter Kostov: The world of finance is becoming more IT 
Address  by  Mr  Dimiter  Kostov,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  Banking 
Department and Fiscal Services Department, before the participants in the 14th Financial IT 
Forum “The World of Finance is Becoming More IT”, Sofia, 19 April 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On  behalf  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  I  have  the  honour  to  congratulate  you  with  the 
opening of the 14th Financial IT Forum. 
This Forum has established itself as an annual opportunity to share experience and ideas, 
and  to  view  the  prospects  opened  to  the  financial  sector  by  the  information  and 
communication technologies. These results are undoubtedly owing to the organizers of the 
event, but what is of no less importance is your interest to it. 
From the point of view of the business, times are still hard for financial intermediation. In the 
conditions of volatile international financial markets and an unstable economy, the Bulgarian 
banking system is coping well with the challenges and remains stable. The levels of capital 
adequacy  and  liquidity  remain  high.  Irrespective  of  the  increased  impairment  costs  the 
banking system continues generating positive results.  
It  is  of  no  little  importance,  too,  that  in  these  conditions  the  banking  system  managed  to 
preserve  and  even  to  slightly  increase  its  loan  portfolio.  In  the  recent  three  years  the 
economic activity in the country has contracted by about 3 percent, while the loan portfolio 
not only did not contract, but grew by about 8 percent. 
The  results achieved  indicate  that in  this  difficult  macroeconomic  environment  the  banking 
system has not only preserved its reliability, but has continued to perform its economic role of 
financial intermediary.  
Another  positive  trend  is  especially  worth  noting,  prompted  by  this  Forum.  Banks  are  not 
focusing  only  on  coping  with  current  issues  and  obstacles.  Regardless  of  the  difficulties, 
banks are putting much thought and effort into developing and implementing new business 
solutions  and  products  based  on  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  information  and 
communications  technologies.  New  solutions  are  sought  not  only  in  the  area  of  good 
management of risks and business processes, but also in developing new services and sales 
channels. 
I would not allow myself to give examples from the experience of one or another bank. The 
Forum  will  provide  plenty  of  opportunities  to  find  this  out  for  yourselves.  I  will  use  as 
illustration of my words the payment infrastructure. The connectivity achieved by the operator 
of the main retail payment systems in this country in the past year, presently makes available 
to  the  Bulgarian  banks  the  so-called  SEPA  connectivity  to  several  thousand  banks  in  the 
European Union. This, on its own part, provides new opportunities for providing reliable and 
high-quality services to ultimate customers. 
As  part  of  my  congratulatory  address  on  the  occasion  of  the  opening  of  this  Forum,  I  will 
allow  myself  to  pose  a  question,  namely  the  question  of  the  connection  between  the 
information  and  communications  technologies  management  and  sales  management,  or  to 
put it more broadly – marketing. 
Neither the new technological solutions nor the financial products developed based on them 
can sell themselves. And again I would use the payments services as an illustration. In the 
recent two years our joint efforts ensured the connectivity to TARGET 2, the national system 
for  euro-denominated  payments,  and  its  interface  with  major  analogical  systems  in  the 
European Union. This provides much greater possibilities for payment intermediation at low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cost.  At  the  same  time,  these  possibilities  are  almost  in  no  way  reflected  in  the  banks’ 
marketing and product strategies. 
Other similar situations can be identified. Endeavors are made to create a new product, but 
the efforts needed for developing the necessary infrastructure for its use and marketing, in 
spite of the efforts and investments made for the latter, may turn to be much greater, as is 
the case with mobile payments. 
I made this small aside comment with the intention to be useful, and not edifying. I am very 
well  aware  that  the  participants  in  this  event  are  primarily  managers  and  experts  in  the 
information and communications technologies. At the same time, it is a well-known fact that 
maintaining and developing the technological level of financial intermediation is owing to your 
efforts, but if you are to enjoy the results, you need the efforts of all your other colleagues, to 
which you are immediately connected. 
By  way  of  conclusion  I  would  like  to  underscore  the  progress  I  see  achieved  in  the 
information  and  communications  technologies,  which  is  not  trifling.  I  also  feel  that  the 
ambitions are even greater. This is obvious even from the motto of the forum. So I wish you 
success in your work!  
Thank you for your attention!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
