Christian Noyer: It was vital to break the adverse feedback loop between 
bank and sovereign risk 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  Les  Échos,  17  September 
2012. 
 Do the ECB’s announcement to purchase sovereign debt and the German 
Constitutional Court’s approval of the European Stability Mechanism mark a turning 
point in the crisis? 
These announcements were welcomed by the markets and the outlook now appears much 
clearer. The European Stability Mechanism is a key factor for strengthening the cohesion of 
the euro area and demonstrates that the euro is here to stay and irreversible. It will help ailing 
economies  return  to  competitiveness  and  growth.  The  Governing  Council’s  decision  to 
purchase, subject to appropriate conditions, government debt is reassuring for at least three 
reasons: purchases are potentially unlimited, which should end speculation about the possible 
collapse of the euro area; the strict conditionality will  oblige countries to  pursue their fiscal 
consolidation efforts; lastly, these purchases fall squarely within the ECB’s mandate as they 
are  conducted  in  the  secondary  market  and  aim  to  ensure  the  proper  transmission of  the 
policy stance to the real economy. 
The ECB has played its role. What must governments now do? 
Euro area Member States need to restore their credibility and they are already making efforts 
to  do  so.  Some  have  had  to  implement  austerity  plans  and  others,  less  drastically,  are 
undertaking structural reforms and continuing to reduce their government deficits. This is the 
case of France. Even if these efforts appear moderate compared to those of other countries, 
they are necessary for our market credibility. 
Brussels has presented its proposals for a European bank supervisory mechanism; 
are they in line with your expectations? 
Yes, they are. The developments of the financial crisis have brought to light one of the euro 
area’s fragilities: the link between bank and sovereign risk. Following the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers, governments bailed out their banking systems and, in doing so, established a nexus 
between  sovereign  debt  and  local  banking  systems,  which  interferes  with  monetary  policy 
transmission. When the euro area sovereign debt crisis erupted, bank refinancing conditions 
became correlated with  sovereign risk,  with  the  consequences that  we  have  witnessed for 
ailing countries. The large amount of liquidity provided by the Eurosystem has reduced this 
impact,  but  funding  costs  have  remained  very  high  in  some  countries.  It  was  therefore 
essential to decouple sovereign risk from bank risk. The banking union will ensure a sounder 
monetary union.  
Germany has expressed doubts as to the proposed set-up, in particular with respect to 
the number of banks covered by the ECB. Could this prove a threat going forward? 
The proposed union implies a transfer of sovereignty from States to the ECB, which Germany 
has  always  wished  for.  As  regards  the  scope  of  supervision  by  the  ECB,  there  were  no 
doubts that all banks had to be covered. The problems often stem from small- or medium-
sized  banks,  as  we  saw  in  Ireland  and  Spain.  To  ensure  credibly  vis-à-vis  the  markets, 
across-the-board coverage is necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In practice, how will the tasks be divided between national supervisors and the ECB? 
The  legal  responsibility  for  supervision  would  be  transferred  to  the  ECB,  but  in  concrete 
terms, national supervisors would continue to supervise banks on a day-to-day basis. In fact, 
it  is  a  mechanism  similar  that  of  the  Eurosystem:  under  the  authority  of  the  Governing 
Council,  the  supervision  committee,  bringing  together  the  ECB  and  the  heads  of  national 
supervisory authorities, will coordinate supervisory actions and the allocation of tasks with the 
national supervisors. In practice, the ECB would be responsible for major decisions regarding 
prudential  supervision:  assessing  capital  adequacy  in  relation  to  risk,  compliance  with 
regulations, etc. I  would also like the  ECB to have decision-making powers in dealing with 
cases of distressed banks. 
Questions remain as to division of powers between the ECB and the European Banking 
Authority (EBA) 
The distribution of tasks seems clear to me: the EBA is the European body responsible for 
banking supervision. It sets prudential rules and standards and ensures that they are applied; 
the  ECB  will  be  the  euro  area  bank  supervisor.  The  EBA’s  governance  arrangements will 
have to be  changed slightly,  as the Commission proposes, to take account of  the banking 
union. The UK has nothing to fear from the creation of a single euro area supervisor. 
What would have changed if the European supervision system had have been in place, 
for example for the Crédit immobilier de France (CIF)? 
Technically, not a lot. Instead of the French Autorité de contrôle prudentiel, the ECB would 
have asked the CIF to increase its capital. But make no mistake, banking supervision is not a 
catch-all insurance. In the case of the CIF, we were aware of its fragility stemming from its 
increasing refinancing difficulties and we knew that there were longer-term liquidity risks. The 
CIF  is  a  textbook case  where  a  downgrade  by  ratings  agency  expedited the  disclosure of 
funding problems. 
Would you say that Moody’s was responsible for this situation? 
No, the primary responsibility lies with its management, which was unable to find a merger 
solution when it was possible and we had asked it to do so. 
Did you lack coercive power in this case? 
Yes,  definitely.  We  have  very  great  powers  when  an  institution  does  not  comply  with 
regulations, but we do not have powers that enable us to prevent a crisis. As things stand, we 
can  appoint temporary  administrators if  need be or revoke an authorisation, but we do not 
have  powers  of  resolution  allowing  us  to  impose  the  restructuring  of  a  banking  group  or 
transfers of assets. We worked on a draft regulation before the European project started to be 
discussed,  but  we  underestimated  the  length  of  time  needed  to  arrive  at  a  European 
proposal. I regret this somewhat as it would have been useful for us. 
Is the French banking system still sufficiently robust? 
In fact, French banks are increasingly robust as they are reducing their risks and increasing 
their capital.  The reduction of  risk  has  resulted from the selling-off of  business lines, often 
abroad, and a scaling-back of some market activities; the increase in their capital reflects the 
setting aside of profits that remain substantial thanks, in particular, to the resilience of retail 
banking  in  the  face  of  the  economic  slowdown.  Their  core  tier  1  capital  grew  by 
0.5 percentage point  in  the  second  quarter  and  they  have  exceeded  the  target  set  by  the 
EBA. In terms of liquidity, they have managed very well the withdrawal of US money market 
funds last year by adjusting their assets, as well as the rebalancing of their sovereign bond 
portfolios.  This  goes  to  show  that,  if  it  is  based  on  a  sound  internal  model,  the  universal 
banking model works well. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Do you remain opposed to the separation of investment and retail activities? 
I really do not understand the benefit of this principle of separating activities. The only thing I 
wish to see is the outright prohibition of speculative activities and stronger internal controls for 
the  risks  associated with  market  activities. Otherwise, banks  should  be  able  to  serve  their 
customers,  whether  they  are  private  individuals,  companies  or  institutions,  in  all  of  their 
operations – on bond markets, forex and hedging operations, and creating savings products. 
For all of these reasons, I do not fully understand the concept of separation, whereas I do 
understand that of stopping speculation. 
At the same time as bank failures are continuing, banks have obtained an easing of 
their liquidity constraints under Basel III. Isn’t this a paradox? 
That's not what it’s about. We have always believed that a liquidity ratio was necessary – and, 
incidentally,  we  have  applied  our  national  rules  for  many  years,  which  is  not  the  case 
everywhere. But the draft agreement was finalised too quickly and we had to rework it. We 
need to strike the right balance between strict regulation and supporting the financing of the 
economy. 
But will the timetable be put back? 
Yes, I am in favour of putting it back a bit, if necessary, in order to make these major trade-
offs and to give banks more time for the implementation phase so that they can adapt to the 
new standards. 
Should banks carry less sovereign debt? 
Banks should facilitate the financing of the economy; from this point of view, they should not 
hold  huge  quantities  of  sovereign  bonds,  even  if  these  constitute  liquid  assets  that  are 
precious  in  assets  and  liabilities  management.  But  the  excessive  concentration  of  liquid 
assets on sovereign debt in the calculation of the liquidity ratio can run into difficulties – either 
when  the  sovereign  has  its  rating  substantially  downgraded or,  on  the  contrary,  when  the 
country has low levels of debt, such as Australia or Switzerland. 
Will the long-term liquidity constraint, the NSFR, eventually be abandoned? 
We will work on it again as of next year. 
Should the Solvency II standards for insurers also be delayed? 
We  have  a  particular problem concerning long-term business lines  (i.e.  life  insurance, civil 
liability,  construction).  Designed  before  the  crisis,  this  system  of  standards,  which  adjusts 
portfolio assets according to their market value, is not suited to a highly volatile environment 
like  the  one  we  have  seen  for  the  past  five  years.  We  need  therefore  to  ask  again  the 
fundamental  question:  are  the  basic  assumptions  underlying  Solvency  II  correct?  And  we 
need to seek to reduce volatility by getting closer to economic reality. Here again, we should 
not  set  rules  too  quickly  the  impact  of  which  may  be  very  great  but  has  not  been  fully 
assessed in times of crisis. I think that it would be fruitful to try out several different technical 
solutions  over  a  number  of  years  before  laying  down  the  final  rules.  In  any  event,  I 
recommend  that  French  insurers  continue  with  their  preparations  in  order  to  be  ready 
technically in 2014 as if the standards were going to enter into force as scheduled. 
Is the programme of job cuts that you have just announced for the Banque de France 
sufficient when compared with staff levels at other central banks? 
I find the accusations about the supposedly excessive staff levels at the Banque de France 
exasperating.  They  are  based  on  spurious  international  comparisons  since  other  central 
banks – such as the  Bank  of  England  –  do  not  print  their  own  banknotes,  do  not  (yet) 
incorporate  the  banking supervisor and  do  not perform tasks such as  the  management of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
over  indebtedness,  which  is  entrusted  to  the  Banque  de  France  by  law.  More  than 
200,000 households  debt  applications  processed  every  year  is  no  mean  feat!  We  have 
already  made  a  great  effort  over  the  past  few  years  as  our  staff  levels have  been  cut  by 
nearly 20% in ten years. And we will continue with this effect; but it is based on a detailed 
analysis of our activities and requires substantial investment in order to increase productivity. 
Our  programme  is  ambitious  but  in  keeping  with  the  reality  of  the  tasks  we  perform  and 
respectful of our employees. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
