Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Demographic transition, impact of ICT, and 
globalization – a long view of the post-crisis world 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Central 
Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Istanbul, 27 August 2012. 
 Introduction: Turkey and Japan – friendship and cooperation on the rim of Asia 
It is my great pleasure to visit the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, and I am especially 
delighted to have the opportunity to speak before you on global economic issues that I think 
are relevant both to Turkey and Japan. 
Turkey  and  Japan  are  nations  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  rim  of  Asia,  separated  by  a 
distance of some 9,000 kilometers. However, the distance has not hindered friendship and 
cooperation between the two nations in the past and the present. We must not forget that the 
two nations faced the same challenges as they tried to modernize themselves in the second 
half of the 19th century. It was in this context that the Turkish Emperor Abdul Hamid II sent 
the frigate Ertuğrul to Japan with more than 600 men on board in 1889. The voyage, as we 
know, ended in a tragedy caused by a typhoon. Nonetheless, the rescue efforts of Japanese 
locals and the subsequent exchanges of goodwill laid the firm foundations of the friendship 
and cooperation between the two nations. 
Today,  the  world,  including  Japan  and  Turkey,  is  facing  many  challenges,  some  of  which 
were caused by the recent financial crisis. On this occasion, I would like to share with you 
some thoughts on issues that I have been thinking about for the last few years. These issues 
are  not  directly  related  to  current  macroeconomic  developments  per  se,  but  relate  to 
medium- to long-term influences on the post-crisis global economic environment. 
My presentation will consist of three parts. First, I  will examine three emerging trends that 
seem  to  define  the  post-crisis  economy.  These  three  trends  are:  mismatches  in  the  labor 
market, lower trend growth, and the end of wage disinflation. I will then turn to the possible 
root  causes  of  these  symptoms.  I  will  identify  four:  demographic  trends,  balance-sheet 
adjustment, 
technology,  and 
globalization/polarization.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  by  discussing  the  policy  implications  of 
these trends for the future. 
information  and  communication 
influence  of 
the 
1. 
Economy after the Crisis: labor market mismatch, low trend growth and 
inflation – the United States and Japan 
So, let me jump into the first part. What are the most important trends in the global economy? 
Different  people  will  surely  have  different  views,  but  I  believe  the  three  most  important 
emerging  trends  in  the  post-crisis  economy  are:  seemingly  increasing  mismatches  in  the 
labor market, persistently lower trend growth, and the stalling momentum of services wage 
disinflation. I will explain each in turn. 
Increased mismatch in the labor market 
1.1. 
An indicator of the increasing mismatch in the labor market – the first trend – is an outward 
shift  of  the  Beveridge  Curve,  which  is  a  well-known  way  to  illustrate  the  state  of the  labor 
market. The Curve represents the relationship between the unemployment rate and the job 
vacancy rate, or the ratio of the number of job vacancies to the sum of employment and job 
vacancies. In its typical format, with vacancies on the vertical (y) axis and unemployment on 
the  horizontal  (x)  axis,  the  curve  slopes  downward,  as  a  higher  rate  of  unemployment 
normally  occurs  with  a  lower  rate  of  vacancies. Data  points  are  expected  to move  up  and 
down the curve along with the business cycle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The graph of the U.S. labor market on this slide shows that data points moved down on the 
curve as the recession took hold in the early 2000s, climbed back up during the subsequent 
expansion  until  they  reached  their  high  point  in  December  2006,  then  fell  again  after  the 
Great Financial Crisis struck, all the way down to June 2009. If we extend the data to June 
2012, the data points climb back up again along with the recovery. Nevertheless, after about 
three dozen data points, it seems sufficiently clear that we are not moving back up the old 
curve, but along a new curve.  
As I have said, the outward shift in the curve, which means higher unemployment for a given 
level  of  vacancies,  is  usually  interpreted  as  an  indication  of  increasing  mismatches  in  the 
market. The implication is that, ceteris paribus, we would see a higher unemployment rate for 
a  particular  stage  in  the  business  cycle.  This  development  reminds  me  of  what  we 
experienced in Japan ten years earlier, which you can see on the next slide. Data points after 
the bursting of the bubble, shown in black, are clearly on a different curve. 
Lower trend growth 
1.2.  
As to the second trend, evidence for lower trend growth can be derived from Okun’s Law, 
which  describes  the  empirical  relationship  between  unemployment  and  the  decline  in  a 
country’s output. In the next graph, annualized quarterly changes in the unemployment rate 
and annualized quarterly changes in growth for the United States are plotted on the x and y 
axes  respectively.  If  we  draw  a  regression  line  for  the  data  points  before  Q4  2000,  the 
coefficient is -1.8573, which is broadly in line with the rule of thumb advocated by Okun: a 
1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate corresponds to a 2 percent decline in 
output.1  The  point  where  this  line  intersects  the  y  axis,  in  other  words  the  intercept  of  the 
regression line, could be regarded as an estimate of the trend growth, given that such a rate 
of growth would leave the unemployment rate unchanged.  
Looking at the data after 2001, we can see that the relationship between unemployment and 
growth has changed. The regression line is much flatter and has shifted lower after Q4 2000. 
The  change  is  more  pronounced  after  the  so-called  Paribas  shock  of  August  2007.  This 
implies  that  the  trend  growth  is  significantly  lower  than  it  used  to  be,  at  least  for  the  time 
being. 
Stalling wage disinflation 
1.3.  
Turning  to  the  third  trend,  the  next  graph  shows  the  changing  relations  between 
unemployment  and  wage  inflation  in  the  United  States.  Wage  inflation  for  a  given 
unemployment rate steadily declined in the service industries from the early 1980s into the 
mid-2000s. In other words, there was a pronounced downward drift in the short-term Phillips 
Curve. In the early 1980s, on the yellow line, wages increased by about 8 percent even when 
unemployment  stood  at  around  8  percent.  Shortly  before  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  wage 
inflation  did  not  even  reach  4  percent  as  unemployment  dipped  below  5  percent.  In  other 
words, we saw substantial wage disinflation relative to the 1980s or 1990s. 
Having  said  this,  the  downward  shift  seems  to  have  been  more  or  less  arrested  in  recent 
years. The data points since Q1 2005, around the black line, seem to be resting comfortably 
on  this  regression  line.  Statistically,  the  coefficient  of  determination  (R  squared)  is  0.89. 
Given  that  services  account  for  more  than  60  percent  of  household  consumption 
expenditure, it is not surprising to find inflation creeping up with the upturn in the business 
cycle, even if unemployment remains stubbornly high. The recent movements in the trimmed 
mean of U.S. PCE inflation on the next graph show this point. Here the trimmed mean PCE 
inflation is usually regarded as representing the steady trend component of PCE inflation. 
                                                
1   Here I refer to the “difference” version of Okun’s Law. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Turning to Japan, we can draw graphs that are quite similar to the U.S. ones that we have 
just seen. In the next slide, while Okun’s relationship is not very visible in Japan, regression 
lines  for  periods  corresponding  to the  U.S.  example  suggest that trend  growth  has  indeed 
declined  in  Japan  as  well.  The  short-term  Phillips  Curve  after  the  bursting  of  the  property 
bubble in the late 1980s is also stable, as you can see in the next slide, and, as a result, 
trend inflation as represented by year-on-year changes in the trimmed mean of CPI has been 
edging up until recently, although the level of inflation is much lower in Japan. 
Temporary or permanent? 
1.4.  
Are these trends temporary or permanent? 
Many in the United States certainly believe that they are temporary. One example is the table 
on  the  next  slide,  which  shows  a  projection  made  recently  by  the  Congressional  Budget 
Office.  Potential  GDP  growth  may  be  lower  in  the  period  2012-2013,  but  it  is  expected  to 
return to pre-crisis levels in 2014-2022. 
Such a view rests on an assessment that the three trends result not from structural changes 
but  from  the  unusually  large  shock  that  was  the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  More  specifically, 
these observers believe that the Beveridge Curve itself has not shifted: the data points are 
just  following  a  historical  counterclockwise  pattern  during  the  upward  leg  of  the  business 
cycle. They also believe that unusually large layoffs and subsequent rehiring in the face of 
the shock could explain the deviation from Okun’s rule of thumb. Accordingly, they tend to 
recommend measures to jump-start aggregate demand, which would enable the economy to 
return to its pre-Crisis trajectory in a relatively short time. 
The problem with such a view is that reality is beginning to work against it. In particular, the 
speed of the recovery has remained very slow,  and is not expected to accelerate anytime 
soon.  The  economy  is  not  rebounding  as  rapidly  as  in  previous  business  cycles.  It  is 
becoming  more  difficult  to  refute  the  parallels  with  the  Japanese  experience  since  the 
beginning of the 1990s, which I have just shown.  
There are also differences with past cycles in the pattern of recovery. For example, the auto 
sector enjoyed a relatively swift recovery, whereas the housing market shows little signs of 
life  even  at  the  current  extremely  depressed  levels.  In  addition,  some  historical  research, 
such as that presented by Reinhart and Rogoff, suggests that recovery from financial crises 
tends  to  be  slow  and  prolonged.2  The  fact  that  not  only  the  United  States  but  also  other 
advanced  economies  are  suffering  from  similar  symptoms,  and  that  emerging  economies, 
which  initially  weathered  the  storm  fairly  well  back  in  2008,  are  now  visibly  slowing  down 
makes us wonder if there are common threads that tie economies to a prolonged period of 
sluggish growth. 
I will explore these common factors in the next part of my presentation, but before moving 
on, I would like to stress that I am not a fatalist. While structural factors play an important role 
in the economy, and they may have a lasting influence, not all economic developments could 
or  should  be  attributed  to  them,  and  the  economy  can  benefit  from  sensible  aggregate 
demand policies, including monetary policy. These policies can certainly prevent excessive 
swings in aggregate demand, in both the upward and downward legs of the business cycle. 
Policies can still be effective, but they must be formulated, adopted, and implemented with 
the understanding that structural changes do occur, and when they do, this will change the 
context and effectiveness of policies. It may be unfair therefore not to mention the potentially 
profound changes related to energy costs resulting from the so-called shale gas revolution in 
the United States, to which I will try to return in the final part of my presentation. 
                                                
2   Reinhart,  C.,  and  K.  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
So, let me now move on to part two. 
2.  
What lies behind mismatch and low trend growth: ageing, balance-sheet 
adjustment and the impact of ICT on workplace, value chain, and globalization 
In this part, I will try to explore the root causes of the trends that I have just observed. As I 
laid  them  out  at  the  beginning,  these  trends  are:  demographic  trends,  balance-sheet 
adjustment,  the  influence  of  information  and  communication  technologies,  and  finally, 
globalization. 
Demographic transition and reduced mobility and flexibility 
2.1.  
The first force that I would like to identify is the effect of the transition from what we might call 
demographic bonus to demographic onus. The two graphs on the next slide demonstrate this 
for Japan and the United States. The black lines show the inverse dependency ratio. This is 
the ratio of the working-age population between 15 and 64 of age to the rest of population, 
who are dependent on the working-age population.  
The inverse dependency ratio shows how many independent working-age persons have to 
provide for one dependent person (in the form of pensions and expenditure on children). The 
two humps in the graphs reflect the post-World War II baby boom: the first hump appeared 
as the boomers reached working age, and the second as the children of boomers reached 
working  age  while  the  boomers  themselves  had  not  yet  retired.  The  pink  and  green  lines 
show  real  estate  prices  and  the  amount  of  bank  loans  outstanding  respectively,  both 
adjusted for inflation and on a scale where the peak level equals 100. The striking feature of 
these graphs is that in both Japan and the United States, the peaks in real estate prices and 
loans have more or less coincided with the peaks in the inverse dependency ratio. The actual 
peaks  are  about  15  years  apart  between  Japan  and  the  United  States,  but  the  pattern  is 
surprisingly synchronous. Similar experiences are observed in other countries as well.  
There are several empirical studies, employing multi-country panel analyses, which conclude 
that demographic changes have a significant effect on economic variables, such as property 
prices  and  long-term  interest  rates.3  This  comes  as  no  surprise  since,  in  the  population 
dividend phase, young baby boomers want to buy more land and save more real money for 
their retirement. Since the supply of land is physically limited, the real price of land will go up. 
Similarly, if nominal money supply is held constant, the “price” of real money holdings, which 
is  the  inverse  of  the  price  level,  should  also  go  up,  implying  deflation.  Being  mandated  to 
maintain  price  stability,  the  central  bank  is  then  likely  to  increase  nominal  money  to  keep 
prices stable. The result is an increase in property prices while general price levels remain 
stable.4 At the same time, I should also stress that demography alone does not explain the 
formation  and  bursting  of  asset  bubbles.  For  example,  excessive  optimism,  or  the 
“this-time-is-different” syndrome is also an important contributing factor. 
Meanwhile,  demography  makes  a  lot  of  difference  when  a  bubble  bursts.  Generally 
speaking,  the  effects  are  expected  to  be  much  more  pronounced  under  the  demographic 
onus  of  an  ageing  population  rather  than  the  demographic  bonus  of  a  young  and growing 
                                                
3   For  property  prices  see,  for  example,  Takáts,  Ellőd  (2012),  “Aging  and  house  prices”,  Journal  of  Housing 
Economics,  vol  21,  no  2,  June,  pp.131–141,  and  Nishimura,  Kiyohiko  G.  (2011),  “Population  ageing, 
macroeconomic  crisis,  and  policy  challenges”,  Panel  discussion  at  the  75th  Anniversary  Conference  of 
Keynes’  General  Theory,  University  of  Cambridge,  19–21  June  2011.  For  long-term  interest  rates  see  for 
example, Ichiue, H., and Y. Shimizu (2012), “Factors Affecting Long Term Interest Rates: A Panel Analysis of 
Major Advanced Economies”, WP 12-J-9, Bank of Japan (in Japanese). 
4   See Nishimura, K. G. and E. Takáts, “Ageing, Property Prices and Money Demand” (work in progress), which 
has both theory and empirical analysis of a panel of 22 advanced economies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
population.  Let  me  offer  two  examples:  reduced  flexibility  or  mobility  in  the  economy,  and 
more acute balance-sheet adjustments. 
Older people tend to be less mobile or flexible than younger people. This is because older 
people,  with  fewer  productive  years  ahead,  are  more  reluctant to  incur  various  adjustment 
costs, for example relocating to a different geographical area or obtaining new skill sets to 
work in a different sector of the economy. This tendency appears not only in workers but also 
in entrepreneurs. As a result, when the population ages and the proportion of older people 
increases, the mobility or flexibility of the whole economy is likely to decline.  
Reduced mobility or flexibility leads to prolonged mismatches in the economy: job seekers 
may  need  more  time  to  find  a  new  job  and  entrepreneurs  may  be  slow  in  exploiting  new 
business opportunities.5 Such a trend would depress productivity growth. I should add that 
the  effects  of  balance-sheet  adjustment,  which  are  aggravated  by  demographic  onus,  will 
also magnify the loss of mobility or flexibility. 
Such a trend was observable in Japan after its bubble burst in the 1990s. Even the United 
States, which is one of the most mobile and flexible economies, has been suffering since its 
housing  market  collapsed  in  2006.  There  is  a  wealth  of  evidence  of  reduced  mobility  or 
flexibility.  For  example,  the  slide  (on  page  20)  shows  that  the  mobility  rate  among  house 
owners  declined  substantially,  by  more  than  30  percent  on  average,  between  2005  and 
2009. The fact that the mobility rate among renters did not change suggests that the change 
was influenced by the decline in house prices during that period. The next graph shows the 
rate of births of new business establishments. It can be said that the higher this rate is, the 
more flexible the economy. Here again, there is a marked decline after 2005, which coincides 
with the peak in the inverse dependency ratio.  
Another example on the next slide shows immigration into and emigration out of the United 
States.  Immigrants  are  the  most  mobile  members  of  the  population  and  are  generally 
regarded as contributing substantially to the flexibility of the U.S. economy. The concurrent 
decline in arrivals (inflows to the U.S.) and increase in departures (outflows from the U.S.) 
once  more  suggests  less  flexibility  in  the  United  States.  To  underscore  this  relationship 
between demographics and mobility or flexibility, I would like to show you the next slide on 
Japan.  After  the  bubble  burst,  there  was  a  sharp  brake  on  the  creation  of  enterprises 
whereas destruction increased only modestly. 
Severe balance-sheet adjustment  
2.2.  
Let me now turn to the second force, the severity of balance-sheet adjustments. 
The next slide (on page 22) shows the changes in inflation-adjusted house prices. The graph 
on  the  left  compares  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States.  It  shows  monthly 
changes in real house prices relative to the peak price. The shape of the graphs is strikingly 
similar. It took more than ten years for the Japanese real house price to hit the bottom at 
almost one third of the peak price, when her population was ageing. While recent data for the 
United States is often regarded as showing signs of stabilization in the housing market, it is 
far from certain that downward trending is finally over, if one takes into account the possible 
effects of an ageing population that the Japanese experience suggests. 
Even  without  any  further  fall,  a  40  percent  decline  in  U.S.  real  house  prices  is  a  deep 
adjustment.  This  has  led  to  a  significant  divergence  among  industries  in  the  pace  of 
recovery.  Some  industries  are  recovering  much  quicker  than  others.  The  proportion  of 
households  that  have  negative  equity  has  jumped  since  2010  and  continues  to  increase, 
which leaves the U.S. housing market still in the doldrums. In contrast, the debt service ratio 
                                                
5   A sizable number of people change jobs without experiencing a spell of unemployment. Thus, in discussing 
mismatch or inefficiency in labor markets, simply focusing on the unemployed is misleading. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
is  now  markedly  lower,  reflecting  the  decline  in  interest  payments  as  central  banks  eased 
monetary policy. Consequently, U.S. auto sales have now recovered to a level closer to what 
can be considered normal. 
Another  problem  related  to  severe  balance-sheet  adjustments  is  the  breakdown  of  the 
market economy’s natural selection mechanism. The role of financial institutions to channel 
funds  to  productive  enterprises  can  be  obstructed  when  those  institutions  have  significant 
amounts of impaired assets. Suffering from severe balance-sheet problems, institutions may 
find themselves with no other choice but to keep borrowers on life support, which prevents 
them from extending new loans to more promising businesses. Such patterns were observed 
in Japan during the financial crisis of the late 1990s. The market selection mechanism broke 
down,  and  the  survival  of  the  fittest  no  longer  applied  to  the  world  of  business.  So-called 
zombie firms were supported by zombie banks. 
Strong  evidence  of  this  phenomenon  is  found  in  a  study  I  conducted  with  Nakajima  and 
Kiyota,  the  main  conclusion  of  which  I  have  included  in  the  next  slide.  By  conducting  a 
large-scale panel analysis at the firm level, this research was able to show that during the 
period  of  the  financial  crisis  of  1997,  the  total  factor  productivity  of  surviving  firms  was 
actually lower than that of exiting firms.6 
Impact of information and communication technology 
2.3.  
The  third  force  that  is  shaping  the  global  economy  is  the  impact  of  information  and 
communication technology (ICT). I argue that ICT has in fact been a polarizing force both in 
the  labor  and  product  markets.  Furthermore,  the  effects  are  not  confined  to  specific 
industries, but are more or less ubiquitous and far reaching. 
Labor markets 
The reason ICT impacts the labor market is that it can be applied to a variety of moderately 
skilled  tasks,  and  consequently  displaces  workers  from  those  tasks.  For  example,  banks 
used to be inundated with paper. Payments were made in checks, slips of paper were made 
to  record  transactions,  which  were  in  turn  tracked  on  paper  ledgers,  and  ticker  tapes 
provided up to the minute market information. Banks employed hundreds or even thousands 
of clerks to literally push the paper around their offices, just to keep track of their operations. 
Clerks were skilled in the sense that they had to know what was the important information on 
those  pieces  of  paper,  and  in  which  books  such  information  was  to  be  written  down.  ICT 
changed  all  this.  Now,  virtually  all  bank  transactions  are  processed  electronically  with 
minimal intervention from human workers. As a result, the bank clerk has become extinct, or 
at  least  an  endangered  species.  Such  changes  occurred  not  only  in  banking  but  in  all 
industries.  Any  task  that  could  be  programmed  was  moved  onto  electronic  platforms, 
displacing workers in the process. 
This  could  be  the  force  behind  the  graph  on  U.S.  employment  according  to  worker  skills, 
which  shows  the  greatest  job  losses  after  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  were  those  for 
medium-skilled workers. 
The next two slides (on pages 25 and 26) are schematic illustrations of this development. 
Let us suppose that there were three broad types of worker defined by their skill sets and a 
labor  market  for  each  type  before  the  prevalence  of  ICT.  We  could  label  them:  top 
management  or  highly-skilled  professional  workers,  middle  management  and 
moderately-skilled  workers,  and  manual  laborers  or  low-skilled  workers.  Looking  at  the 
                                                
6   Nishimura,  K.  G.,  T.  Nakajima,  K.  Kiyota  (2005),  “Does  Natural  Selection  Mechanism  Still Work  in  Severe 
Recessions?  –  Examination  of  the  Japanese  Economy  in  the  1990s –”,  Journal  of  Economic  Behavior and 
Organization, 58:1 (2005), pp.53–78. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supply curve for the three categories of workers, we would expect a steeper curve for more 
skilled  workers,  since  it  is  likely  that  there  would  be  a  smaller  number  of  these  skilled 
workers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  demand  curve  would  be  determined  by  the  marginal 
productivity  of  workers,  which  in  turn  is  equivalent  to  what  employers  are  willing  to  pay 
workers as wages. In this regard, employers should be willing to pay higher wages for more 
skilled workers, because their marginal productivity is higher. The resulting equilibria for the 
three types of workers could then be illustrated as in this slide (page 25). 
The effects of the widespread application of ICT are shown on the next slide. The resulting 
increase in productivity is reflected in the upward shift of the labor demand curve. Meanwhile, 
the  market  for  middle  management  and  moderately-skilled  workers  is  now  gone  because 
tasks  performed  by  those  employees  are  easily  replaced  by  ICT.  Since  the  displaced 
workers are not likely to have the skill sets required for the top group of workers, they will 
probably  have  to  compete  for  jobs  with  the  manual  labor  or  low-skilled  workers.  This  will 
have  the  effect  of  shifting  down  the  labor  supply  curve  for  manual  laborers  or  low-skilled 
workers.  The  resulting  equilibria  would  offer  higher  wages  for  top  management  or 
highly-skilled  professional  workers,  reflecting  the  shift  in  the  demand  curve,  and  only 
moderately higher wages for manual laborers or low-skilled workers, reflecting the shifts in 
both  the  demand and  supply  curves.  In  addition,  the  influx  of over-skilled  workers  into  the 
market for manual laborers or low-skilled workers implies increasing mismatches. 
What  would  happen  if  this  mechanism  were  not  allowed  to  play  itself  out  for  historical, 
cultural or political reasons? Employers may be compelled to (or even be willing to) preserve 
the  status  quo.  In  order  to  maintain  the  middle  market  for  labor,  employers  cannot  take 
advantage  of  ICT,  which  becomes  a  drag  on  productivity  growth.  This  may  explain  the 
slowing  of  Japanese  productivity  growth  since  the  1990s.  Historically,  up  until  the  1980s, 
Japanese firms benefited from the accumulation of firm-specific skills or knowledge in their 
workforce, particularly among middle management or medium-skilled workers. Nevertheless, 
the reluctance of firms to replace those workers with ICT since the 1990s, because of the 
high  cost  of  shedding  workers,  began  to  weigh  on  productivity.  I  have  shown  the 
consequences of this empirically in a panel study of sixteen industries from 1981 to 1998.7 
to 
Product markets 
Turning  to  the  product  market,  ICT  is  influencing  business  organization  and  business 
models. 
As mass-production developed and economies of scale advanced from the latter half of the 
19th century, the cost of getting the right inputs at the right time became more of a concern 
to  firms  than  the  cost  of  the  inputs  themselves.  Thus,  the  skills  required  to  organize  and 
optimize the production process and product development became the source of profits. An 
early  solution 
the 
“ore-to-assembly”  operation  exemplified  by  the  Ford  Motor  Company’s  sprawling  River 
Rouge complex in Detroit. A later solution in the latter half of the 20th century was Toyota’s 
Kanban  operation,  which  improved  the  interaction  between  the  car  assembly  plant  and  its 
various  suppliers.  In  both  cases,  the  knowledge  and  skills  of  coordinating  a  complex 
production  system  and  product  development  were  the  major  source  of  profits,  and  thus 
assemblers became profit centers. Though not as pronounced as in the automobile industry, 
the same was true in other areas, including consumer electronics. 
Considering that such skills boil down to communication and information processing, we can 
understand why the impact of ICT has been so enormous, especially since around the turn of 
this century. As ICT dramatically reduced the cost of interfacing between functions, it soon 
this  problem  was 
firm  based  on 
the  vertically 
integrated 
                                                
7   Minetaki,  K.,  and  K.  G.  Nishimura  (2010),  Information  Technology  Innovation  and  the  Japanese  Economy, 
Stanford University Press, 2010, Chapter 6, Section 4, pp.133–144. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
became more efficient to procure products and services from specialized outside suppliers, 
who could offer better products much cheaper by virtue of specialization and economies of 
scale.  If  everyone  is  buying  the  same  inputs  from  the  same  supplier,  and  the  cost  for 
sourcing  is  leveled  due  to  ICT,  there  will  be  less  opportunity  to  differentiate  any  finished 
product  assembled  from  those  inputs.  Consequently,  the  assembly  business  became  a 
business  of  attrition.  This  is  clearly  manifested  in  the  next  slide  (page  26).  The  operating 
profit margin is depressed in the downstream: particularly for LCD TV set makers. The same 
is true for solar cells, where assemblers (system venders) are suffering from dwindling profit 
margins. 
ICT also forced changes in business models in many sectors. For example, if you wanted to 
distribute music in the mid-20th century, you had to cut a master disk from a recording, plate 
it to make a die, stamp a piece of vinyl  with the die to make a record, put the record in a 
paper jacket and send the final package off to stores around the country. Each record sale 
had to cover the costs involved in this process. This model did not change much even after 
the  compact  disc  was  introduced  in  the  early  1980s.  Now,  however,  music  is  distributed 
digitally:  a  recording,  once  converted  to  an  appropriate  format,  can  be  copied  an  infinite 
number of times at virtually no cost. ICT is making this transition to electronic delivery more 
practical in many industries. Economics tells us the price of a product will be driven down to 
the  marginal  cost  of  production.  Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  to  see  the  price  of  electronically 
delivered products falling ever closer to zero, which is the cost of reproducing such products. 
These  changes  introduced  by  ICT  have  not  only  sealed  the  fate  of  traditional  distribution 
channels, but have also forced businesses to re-consider how they charge for their products. 
The rise of platform businesses is perhaps one answer. 
These  developments  in  the  product  market  interact  with  the  labor  market.  When  huge 
integrated  manufacturing  firms  are  replaced  by  decentralized  networks  of  smaller  firms, 
some  of  which  are  abroad,  workers  who  were  responsible  for  internal  coordination  are 
released and replaced by ICT. At the same time, these smaller firms become more efficient 
than before thanks to ICT, and tend to employ fewer workers to complete a certain task. As a 
result employment creation in manufacturing is likely to stagnate. Furthermore, jobs are also 
lost when existing distribution channels, which were a significant source of employment, are 
replaced by electronic distribution. In contrast, now-flourishing platform businesses, by virtue 
of being easily scalable, will not be hiring too many workers even if they grow rapidly in terms 
of sales. Thus, the end result is a headwind in the labor market.  
2.4.   Globalization 
ICT also influences globalization, which in turn affects developments in the labor and product 
markets. 
As is widely recognized, ICT has been one of the driving forces behind globalization. It has 
greatly  reduced  the  cost  of  communicating  and coordinating  across  borders.  Coupled  with 
the integration of former communist bloc countries into the global trading system, the horizon 
has broadened considerably for locating business operations. Not only can firms now create 
networks across borders in order to attain maximum aggregate output at minimum cost, but 
they can also change them easily as conditions change in various corners of the world. If you 
have  chance  to  look  closely  at  the  content  of  your  wardrobe,  you  will  be  surprised  by  the 
wide variety of the countries of origin, even for seemingly similar items from the same brand. 
A  fashion  brand  may  design  a  T-shirt,  but  it  contracts  out  the  production  to  specialized 
factories  around  the  world.  The  multitude  of  countries  of  origin  on  the  labels  shows  that 
brands are certainly not shy of taking advantage of an offer from a factory in Dhaka to make 
a T-shirt more cheaply than a factory in Shenzhen. 
Such  practices  put  competitive  pressure  on  wages  across  borders,  and  contribute  to  the 
polarization of wages, because the benefit of increased profitability would accrue mostly to 
top management or highly-skilled professional workers. Meanwhile, some multinational firms 
might go one step further and directly play one country’s workers against another’s. These 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
firms might threaten to leave a country and reestablish themselves in another with cheaper 
wages,  thereby  extracting  concessions  from  existing  workers.  This  would  exacerbate 
polarization by lowering the wages paid to manual labor or low-skilled workers. 
Now,  I  am  about  to  conclude  my  discussion  of  demographic  trends,  balance-sheet 
adjustment,  and  the  influence  of  information  and  communication  technology,  so  before  I 
move on to the next part, I would like to summarize where I think we are. First of all, a period 
of low trend growth is probably here to stay for some time, together with rigidities that may 
become more entrenched. It is a problematic combination of factors that could reinforce each 
other.  Secondly,  in  such  a  state,  economies  would  be  more  vulnerable  to  occasional 
downward  shocks.  That  could  exacerbate  inefficiencies.  Finally,  polarization  may  become 
more pronounced, again aggravating general efficiencies. 
This  certainly  is  a  challenging  situation,  but  there  are  opportunities  ahead  as  well.  Let  me 
explain by moving on to the final part. 
3.   What lies ahead of us? 
As I have just explained, in my view, the global economy, and the advanced economies in 
particular, is affected by four strong undercurrents: demographics, balance-sheet adjustment, 
the  impact  of  ICT,  and  globalization/polarization.  In  this  final  part,  since  balance-sheet 
adjustment 
(though  prolonged)  phenomenon  and 
globalization/polarization has been discussed extensively elsewhere, I will concentrate on the 
other two, which have been changing the global economy permanently, but the significance 
of which is grossly underestimated and largely overlooked by many observers. I would like to 
think about where demographic factors and ICT will take us in the years ahead. 
is  essentially  a 
transitional 
From demographic bonus to demographic onus 
3.1.  
Firstly,  the  global  population  is  now  in  the  midst  of  a  significant  transition.  One  by  one, 
economies  are  watching  their  demographic  bonus  give  way  to  demographic  onus.  Many 
countries in East Asia will reach the turning point in around 2015, as you can see from the 
graph on the next slide (page 27). Meanwhile, Latin American countries like Brazil and Chile 
have a little more time, but are expected to face the transition in the years between 2015 and 
2020, as you can see in the next slide (page 27). In short, many emerging economies are 
going to lose an important engine of growth in  the next decade or so. The effects are not 
going to  be  uniform,  but  those  economies  are going to face their  own  version  of  declining 
flexibility and mobility, leading to reduced growth potential.  
Having said this, I should also stress that while this demographic phenomenon is a more or 
less  inevitable  outcome  of  people’s  choices  reflecting  increasing  living  standards,  it  is  not 
synchronous across countries. Comparing Japan and Turkey in the next slide (page 28), you 
can see that the inflection points are roughly 40 years apart, or one and a half generations. If 
there  are  complementarities  between  economies  in  these  cases,  for  example  in  terms  of 
resource needs and savings and investment patterns, and if we can take advantage of them, 
the impact of demographics could be mitigated at the global level. 
Looking at the impact of aging on individual economies, firms are beginning to respond to 
this  reality.  Mass-production,  mass-marketing  and  mass-consumption  now  prevalent  in  the 
advanced economies came about as firms responded to the post-war demographic bonus. 
Firms  targeted  their  sales  efforts  at  the  large  group  of  people  entering  the  workforce  and 
becoming more affluent by the day. As a result, firms’ sales efforts tended to focus on young 
people, and the portfolio of goods and services available to consumers was tailored to satisfy 
their  preferences.  It  was  the  most  efficient  and  effective  business  strategy.  Today,  those 
consumers  are  ageing,  and  with  it  they  are  becoming  more  diverse.  For  example,  the 
majority  of  young  people  gather  together  in  schools,  whereas  older  people  are  divided  by 
their  occupation.  Young  people  are  generally  healthy,  but  older  people  are  more  diverse: 
some  remain  quite  healthy  well  into  their  80s  and  even  90s,  some  prefer  to  use  lifestyle 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
drugs  (botox,  for  example),  and  there  are  others  suffering  from  various  ailments.  The 
cumulative effect of differences in income and hence wealth could be very large. Firms are 
finally  realizing  that,  with  the  shrinking  of  the  young  population,  they  must  part  with  the 
winning strategy of yesterday that focused on youth. Instead, they should begin catering to 
older  people,  if  they  are  to  succeed  at  all.  In  Japan,  there  are  reports  of  more  and  more 
successes, especially in the retail sector, as the older generation seems willing to pay more 
for those goods and services that satisfy their needs. 
Adjusting to ubiquitous ICT 
3.2.  
Now I turn to ICT. As I have explained, ICT disrupts the status quo because it is one great 
global leveling force. Competitive advantages that existed before the advent of ICT are now 
being  eroded  away.  At  the  same  time,  since  factor  endowment  among  economies  is 
necessarily  uneven,  the  law  of  comparative  advantage  tells  us  that,  once  ICT  becomes 
ubiquitous,  a  new  pattern  of  product  flows  should  emerge  to  the  advantage  of  everyone. 
Looking at Japan and elsewhere, there are promising signs that this new world will offer rich 
opportunities for economic growth and social advances. 
For example, in manufacturing, firms are now beginning to realize that selling hardware, be 
they mobile handsets, flat panel TVs, automobiles or even airplanes, captures only one part 
of the value accruing to the users over the life of the hardware. Very often, as I have noted 
earlier, there is a relentless downward pressure on the price that manufacturers can charge 
for their product. On the other hand, users of mobile handsets for example, will pay many 
times  over  the  cost  of  the  handset  as  monthly  voice  and  data  subscription  charges.  They 
may also pay substantial sums for downloaded content such as music and video. As a result, 
many  firms  are  now  slowly  adapting  their  business  models.  One  option  is  to  become 
“platform businesses,” making their physical products platforms for various services. The aim 
is  to  capture  as  much  of  what  the  users  are  prepared  to  pay  over  the  life  of  the  product. 
Meanwhile,  another  option  is  to  become  the  provider  of  one-of-a-kind  inputs  (especially 
materials), which cannot be easily replicated by other firms. Successful firms in Japan and 
elsewhere  are  now  pursuing  these  strategies,  which  I  noted  in  a  book  published  several 
years ago.8 
One footnote here is the impact of recent breakthroughs in the energy sector regarding shale 
gas and tight oil production. While the impact is now most visible in the United States, there 
are  many  promising  geological  formations  in  the  world  where  new  exploitable  gas  and  oil 
deposits  might  be  discovered,  including  Turkey.  While  they  may  or  may  not  become 
game-changers as some commentators suggest, once discovered and developed, these new 
sources  of  energy  could  affect  the  global  economy  in  two  respects.  They  will  definitely 
change  the  energy  endowment  of  economies.  However,  more  uncertain  is  the  effect  on 
energy  prices  and  their  impact  on  the  increasing  mismatches  and  polarization  we  have 
witnessed in the past decade. 
Challenges for the aged society 
3.3.  
Finally, what will be the effect of the two forces – demographics and ICT – working together? 
I explained earlier that if the ubiquitous presence of ICT becomes the new normal, there will 
be relentless pressure on corporate profits because prices of products will tend to fall and 
even  approach  zero,  reflecting  the  very  low  marginal  cost  of  production  for  ICT-enabled 
products. At the same time, the replacement of moderately skilled workers by ICT will lead to 
a  polarization  of  the  workforce,  with  heavy  losses  of  relatively  well-paid  jobs  in  the  labor 
market. That said, the impact of ICT differs between aging societies and those with young 
and growing populations.  
                                                
8   Nishimura,  K.  G.  (2004),  The  Japanese  Economy:  Inconspicuous  Structural  Transformation,  Tokyo:  Nihon 
Keizai Shinbun, pp.24–34. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In the case of ageing societies, ICT may create some new business opportunities, because 
ICT  can  help  firms  adapt  to  the  demands  of  ageing  consumers,  who  tend  to  be  more 
heterogeneous  than  younger  consumers.  ICT  could  help  firms  to  tailor  their  products  to 
individual tastes at a lower cost and hence make them more affordable. However, there is a 
caveat here in that lower prices, which on the one hand make products more affordable, will 
on  the  other  hand  lower  the  investment  returns  for  the  providers  of  the  products,  ceteris 
paribus.  The  key  is  the  degree  of  demand  stimulation  from  the  lower  prices.  If  demand 
generation  is  not  sufficient,  it  might  be  necessary  in  such  circumstances  to  devise 
mechanisms that are not completely dependent on market forces in order to provide socially 
useful products. 
Challenges when population is young and growing 
3.4.  
Meanwhile,  in  the  case  of  economies  enjoying  a  population  bonus,  the  challenge  is  to 
provide the right sort of jobs for the large number of people entering the workforce, who are 
in many cases, well-educated and technologically adept. When the advanced economies had 
their  population  bonus,  there  were  a  large  number  of  openings  for  medium-skilled  jobs, 
where workers could expect to build a career and, with hard work and perhaps some luck, 
advance  into  highly-paid  management-level  jobs.  Now,  with  the  prevalence  of  ICT,  those 
jobs are becoming scarcer. In order not to waste talent in dead-end low-paying jobs, it has 
become  necessary  to  provide  the  right  social  and  economic  incentives  for  prospective 
employers to employ talented youth for the long term, providing them with the training and 
opportunities to advance their careers. 
It is not easy to solve the problem of providing goods and services (in the case of advanced 
economies)  and  employment  opportunities  (in  the  case  of  developing  economies)  that  the 
market  fails  to  provide  on  its  own.  Some  time  ago,  before  joining  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I 
advocated  the  creation  of  socially-oriented  investments  trusts,  where  the  public  sector 
provides seed capital to socially desirable projects that would not offer adequate returns on 
capital  but  could  still  be  run  as  market-disciplined  entities.  The  idea  is  yet  to  be  widely 
accepted, but more and more people seem to be realizing that such a structure might provide 
a workable solution.9 
Challenges facing central banks 
3.5.  
Central  banks  are  facing  enormous  challenges,  particularly  those  of  the  advanced 
economies.  After  stepping  in  decisively  to  halt  the  contagious  disruption  in  the  global 
financial  markets  and  economy  following  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  central  banks  of  the 
advanced  economies  have  now  exhausted  the  available  options  for  traditional  monetary 
policy.  Consequently,  these  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  are  pursuing  the 
most  unconventional  policies  ever  imagined.  There  is  still  room  in  this  direction  for  further 
easing of monetary conditions to support the economy. There are also still means to assist 
economic agents in making structural adjustments. 
One such policy is the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundation 
for Economic Growth (Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility [GFSF] for short) adopted 
by  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  June  2010.  This  measure,  while  not  providing  funds  directly  to 
non-financial borrowers, is intended to be a catalyst for financial institutions willing to lend to 
various  private-sector  initiatives  that  attempt  to  overcome  structural  headwinds  and  will 
enhance  potential  growth  in  the  medium  to  long  run.  I  believe  the  “Funding  for  Lending” 
scheme, which was recently announced by the Bank of England and the U.K. Treasury, has 
a  similar  purpose,  and  I  am  carefully  following  its  outcome,  although  this  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s scheme will need a long time before they can show any concrete benefits. 
                                                
9   Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  M.  Saito  (2003),  “On  Alternatives  to  Aggregate  Demand  Policy  to  Revitalize  the 
Japanese Economy”, Asian Economic Papers 2:3 (2004), pp.87–126, especially pp.118–123. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
So far, I have explained the formidable challenges now facing central banks. While monetary 
policy is not a panacea, as often stressed by Governor Shirakawa of the Bank of Japan and 
other prominent central bankers, it can usefully  support efforts by economic agents. There 
are  risks  such  as  economic  polarization  leading  to  political  polarization,  as  I  mentioned 
before, which could prevent governments from implementing the necessary policies. That tail 
risk is significant. Nevertheless, I am cautiously optimistic that what we  are doing now will 
eventually lead to a better future, although there are going to be ups and downs along the 
way.  In  any  case,  enhanced  cooperation  between  countries  and  regions  is  essential  in 
achieving this goal, and I hope my presentation today had been one small step in this regard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
 20 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
   26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   27 
  28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 29 
