Charles I Plosser: Economic outlook and communicating monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast and Annual Meeting 
of the Main Line Chamber of Commerce and the Main Line Chamber Foundation, Gladwyne, 
Pennsylvania, 1 February 2012. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and thank you for inviting me to participate in the 2012 Economic Forecast 
Breakfast. We are in that season when traditionally we reflect upon the past year and look 
ahead. So in the spirit of the season, I will give you my take on the economic outlook. Then I 
want  to  spend  the  remainder  of  my  time  discussing  recent  steps  taken  by  the  FOMC  to 
enhance the way we communicate about monetary policy. 
Before  I  begin,  though,  I  should  note  that  one  of  the  strengths  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System  and  its  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  is  that  it brings  together  a  wide  range  of 
independent  assessments  of  economic  conditions  and  perspectives  on  policy.  As  that 
famous American journalist Walter Lippmann once said: “Where all men think alike, no one 
thinks  very  much.”  So  let  me  assure  you  that  there  is  a  lot  of  thinking  going  on  among 
policymakers at the Fed, but my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Economic outlook 
Let me start with some general comments on the state of the economy as we enter 2012. A 
year ago, most economists were forecasting that economic growth would be 3 percent or a 
bit more in 2011. Instead, the latest numbers released last Friday showed that real GDP in 
2011 was 1.6 percent, compared to 3.1 percent in the prior year. 
Some  of  this  weakness  is  perfectly  understandable,  given  the  shocks  we  experienced 
throughout most of the year. Last year began with severe snowstorms in the East. As 2011 
progressed,  there  were  the  earthquake  and  ensuing  disasters  in  Japan,  followed  by  the 
unrest in the Middle East and North Africa, which led to a run-up in oil prices. In addition, 
there were renewed concerns about European sovereign debt and the midsummer uproar in 
Washington  over  fiscal policy  and  the  debt ceiling.  All  of  these  events  weighed  heavily  on 
growth, as well as on business and consumer confidence. 
Yet, the economy persevered. Indeed, growth accelerated across each of the four quarters, 
from less than 0.5 percent in the first quarter to around 2–3/4 percent in the fourth quarter. I 
anticipate  that  we  will  continue  to  see  moderate  growth  of  around  3  percent  for  2012  and 
2013, which is slightly above trend. 
Business spending, especially investments in equipment and software, was relatively healthy 
last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. In January, the Philadelphia Fed’s 
Business Outlook Survey showed that regional manufacturing activity continued to expand at 
a  moderate  pace,  the  fourth  consecutive  monthly  increase  since  a  late  summer  lull.  The 
survey’s  measures  of  future  activity  also  indicated  that  our  respondents  expect  activity  to 
continue to pick up over the next six months. I take this as a sign that business sentiment is 
also improving. 
On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization but not much improvement in 2012. We 
entered the Great Recession over-invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to 
see  a  housing  recovery  until  the  surplus  inventory  of  foreclosed  and  distressed  properties 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
declines.  Even  as  the  economy  rebalances,  we  should  not  seek  nor  should  we  expect 
housing  and  related  sectors  to  return  to  those  pre-recession  highs.  Those  exuberant  days 
were  simply  not  sustainable,  and  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  retain  that  standard  as  our 
benchmark for recovery. 
The  housing  crash  destroyed  a  great  deal  of  wealth  for  the  average  consumer  and  the 
economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals 
and many businesses. Moreover, the losses cannot be papered over with monetary policy 
nor should it try to do so. Households and businesses, however, continue to make progress 
on restoring the health of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. 
Most economists, including myself, believe that this process will continue into 2012. But the 
drag on growth from this rebalancing will gradually lessen over time. 
While there is a long way to go in restoring a vibrant labor market, I am encouraged by the 
employment  reports  released  over  the  past  several  months.  The  December  employment 
report  showed  a  net  gain  of  200,000  jobs  and  a  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  to 
8.5 percent. The economy added over 1.6 million jobs during 2011, and the unemployment 
rate fell nearly a full percentage point. Interestingly, the last time the unemployment rate fell 
by this much in one year was in 1995. As growth continues and strengthens, I expect further 
gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling to around 8 percent or a little 
less, by the end of 2012. 
Of course, forecasting is a hazardous business, even in the best of times, and we should all 
take any economic forecast with at least a grain or two of salt – if not more. So it is important 
to recognize that there are some obvious risks to the growth forecast. The largest of these 
are the ramifications for the U.S. economy of the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. 
An economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely restrain U.S. exports. And while strains in 
financial  markets  have  been  limited  to  European  institutions  so  far,  the  situation  bears 
watching  to  ensure  that  there  are  no  adverse  spillovers  to  U.S.  financial  institutions.  Of 
course,  regardless  of  how  the  European  situation  plays  out,  it  has  already  imposed 
considerable uncertainty on growth prospects for the global economy. 
That uncertainty has been compounded by our own nation’s inability to establish a clear plan 
to  put  our  fiscal  policy  on  a  sustainable  path.  Until  the  economic  environment  becomes 
clearer, firms and consumers are likely to postpone significant spending and hiring decisions 
– posing a drag on the recovery, even as economic developments in the U.S. continue to 
improve. 
Just  as  growth  was  weaker  in  2011  than  many  forecasters  had  anticipated,  inflation  was 
higher. A year ago, many were concerned about the risks of a sustained deflation. I was not 
among them. Instead, I thought we would see inflation at about 2 percent for the year. 
It turns out we were all wrong. Total inflation in 2011, as measured by the CPI on a year-
over-year  basis,  was  3  percent,  reflecting  strong  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices, 
particularly  in  the  early  part  of  the  year.  Core  inflation,  which  excludes  food  and  energy 
prices,  rose  to  about  2.2  percent.  I  anticipate,  however,  that  with  many  commodity  prices 
now leveling off or falling, and inflation expectations relatively stable, inflation will moderate in 
the near term. Indeed, total inflation has been more subdued over the past several months. 
As  a  policymaker,  though,  I  focus  less  on  the  near  term  and  more  on  the  medium  term. 
Given the very accommodative monetary policy that has been in place for more than three 
years, I believe we must continue to monitor inflation measures very carefully. 
Inflation most often develops gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it 
can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often 
thought to prevent inflation from rising. But that did not turn out to be true in the 1970s. Thus, 
we need to proceed with caution as to the degree of monetary accommodation we supply to 
the economy. So let me review some of the policy actions the Fed has taken. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy 
As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to 
support  the  recovery.  We  have  also  conducted  two  rounds  of  asset  purchases  that  have 
more than tripled the size of the balance sheet and changed its composition from short-term 
Treasuries  to  longer-term  Treasuries  and  housing-related  securities,  mostly  mortgage-
backed securities. 
In the most recent meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee announced that economic 
conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least 
through late 2014” – that’s almost three years from now. Last August when the FOMC first 
signaled a time frame for continued low rates, it was until mid-2013. So our announcement 
last week lengthened the period of anticipated very low rates by 18 months. In addition, the 
Committee announced that the Fed intends to continue the maturity extension program, or 
“operation twist,” first launched last September. In this program, to be completed by the end 
of June, the Fed is buying $400 billion of longer-term Treasuries and selling an equal amount 
of shorter-term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce yields from already historically low levels. 
The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt 
and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. 
You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September because 
it was not clear to me that further monetary policy accommodation was appropriate. After all, 
inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year. Moreover, 
policy  actions  are  never  free;  they  need  to  be  evaluated  based  on  a  thorough  analysis  of 
costs and benefits. I believed that the benefits of further monetary policy easing were small 
at best, since, in my view, they would do little to help resolve the challenges we face on the 
employment front. But the potential costs of this further accommodation could translate into a 
steady  rise  in  inflation  over  the  medium  term,  even  without  much  of  a  drop  in  the 
unemployment  rate.  In  my  assessment,  the  potential  costs  of  further  accommodation 
outweighed the potential benefits. 
For  similar  reasons,  I  was  not  supportive  of  the  most  recent  decision  to  extend  the  time 
frame  for  exceptionally  low  rates  through  2014.  In  my  view,  economic  conditions  have 
modestly  improved  since  our  December  meeting,  especially  on  the  employment  front,  and 
the  downside  risk  of  a  double-dip  recession  that  many  feared  in  September  when  the 
Committee  instituted  “operation  twist”  has  substantially  abated.  Thus,  with  the  economy 
gradually improving, I saw little justification to further ease monetary policy and felt it risked 
undermining confidence in the process. 
In  addition,  I  don’t  support  the  practice  of  offering  forward  policy  guidance  by  saying 
economic  conditions  are  likely  to  lead  to  low  rates  through  some  calendar  date.  Such 
statements  are,  in  my  mind,  particularly  problematic  from  a  communications  perspective. 
Monetary policy should be contingent on the economic environment and not on the calendar. 
For example, I often read comments in the media that the FOMC has “pledged” or “vowed” to 
keep rates at zero at least until late 2014. But this is clearly incorrect. The FOMC has made 
no such commitment and the statement indicates as much – if economic conditions change, 
then  so  will  policy.  Yet  there  continues  to  be  confusion  and  the  confusion  stems  from  our 
statement.  In  my  view,  there  are  much  better  ways  to  communicate  information  about  the 
future path of policy than the use of calendar dates. Indeed, one of these ways was provided 
in  January  when  we  began  providing  information  on  the  policy  paths  that  underlie  FOMC 
participants’ forecasts. 
Improving communications  
So  let  me  turn  to  our  communication  initiatives,  which  have  received  a  fair  amount  of 
attention  in  the  financial  press.  Improving  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy  has  always 
been high on my list of things to do since joining the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
2006. The Federal Reserve is accountable to the public, so it needs to clearly communicate 
its goals and its approach to making policy decisions. 
To its credit, the Federal Reserve has strived to increase transparency about its actions and 
its  policies,  particularly  during  the  tenure  of  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke.  For  instance,  in  an 
effort to improve its communications to the public, the FOMC decided in 2007 to release its 
Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, four times a year. 
In 2011, Chairman Bernanke introduced press briefings to provide additional context for the 
FOMC’s  policy  decisions  following  the  release  of  the  SEP.  However,  until  now,  these 
releases  did  not  include  any  information  about  the  assumptions  policymakers  made  about 
the  path  of  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  it  was  difficult  for  the  public  to  interpret  the 
projections for growth, employment, and inflation. 
Early last summer, Chairman Bernanke asked Governor Yellen, Governor Raskin, President 
Evans, and me to serve on a communications subcommittee. In January, the FOMC adopted 
two  initiatives  brought  forward  by  the  subcommittee.  Both  initiatives  are  important  steps 
forward  for  the  FOMC  and  are  intended  to  serve  the  Committee  and  the  public  over  the 
longer term. 
The  first  concerned  improving  our  communications  about  FOMC  participants’  economic 
projections in the SEP. So starting with our last meeting, the expanded SEP now contains 
information about policymakers’ assumed path for monetary policy, along with the projections 
for growth, unemployment, and inflation. It is important to keep in mind that the Fed’s SEP 
projections differ from those of private-sector forecasters. Private-sector forecasters explicitly 
or implicitly try to predict what the Fed’s next move  will be. In the SEP, each policymaker 
assumes a path for monetary policy that – based on current economic conditions – he or she 
believes will deliver the best outcomes for the economy. 
Providing policy projections in the SEP helps the public to interpret the economic forecasts 
included  in  the  SEP.  For  example,  FOMC  participants  might  have  considerably  different 
growth forecasts. Is it because they have different views about the underlying dynamics of 
the economy? Or is it because they are assuming different policy paths? Alternatively, two 
participants  may  have  similar  forecasts  –  say,  the  same  inflation  forecast  –  but  they  may 
believe  that  these  forecasts  will  be achieved  through  different  policy  paths.  The  expanded 
SEP will now show the range of views about the assumed policy paths that give rise to the 
projections. 
Of  course,  over  time,  policymakers’  views  will  evolve  as  the  economy  evolves.  So,  the 
expanded SEP will add an important perspective not just of prospective policy at a point in 
time, but of how the policy projections are influenced as economic conditions change. 
I  would  argue  that  adding  policymakers’  assumptions  to  the  SEP  conveys  more  useful 
information about the likely future path of monetary policy than using a calendar date as we 
have been doing. It has two main advantages in my view. First, it illustrates the full range of 
views  and,  in  doing  so,  underlines  the  uncertainty  that  truly  exists  about  future  policy. 
Second, over time it will reveal more information about the reaction function of policymakers’ 
views  of  policy  to  the  evolution  of  economic  conditions,  which  are,  after  all,  the  ultimate 
drivers of policy decisions. Such communication will prove useful not only in periods such as 
the current unusual circumstances but in more normal times as well. 
The  second  important  communications  initiative  adopted  by  the  FOMC  in  January  was  to 
issue a consensus statement of the longer-run goals and policy strategy. 
When households, firms, and markets have a better understanding of what to expect from 
monetary policy, they can make better financial plans and spending decisions. Thus, greater 
clarity  helps  monetary  policy  become  more  effective  at  promoting  its  congressionally 
mandated  goals  of  price  stability,  maximum  employment,  and  moderate  long-term  interest 
rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The consensus statement does three very important things never before undertaken by the 
Federal  Reserve.  First,  the  FOMC  explicitly  states  its  goal  for  inflation  as  2  percent,  as 
measured  by  the  year-over-year  change  in  the  overall  personal  consumption  expenditures 
(PCE) chain-weighted price index. Being explicit about our inflation objective will enhance the 
credibility of our commitment to price stability, which will help anchor inflation expectations 
and  foster  price  stability  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  Moreover,  a  credible 
commitment to price stability affords the Fed more flexibility in the short run as it attempts to 
mitigate  the  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment  in  the  face  of  significant  economic 
disturbances. 
Second,  the  statement  explains  why  the  FOMC  cannot  set  a  fixed  long-run  numerical 
objective  for  the  employment  part  of  our  mandate.  This  is  not  because  we  do  not  seek 
maximum employment or because we want to disregard or downplay its importance. Rather, 
it  reflects  the  differences  between  the  economic  determinants  of  the  inflation  and 
employment  parts  of  our  mandate.  Over  the  longer  run,  the  economy’s  inflation  rate  is 
primarily determined by monetary policy. So, the FOMC is able to set a longer-run numerical 
goal for inflation and should be held accountable for achieving that goal. 
On the other hand, maximum employment is largely determined by factors that are beyond 
the  direct  control  of  monetary  policy.  These  factors  include  such  things  as  demographics, 
technological innovation, the structure of the labor market, and various governmental policies 
–  all  of  which  will  vary  over  time.  Policymakers  consider  a  wide  range  of  indicators  in 
assessing  employment,  but  estimates  of  maximum  employment  at  any  point  in  time  are 
subject  to  substantial  uncertainty.  The  FOMC  cannot  set  a  fixed  numerical  objective  for 
something that it does not directly control and cannot accurately measure. 
A  third  element  of  the  consensus  statement  is  that  it  makes  clear  that  the  FOMC  takes  a 
balanced approach to setting policy. By balanced approach I mean one that promotes all of 
our  congressionally  mandated  objectives  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and 
moderate long-term interest rates and does not favor one over the other. 
The consensus statement does not provide answers for all the hard policy choices. How best 
to  implement  this  balanced  approach  takes  a  lot  of  judgment  and  may  well  differ  across 
policymakers who may have different models of the economy even as they work to promote 
the same long-term goals for monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual 
growth to gradually accelerate to around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. 
Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the 
unemployment  rate  falling  gradually  over  time.  I  believe  inflation  expectations  will  be 
relatively  stable  and  inflation  will  moderate  in  the  near  term.  However,  with  the  very 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy,  the  inflation  situation  is  one  that  bears  careful 
watching in order to ensure that inflation pressures remain contained over the medium run. 
On monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has taken bold and significant steps to improve the 
transparency of its policy actions and to create better public understanding of the rationale 
behind the FOMC’s decisions. Specifically, the FOMC now includes information about each 
participant’s assessments for the target federal funds rate path in its Summary of Economic 
Projections. The FOMC has also clarified its longer-run goals and monetary policy decision-
making process and clearly articulated its inflation objective. 
Economic  research  over  the  past  30  years  has  shown  that  setting  monetary  policy  in  a 
systematic manner leads to better economic outcomes – lower and less volatile inflation and 
greater economic stability in general. But the benefit depends on the public’s understanding 
of the policymaking framework. Transparency not only furthers the effectiveness of monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
policy by enhancing the credibility of the central bank but also raises the Fed’s accountability 
to the public. Thus, I remain committed to working to increase the clarity of the Fed’s public 
communications  about  current  economic  conditions,  the  economic  outlook,  and  our 
policymaking framework. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
