Andreas Dombret: Towards a more sustainable Europe 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Euromoney Germany Conference, Berlin, 25 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  at  the  Euromoney  Germany 
conference.  Now  in  its  8th  year,  the  conference  has  established  itself  as  a  first-class 
opportunity  for  policymakers  and  financial  practitioners  to  exchange  views.  I  firmly  believe 
that this free flow of ideas is of benefit to us all, and I am looking forward to sharing my views 
with you in the next 20 minutes. 
We  are  facing  a  crisis  that  is  no  longer  confined  to  individual  countries.  Throughout  and 
beyond Europe, it weighs heavily on people’s minds. Some believe, it even challenges the 
viability of monetary union in its current form. Given the exceptional scale and scope of the 
crisis, it is hardly surprising that views diverge on how to overcome it. But it is worth recalling 
that  despite  intense  debates  on  the  best  way  forward,  we  share  a  common  vision  for  the 
future  of  our  monetary  union:  a  sound  currency,  sound  public  finances,  competitive 
economies, and a stable financial system. 
These are the principles enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty. With the adoption of the treaty, 
all euro-area member states committed to a European stability culture. Among those most 
eager  to  join  were  the  countries  with  first-hand  experience  of  the  painful  consequences  of 
deficits  spiralling  out  of  control  and  of  a  monetary  policy  not  always  fully  committed  to 
maintaining price stability. 
The  unholy “marriage”  between  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  Italian  treasury  in  1975  is  a  perfect 
example. Banca d’Italia vowed to act as buyer of last resort for government bonds. Up to the 
“divorce” in 1981, Italian government debt more than tripled while average inflation stood at 
17%.  After  Banca  d’Italia  was  granted  greater  independence,  inflation  rates  began  to  fall 
significantly. 
The principles of a sound currency, sound public finances and a competitive economy thus 
remain  the  cornerstones  of  a  strong  and  sustainable  monetary  union.  Far  from  being  a 
specifically  German  conviction,  they  serve  the  well-being  of  citizens  throughout  the  euro 
area. And the ongoing validity of these principles is a prerequisite for the public acceptance 
of  monetary  union.  Thus,  any  approach  that  does  not  respect  and  comply  with  these 
principles will not bring about a lasting solution to the crisis. 
The current crisis is not a crisis of the euro as our common currency. Since the start of the 
euro, inflation has been in line with the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability, and the euro 
continues to be a strong currency – to some, it actually appears to be too strong. But it is 
generally  accepted  that  the  two  central  elements  of  the  crisis  are  large  macroeconomic 
imbalances  stemming  from  diverging  competitiveness  levels,  and  unsustainable  levels  of 
public debt. 
2 
The root causes of the crisis: macroeconomic imbalances and 
over-indebtedness 
No  lasting  solution  to  the  crisis  will  be  achieved  unless  these  root  causes  are  tackled. 
Firewalls can help some countries to cope better with the effects of sudden shifts in investor 
sentiment, but, ultimately, all it can do is buy time. As the IMF points out in its recent World 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Economic Outlook , firewalls by themselves cannot solve the difficult fiscal, competitiveness 
and growth issues that some countries are now facing. 
2.1 
Macroeconomic imbalances 
There  is  broad  consensus  that  macroeconomic  imbalances,  which  have  built  up  in  recent 
years, lie at the heart of the crisis. But the best way to correct these imbalances has been the 
subject of intense debate. 
Exchange  rate  movements  are  usually  an  important  channel  through  which  unsustainable 
current account positions are corrected – deficit countries eventually see a devaluation, while 
surplus tend to revalue their currencies. The reactions that this triggers in imports, exports 
and  corresponding  capital  flows  then  help  to  bring  the  current  account  back  closer  to 
balance. 
In a monetary union, however, this is obviously no longer an option. Spain no longer has a 
peseta to devalue; Germany no longer has a deutsche mark to revalue. Other things must 
therefore give instead: prices, wages, employment and output. 
The question now is which countries have to shoulder the adjustment burden. Naturally, this 
is where opinions start to differ. 
The German position could be described as follows: the deficit countries must adjust. They 
must address their structural problems, reduce domestic demand, become more competitive 
and increase their exports. 
But this position has not gone uncontested. Indeed, well-known commentators suggest that 
surplus  countries  should  bear  part  of  the  adjustment  burden  in  order  to  avoid  deflation  in 
deficit  countries.  They  also  point  out  that  not  all  countries  can  act  like  Germany,  in  other 
words, not all countries can run a current account surplus. Hence, they suggest that surplus 
countries should shoulder at least part of the burden. 
But  this  criticism  misses  the  point  of  what  the  correction  of  domestic  imbalances  actually 
means: 
As  regards  the  lingering  threat  of  a  protracted  deflation,  it  is  rather  a  one-off  reduction  of 
prices  and  wages  that  is  required,  not  a  lasting  deflationary  process.  In  fact,  frontloading 
reforms  and  necessary  adjustment  has  proven  to  be  more  successful  than  protracted 
adjustment, as experience in the Baltic states and Ireland shows. 
And  while  not  all  countries  can  run  a  current  account  surplus,  all  can  become  more 
competitive – higher competitiveness due to productivity increases or lower monopoly rents 
in, up to now, overregulated sectors is not a zero sum game. Structural reforms can unlock 
the  potential  to  increase  productivity  and  thus  improve  competitiveness  without  inducing 
deflation. 
There is no way around the fact that Europe is part of a globalised world. And, at the global 
level, we are competing with economies such as the United States or China. To succeed, 
Europe as a whole has to become more dynamic, more inventive and more productive. 
Once  the  deficit  countries  start  to  become  more  competitive,  surplus  countries  will  adjust 
automatically.  They  will  become  less  competitive  in  relative  terms,  exporting  less  and 
importing  more.  And  we  should  acknowledge  that  this  process  has  already  been  set  in 
motion.  Exports  of  a  number  of  peripheral  countries  have  started  to  grow,  bringing  down 
current account deficits in the process. Correspondingly, German imports from the euro area 
have  grown  strongly  over  the  last  two  years,  almost  halving  the  current  account  surplus 
between 2007 and 2011. 
To facilitate the adjustment process, euro area members  have committed significant funds 
within the framework of the EFSF and the ESM. Germany is contributing the biggest share. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This support is based on the high reputation Germany enjoys among investors. We would 
put this trust in jeopardy if we were to give in to calls for fiscal stimulus in Germany in order 
to raise demand for imports from the peripheral euro area. But weakening Germany’s fiscal 
position would lead to higher refinancing costs and, therefore, either reduce the capacity of 
the firewalls or raise the borrowing costs for programme countries. 
Moreover,  studies  by  the  IMF  suggest  that  positive  spill-over  effects  from  an  increase  in 
German  demand  to  partner  countries  in  the  euro  area  would  be  minimal.  So,  instead  of 
stimulating exports in peripheral euro-area countries, additional fiscal stimulus at a time when 
Germany’s  economy  is  already  running  at  normal  capacity  would  be  of  detriment  to  all 
parties. 
Fiscal consolidation 
2.2 
Turning  to  fiscal  consolidation,  it  is  often  stressed  that  such  measures,  together  with 
structural  reforms,  would  be  too  much  of  a  burden.  They  would  create  a  vicious  circle  of 
decreasing  demand  and  further  budget  pressure  that  would  eventually  bring  the  economy 
down.  But  to  the  extent  that  the  current  output  level  was  fuelled  by  an  unsustainable 
ballooning  of  private  and  public  debt,  correction  as  such  is  unavoidable,  and  the  only 
question that remains is that of the best timing. 
However,  this  crisis  is  a  crisis  of  confidence.  While,  under  normal  circumstances, 
consolidation  might  dampen  the  economy,  the  lack  of  trust  in  public  finances  and  in 
policymakers”  willingness  to  act  is  a  huge  burden  for  growth.  Thus,  frontloaded,  and 
therefore  credible,  consolidation  would  instead  strengthen  confidence,  actually  help  the 
economy to grow and reduce the danger of the crisis spreading to the financial system. 
In  addition,  urgently  needed  structural  reforms  and  consolidation  are  often  hard  to 
disentangle. For example, a bloated public sector or very generous pension system are both 
a drag on growth and a burden on the budget. The same applies to inefficient companies that 
are state-owned or operate in highly regulated sectors. 
The risks to growth emanating from immediate fiscal consolidation therefore have to be put 
into  perspective.  Negative  short-term  effects  cannot  be  ruled  out.  But  to  the  extent  that 
consolidation constitutes necessary corrections of an unsustainable development and brings 
about greater efficiency, the long-term gains do not only vastly exceed potential short-term 
pain, they also help to alleviate it now by restoring the lost credibility in the ability to tackle 
the root causes of the crisis.  
The role of monetary policy 
3 
Up to now, the picture has been mixed in this regard. We have seen substantial progress, 
often initiated by new, more reform-minded governments, but also some setbacks. A much 
clearer  pattern  has  emerged  with  respect  to  the  expectations  placed  on  monetary  policy. 
Whenever a new intensification of the crisis looms, the first question seems to be “What can 
the central banks do about this?” To me, this is a worrisome development. 
Monetary policy has already gone a very long way towards containing the crisis. But we have 
to be aware that the medicine of a very low interest rate policy, ample provision of liquidity at 
very  favourable  conditions  and  large-scale  financial  market  intervention  does  not  come 
without side effects – which are all the more severe, the longer the drug is administered. 
In the course of this crisis, the role of central banks has changed fundamentally. Before the 
crisis,  they  provided  scarce  liquidity;  now  they  increasing  serve  as  a  regular  source  of 
funding for banks, and this threatens to replace or displace private investors. This may give 
rise to new financial instability if, as a result of the measures, banks and investors behave 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
carelessly  or  embark  on  unsustainable  business  models,  for  instance,  due  to  substantial 
carry trades. 
But  emergency  measures  will  not  become  the  “new  normal”.  Banks,  investors  and 
governments  have  to  be  fully  aware  of  this,  and  central  banks  cannot  tolerate  that  their 
well-intentioned  emergency  measures  result  in  a  delay  in  necessary  adjustments  in  the 
financial sector or protracted consolidation and reform efforts among governments. 
Conclusion 
4 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
In my remarks, I have focused on necessary reforms in the euro area member states. This is 
not  to  say  that  changes  to  the  institutional  set-up  of  monetary  union  are  not  important.  If 
member states want to retain autonomy with regard to fiscal policy, we need stricter rules to 
account  for  the  incentives  to  accumulate  debt  that  exist  in  a  monetary  union.  The  fiscal 
compact is a promising step forward. Now, it is essential that the rules are applied rigorously. 
Referring to the motto of this conference “A German Europe or a European Germany”, how 
should one label the recipe to overcome the crisis that I have just presented? Well, it is, quite 
obviously, a European solution. And that is because it fully reflects and respects the letter as 
well as the spirit of the European Treaty and therefore of the principles that I stressed at the 
beginning. The current crisis is most certainly a defining moment for monetary union. But the 
crisis  and  the  measures  taken  to  overcome  it  should  not  be  allowed  to  redefine  implicitly 
what monetary union actually is. 
This time we really cannot “let this crisis go to waste”, as the former White House chief of 
staff, Rahm Emanuel, put it. The crisis has laid bare structural flaws at many levels. It has 
questioned the way we adhered to the principles of EMU, but did not invalidate the principles 
themselves, quite the contrary. I am confident that having stared into the abyss, Europe will 
make the right choices and pave the way for a more prosperous and sustainable future – to 
the benefit of Germany as well as of the euro area as a whole. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
