Koji Ishida: Recent economic and financial developments in Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at 
a meeting with business leaders, Kagoshima, 21 June 2012. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
 Recent developments 
Japan’s economy  
I.  
A. 
1.  
First, I will talk about recent developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
Economic conditions in Japan worsened sharply in the wake of the severe global contraction 
that followed the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008.  Thereafter, the economy showed signs 
of recovery as a result of various policy measures taken as well as efforts made nationwide, 
but it plunged again due to the Great East Japan Earthquake, which occurred on March 11, 
2011.  This  was  followed  by  additional  shocks  such  as  the  European  debt  problem  and  the 
flooding in Thailand, making the year 2011 an extremely severe one for Japan’s economy. 
Since the beginning of 2012, Japan’s economic activity has started picking up moderately as 
domestic demand remains firm, supported mainly by reconstruction-related demand after the 
earthquake. Public investment has been increasing with the progress in the implementation 
of government budgets earmarked for reconstruction related to the disaster.  Business fixed 
investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend  with  corporate  profits  improving. 
Against  the  background  of  improvement  in  consumer  sentiment,  private  consumption  has 
continued  to  increase  moderately  due  to  the  effects  of  measures  to  stimulate  demand  for 
automobiles. A high degree of uncertainty remains regarding exports, but they have shown 
signs of a pick-up. Reflecting these developments in demand, production has started picking 
up moderately.  
Price  developments  in  terms  of  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI;  all  items  less  fresh  food) 
indicate that, after reaching a historical trough of minus 2.4 percent in the middle of 2009, the 
year-on-year rate of decline has continued to slow. In recent months, the rate of change has 
been at around 0 percent. 
2.  
Overseas economies 
Next, I will talk about recent developments in overseas economies.  
With  regard  to  the  U.S.  economy,  business  fixed  investment  is  maintaining  its  uptrend, 
supported  by firm  corporate  profits,  and  private  consumption  is also  increasing moderately. 
The  employment  situation  continues  to  recover  modestly  as  a  whole  so  far,  although  it 
appears  that  the  effects  of  the  boost  from  a  record-breaking  warm  winter  are  starting  to 
dissipate.  
On the other hand, the economic activity in the euro area has been sluggish despite signs of 
a  pick-up  in  exports,  because  domestic  demand  there  has  been  stagnant  reflecting  severe 
fiscal  financial  conditions  in  some  peripheral  countries,  and  this  has  acted  as  a  drag  on 
economic activity. Meanwhile, disparities among countries regarding economic sentiment are 
widening further. For example, the unemployment  rate for April had registered a historically 
low  level  of  5.4  percent  in  Germany  since  the  reunification  of  East  and  West  Germany, 
whereas  that  in  Spain  was  over  20  percent  for  all  workers  and  over  50  percent  for  those 
aged 15–24. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  been  maintaining  somewhat  high 
growth rates as a whole, but the pace of growth has been slowing somewhat recently. The 
Chinese  economy  continues  to  show  relatively  high  growth;  however,  exports  have  been 
negatively affected by the sluggishness in the European economy, and the rates of increase 
particularly  in  durable  goods  consumption  and  private  real  estate  investment  have 
decelerated to some extent, due in part to the effects of measures to restrain the increase in 
real  estate  transactions  and  monetary  tightening  implemented  so  far.  In  the  NIEs  and  the 
ASEAN  countries,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  begun  to  pick  up,  reflecting  the 
restoration  following  the  damage  caused  by  the  flooding  in  Thailand,  in  a  situation  where 
private consumption and business fixed investment remain firm. 
Overseas  economies  on  the  whole  still  have  not  emerged  from  a  deceleration  phase,  but 
some improvement has been observed, including the recovery, albeit at a moderate pace, of 
the U.S. economy and some emerging economies. 
B.  
Outlook for Japan’s economy and prices 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  outlook for  Japan’s  economy.  Semiannually,  in  April  and October,  the 
Bank of Japan releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, known as the Outlook 
Report, in which it makes public its forecasts for economic activity and prices for the next two 
to three years. According to the projections in the Outlook Report that the Bank released in 
April this year, the economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path in the first half 
of fiscal 2012 as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picks up, led by emerging and 
commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after the earthquake 
gradually strengthens. 
With the economy moderately recovering, the outlook for prices in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI is expected to gradually rise to a range of above 0.5 percent and 
less than 1 percent toward the latter half of the projection period through fiscal 2013 as the 
aggregate supply and demand balance improves. 
Expressing this outlook in terms of the median of individual Policy Board members’ forecasts, 
Japan’s real GDP growth rate is projected to be 2.3 percent for fiscal 2012 and 1.7 percent 
for fiscal 2013. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to be 0.3 percent and 
0.7 percent for fiscal 2012 and 2013, respectively. 
Looking  at  the  current  state  of  Japan’s  economy,  while  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas 
economies  has  been  slower  than  expected  in  the  April  2012  Outlook  Report,  domestic 
demand in Japan has been relatively stronger, and therefore Japan’s economy as a whole so 
far is generally in line with the forecast in the April Outlook Report. 
C.  
Uncertainties about the outlook 
The outlook I have just mentioned is the scenario for economic activity and prices considered 
to be the most likely by the Bank, or the baseline scenario. In the April 2012 Outlook Report, 
the Bank raised the following four risk factors concerning this outlook as warranting attention: 
developments  in  overseas  economies,  especially  the  European  debt  problem;  uncertainty 
with  regard  to  reconstruction-related  demand;  possible  changes  in  firms’  and  households’ 
medium- to long-term growth expectations reflecting the shift of production sites to overseas 
as  well  as  problems  concerning  the  supply  and  demand  of  electric  power;  and  problems 
regarding Japan’s fiscal sustainability.  
At  present,  the  chief  concern  is  developments  in  overseas  economies,  especially  the 
European debt problem. Tensions in global financial markets rose rapidly in the second half 
of 2011, but eased somewhat from the start of 2012 due to the massive liquidity provision by 
the European Central Bank (ECB), in addition to the decision on the second financial support 
program for Greece by the European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  signing  of  the  European  Fiscal  Compact  by  EU  member  states,  and  the  agreement  to 
raise  the  lending  capacity  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  and  the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM). From February to March 2012 in particular, sentiment 
in global markets was “risk on,” leading to purchasing of stocks and selling of the yen.  
However, market sentiment thereafter shifted gradually to a “risk off” mode and risk aversion 
among global investors has been increasing again as a result of growing concerns about the 
political  situation  in  Greece,  as  well  as  the  health  of  Spanish  banks  and  the  consequent 
deterioration in Spain’s fiscal condition. Yields on government bonds issued by countries with 
debt problems have risen, while yields declined on Japanese, German, and U.S. government 
bonds, which are regarded as safe assets. Stock prices have fallen and the yen has resumed 
its rise in the foreign exchange market. 
The efforts made by Germany and other core European countries are expected to ultimately 
help  avert  a  significant  worsening  of  the  problems  in  Europe,  leading  to  a  period  of  brief 
respite.  However,  a  comprehensive  solution  will  take  quite  a  while.  This  is  because  at  the 
root of the European debt problem lies a structural problem: countries with large disparities in 
fiscal conditions and economic strength share a single currency without having an integrated 
fiscal policy, making it difficult to adjust imbalances in these countries.  
A key element in the Bank’s baseline scenario for Japan’s economy is that, while domestic 
demand  supports  the  economy,  external  demand  will  strengthen,  prompting  the  virtuous 
circle  of  production,  income,  and  spending  to  start  operating  before  reconstruction-related 
demand begins to decline. The economy is very likely to follow this main scenario, barring an 
unexpected  worsening  of  the  situation  in  Europe.  This  is  because  the  U.S.  economy  is 
expected  to  continue  growing  at  a  moderate  pace,  and  the  growth  rate  of  the  Chinese 
economy – one of the main emerging and commodity-exporting economies – is expected to 
stop decelerating, with the economy likely heading toward a recovery due to the fine-tuning 
of the current set of restrictive policies. 
If the European and U.S. economies become unstable, however, this would weigh heavily on 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies, exerting  a  large  negative  impact  on  Japan. 
Therefore, due attention should be paid to developments in the United States and Europe. 
II. 
The bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
Next,  I  will  outline  the  measures  currently  implemented  by  the  Bank  to  pursue  powerful 
monetary easing. The Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy faces the critical challenge of 
overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
A.  
Pursuit of powerful monetary easing 
Based  on  this  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  through 
the comprehensive monetary easing measures. 
In  February  this  year,  the  Bank  introduced  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long 
term” and announced that  it would pursue powerful monetary easing until  the price stability 
goal  was  in  sight.  With  the  aim  of  achieving  the  goal  of  a  1  percent  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  the  CPI,  the  Bank  announced  that  it  would  encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term 
market  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk  premiums.  Specifically,  the  Bank 
announced that it would (1) continue its virtually zero interest rate policy of encouraging the 
policy  interest  rate  to  remain  at  around  0  to  0.1  percent;  and  (2)  implement  the  Asset 
Purchase Program (hereafter the Program) mainly through the purchase of various financial 
assets,  such  as  government  securities,  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate  bonds, 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs).  
Since  the  establishment  of  the  Program  in  October  2010,  the  Bank  has  expanded  its  size 
successively.  After  the  start  of  2012,  the  Bank  increased  it  in  February  and  April,  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
outstanding amount of the asset purchase is to reach about 65 trillion yen by around the end 
of 2012 and about 70 trillion yen by around the end of June 2013. The outstanding amount of 
the  Program  stands  at  approximately  51  trillion  yen  as  of  June  10,  and  thus  the  Bank  will 
increase it by approximately 14 trillion yen – at a pace exceeding 2 trillion yen per month on 
average – by the end of this year. The amount of the Bank’s purchases of assets, including 
those  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  conducted  regularly  at  the  pace  of 
1.8 trillion yen per month, will total as much as 4 trillion yen per month on average. 
Due to such pursuit of powerful monetary easing, market interest rates in Japan have been 
moving at an extremely low level. For example, yields on JGBs with maturities of up to three 
years have been at around 0.1 percent, which is almost equivalent to money market interest 
rates,  and  those  on  ten-year  JGBs  have  been  below  0.9  percent.  In  these  circumstances, 
firms’ funding costs, as measured by lending rates, and credit spreads in corporate bond and 
CP markets, have both been moving at low levels. These rates, unlike those in the European 
and  U.S.  markets,  have  been  stable  at  low  levels  even  when  market  concerns  about  the 
European  debt  problem  intensified  significantly.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  pursue  powerful 
monetary  easing  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  goal  of  a  1  percent  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI so that firms and households can gain easier access to loans at a lower 
interest rate. 
B.  
The bank’s efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
I will now talk about the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations 
for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility),  which  has  been 
implemented  concurrently  with  the  Bank’s  measures  to  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing. 
The measure was introduced in June 2010 with the aim of supplying long-term funds at a low 
interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and 
investment to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. The initial ceiling of the total 
amount of loans was set at 3 trillion yen. Subsequently, in June 2011, the Bank established a 
500 billion yen new line of credit, separate from the existing one, for equity investments and 
asset-based  lending  (ABL),  in  which  assets  such  as  accounts  receivables  and  inventories 
are used as collateral, based on the consideration that it was essential for the Bank to devise 
ways  to  encourage  the  provision  of  equity-like  funds,  such  as  equity  investments,  and  of 
loans  without  conventional  collateral  or  guarantees.  In  March  2012,  the  Bank  decided  to 
enhance  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility  by  (1)  increasing  the  ceiling  for  the  total 
amount of loans from 3 trillion yen to 3.5 trillion yen; and (2) establishing special rules for a 
new  lending  arrangement  of  500  billion  yen  for  small-lot  investments  and  loans,  as  well  as 
those  for  a  new  U.S.  dollar  lending  arrangement  of  12  billion  U.S.  dollars  (equivalent  to 
1 trillion yen) for foreign currency-denominated investments and loans. 
Looking  at  the  amount  of  loans  disbursed  so  far  under  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding 
Facility, the outstanding balance of the total loans stands at approximately 3.2 trillion yen as 
of the beginning of June 2012. With regard to loan disbursement under the special rules for 
the  U.S.  dollar  lending  arrangement,  the  first  disbursement  of  loans  is  to  take  place  in 
September  2012.  A  breakdown  of  financial  institutions’  individual  investment  or  lending  in 
April 2010–March 2012 by the areas for strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
shows  that  their  investment  and  loans  covered  a  wide  range  of  areas;  in  particular,  almost 
30 percent of the total funds was provided to environment and energy business and almost 
20 percent was provided to medical, nursing care, and other health-related business.  
The Bank expects that this facility will act as a catalyst to promote financial institutions’ loans 
without  conventional  collateral  such  as  real  estate  collateral  as  well  as  investment  and 
lending  to  growth  areas  using  long-term  funds  provided  at  a  low  interest  rate.  The  Bank 
expects  that  this  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  entrepreneurs  and  firms  starting 
new businesses, and that this will in turn enhance the growth potential of Japan’s economy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
III.  
Growth strategy for japan 
These are the recent economic and financial developments and the Bank’s policy measures 
taken in response. I will now take a look at Japan’s economy from a longer-term perspective. 
Similar to Europe, Japan faces a structural problem, although in Japan’s case the problem is 
declining growth rates amid population aging. I will also touch upon this issue.  
A.  
Growth rates in the past two decades 
Looking back at Japan’s economic growth from a long-term perspective, the annualized GDP 
growth  rate  averaged  more  than  10  percent  during  the  high-growth  period  of  the  1960s.  In 
the 1970s and 1980s, the rate did not reach double-digit figures but was stable, averaging an 
annualized 4 to 5 percent. Subsequently, the economic bubble burst and low growth ensued, 
moving around 1.5 percent in the 1990s and falling below 1 percent during the 2000s. 
The stagnation of the 1990s can be largely attributed to the bursting of the economic bubble 
and  malfunctioning  of  the  financial  system.  It  was  widely  believed  that  the  economy  would 
regain  strength  once  the  nonperforming-loan  (NPL)  problem  was  resolved.  In  reality, 
however,  economic  growth  did  not  return  to  the  previous  levels,  even  after  the  mid-2000s, 
when  the  NPL  problem  had  largely  been  resolved.  The  periods  of  persistent  low  growth 
during the 1990s and 2000s have together been called the “two lost decades,’’ but I believe 
the slumps in these two periods had different causes. 
Contributions  to  economic  growth  come  from  increases  in  both  labor  productivity  and  the 
labor  force.  Growth  in  labor  productivity,  measured  by  the  rate  of  growth  in  real  GDP  per 
worker,  had  been  on  a  downward  trend  throughout  the  1990s  and  has  been  sluggish 
recently, although it  remains narrowly  in positive territory. The labor force measured by the 
rate of change in the number of workers, on the other hand, started to decline in the 2000s. 
The  lackluster  economic  performance  during  these  two  decades  reflects  the  different 
contributions of these two factors.  
Turning to the issue of future growth,  if we assume that the current labor force participation 
rate  in  Japan  does  not  change,  then  the  number  of  workers  based  on  the  long-term 
demographic forecast is expected to decline by 0.6 percent during the 2010s, and further by 
1.2  percent  during  the  2030s.  Assuming  that  productivity  growth  remains  at  around 
1 percent, which has been the average over the past two decades, the growth rate from 2010 
onward  may  be  forecast  at  an  annualized  average  of  about  0  to  0.5  percent.  During  the 
2030s, negative growth is likely to become the norm. 
B.  
Measures to counter the declining population 
Given that this situation is clearly foreseeable, the utmost efforts must be made to improve it.  
Currently,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  per  worker  is  fairly  high  in  Japan  compared  with  other 
countries.  If  no  action  is  taken,  however,  the  rate  per  capita  will  decline  as  a  result  of  the 
lower ratio of workers to population caused by population aging. Real GDP growth per capita 
serves  as  a  benchmark  of  national  wealth.  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  the  current  standard  of 
living  and  welfare,  achieved  through  hard  work  over  many  decades,  will  not  be  enjoyed  by 
our  children  and  grandchildren.  In  order  to  avert  this  situation,  it  is  imperative  to  increase 
labor  productivity  per  worker  and  ensure  that  the  number  of  workers  is  maintained  despite 
the declining population. 
1.  
Increasing labor productivity 
In  order  to  raise  labor  productivity,  it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  following  steps  must  be 
taken: (1) develop new technology, products, and services; (2) ensure the full application of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
information  technology,  while  redistributing  resources  from  sectors  and  firms  with  low 
productivity to those with higher productivity; and (3) facilitate regeneration of industries. I will 
not elaborate on this broad subject today, but will focus instead on the issue of measures to 
halt the decline in the number of workers. 
2.  
Increasing the number of workers 
As often pointed out in the past, given the declining population – which is an undeniable and 
unavoidable development – it is necessary to increase the labor participation of women and 
create job opportunities for the elderly in order to stop the number of workers from declining. 
a.  
Women 
In  2011,  the  number  of  Japanese  women  aged  25–64  without  jobs  and  not  seeking 
employment averaged as many as 10 million (women under 24 are assumed to be at school 
and are excluded). A breakdown of the labor force participation rate by age group shows that 
the  rate  dips  in  Japan  for  women  in  their  30s,  indicating  the  burden  of  raising  children. 
Consequently,  the  data  represented  in  a  line  graph  are  “M-shaped.”  There  has  been  an 
increase in recent years in the number of nursery schools to address the serious shortage in 
Japan of such schools, which has prevented mothers from working. Some consider this an 
aspect of social welfare policy, but I believe it is also an economic policy for growth. 
Raising children in Japan, which used to be seen as a mother’s full-time role at home, could 
be passed on to those undertaking it as a job, allowing mothers to continue their jobs outside 
the home. This would be a division of labor at work. Subsequently, the number of jobs would 
expand, and together with a rise in income, payers of taxes and social insurance premiums 
would  increase,  contributing  greatly  to  the  growth  strategy.  Furthermore,  it  is  not  just  an 
increase in the number of nursery schools in Japan that is needed for the raising of children. 
Schools and employers need to take steps to remove various obstacles in the way of working 
mothers.  Families  described  as  “double 
term  heard 
recently – could become the basic unit of society, and existing structures and systems should 
be changed so that women would feel secure in their balance of work and  raising  children. 
The  removal  of  some  of  the  barriers  to  having  children  would  raise  the  labor  force 
participation rate of women, and also help stop the decrease in the birth rate.  
two  kids”  –  a 
income  with 
b.  
The elderly 
The  share  of  the  elderly  seeking  employment  falls  sharply  in  Japan  from  65  years  of  age 
onward. Statistics show that in 2011 the labor force participation rate averaged 78 percent for 
people  aged  50–59  and  60  percent  for  those  aged  60–64.  It  went  down  to  38  percent  for 
those aged 65–69, and declined further to 23 percent for those aged 70–74. This trend could 
be attributed to the fact that in Japan corporate pensions are paid from the age of 60, and the 
widely  held  perception  that  the  elderly  –  who  are  often  defined  as  those  aged  65  years  or 
more – do not work or are not expected to work. 
Many  studies,  however,  show  that  the  percentage  of  healthy  people  aged  65  or  more  is 
increasing. Data from the World Health Organization (WHO) as of 2007 revealed that healthy 
life  expectancy,  which  is  the  average  number  of  years  a  person  can  expect  to  live  in  full 
health,  was  76  years  in  Japan,  the  highest  in  the  world.  Another  study  shows  that  the 
capacity of judgment and understanding, acquired through education and training, peaks at 
around  60  and  gradually  declines  thereafter.  Apparently,  however,  findings  show  that  such 
capacity for those  in their  80s  roughly  equals  that  of  people  in  their  mid-20s. In fact,  in the 
agricultural sector 60 percent of workers are aged 65 or above, and in the fishing sector the 
proportion is more than 30 percent. This is evidence of the capability of people at 65 or more 
to  continue  to  work.  According  to  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development  (OECD),  an  increasing  number  of  countries  have  raised  the  pension  age  to 
67 or above. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Therefore,  although it is not immediately possible, it seems necessary to change Japanese 
society’s  definition  and  perception  of  the  elderly.  If  the  nation’s  working-age  population  is 
redefined  to  include  the  population  up  to  69  years  of  age,  the  number  of  employable 
population  would  increase  by  slightly  less  than  8  million.  The  working-age  population  up  to 
64  years  of  age  is  82  million  at  present  and  is  expected  to  decline.  If  the  population  up  to 
69 years of age is included in the working-age population, we would have approximately ten 
more years before it approached the present level of 82 million and started to decrease. In 
order  to  bring  about  the  acceptance  of  new  social  perceptions  of  age  and  work that  I  have 
just mentioned, it is necessary to change various social structures and systems substantially. 
In  Japan,  with  its  rapidly  aging  population  and  fall  in  childbirth,  it  is  essential  to  construct 
cooperative  networks  and  systems  that  encourage  older  members  of  society  to  join  forces 
with the rest of the working population. 
C.  
Increasing job opportunities 
In order to both increase the labor participation rate of women and draw on the labor of the 
elderly, it is necessary to significantly expand the number of available jobs. Various opinions 
have been expressed on how to deal with the current decrease in the workforce caused by 
population  aging  with  fewer  children.  Among  them  is  the  suggestion  that  Japan  should 
accept more immigrant labor from overseas. At present, however, there are not enough job 
opportunities  on  offer  to  meet  an  increase  in  the  workforce.  Although  improvements  have 
been  made  recently,  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  applicants  in  April  2012  was  0.79,  while  the 
unemployment  rate  was  4.6  percent.  The  number  of  unemployed  was  3.15  million 
(seasonally  unadjusted),  and  if  figures  are  added  for  the  hidden  unemployed  –  who  are 
willing to work but not actively seeking a job – the total number of unemployed amounts to 
about 7.53 million.1 To promote growth of the economy, new job openings must be created to 
accommodate these unemployed people, in addition to more women and the elderly. 
In  view  of  the  current  imbalance  between  supply  and  demand  of  goods  and  services,  with 
demand  falling  short  of  supply,  it  is  necessary  to  respond  to  the  changing  social  structure 
and create demand by replacing old products and services with new ones. The structure of 
consumption, or spending patterns, has also changed largely reflecting the population aging 
with  fewer  children.  The  outcome  of  competition  among  firms  now  depends  on  how  they 
adapt  to  such  changes.  New  job  opportunities  will  be  created  in  the  process  of  such 
corporate endeavors. 
It  is  also  essential  to  seek  overseas  demand,  since  the  population  in  Japan  is  declining. 
Rapidly expanding Asian markets are located close to Japan. In view of an expected rise in 
income  levels  in  the  area,  these  markets  are  likely  to  become  extremely  important  for 
high-quality  goods  produced  in  Japan  that  offer  superior  features  in  terms  of  safety  and 
reliability,  although  production  of  “volume-zone,”  widely  used  goods,  may  have  to  be  done 
overseas.  Moreover,  looking  further  ahead,  it  is  very  likely  that  Japan  will  be  able  to  offer 
products  and  services  developed  for  its  aging  society  to  other  Asian  nations,  since  their 
populations  too  are  bound  to  mature.  With  this  favorable  outlook  in  mind,  stepping  up 
investment  for  growth  would  lead  to  a  larger  flow  of  funds,  an  expanded  job  market,  and 
ultimately sound economic growth in Japan as well as Asia. 
 1  The data for April 2012 were taken from the Labour Force Survey released by the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
and Communications. The number of “hidden unemployed” represents those “wishing to work” in the category 
of  “not  in  the  labour  force.”  A  breakdown  of  figures  for  those  “not  in  the  labour  force”  is  not  published  on  a 
monthly  basis,  and  therefore,  the  simple  average  of  three  months  for  the  period  between  January  through 
March 2012 (4.38 million) was used. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
D.  
Regional areas 
Viewed  from  a  different  perspective,  the  decline  of  the  population  is  likely  to  have  a  larger 
effect  on  regional  areas  than  on  urban  ones.  If  job  opportunities  in  these  areas  are 
insufficient,  youthful  job  seekers  will  leave,  causing  a  population  drain  and  leading  to  a 
further shrinkage of regional economies. To respond to this situation, it is important to make 
full use of the resources unique to each region, in addition to human resources of the elderly 
and  women:  for  example,  to  draw  on  the  labor  of  the  elderly  in  the  areas  of  nursing  care, 
where  demand  is  growing,  or  of  childcare;  and  to  revitalize  the  primary  industry.  Business 
opportunities may also lie in agricultural and food industries in rural Japan. It is possible that 
the  supply-demand  conditions  for  food  will  tighten  worldwide  reflecting  the  rapid  growth  of 
emerging economies, and as the income levels of emerging economies rise, demand is likely 
to increase for Japan’s expensive but safe, reliable, and high-quality food products, in which 
the  country  has  a  competitive  edge.  Efforts  to  expand  exports  of  agricultural  and  marine 
products to other Asian countries could bear fruit through, for example, selective breeding of 
grain  species  and  improvement  in  aquaculture  technology  by  means  of  effectively  utilizing 
fallow  and  abandoned  fields,  as  well  as  Japan’s  coastline,  which  is  the  sixth  longest  in  the 
world.  The  agricultural  and  fisheries  industries  by  themselves  account  for  a  relatively  small 
share of Japan’s GDP, but if related businesses such as food processing, transportation, and 
distribution are included, they contribute a great deal to regional economies. 
Furthermore,  regional  areas  in  Japan  possess  scenic  and  cultural  resources  unrivaled  by 
many  other  countries:  you  can  find  mountains,  volcanoes,  hot  springs,  valleys,  beaches, 
lakes, a mild climate with four seasons, historic sites,  cultural events such as festivals, and 
safe  towns  with  hospitable  people,  all  in  this  small  country.  Unfortunately,  despite  such 
abundant  tourist  attractions,  Japan  ranks  only  30th  or  so  in  terms  of  the  number  of foreign 
tourists. Considered another way, however, this implies that there is much room for growth in 
tourism. If Japan’s regional areas could capture tourism demand from other countries in Asia 
that have a great potential for growth, this would have a significant impact on employment.  
In  order  to  strengthen  such  efforts,  local  governments  need  to  take  detailed  measures. 
Support from local financial institutions is also important, as funds from various sources will 
be  required.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank  supports  the  efforts  of  financial  institutions 
through the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility.  The amount of funds provided through the 
facility  to  such  businesses  as  tourism  and  to  childcare  services  is  still  small,  and  there  is 
much room  to  increase  the funding  provided  to  these  businesses  as  well  as  to  others. The 
Bank thus expects greater use of the facility.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
