Patrick Honohan: The experience of financial integration – Ireland, 
Britain, Europe 
Text of the Mais Lecture by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at 
the Cass Business School, London, 8 May 2012. 
 Cheerleaders for financial integration are having a hard time these days. It can seem that the 
financial crisis was exported from the United States and that the waves of liquidity surging 
around  the  world  ended  up  washing  away  several  years  of  growth  in  the  advanced 
economies. 
Indeed,  I  think  it  can  fairly  be  said  that  it  without  the  complacent  expansion  of  credit  by  a 
globally  integrated  financial  market,  we  would  not  now  be  seeing  the  stresses  of  over-
indebtedness that are impairing economic recovery not only in the euro area (Ireland being a 
conspicuous  example),  but  in  many  other  advanced  economies  which  I  am  too  polite  to 
enumerate.  Despite  its  overriding  importance,  I  will  not  today  expand  on  the  question  of 
short-term adjustment of over-indebtedness and imbalances, in favour of looking at the wider 
and  longer  term  issue  of  the  approach  that  our  two  neighbouring  countries  should  be 
adopting in relation to financial integration. 
After  all,  international  financial  integration  is  as  much  a  product  of  technology  as  of 
liberalising financial policy and, as such, is with us, whether we like it or not. Exchange rate 
regimes, financial flows and provision of financial services are its chief vehicles. Mostly we 
can like it, but it can and has run amok, so needs well designed and policed regulation. 
That regulation itself happens in an international environment, often with an initial regional 
layering. Ireland’s age-old financial links with Britain have not been impeded by our shared 
adoption  of  the  envelope  of  European  Union  legislation  governing  finance,  nor  even  by 
Ireland’s  adherence  to  the  euro  with  its  even  greater  ambitions  –  currently,  to  be  sure, 
suffering  a  setback  (partly  because  the  risks  presented  by  over-elastic  international  flows 
were  not  sufficiently  understood  or  managed)  –  for  harnessing  the  power  of  financial 
integration. 
My  overall  message  today  is  that  we  in  these  islands  have  much  in  common  as  we  work 
within European structures to develop more effective regulatory and policy regimes that will 
do a better job of handling financial integration than was managed in the first decade of the 
new millennium. 
Keynes’ view 
It was in Dublin in a speech given in 1933 before an audience of the professional middle-
classes that John Maynard Keynes made one of his earliest, most widely quoted and most 
succinct  expressions  of  doubt  about  international  financial  integration.  “Ideas,  knowledge, 
science,  hospitality,  travel  –  these  are  the  things  which  should  by  their  nature  be 
international.  But  let  goods  be  homespun  whenever  it  is  reasonably  and  conveniently 
possible,  and,  above  all,  let  finance  be  primarily  national.”  For  the  elite  of  a  newly 
independent country which valued the financial stability they had inherited and retained from 
the colonial era, this was not a welcome message.  
Indeed, the message was largely ignored. The one-for-one exchange rate parity for the Irish 
pound with sterling embodied first in a currency board arrangement and then with a limited-
function central bank, survived for almost another half-century, as did the banking and stock 
exchange  links.  Indeed  the  English,  Scottish  and  Irish  banking  systems  have  long  been 
intertwined. For example, it was Kerryman Daniel O’Connell (“the Emancipator”) who set up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the National Bank in London in 1835 – one of the seven great clearing banks, whose English 
branches  later  formed  part  of  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland  (and  now  presumably  heading  to 
Santander)  –  with  the  goal  of  providing  banking  services  “across  borders”  into  Ireland  to 
compete with the monopoly which had been granted there to the Bank of Ireland. Right into 
the  twentieth  century,  the  Irish  banks  collected  deposits  from  rural  parts  –  not  least  in  the 
wartime  years  when  food  prices  soared  and  there  was  little  available  in  the  prevailing 
international  conditions  on  which  to  spend  the  export  receipts;  and  so  the  savings  were 
placed in the London money market. Finance was not “primarily national” then, and has not 
been since. 
But was Keynes right?  
The conventional wisdom identifies several dimensions of financial integration which can be 
ranked by their potential net benefits in terms of growth and stability. Exchange rate regimes 
determine  the  overall  degree  of  monetary  stability  and  can  be  designed  to  achieve  price 
stability – but if so, may be vulnerable to other pressures. Mobility of financial flows allows for 
risk-sharing and consumption smoothing – but can open the door to destabilizing speculative 
movements.  Provision  of  banking  and  other  financial  services  by  foreign  firms  can  convey 
lower costs and greater sophistication as well as better risk-sharing – but can leave the host 
country high and dry if the service-providers choose to withdraw.  
Both Ireland and Britain have experiences the rough and the smooth in each of these three 
dimensions.  But  the  information  technology  revolution  implies  that  international  financial 
integration is not a question of whether, but of how.  
Ireland’s path of integration 
Ireland’s  “how”  started  through  a  narrow,  mainly  banking  channel  and  a  fixed  peg  to  one 
major financial node, London. Over the years, and especially after the inflation and slowing 
UK growth of the 1970s, Ireland took the opportunity of the creation in 1979 of the European 
Monetary System and its exchange rate mechanism (ERM) to diversify away from this too 
narrow channel and, within a governmental structure defined by Europe and the euro-area, 
integration now passes through a multitude of channels, albeit with Britain still a key route.  
Britain is also squarely within the institutional and legal framework of the European Union, so 
far as financial integration is concerned. And it will not come as a surprise to hear me say 
that the officials of the UK are highly influential not only in EU decision making bodies but 
clearly on the global stage through the G-20 and the FSB. 
The  crisis  has  generated  a  sense  in  some  quarters  that,  in  these  matters  of  financial 
integration, the old days were better, both when seen from the Irish and the British point of 
view, but is that really true?  
I certainly would not want to glamorise that ancien regime of Irish banks integrated in the UK 
system.  Just  as  economic  historians  have  often  castigated  the  Victorian  British  banks  for 
contributing little to the growth of British industry, so the Irish banks might have contributed 
more if they had been geared-up to spotting lending opportunities for budding exporters. The 
marginal efficiency of capital in Ireland was probably a good deal higher in those days than 
the discount rate in London. Besides, there was more to global finance even then than the 
London money market. (Though this is a point that was probably not appreciated by whoever 
in  Dublin  decided  to  convert  the  US  dollars,  received  from  Marshall  Aid,  into  sterling  just 
weeks before the sterling devaluation of 1949.) But adherence to global finance through the 
sterling  link  did  more  or  less  guarantee  that  Ireland  would  import  whatever  degree  of 
monetary stability was attained in Britain. Only once, in 1955, did Irish policymakers try to 
break  out  of  the  discipline  of  a  currency  board,  arm-twisting  the  Irish  banks  not  to  follow 
London’s bank rate increase. The consequence then was an outflow of funds, followed by a 
hasty fiscal over-reaction and the worst recession for a couple of decades. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Britain and the prospective reconfiguration of world finance 
It would be a great understatement to characterise the past two centuries of British finance 
as being not “primarily national”. After all, for much of that period London was the centre of 
global  finance  as  well  as  of  international  economic  relations  generally.  Having  reinvented 
itself  in  the  1960s,  and  in  the  1980s,  and  perhaps  again  today,  London’s  role  in  global 
finance has outlived – indeed outgrown – its imperial origins and remains a key node in a 
multipolar system. But that is a system which has been shaken by the evolving crisis from 
which  it  will  emerge  in  a  reconfigured  form.  Influencing  the  design  of  this  reconfiguration 
through  domestic,  regional  European,  and  wider  international  governance  structures  is  a 
major  preoccupation  of  financial  policymakers:  what  will  the  role  of  London  be  in  the 
reconfigured system, how will Ireland fare? These are key issues preoccupying you and me 
respectively, and they are not unrelated. 
Perhaps the most contested part of the on-going and prospective reconfiguration relates to 
the role of governments in the financial systems of the future. And, in the European context, 
that  includes  the  question:  which  governments  or  governmental  agencies  for  which  roles? 
What should be at the national level, what at the regional – in our case European – and what 
to the global level? Let me take some examples of issues that have arisen and have been 
dealt with in a variety of ways to illustrate the import of these questions. 
Banks, sovereigns and financial de-integration 
For  many  years  now,  a  mantra  of  most  financial  development  economists  has  been  to 
emphasise  the  failures  of  government  involvement  in  the  running  of  banks.  Country  after 
country  suffered  severe  set-backs  when  the  degree  to  which  the  lending  policies  of 
government-controlled  banks  were  exposed  –  in  a  downturn  –  as  having  been  largely 
politically-motivated  and  more  like  grants  than  loans.  The  recent  crisis  has  also  entangled 
banks and governments again, but in a different way (albeit one which was also seen in other 
developing  countries  in  the  past),  namely  the  socialisation  of  private  banking  losses 
destabilizing the finances of the State.  
Even  where  the  State  did  not  pick  up  the  tab  for  the  bank  debts,  namely  Iceland,  the 
consequences for the State of the losses have been severe. And I think it is fair to say that 
the  Icelandic  events  have  also  shaken  the  underpinnings  of  the  European  single  banking 
market.  The  idea  of  cross-border  branch  banking  has  been  undermined  by  regulatory 
responses in some European Union countries no longer prepared to accept the validity of the 
single  passport  and  requiring  foreign-owned  banks  who  wish  to  operate  across  borders  to 
create, for example, a local subsidiary. Regulatory ring-fencing of local bank liquidity has also 
been observed – clearly contrary to the spirit of the single banking market. What this seems 
to come down to is a loss of confidence in the idea that foreign regulators could be relied 
upon and, perhaps also, a perceived lack of creditworthiness of some sovereigns even within 
Europe. The latter may be seen as not altogether unjustified, given the recent restructuring of 
Greek sovereign debt. Still, it is noteworthy that banking debt has been repaid across Europe 
despite the pressures that have been placed on sovereigns. In this process, there has been 
a sharp reduction in cross-border banking exposures in the market. Thus, both in regulation 
and in market behaviour, the single banking market has suffered a notable retreat. 
Restructuring  and  downsizing  of  European  banks  has  had  a  similar  effect,  some  of  it 
ironically the consequence if pro-competition measures taken by the European Commission. 
By  the  early  2000s,  the  Irish  banks  had  moved  from  their  historic  position  as  exporters  of 
funds to the rest of the world to champion importers of funds to be recycled into finance for 
mortgages and for property development in the Irish world-beating property and construction 
bubble.  Although  this  boom  coincided  with  Ireland’s  euro  membership,  I  have  argued 
elsewhere that the link was a tenuous one. One indication: the fact that the British banking 
connection  held  up  well  in  this  period  also:  the  two  biggest  UK  banks  were  among  those 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
for 
intermediated 
through  official  channels  has, 
leading  the  headlong  charge  for  property  lending.  Now  they,  and  the  local  banks  (and 
government),  are  licking  their  wounds  in  terms  of  heavy  actual  and  prospective  loan-loss 
charges.  Financial  integration  generally  –  not  just  the  euro  –  fuelled  the  boom  to  dizzying 
heights from which the fall has been painful.  
By now, the Irish banks, faced with a “sudden stop”, have repaid vast borrowings from the 
globalised  financial  system  largely  using  central  bank  funds  to  do  so  –  though,  also  using 
some  of  the  Troika  funds  via  the  recapitalisation  of  the  banks  at  mid-2012.  Financial 
integration 
the  moment,  replaced 
international market integration.  
And  the  same  replacement  is  also  happening  across  the  euro  area.  Continental  banks  in 
several of the largest countries have switched to central bank financing over the past several 
months  as  they  repaid  cross-border  market  funding.  While  commentators  have  rightly 
emphasised  other  aspects  of  the  expanded  borrowing  from  the  Eurosystem  through  the 
3-year LTRO – notably the use by banks in some countries of some of the borrowed funds 
for  the  acquisition  of  government  bonds,  and  the  way  in  which  the  LTRO  has  eased  the 
sharp  tightening  of  credit  conditions  that  had  occurred  in  the  last  quarter  of  2011  –  the 
disintermediation of cross-border bank finance in Europe has been quantitatively larger than 
these other two effects.  
A multi-country zone in which, despite a single currency, credit risk hampers the free-flow of 
banking  finance  is  not  what  the  inventors  of  the  euro  had  in  mind.  One  approach  to 
correcting the situation is to reduce credit risk by increasing the capital of banks; certainly we 
need to move and are moving steadily in that direction. But when the lack of creditworthiness 
is entangled with the questions about creditworthiness of the national governments, it is not 
evident  that  even  increased  bank  capital  will  be  immediately  sufficient.  I  for  one  have  not 
been  expecting  the  large  recapitalisation  of  Irish  banks  to  enable  them  to  access 
international  capital  markets  on  a  large  scale  ahead  of  the  market  re-entry  of  the  Irish 
sovereign itself. The maxim that a sovereign rating normally provides a ceiling on the rating 
of any other entity has sound foundations. 
Getting  away  from  the  pernicious  dynamic  whereby  the  indebtedness  and  contingent 
exposure  of  sovereign  and  banks  to  each  other  does  have  what  seems  to  be  a  simple 
solution, though not one which has yet been accepted let alone implemented. Using pooled 
European funding mechanisms directly as a means of recapitalising weak banks and acting 
as  a  backstop  for  future  problems  is  an  obvious  way  of  pooling  risk  and  breaking  the 
sovereign-bank  linkage.  When  I  say  directly,  I  mean  without  entailing  a  sovereign 
indebtedness. For example, the €17 billion injected by the Irish government last year alone, 
to bring the going concern banks’ accounting capital up to the high ratios built into the stress 
tests  conducted  in  March  2011  as  part  of  the  Troika-financed  programme,  added  some 
13 per cent of GNP to Ireland’s debt. (Of course the Irish government also spent a lot more 
than  that  paying  off  creditors  in  the  “gone  concern”  banks.)  But  if  a  sizable  fraction  of  the 
sums  invested  that  had  been  injected  directly  as  capital  by  the  EFSF,  debt  sustainability 
would be much less of a concern to the rating agencies and the EFSF could look forward to 
upside in the recovery by being the owner of two banks with a substantial national franchise.  
Although the Irish case has been exceptionally severe, it is evident that the same formula 
could be relevant to other countries. The Greek debt restructure brought most of Greece’s 
banks under water, and they are being recapitalised by injection of EFSF bonds. But once 
again the Government – in this case the Greek government – is assuming the corresponding 
debt, and acquiring or increasing its ownership stakes in the banks. If there’s any European 
government  that  doesn’t  need  any  more  debt,  it’s  the  Greek  one.  Another  missed 
opportunity, one might say, in the design of restructuring and resolution policies for European 
banking. 
While the banking losses for UK banks were on a smaller scale relative to the size and fiscal 
capacity  of  the  UK  economy,  looking  ahead,  policymakers  in  countries  even  as  large  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prosperous  as  the  UK  look  with  some  trepidation  at  the  scale  of  their  largest  financial 
institutions – together with the fact that these institutions hunt in packs and do not represent 
a diversified pool of risks. One solution is to shrink the institutions and distance their liabilities 
from  the  State.  This  is  definitely  needed.  In  addition,  though,  especially  looking  to  future 
risks, a complementary strategy, relying for bank recapitalisation where needed not on one 
sovereign but on the pooled fiscal resources of a larger and more diversified entity such as 
the EU needs to be developed.  
It’s  not  hard  to  see,  though,  that  to  get  such  a  degree  of  cross-border  public  financial 
engineering working smoothly at the European level requires an institutional structure that is 
both  more  comprehensive  and  more  streamlined  than  exists  today.  It  is  clearly  something 
much more ambitious than has ever been attempted by the IMF and World Bank. 
A Banking Union in Europe 
As you may have guessed, I have used a less familiar route to back into what is increasingly 
becoming a conventional line of argument, namely that we have found that a monetary union 
needs  to  be  accompanied  by  stronger  arrangements  to  ensure  what  might  be  called  a 
Banking Union. In simple terms, the main elements of a banking union would be a degree of 
(i) centralised bank regulation, licensing and supervision as well as (ii) central responsibility 
for resolution and for depositor protection and any public sector solvency support. 
It’s not just the spillover effects that warrant centralised supervision. “Keen is the eye of the 
guest” (Glöggt er gests augað) as an Icelandic proverb has it. Of course nationals should be 
involved in supervision: often it is they who pick up the vibes and the market talk. And – while 
I do think that many governments don’t want to cede control over bank licensing issues to 
foreigners, I don’t attach as much importance as some to the relevance of national political 
pressures on the supervisor. Thus, it’s not just the implicit political protection that a plausible 
rogue may seek and secure: any national regulator worth their salt should be able to stand 
against that. But in periods of collective national myopia such as that which generated the 
property bubble in Ireland, the chance of getting somebody whose judgement is not affected 
is greater, the more distant their base. It’s time to start the ball rolling in a direction going well 
beyond the current mandate of the ESRB and the ESAs. 
Let  me  be  clear 
that  centralised  supervision  should  not  blindly  apply  common 
macroprudential ratios across the whole of Europe regardless of national, regional or sectoral 
credit conditions. Where circumstances warrant it, transitory variations in capital ratios and 
other macroprudential tools (such as loan-to-value ratios for household mortgages) must be 
part of the toolkit. That is needed today: maximum harmonisation, understood to mean, for 
example, that minimum capital ratios must never vary by country, is not necessary to retain 
the advantages of the single market. Even when regulation is as centralised as I would wish 
it  to  be,  the  regulators  must  not  hide  behind  the  single  market  as  an  excuse  for  dodging 
unpopular bubble-bursting measures of restraint.  
A pan-European Deposit Guarantee Scheme is often mentioned as the second key element 
of  any  banking  union.  But  of  course  the  current  guarantees,  covering  up  to  €100,000  per 
person, do not cover the largest and most mobile funds. It is not by paying out on insured 
depositors  that  the  Irish  public  finances  have  been  crippled.  No:  the  direct  fiscal  costs  of 
bank failures have always come in large part from indemnifying non-insured depositors. No 
bank senior creditor in the euro area has lost a penny in the crisis and the same is true in the 
United  States  –  but  only  since  September  2008;  before  then  bondholders  and  uninsured 
depositors  did  suffer  losses  in  the  US.  Even  if  the  Irish  government  had  not  stepped-in 
pre-emptively with its rash and overly-broad guarantee at the end of September 2008, there 
can be no doubt that irresistible partner country pressure would have been brought to bear 
on  the  government  to  avoid  bondholder  losses  (as  indeed  happened  after  the  period  of 
guarantee ended in respect of the remaining out-of-guarantee bonds, as a quasi-condition for 
continuing Troika support). In a former existence I have argued that covering bondholders’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
claims in bank resolution can be counterproductive in limiting the costs of banking crisis. I 
have  not  changed  my  mind.  A  fortiori,  I  could  not  see  the  case  for  asking  a  stressed 
Government  to  do  this  order  to  protect  the  functioning  of  the  bank  bond  market  in  other 
countries.  Such  decisions,  and  paying  for  them,  should  at  least  be  the  responsibility  of  a 
Europe-level resolution agency.  
Long overdue mechanisms and legislation for managing bail-in of private creditors in bank 
resolution  also  are  something  that,  in  practice,  has  to  be  resolved  at  EU-wide  level  and 
wider. 
Note that I refer to the EU as a whole here and not just to the euro area. While the policy 
spillovers are undoubtedly greater as between euro area countries, the case for centralized 
supervision and resolution can plausibly be extended to the whole single market. After all, 
the Icelandic problem in UK banking arose out of the mismatch between the single market in 
banking and the uneven effectiveness of bank supervision and regulation in the European 
Economic Area. The alternative to moving towards a banking union could be a progressive 
dismantling of the European single banking market, of which we may even have seen some 
policy  signs  in  the  past  few  years.  I’m  not  at  all  sure  that  this  will  be  a  benefit,  from  the 
perspective of Ireland or the UK. It is not just the smallest countries that would benefit from a 
system where risks in Europe were pooled, rather than falling arbitrarily on one country or 
another. 
Concluding remarks 
Some have taken the message from the euro crisis that financial integration has gone too far 
in  Europe.  My  read  is  different.  Inasmuch  as  any  country  that  did  not  adequately  operate 
sustainable macro and financial policies would suffer greatly from the denouement of policy 
deficiencies, the euro embodied a strong commitment device. The costs of that policy failure 
are being felt now.  But the answer is not to fall back on the more autarchic policies of the 
1960s and 1970s, but to try again, try better. The markets – gullible as we know they can be – 
naively assumed that the commitment device would be effective so that they need no longer 
fear  unsustainable  policies.  They  know  better  now,  and  so  do  the  governments.  Next  time 
around will (to this extent) be different: this particular lesson has been learnt. 
I have no illusions that a euro area restored to health would be enough to immediately attract 
UK  membership  (even  though  that  would  be  a  welcome  development  for  Ireland),  but  the 
banking union which is a prerequisite for a healthy euro area holds attractions for the whole 
membership of the European Union. Ireland and Britain now have much in common in the 
general approach to the design of a banking union. Although this is a medium-term project, 
initial steps themselves could be catalysts for the growth recovery which is so essential for all 
of  us  in  the  immediate  future,  and  which  will  of  course  require  a  suite  of  other  policies  to 
discuss which would take me far too far afield today, especially as I have already exhausted 
my time!  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
