Paul Fisher: Developments in financial markets, monetary and 
macroprudential policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at 
Richmond University, London, 25 September 2012. 
 When I gave a speech about the state of financial markets in June 2011, I talked about a 
process  of  healing  as  markets  recovered  from  the  Great  Recession.1  But  since  then  the 
patient has not regained anything like a full state of health. In this lecture today, I want to 
offer a second opinion on the condition of financial markets. But also, as a member of both 
the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the  Financial  Policy  Committee,  I  want  to  talk  about 
aspects  of  the  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  which  are  part  of  the  medicine.  In 
particular I want to give some background to a recent initiative by the Bank of England and 
HM Treasury to revive the economy, the Funding for Lending Scheme. 
Financial  markets  have  continued  to  be  buffeted  by  global  events  over  the  past  year.  In 
particular,  the  sovereign  crisis  in  the  euro  area  became  more  acute.  It  suffered  a  serious 
lurch in mid-July 2011 when confidence in Italian politics evaporated and Italian and Spanish 
sovereign yields rocketed to record euro-era highs (Chart 1). What followed was alarming – a 
growing  fragmentation  of  euro  zone  markets  as  participants  positioned  themselves  to 
minimise  risk  in the  event  of  euro  break-up.  And  the  story  has  become  more focussed  on 
Spain than Italy. But that has not been the only shock markets have had to cope with. 
 
Chart 1 
Ten year government bond yields(a) 
9
Per cent
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Chart 2 
GDP in selected countries and regions(a) 
Percentage change on 
a year  ago
20
15
10
5
0
-5
Jun 11
Sep 11
Germany
Dec 11
Spain
Mar 12
Italy
Jun 12
US
0
Sep 12
UK
 2005
2007
2006
China
2008
US
2009
2011
2010
Euro area
-10
2012
UK
 Source: Bloomberg 
(a)  Yields 
government bonds. Data updated to 19 September. 
to  maturity  on 
ten-year  benchmark 
Sources:  Eurostat,  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  of 
China,  ONS,  Thomson  Reuters  Datastream  and  US 
Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(a)  Real  GDP  measures.  Figures  for  China  are  non-
seasonally adjusted.  
                                                 
1  Paul  Fisher 
(2011), 
publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech507.pdf 
“The  State  of 
the  Financial  Markets”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Growth  in  Europe  has  been  anaemic  at  best  (Chart  2).  Growth  in  the  US  has  been  a  bit 
stronger  but  not  enough  to  reduce  an  elevated  unemployment  rate.  And  we  have  seen 
indications of a slowdown in China and other large EMEs. Perhaps the most striking thing 
about this is the degree of co-movement in GDP growth rates across economies. 
In reaction to the deteriorating outlook, we have seen a stream of policy actions, mostly by 
central banks as many fiscal authorities have felt constrained by excessive debt, deficits or 
both (at least in the western hemisphere). Last November, the ECB announced three-year 
term repos, in unlimited scale. And more recently details of their proposed Outright Monetary 
Transactions  (OMTs).  In  the  United  States  there  is  to  be  more  quantitative  easing  (QE), 
including  open-ended  purchases  of  RMBS.  In  Japan,  just  last  week  we  saw  a  large 
expansion  of  their  asset  purchase  programme.  In  the  United  Kingdom  we  have  been 
undertaking extra QE since October 2011 and earlier this summer we activated for the first 
time our new contingent facility of six month repos against a broad range of collateral – what 
we call the Extended Collateral Term Repo facility or ECTRs. That was intended to act as a 
backstop  should  the  risks  in  Europe  deepen  and  crystallise.  Usage  has  declined  sharply 
since  the  first  two  operations  suggesting  that  the  degree  of  stress  is  not  that  great  at  the 
moment. More recently the Bank and HM Treasury jointly launched the Funding for Lending 
Scheme (the FLS) – of which more later. The full list of policy actions is much, much longer 
of course. The length of that list reflects the seriousness of the economic situation and the 
constrained  ability  of  fiscal  authorities.  In  the  world  of  central  banking,  unconventional 
policies are the new normal. At least for now. 
Financial markets have not just been suffering from external shocks. A series of home-made 
disasters have also rocked the sector. The UBS “rogue trader”, the losses at JP Morgan’s 
Chief  Investment  Office,  LIBOR  manipulation  at  Barclays  (with  others  under  investigation) 
and the mis-selling of PPI. These scandals have not so far been institution-threatening, but 
coming on top of the financial and macroeconomic crisis to date, they have helped to suck 
confidence from the financial sector just when it might otherwise have been recovering. 
Chart  3  shows  a  “heat  map”  of  markets  generated  by  colleagues  in  the  Financial  Stability 
area of the Bank. This chart uses indicators such as issuance amounts and bid-ask spreads 
to  monitor  market  conditions.  Red  indicates  a  non-functioning  market.  The  process  of 
“healing”  since  2008/09  that  I  referred  to  a  year  ago  is  clear.  But  then  the  improvement 
plateaus and starts to reverse in mid-2011. A year ago it looked like conditions were starting 
to revert to those of late 2008. As the managers of the UK’s foreign exchange reserves we 
experienced some of these deteriorating conditions at first hand. (It is a neglected point that 
the  Bank  of  England  is  a  significant  participant  in  the  market  on  behalf  of  HM  Treasury 
through  reserves  management  operations,  as  well  as  being  the  monetary  authority  for 
sterling markets.)  
In  policy  meetings  during  the  Autumn  of  2011,  I  started  to  warn  of  a  growing  state  of 
dysfunction as some markets – such as for bank funding – closed completely, others saw 
bid-offer spreads widen and those firms perceived to be weak found their credit lines from 
fellow banks being cut. The situation was growing very dangerous. To a large extent it was 
the ECB three-year LTROs which dealt with that dysfunction – leading to the reopening of 
bank funding markets in particular.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Market functioning “heat map” based on issuance and spreads data(a)(b) 
Chart 3 
Corporate bonds
US
UK
Euro area
CMBS
P
R
I Bank bonds, unsecured US
M
UK
A
Euro area
R RMBS
US
Y
UK
Euro area
US
UK
Euro area
US
UK
Euro area
S
E
C Bank bonds, unsecured US
O
UK
N
Euro area
D RMBS
US
A
UK
R
Euro area
Y CMBS (b)
US
Euro area
Corporate bonds
NNNNNNNNNN
NNNNNNNNN
NNNNNNNNN
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
07
08
09
10
11
12
 Funding conditions compared with historical averages
Very loose
Lack of spreads data
Loose
Normal
Tight
Very tight
No issuance
               Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, JP Morgan Chase & Co., Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Bank calculations. 
(a) Shading is based on a score that reflects gross issuance (relative to GDP) and spreads in primary markets, 
and spreads in secondary markets, expressed as a number of deviations from historical averages, using as much 
data as available from January 1998. Primary market indicators reflect the past three months, to smooth volatility. 
(Where primary market spreads are not available, mainly affecting the CMBS series in some periods between late 
2009 and 2011, primary market indicators are based solely on issuance.) 
(b) Updated to end-August 2012.  
Market functioning in 2012 has developed in a rather unexpected way. Despite regular crisis 
points and the fading of the LTRO effect, we have seen (implied) volatility and skews derived 
from options prices fall to post-crisis lows across a range of markets (Chart 4). One might 
have thought that the heightened sense of uncertainty about economic developments would 
lead to the opposite. What has been going on? 
I think there are several influences pushing down on market volatility. One is the perception 
that  central  banks  are  on  permanent  standby  to  deal  with  tail  risks.  Another  might  be  a 
realisation that certain types of financial protection are not worth having: for example if the 
counterparty  selling  the  insurance  (eg  options  or  CDS)  might  not  survive  the  tail  risk  it  is 
selling protection against. And it has been seen as better not to take such risks rather than to 
try and hedge them. So demand for some types of protection may have fallen for that reason. 
A further observation is that market participants have to some extent grown accustomed to 
the perpetual state of crisis and decided that the show – albeit a chaste and less spectacular 
show  –  must  go  on.  There  are  large  sums  of  money  arising  from  savings  or  other  cash 
balances which must be (re-)invested somewhere. Returns from the safest sovereign assets 
have  been  driven  to  very  low  yields.  And  even  some  risky  assets  –  like  bank  debt  –  are 
getting scarcer as a result of policy actions, directly or indirectly. Where are asset managers 
putting the money? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Chart 4 
Financial market volatility(a)(b) 
Interest rates (RHS)
CDS premia (RHS)
Equities (LHS)
Foreign exchange (LHS)
Basis points
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 08
09
10
11
12
Per cent
100
80
60
40
20
0
07
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange, 
NYSE  Euronext,  JPMorgan  Chase  &  Co.  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a) Three-month option-implied volatilities. 
(b) Average of FTSE 100, S&P 500 and Euro Stoxx 50 for 
equities. Average of three-month short sterling, euro-dollar 
and Euribor for interest rates. Average of five-year on-the-
run 
iTraxx  Europe  main  and  CDX  North  America 
investment-grade for CDS premia. Average of three month 
€per£,  $per£,  $per€,  Yen  per  $,  and  Yenper€  for  foreign 
exchange. 
There has been a renewed search for investible assets going on. Not the old, indiscriminate, 
invest-in-anything-with-a-high-return-and-ask-no-questions  “search-for-yield”.  It  has  so  far 
been a much more calculated hunt. Not so much for return on capital but return of capital. 
Credit  and  liquidity  risks  are  now  being  much  more  thoroughly  appraised.  In  particular, 
investment  firms  have  been  avoiding  the  least  liquid  products.  So  equity-linked  structured 
notes, for example, have been out of fashion. High yield (non-financial) corporate bonds and 
Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) have both been in. But since the risks in some ETFs were 
highlighted  –  by  the  UK’s  new  Financial  Policy  Committee  amongst  others  –  some  of  the 
more complicated ETFs and those with opaque securities lending programmes, have faded 
somewhat. 
It is not that investors are avoiding all credit risk – where it can be properly assessed and a 
diversified  portfolio  is  possible.  For  example,  the  end-investor  demand for  corporate  credit 
ex-financials is generally very strong. 
The announcement of OMTs by the ECB and the other announcements by the US Fed and 
the Bank of Japan, appear to have led to a collective sigh of relief in recent weeks. Yields on 
Spanish and Italian debt have fallen since the announcement – by 100bps or so at 10 years 
– and equity markets are up. I hope that the ECB action lays the foundation for a successful 
resolution of the European debt crisis. The view of markets so far is positive in that regard. I 
would  caution,  however,  that  we  have  been  here  before.  Along  with  every  other  market 
participant I hope that this time will be different. But central banks cannot solve fundamental 
problems in the real economy, even using unconventional measures – they can only give the 
time  and  space  for  governments  and  private  sector  agents  to  do  so.  There  will  now  be  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
period  of  opportunity  for  the  politicians  of  Europe  to  get  on  with  making  the  changes  that 
would really make a long-term difference, such as improving competitiveness in the countries 
of southern Europe. 
To summarise my assessment of markets at this point I would no longer say that they are 
healing. Rather, markets are scarring over – adapting and evolving to the new environment. 
No one is quite sure where the process will end, but the industry has a job to do, including 
investing large sums of money here and now. And in some fashion, reflecting the enhanced 
perceptions of risk, that will continue. 
Given what happened in financial markets, it is no surprise that there are policy initiatives on 
financial market regulation everywhere one chooses to look: Dodd-Frank in the US; EMIR, 
Solvency II and the Crisis Management Directive in the EU; the Independent Commission on 
Banking  (ICB)  proposals  in  the  UK;  the  new  Basel  3  rules  on  capital  and  liquidity  globally 
(CRD  IV  in  Europe),  and  numerous  initiatives  under  the  auspices  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board including defining the key attributes for effective resolution regimes. The full list of new 
rules is much, much longer of course. 
Despite  the  variety  of  authorities  involved,  I  believe  there  is  a  common  thread  behind  the 
policy reactions. Many of the changes have been prompted by perceived excesses in much 
of the financial sector. But in my view, the motivation is not, and should not be, to seek some 
kind of public revenge. The simplest way to understand all these initiatives is that their main 
collective purpose is to avoid public money being needed in future to bail out the financial 
sector. Even though some bail outs have ultimately led to profits being made, the sense of 
injustice around this use of public money makes it extremely unpopular. Solving the “too big 
to fail” problem remains key. 
Meanwhile a debate has been growing as a result of the slow recovery. Is regulation itself 
directly responsible for restraining credit and hence limiting economic growth? I have recently 
argued that this should not be so.2 Safe and sound credit institutions are a necessary part of 
generating sustainable economic growth. If banks hold more capital than they did pre-crisis 
and are less levered, then they will be in a more secure position to provide credit to support 
the  real  economy.  Switzerland  has  made  a  practical  demonstration  of  the  proposition  that 
making banks hold more capital can actually lead to those banks having higher equity prices 
and lower funding costs. We have recently witnessed an example where capital raising by a 
Swiss  bank  was  followed  by  its  equity  price  rising  (and  its  CDS  premium  fell)  on  both  a 
relative and absolute basis. 
Just  as  in  the  debate  about  output  and  inflation,  there  is  no  clear  cut,  stable,  trade-off 
between making banks hold a prudent amount of capital and growth in the medium term. A 
resilient  and  innovative  banking  system  will  support  the  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and 
therefore technical progress and growth.  
Financial  markets  are  fundamentally  about  risk-taking:  credit  risk,  liquidity  risk  and  market 
risk are basic components of even the safest and soundest banking systems. As a society, 
we  need  risk  taking  as  part  of  the  process  of  allocating  capital  to  competing  ends.  And 
people  who  take  risks  –  at  least  with  their  own  money  or  their  own  careers  –  need  to  be 
rewarded (appropriately!) for that risk or they won’t take it. So we are not in a world where, as 
a matter of policy, we want to eliminate financial risk. 
The key is for financial risks to be properly appraised, priced, managed and provisioned. And 
we should discourage some of the cross-subsidisation of different types of risk taking if we 
want risk capital to be appropriately allocated. That includes any perceived public subsidy, 
which is what the ICB recommendations are about. We also want to avoid profits being made 
                                                
2  The Forum, City AM, page 20, September 14 2012 (http://www.cityam.com/forum/why-britain-s-banking-rules-
aren-t-restricting-our-economic-recovery) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
out  of  dishonest  practices  such  as  insufficient  provision  of  information,  the  deliberate 
mis-pricing of risk or other market abuses. The new Financial Conduct Authority will have an 
important role to play in that. 
The regulatory reform process will inevitably take time. And while the process is developing 
there are risks arising from the uncertainty that it brings. We need banks to raise more equity 
capital. But when we ask potential equity investors in banks what is holding them back, they 
often  cite  the  uncertainty  over  the  rules  which  will  affect  their  future  risk  profiles  and 
profitability. Such uncertainty will add a discount to the price of bank equity (although there 
are  many  other  important  factors  too,  such  as  the  uncertain  valuations  of  bank  assets). 
Similar concerns about the rules have affected the attitude of debt investors, particularly the 
debates on “bailing in” senior debt. 
The rule makers are moving as fast as they can. The good news is that, once there is more 
certainty, we should expect a positive response from investors. Within, say, a year or so from 
now,  I  would  expect  a  lot  of  progress  to  have  been  made  such  that  the  outlook  for  the 
financial sector is much brighter – at least in this regard. 
In  the  short-term,  there  can  be  a  more  explicit  trade-off  between  growth  and  regulation, 
particularly  with  liquidity  regulations.  Holding  extra  liquid  assets  to  meet  regulatory  buffers 
can compete with other assets such as loans. (That trade off is not the same for capital – 
capital  is  not  an  asset  on  a  bank’s  balance  sheet  and  the  nature  of  capital  is  often 
misunderstood).  But  how  should  the  authorities  introduce  much  needed  new  liquidity 
regulations in these depressed circumstances? 
We  do  not  want  to  see  the  weakening  of  new  long-term  standards  because  of  short-term 
cyclical  concerns.  Yet  we  don’t  want  the  introduction  of  new  regulations  to  make  a  bad 
economic  situation  worse.  One  could  put  off  deciding  on  new  rules  –  but  the  uncertainty 
would then still act as a drag. The best course seems to be to design and publish the new 
frameworks but delay their implementation. Even this isn’t entirely satisfactory – the market 
will  reward firms  who  meet the  rules  early  as they  will  be  perceived  to have  the  strongest 
balance  sheets.  Competitive  pressure  will  encourage  weaker firms  to  accelerate  their  own 
process so as to keep up, possibly reducing the benefits of a relaxed timetable. 
The  answer  to  these  practical  problems  of  policy  making  is  perhaps  in  the  following  key 
point: the new regulations should be designed  as far as possible to be counter-cyclical so 
that they are less demanding during a crisis such as now, than at other times. Buffers are 
there to be used. If capital and liquidity buffers could not be used during the bad times then 
they serve no purpose: they would just be a deadweight loss on the banking system, shifting 
the point of failure for a firm to a more expensive and hence less efficient location. 
Putting this in concrete terms, the Financial Policy Committee recently recommended to the 
FSA that it make clear that the new liquidity buffers introduced by the FSA in 2010 may be 
used in part, in the event of a liquidity stress, without regulatory over-reaction. Firms don’t 
need to treat the FSA guidance as a hard minimum and hold an extra buffer on top. The FSA 
has  also  been  able  to  lower  micro  prudential  liquidity  requirements  because  of  the  extra 
liquidity backstop being provided by the Bank of England – in particular the ECTR and the 
Funding for Lending Scheme. 
This  example  may  be  important  in  a  wider  sense.  One  of  the  challenges  facing 
macroprudential  policy  is  that  the  instruments  may  not  be  symmetric  in  their  impact.  Put 
crudely, we can make firms hold more capital and liquidity when the going is good. We can’t 
force them to use those buffers when the going is bad, even if the rules are relaxed. Taking 
away  the  stick  isn’t  the  same  as  offering  a  carrot.  Vegetable  metaphors  are  not  always 
welcomed but I think it’s acceptable to suggest that the FLS may be seen as a carrot! And 
the FPC recommendations are perhaps a first example of macro prudential policy being used 
in a co-ordinated way (with central bank actions) to support the resilience of the UK financial 
system,  by  being  counter-cyclical  in  approach.  This  ability  to  co-ordinate  may  also 
demonstrate the benefits of some shared membership across the FPC and MPC.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I want to turn now to the Funding for Lending Scheme in the context of our announcements 
this  morning  of  the first  banks  and  building  societies  to  have  signed  up  and  their  stock of 
sterling lending to UK firms and households at end-June 2012 (Table 1) that will be used as 
a reference point. Together these banks account for around 73% of the stock of lending to 
UK  households  and  corporates.  I  should  also  note  that  a  significant  number  of  other 
institutions are close to signing up too and we will update this table in due course. In addition, 
we will publish the first set of drawdown data in December, although you will have seen that 
one bank has already announced that it has drawn £1bn and plans to draw more. That said, 
it will probably take some time for banks to review fully their lending plans, and it is likely that 
drawings from the FLS will be spread out over the full window to end-2013. 
 Table 1 
FLS data 
The table below includes all participating groups that had signed up to the scheme  
and certified their Base Stock of loans by 24/09/2012 
FLS Group 
Certified lending to UK households and PNFCs 
(£mn) 
Aggregate 
outstanding FLS 
drawings (£mn) 
Base Stock of 
loans as at 
30/06/12 
Quarterly net 
lending flow 
Cumulative net 
lending since 
30/06/2012 
TOTAL 
Aldermore 
Barclays 
Hinckley & Rugby Building 
Society 
Ipswich Building Society 
Kleinwort Benson 
Leeds Building Society 
Lloyds Banking Group 
Monmouthshire Building 
Society 
Nationwide Building Society 
Principality Building Society 
RBS Group 
Santander 
Virgin Money 
1,211,736 
1,567  
181,020  
433  
444  
11  
7,567  
443,255  
629  
152,155  
5,408  
214,816  
189,339  
15,093  
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
The FLS measure of lending covers drawn sterling loans to households and private non-financial corporations 
(PNFCs) by the FLS Group, which includes all UK resident monetary financial institutions and related specialist 
mortgage lenders within a group. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  FLS  has  been  implemented  in  large  part  because  of  the  developments  in  financial 
markets I have described: an example of the important and powerful linkages between the 
real  economy  and  the financial  sector. The  continued  uncertainties  about  the future  of  the 
Eurozone  and  about  the  European  banking  system  meant  that  during  the  past  two  years 
bank funding markets have had periodic bouts of closure. And when open, spreads of bank 
debt over risk-free rates have remained elevated. A number of large UK banks still rely on 
wholesale markets for funding at the margin and higher wholesale funding costs have spilled 
over  into  other  funding  markets  –  driving  up  retail  deposit  rates  for  example.  Prior  to  the 
announcement  of  the  FLS,  banks  were  passing  on  their  elevated  funding  costs  to  their 
lending rates. Over the 12 months to mid-2012, we saw lending rates to businesses and for 
mortgages rising (Chart 5). Furthermore, the Bank of England’s 2012 Q2 Credit Conditions 
Survey  of  UK  banks  suggested  that  household  secured  and  corporate  lending  rates  were 
expected to rise further. 
 
Chart 5 
Chart 6 
Change in bank funding and mortgage 
rates between 31 July 2011  
and 31 May 2012 
Annual lending growth to households 
and companies(a) 
Per cent
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
  (a)  Based  on  scheme  definition.  Sterling  loans  to 
related 
banks  and  building  societies 
specialist  mortgage 
lenders) 
resident 
households and private non-financial corporations. 
(including 
to  UK 
 
Although only a small rise in absolute terms, according to our business contacts this increase 
in interest rates was accompanied by generally tighter lending standards, reflected in broader 
changes in terms and conditions, and came after two years of flat GDP growth and 3 years of 
declining credit growth to households and businesses in the UK (Chart 6). And despite this 
being  a  period  in  which  the  MPC  re-launched  quantitative  easing,  helping  to  bring  down 
longer term yields on gilts to record lows.  
Central  banks  should  not  normally  have  to  intervene  to  provide  banks  with  medium-term 
funding at reasonable spreads. But enough was enough! The FLS will not address any of the 
underlying problems in the euro area or in the financial sector, but given that many of those 
problems  are  outside  the  UK’s  direct  control,  it became  necessary  for  us  to  do  something 
innovative. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I want to use this opportunity today to expound on some of the principles underlying the FLS. 
It is a deceptively simple scheme and inevitably there will be some misunderstanding about 
what it is intended to achieve and how it works.3  
To begin, I wish to make clear that the FLS has been designed to support the UK economy, 
not the banks. There were many features of the scheme for which we made different choices 
because  of  that  over-riding  objective  –  full,  quarterly  disclosure  of  usage,  bank  by  bank, 
being the most obvious. 
Let me summarise the key features of the FLS for those who have not followed the details. 
We  will  reduce  the  funding  costs  for  banks  and  building  societies  by  providing  them  with 
relatively  cheap  liquidity.  In  practice  by  lending  them  Treasury  Bills  for  up  to  four  years  in 
exchange  for  the  widest  possible  range  of  collateral  that  the  Bank  can  accept  –  including 
pre-positioned  portfolios  of  loans.  Those  Treasury  Bills  can  be  used  as  liquid  assets  to 
support an expansion of lending or turned into cash if necessary. We will charge a fee of just 
25 basis points per annum as long as a bank’s stock of lending does not contract over the 
period to end 2013.  
The firms will have that 18 months to draw down the bills. This is essentially a swap of highly 
liquid  assets  for  illiquid  ones  and  part  of  a  wider  programme  where  the  Bank  has  been 
extending the range of collateral that it can take in such operations. So portfolios of loans are 
now eligible collateral for the first time in our market-wide facilities. One of the benefits of this 
expansion  is  that  our  operations  are  now  much  more  accessible  to  smaller  banks  and 
building societies that don’t have large portfolios of tradable securities.  
Every firm that signs up to the FLS will be able to borrow an amount equal to at least 5% of 
their initial stock of lending on a standard definition for which the Bank already collects data.4 
If the firm expands its lending over the period until end-2013, they will be able to borrow an 
equivalent  additional  amount  too.  There  are therefore  strong  incentives for  banks  to  boost 
lending  because  every  pound  of  additional  lending  increases  the  amount  that  a  bank  can 
borrow cheaply by a pound.5  
If a firm’s lending stock contracts, however, they can only access up to  that 5% allocation 
and the price of the scheme will also be higher – rising linearly to a maximum of 150 basis 
points if their lending contracts by 5% or more. 
You might reasonably ask some questions: 
• 
• 
Why have we set this minimum access amount and complicated pivot in the price? 
How  can  we  be  sure  that  any  increase  in  credit  flows  to  where  it  may  be  most 
needed? In particular to SME businesses and to first-time home buyers. 
What if there just isn’t sufficient demand for credit? 
Won’t the banks just pocket the benefits of the cheap funding? 
• 
• 
Indeed those are some of the questions I am most often asked and where I want to put some 
answers on the record today. 
                                                
3  The  Bank  published  an  explanatory  note  on  the  FLS,  available  here:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
markets/Documents/explanatory_notefls120713.pdf 
4  Drawn sterling loans to UK private non-financial corporations (PNFCs) and households, by the FLS Group, 
which includes all UK resident monetary financial institutions and related specialist mortgage lenders within a 
group. 
If their lending expands by 7% for example, then they can draw down an amount of treasury bills equal to 
(7+5=) 12% of their initial stock. 
5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
The  first  point  I  want  to  make  in  reply  is  that  banking  in  the  UK  is  far  from  a  perfectly 
competitive market. The six biggest lenders account for the vast majority of lending to UK 
businesses and households – and the seventh largest accounts for less than a third as much 
as  number  six.  In  large  part  the  quantitative  success  of  the  scheme  will  depend  on  what 
these larger lenders do. 
But  each  bank  is  in  a  different  strategic  position  to  start  with.  They  will  all  have  some 
portfolios they wish to shrink, and others to expand. But some were planning to reduce their 
overall stock of lending, given market conditions and their own capital and liquidity positions. 
And some had been ordered to reduce parts of their lending because they had received state 
aid. The  FLS  is  not  intended  to undermine  competitive  and financial  stability  objectives  by 
forcing  banks  to  change  such  strategic  decisions.  What  we  do  want  to  encourage  is  an 
expansion of their core portfolios. And we want to encourage new entrants to step in and pick 
up where the major banks cannot.  
So  the  answer  to  the  first  question  about  the  minimum  allowance  and  asymmetric  pricing 
structure is that they are designed to encourage more core lending from those banks who 
nevertheless must shrink their balance sheets in aggregate – the macro impacts of the FLS 
won’t be sufficient unless those banks have an incentive to participate. And the banks who 
can expand lending will benefit from the lowest price and greater proportionate access. The 
scheme is designed so that every firm has the potential to use it to support lending. 
But what this means is that we cannot expect every bank in the FLS to increase its stock of 
lending to the real economy over the 18-month period. It is to be expected that some firms 
still  show  an  overall  reduction,  even  if  the  FLS  is  successful.  The  crucial  impact  will  be 
whether the FLS enables them to lend more than they would have done in its absence. 
The Bank cannot give details of an individual firm’s previous or new lending plans. It is for 
each  of  them  to  explain  how  the  FLS  enables  them  to  support  the  economy.  Most  have 
already  announced  reductions  in  some  interest  rates  or  a  loosening  of  other  terms  and 
conditions.  Some  will  respond  by  lending  to  firms  that  they  would  previously  not,  because 
they  can  now  earn  a  return  that  compensates  for  the  extra  risk.  All  these  approaches  will 
help. 
Of course, one of the big problems facing a macroeconomic policy maker is the difficulty of 
setting out ex ante success criteria. We can’t perform controlled experiments on the macro 
economy. What matters is whether policy makes the outcome better than it would otherwise 
have been – but that alternative reality – the “counterfactual” in economic speak – is always 
a matter of conjecture and debate. Nevertheless I believe the scheme provides all the right 
incentives to increase the supply of credit.  
A  second  problem  for  macroeconomic  policy  is  that  we  cannot  rely  on  the  usual  “ceteris 
paribus”  assumption  of  economic  theory  –  when  we  make  large  changes  in  policy  then 
everything else changes too, including the behaviour and expectations of those very people 
we are trying to influence. And policy effects which are relatively small can nevertheless be 
absolutely significant if the policy change is large enough. In fact, the FLS is designed to take 
advantage of the pressures to change behaviour. 
The FLS provides strong incentives to banks and building societies themselves – because 
the  more  they  lend,  the  more  they  benefit.  Either  because  of  the  price  effect  on  those 
deleveraging and/or quantity effects on those expanding. And we have built in incentives that 
enhance  competitive  pressures  between  the  lenders.  They  cannot  afford  to  miss  out  on 
lending opportunities – or their competitors will take advantage. 
I think this will help answer the second question about whether lending will go to the people 
who are perceived as most need in need of it. The FLS does not seek to allocate credit to 
particular parts of the economy directly – the Bank is not taking a view on this matter. But 
SMEs  and  first  time  home  buyers  in  particular  are  thought  to  be  credit  hungry.  Banks  will 
collectively need to meet that demand if they are individually to make the most of the FLS. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Not  necessarily  every  bank  will  support  every  sector.  But  if  the  big  firms  don’t  then  the 
smaller banks will. We are relying on the pressures of demand and supply, and competition, 
to ensure that credit flows to where there is demand. 
The normal business model of a bank is that their lending rates are related to their funding 
rates. The process for doing so is not immediate and funding from different sources – both 
retail  and  wholesale,  secured  and  unsecured,  might  be  used  to  support  lending  activities. 
There is no reason to think that the provision of cheaper funding via the FLS  will cause a 
bank to change its business model in this regard. Indeed the incentives in the scheme are for 
banks and building societies to cut lending rates and hence lend more to get the cheapest 
funding. Since the scheme was announced we have seen widespread falls in funding costs 
across  different  sources  and  an  equally  wide  variety  of  lending  rate  reductions.  The  final 
benefit  in  terms  of  lower  lending  rates  is  uncertain:  I  can  envisage  strategies  in  which  the 
degree of pass through ends up being less than 100% or greater than 100%. The key point is 
that if the cost of funds is reduced, the supply of credit expands and hence the quantity of 
lending should rise. 
So  will  the  banks make  more money  as  a  result  of the  FLS? Well  they  should  try  to! The 
scheme  depends  on  banks  exploiting  the  opportunity  to  make  more  loans  and  more 
profitable loans because that is in everyone’s interest. If they don’t respond by lending more 
than they otherwise would have done, competition will probably mean that they make fewer 
profits  because  other  firms  will  take  their  business.  Shareholders  should  be  urging 
management to take advantage of the opportunity. The fact that, by signing up, banks and 
building  societies  agree  to  the  Bank  of  England  publishing  details  of  their  usage  of  the 
scheme, means that pressure will be more intense. 
What of the question on the state of demand? I have personally talked to businesses in many 
different  parts  of  the  country.  Those  SMEs  who  have  got  the  finance  they  wanted  –  and 
many have, despite the unfavourable public commentary – complain about the length of time 
it has taken, the bureaucratic processes and the onerous terms and conditions. Few have 
actually complained to me about the price of their new loans – but many have come under 
pressure to renegotiate existing cheaper arrangements. So how will the FLS help? 
Let’s be clear on one thing. It is up to the banks whom they lend to. If a firm goes under, or 
simply can’t repay its loan, that bank loses money: under the FLS the credit risk stays with 
the banks. And it is not our intention that banks put themselves at risk by making imprudent 
loans. Although there are many good quality businesses seeking extra credit, not every one 
is as good a credit risk as they might make out to their local journalist or MP, so we need to 
be wary of judgement by anecdote. 
But the FLS will put the pressure on banks to lend where they profitably can. That may “turn 
the  conversation  around”  as  banks  do  more  to  seek  out  lending  opportunities  rather  than 
businesses  or  home  buyers  struggling  to  find  accommodating  banks.  If  demand  for  credit 
turns out to be weak then that will add to the competitive pressures on the supply of credit. 
In summary, I am confident that the FLS will help the supply of credit. Before its introduction, 
it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the  stock  of  credit  would  contract  further  over  the  next 
18 months.  Perhaps  it  still  may.  But  any  return to  positive  credit growth  would  be  a  better 
outcome than we could have previously hoped for. 
But I want to underline one thing about the expected outcome: I expect banks’ usage of the 
scheme  to  exceed  their  lending  growth.  Partly  because  I  know  some  banks  are  acting 
against a base case of contraction. And partly because some of the funding could be used to 
refinance existing loans at cheaper rates. But also in the first instance, we have set it up so 
that the funding can be drawn down in advance or as it is needed, not with a delay. That is 
just one of the features designed with the macroeconomic benefits in mind. At every stage 
we asked ourselves how the design choice would best support lending growth. I believe we 
have made the right choices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
I would like to conclude by noting that one lesson from the crisis is just how important it is to 
have a properly functioning financial sector, expert in allocating savings to consumption and 
investment. Financial markets are not there to line the pockets of the participants. They exist 
because  there  are  social  and  economic  benefits  from  the  services  they  provide.  I  believe 
most  of  the  industry  understands  and  accepts  this.  We  need  to  focus  on  policies  which 
encourage those benefits. For policy to be effective, it also needs to be joined up. The FLS, 
jointly launched by Bank and HM Treasury, and with supporting actions from the MPC, the 
FPC  and  the  FSA  shows  that  the  new  arrangements  among  these  authorities  can  ensure 
that policies work together to get the economy back on track to meet the objectives of low 
and stable inflation, sustained growth and financial stability.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
