Stefan Gerlach: Housing markets and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Gerlach,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the 
National University of Ireland, Galway, 20 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is an honour for me to participate in this conference on “Contemporary Housing Issues in a 
Changing Europe.”1 This is my first trip in Ireland away from Dublin and I am very pleased to 
be here.  
As you all well know, there are many aspects of housing that influence, and are the objective 
of,  public  policy.  Policy  makers  in  Ireland  and  abroad  thus  worry  about  the  cost  and 
availability  of  housing,  the  role  of  planning  procedures  in  housing  development,  and  the 
rights of tenants and distressed mortgage borrowers, to mention but just a few a topics. 
It will therefore come as no surprise to you that central banks and financial regulators also 
worry a great deal about the housing market and the banks and households that are its key 
actors. To fit with the broad theme of the conference, I have decided to talk this afternoon on 
the topic of “Housing Markets and Financial Stability.” The main focus of my talk is to explain 
why  central  banks  are  concerned  about  housing  market  developments.  One  reason  is  the 
risk  of  housing  bubbles  that  can  have  far-reaching  implications  for  financial  stability.  I  will 
therefore also discuss what policies can be adopted to mitigate the likelihood that a bubble 
occurs and the consequences if it does. Following the financial crisis, central banks across 
the world will attach even greater weight to housing market developments, so this is a timely 
topic.  
Central banks and the housing market 
It  is  useful  to  start  by  asking  why  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  worry  about  the 
housing market.2 They do so for three reasons: for monetary policy purposes; for financial 
regulatory reasons and because of financial stability concerns.  
First, the housing market is a key link in the chain of events through which monetary policy 
impacts on the economy. Since housing is typically constructed or purchased using borrowed 
funds,  the  cost  of  borrowing  is  a  major  part  of  the  overall  cost  of  housing.  A  tightening  of 
monetary  policy  increases  these  costs  and  therefore  moderates  the  demand  for  housing, 
which reduces property prices and leads to a fall in construction activity.  
The decline in property prices also decreases collateral values and banks’ willingness and 
ability  to  lend  to  firms  and  households.  Furthermore,  it  also  reduces  households’  wealth 
perceptions.  The  overall  effect  is  to  lower  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  the 
economy, economic activity and inflation pressures. 
But while crucially important, the role of housing in the monetary transmission mechanism is 
well known and in the interest of brevity I will not focus on it here. 
                                                 
1  Address  given  at  the  conference  on  “Contemporary  Housing  Issues  in  a  Changing  Europe,”  National 
University of Ireland, Galway, April 20, 2012. I am grateful to Rebecca Stuart for her help in preparing this 
speech. 
2  The Central Bank of Ireland is both a central bank and a financial regulator. In what follows I will not make a 
distinction between central banks and financial regulators. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The second reason central banks worry about the housing market arises from the fact that 
mortgages are the single biggest financial transaction most households undertake. Property 
lending  is  a  major  component  of  households’  liabilities  and  an  important  exposure  of 
mortgage  lenders.  Central  Banks  that  have  responsibility  for  micro-prudential  supervision 
and regulation and for customer protection, as the Central Bank of Ireland does, will wish to 
ensure that individual banks make sound lending decisions in order to protect their balance 
sheets and that they deal fairly with customers. 
Given  the  developments  in  Irish  housing  markets  in  recent  years,  my  colleagues  at  the 
Central Bank have given a number of speeches on mortgage markets and mortgages arrears 
in the recent past.3 I will therefore not discuss this aspect of housing markets today.  
The third reason central banks are concerned by housing markets is, as we have seen in 
Ireland, that large declines in property prices can trigger an episode of financial instability. 
The borrowing capacity and credit demand of households and firms are affected by changes 
in  the  prices  of  properties.  Since  they  are  often  used  as  collateral  for  bank  lending,  rising 
property  prices  are  typically  associated  with  rapid  credit  expansion.  Developments  in  the 
property  market  therefore  affect  banks’  capital  positions  and  their  lending  capacity,  both 
directly  through  changes  in  the  valuation  of  their  holdings  of  real  estate  assets  and,  if 
property prices fall, indirectly via changes in non-performing loans.  
A  sharp  fall  in  property  prices  can  lead  to  financial  instability  in  many  ways.  A  decline  in 
prices tends to be associated with economic weakness as housing construction grinds to a 
halt,  triggering  financial  strains  and  defaults  among  property  developers,  construction 
companies and real estate firms. Rising unemployment also leads to mortgage arrears and 
defaults among households. The overall effect can be a sharp worsening of banks’ balance 
sheets. 
It  is  this  link  between  housing  prices  and  financial  stability  that  I  wish  to  focus  on  this 
afternoon. 
Property bubbles 
Next  I  will  review  how  the  property  bubble  developed  here  in  Ireland  and  put  it  into  an 
international  context.  My  main  point  is  that  housing  bubbles  are  not  only  highly  adverse 
events, but they are common and similar. Nevertheless, too few policy makers have learned 
too little from the historical experience.  
Figure  1  shows  annual  property  price  indices  in  nominal  terms  from  the  BIS  website  for 
10 countries,  indexed  so  that  1999  equals  100.  The  figure  tells  a  familiar  story:  property 
prices rose sharply across the world in the decade before the financial crisis started in 2007. 
The  diversity  of  the  price  changes  between  1999  and  2007  is  staggering,  ranging  from  
–6% in Germany to over 160% in Spain, which corresponds to an average annual increase 
of between –0.85 and 12%. These large differences between countries in the extent of the 
price  increases  are  interesting.  It  is  particularly  notable  that  the  price  increases  in  the  
US  –  75%  in  this  period  or  7%  annually  –  were  rather  modest  from  an  international 
perspective.  
Figure 2 shows credit expansion in the same economies, using data from the IMF. As can be 
seen, the run-up in property prices was associated with large increases also in credit, which 
varied between 23% in Germany to in excess of 400% in Ireland. 
                                                 
3  See,  for  instance,  Governor  Honohan’s  address  to  the  University  of  Limerick  Law  Society  on  “Household 
Indebtedness:  Context,  Consequence  &  Correction”  on  14  March,  2012,  and  Deputy  Governor  Matthew 
Elderfield’s address to the Harvard Business School Alumni Club of Ireland on “Mortgage Arrears Resolution: 
Where Next?” on 2 March, 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
future 
Indeed, 
for  housing. 
their  demand 
income  and  raise 
The  fact  that  credit  and  housing  prices  rose  together  can  be  interpreted  in  several  ways. 
Many believe that it reflects changes in banks’ willingness and ability to lend – arising, for 
instance,  from  excessively  expansionary  monetary  policy,  securitisation  and  reduced  risk 
perceptions – that triggered property price bubbles across the world.  
But  it  is  also  possible  that  rapid  economic  growth  led  households  to  revise  up  their 
expectations  of 
the 
macroeconomic  environment  before  the  start  of  a  property  bubble  is  typically  highly 
favourable. This was certainly the case in Ireland, where real GDP grew at an average rate 
of 6% per year in the period 2000 to 2006.  
Specifically,  asset  prices  were  rising,  labour  market  participation  rates  and  nominal  wage 
growth were high and unemployment was low. With the housing stock essentially given at 
any  point  in  time,  greater  demand  for  housing  leads  to  sharp  and  sustained  increases  in 
property  prices.  Such  advantageous  conditions  can  lead  households  to  expect  additional 
capital  gains  that  typically  exceed  the  cost  of  borrowing,  triggering  further  increases  in 
property demand.  
As we now know, the global property market boom was followed by a collapse in prices that 
has cumulatively been very large. Among the countries in Figure 1 which have experienced 
price  declines  over  the  period,  falls  have  been  between  46%  in  Ireland  and  3%  in  New 
Zealand between 2007 and 2011.4 The left-hand panel of Figure 3 shows that the size of fall 
mirrored the increase before the crisis.  
However,  the  sheer  size  of  a  rise  in  property  prices  is  not  the  most  important  factor  in 
determining  how  severe  the  bust  will  be.  Rather,  what  matters  is  whether  the  asset  price 
boom  is  funded  by  credit.  If  so,  the  evidence  suggests  that  the  cost  of  a  bust  is  much 
greater.5 
The  right-hand  panel  of  Figure  3  shows  that  house  price  falls  following  the  crisis  are 
negatively related to the extent of credit expansion before the crisis. Overall, these data show 
that the rapid increases in property prices and credit are typically followed by large price falls.  
Thus, the IMF (2011a) studies a number of emerging market and advanced economies and 
finds  that  faster  growth  in  mortgage  credit  during  booms  was  accompanied  by  stronger 
house  price  growth  at  the  time,  and  greater  house  price  declines  and  larger  increases  in 
non-performing  loans  during  busts.  Furthermore,  IMF  (2012)  finds  that  housing  busts  and 
recessions associated with higher leverage in the boom phase tend to be longer and more 
severe, while Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2011) find that recessions preceded by greater 
private-sector leverage6 are associated with worse outcomes in terms of economic growth, 
investment  spending,  and  credit  growth  than  those  associated  with  less  leverage.  These 
effects  are  amplified  if  the  recession  coincided  with  a  financial  crisis.7  Overall,  the 
international  evidence  shows  that  mortgage  credit  growth  and  the  state  of  the  economy 
                                                 
4  The Irish decline is based on CSO data for end-2011. 
5  For  instance,  the  dot-com  bubble  was  not  primarily  funded  by  the  banking  sector  and  was  followed  by  a 
relatively mild recession. For a discussion on this, see Crowe et al. (2011a). 
6  Measured as domestic bank credit as a proportion of GDP. 
7  Mian and Sufi (2011) show that US counties which were more highly leveraged before the crisis had greater 
declines  in  employment  growth,  residential  investment  growth  and  consumption  growth  following  the  crisis. 
Dynan (2012) finds that the reduction in spending of highly leveraged households is greater than  would be 
predicted  by  the  impact  of  house  price  declines  alone.  This  may  be  because  highly  leveraged  households 
reduce  spending  to  pay  down  debt,  and  because  highly  leveraged  households  may  no  longer  be  able  to 
access credit, thus reducing consumption. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
during the boom explain most of the subsequent differences in house prices and bank loan 
losses.8 
The recent financial crisis was started in much the same way as many other crises, that is, 
by a huge property price bubble that was financed by massive credit expansion by banks.9 
Such dramatic falls in house prices as were experienced during the crisis were followed by 
widespread  fragility  in  the  financial  sector  as  borrowers’  balance  sheets  became  stressed. 
Once  the  falls  became  large  enough  and  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  borrowers  were 
affected, a full-blown financial crisis ensued.  
House prices, financial crises and fiscal stability 
Unfortunately, the Irish housing bubble was not an atypical event. It is therefore of interest to 
look  more  generally  at  property  price  booms  and  financial  stability  to  see  what  the 
consequences  of  the  bursting  of  a  housing  bubble  are.  In  this  section  I  look  first  at  the 
consequences for the broader economy before looking at their impact on governments’ fiscal 
positions. 
Macroeconomic effects of housing bubbles 
Financial crises associated with speculative boom-bust episodes have been traced back as 
far  as  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  in  the  17th  century.10  Not  all  of  these,  of  course,  relate  to 
property  bubbles,  although  many  do.  Indeed,  there  is  ample  historical  evidence  of  house 
price boom-bust cycles and their economic effects.  
Work by the IMF11 found that approximately 40 per cent of house price booms were followed 
by  busts,12  resulting  in,  on  average,  30  per  cent  house  price  declines,  and  lasting  for 
approximately four years. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) find that the cumulative decline in real 
house  prices,  from  peak  to  trough,  is  in  excess  of  35  per  cent  over  an  average  period  of 
6 years, although declines of 50 and 60 per cent have also been recorded (Figure 4).13 
So house price booms frequently end in a bust. But how frequently do they end in a financial 
crisis? Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) in their celebrated study of financial bubbles show that 
house  price  increases  are  indeed  common  prior  to  banking  crises  (Figure  5).  Bordo  and 
Jeanne  (2002)  find  that  financial  crises  are  generally  triggered  when  house  prices  have 
peaked, or immediately after they have started falling. Of 15 advanced economies over the 
period 1970–2002, they identified 20 episodes of housing booms, of which 11 were followed 
by a bust. Of these 11 boom-bust cycles, 6 involved banking crises.14 Crowe et al. (2011a) 
                                                 
8  See IMF (2011a). 
9  Kindleberger and Aliber (2011) state that “Bubbles result from the growth of credit that proves too high to be 
sustainable; when the credit growth slows, some asset prices begin to decline”. 
10  See Kindleberger and Aliber (2011) for a history of bubbles and crashes. 
11  IMF (2003). The analysis is carried out on 14 countries. 
12  ECB (2003) finds that 55 per cent of booms in real house prices in EU countries were followed by busts. 
13  Japan experienced a long decline in house prices following the 1992 crisis. However, excluding Japan from 
the sample still leaves the average  duration of house prices declines following financial crises in excess of 
5 years. Claessens et al. (2008b) find that house prices decline for an extended period, “typically much more 
than three years”. 
14  In a study of 14 OECD countries, Barrell et al. (2010) find that a single percentage point rise in real house 
price  growth  is  sufficient  to  raise  the  probability  of  a  crisis  in  the  range  of  0.07%  (in  the  US)  to  0.74%  (in 
France). The unweighted average marginal effect of the 14 individual country effects is 0.31%. Reinhart and 
Rogoff (2009a) find that real house prices are one of the best indicators of banking crises. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
show that, of 23 countries that experienced booms in both real estate and credit before the 
crisis, 21 experienced either a financial crisis or a significant drop in GDP growth, while of the 
seven  countries  that  experienced  a  boom  in  real  estate  only,  just  two  had  a  systemic 
financial crisis.15 
The evidence regarding the impact on the real economy is similarly stark. Recessions that 
coincide with housing busts are, on average, longer and more pronounced than others.16 The 
macroeconomic effects of the bursting of a bubble are studied in Claessens et al. (2008b).17 
They find that the prolonged nature of house price declines following busts has a significant 
impact on a range of real economy indicators (Figure 6). Specifically, they find that output, 
investment and credit begin to decline once house prices have peaked, while consumption is 
slowing.  Inflation  typically  increases  for  a  number  of  quarters  after  the  house  price  peak, 
before  declining  sharply.  The  unemployment  response  is  even  more  lagged,  remaining 
steady for almost 2 years before increasing. It is therefore no surprise that almost five years 
after housing prices started to fall, the recovery in Ireland is still very weak.  
The left-hand panel of Figure 7 shows the evolution of house prices, from their peak, through 
the  crisis  period  for  a  sample  of  the  “Big  Five”  crisis  countries  identified  by  Reinhart  and 
Rogoff  (2009a),  Korea  and  Ireland.18  Clearly,  Ireland  has  experienced  a  comparatively 
severe  house  price  drop.  The  right-hand  panel  of  Figure  7  shows  the  falls  in  GDP  in  the 
same economies. Ireland has also experienced one of the greatest falls in real GDP and one 
of the slowest recoveries.  
It is interesting to note the difference in the time frame for recovery between house prices 
and  GDP.  While  GDP  in  this  sample  of  countries  typically  recovered  to  peak  levels  within 
6 years,  the  recovery  in  house  prices  was  much  delayed.  In  the  Nordic  countries,  the 
recovery  took  between  10  and  22  years,  while  house  prices  have  not  yet  recovered  to 
pre-crisis levels in Korea and continue to decline in Japan. 
Overall, these graphs suggests that economic activity in Ireland will recover only gradually 
and that it may take a long time before house prices return to their level in 2007. 
Public debt and deficits 
Another,  related  consequence  of  a  financial  crisis  is  a  sharp  deterioration  of  government 
finances.  Nowhere  have  the  consequences  for  public  finances  of  the  financial  crisis  that 
started in 2007 been more apparent than in Ireland. However, the Irish experience was not 
an outlier. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) find that public debt rises, on average, over 85 per 
cent following a financial crisis.19 
There are three reasons why public finances deteriorate so much after a financial crisis. First, 
the  economic  slowdown  reduces  tax  collections.  The  resulting  loss  of  revenue  was 
particularly  dramatic  in  Ireland  where  during  the  boom  years  the  government  relied 
increasingly on taxes that were dependent on the state of the business cycle, and on activity 
in  the  housing  market  in  particular.  When  the  crisis  struck,  tax  revenue  collapsed 
                                                 
15  See Crowe et al. (2011a). 
16  See Claessens et al. (2008a). 
17  See also IMF (2003), which finds that house price busts following booms resulted in an average output loss of 
8% of GDP, and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) who find declines in real GDP around severe banking crises 
average 9.3 per cent, and that, on average, the unemployment rate rises for almost 5 years, increasing around 
7 percentage points during this time. 
18  The “Big five” crises are Japan (1992), Norway (1987), Sweden (1991), Finland (1991) and Spain (1977). 
19  This figure is reported as an increase in the stock, rather than as a percentage of GDP, as declines in GDP 
can make this ratio difficult to compare across countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
translates 
into  greater  need 
for 
(see Figure 8).  Second,  weaker  economic  growth 
government expenditure on unemployment support and social welfare (see Figure 9). Third, 
if banks incur sufficiently large losses, the government may be forced to inject capital in the 
banking system, potentially leading to large increases in public debt. 
Ireland’s current fiscal problems largely result from the effect of the housing bubble on the 
public  debt.  As  Figure  10  shows,  following  the  onset  of  the  crisis  in  2007,  Ireland  has 
experienced  very  large  public  deficits  and  a  rise  in  the  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  from 
25% in 2007 to 105% in 2011. This increase in public debt was so large that investors grew 
concerned  about  the  Government’s  ability  to  service  the  debt,  impairing  the  Government’s 
access to financial markets in 2010 and requiring outside financial assistance. 
This  large  public  debt  makes  it  very  difficult  for  the  Government  to  support  economic 
recovery through any sort of expansionary fiscal policy. Indeed, the sheer size of the debt 
requires the Government to pursue tight fiscal policies. It also has to be borne in mind that, 
should banks’ loan losses rise further than currently expected, further upward pressure would 
be put on an already high debt ratio.  
Macro-prudential policy 
Given the devastating consequences housing bubbles can have, policy makers have good 
reasons  to  attempt  to  prevent  them.  But,  while  some  housing  bubbles  are  followed  by  a 
crisis,  not  all  are.  Unfortunately,  it  is  impossible  to  know  in  advance  which  bubbles  are 
followed  by  a  crisis.20  This  uncertainty  can  bias  policy  makers  in  favour  of  inaction.  One 
particular  problem  is  that  the  boom  phase  is  associated  with  rapid  growth  of  real  income, 
falling unemployment, rising tax revenues, increasing asset prices and high bank profitability. 
With  households,  government  and  banks  all  doing  well,  there  is  little  political  support  for 
policies  intended  to  prevent  the  bubble  from  growing  further,  even  when  policy  makers 
believe  them  necessary.  To  avoid  such  a  scenario,  the  policy  makers  responsible  for  the 
overall health of the financial system – the macro prudential authority – must have a clear 
mandate and be independent.  
Following the crisis, there has been much work on the development of macro-prudential tools 
that  reduce  the  likelihood  of  property-driven  financial  crises,  and  that  reduce  or  limit  their 
consequences  if  they  do  occur.  As  the  Central  Bank  is  the  macro-prudential  authority  in 
Ireland,21 the bank is following this debate closely.   
What are macro-prudential tools? The IMF (2011c) proposes two criteria. First, they explicitly 
and specifically target the build-up of risk across the financial system – systemic risk – as the 
bubble grows. Second, they are controlled by the macro-prudential authority.22 However, few 
macro-prudential tools have been used systematically and there is little practical experience 
for policy makers to rely on.23 Nonetheless, several tools that target real estate lending have 
                                                 
20  Costly property bubbles could potentially be identified by early warning systems. For a discussion, see Barrell 
et al. (2010). 
21  This  mandate  is  provided  in  Article  6A(2(a))  of  the  Central  Bank  Reform  Act  2010.  Available  here: 
http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0023/index.html. 
22  Many public policies (such as micro prudential, monetary or tax policy) impact on the property market but do 
not constitute macro prudential policy. 
23  For  instance,  Crowe  et  al.  (2011b)  note  that  of  a  sample  of  36  countries,  as  at  September  2010  only 
3 reported  “actively”  implementing  Loan-to-value,  or  Loan-to-Income,  limits  to  address  property  market 
developments. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(LTI) 
ratios 
target 
limits  on 
(LTV)  and 
loan-to-value 
loan-to-income 
been  adopted  in  a  small  number  of  economies.24  They  can  be  grouped  in  three  broad 
categories.25  
The first category relates to capital requirements on property lending. For instance, capital 
requirements for mortgages for buy-to-let properties could be increased relative to those for 
primary  dwellings.  This  would  tend  to  reduce  this  type  of  lending,  which  appears  to  be 
associated  with  greater  credit  risk,  and  ensure  that  banks’  resilience  is  bolstered  by  the 
additional capital buffer.26  
Second, dynamic provisioning requires banks to hold provisions against expected losses due 
to credit risks. This tool has been implemented in Spain, where banks are required to build 
up  buffers  against  performing  loans  in  an  upturn,  which  can  then  be  drawn  down  in  a 
recession.27  This  naturally  slows  bank  lending  in  the  boom  phase  and  leaves  banks  in  a 
better position to withstand loan losses in a crash.  
Third, 
the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers  more  explicitly.  While  LTV  limits  help  ensure  that  the 
underlying  collateral  –  the  property  –  is  sufficient  to  cover  the  loan,  were  the  borrower  to 
default,  LTI  limits  enhance  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers  by  limiting  their  repayment 
burden. Tightening these ratios in the as the boom gets underway raises the ability of the 
financial system to cope if the bubble bursts. Their potential use in Ireland warrants further 
reflection.28  
It is sometimes argued that tighter monetary policy – higher interest rates – is the appropriate 
way to deal with property bubbles. However, monetary policy is a blunt tool that affects all 
lending, risky and less risky. In contrast, macro prudential tools can be targeted narrowly on 
the most risky borrowers. Such a sharp focus may lower the overall cost of preventive action.  
However,  the  narrow  focus  may  enable  borrowers  and  lenders  to  seek  to  circumvent  the 
restrictions. For instance, Crowe et al. (2011a) report that, in Korea lower LTV limits were 
implemented for loans of less than 3 years substantially increasing the popularity of loans of 
three years and one day. Furthermore, LTV limits have been circumvented by taking out a 
personal loan to cover a portion of the house price. Moreover, measures aimed at limiting 
credit  provision  by  banks  risk  pushing  lending  into  other,  less  regulated,  sectors.  To 
overcome these problems, policy makers will likely employ several macro prudential tools at 
the same time. While this may reduce the risk of avoidance, it may be difficult to calibrate the 
setting of the different policy instruments since they are likely to interact. It is to be expected 
that re-calibration of instruments will take place regularly as experience with macro prudential 
policy is gathered.  
In addition, using macro-prudential policy requires detailed micro and macro data in order to 
determine  whether  and  which  tools  are  needed.  Moreover,  there  is  a  need  for  expert 
judgement, which will be a scarce commodity at the outset.29 There are also requirements in 
terms  of  the  legal  framework  in  countries  in  enabling  the  imposition  of  macro-prudential 
                                                 
24  For a discussion of policy practices internationally, see, for example, Honohan and Laeven (2005). Honohan 
(2010) discusses policy actions undertaken and available in Ireland before the current crisis. 
25  See Crowe et al. (2011a). 
26  Risk weights on certain types of riskier property lending were introduced in Ireland in 2006–7. Honohan (2010) 
concludes had such a surcharge been implemented earlier, it might have been more effective. 
27  For a discussion of dynamic provisioning in Spain, see Saurina (2009). 
28  A similar process is underway in the UK where the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) is considering potential 
macro  prudential  tools,  including  LTV  and  LTI  limits.  See:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
records/fpc/pdf/2012/record1203.pdf 
29  See BIS (2010), which finds that of 22 countries surveyed, all relied exclusively on judgement in setting macro 
prudential policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
instruments. Macro prudential instruments are often forward looking and preventive in nature 
and  it  may  be  difficult,  if  the  legal  framework  places  the  burden  of  proof  on  the  macro 
prudential authority, to justify a tightening of macro prudential policy, particularly in a situation 
in which financial tensions are not clearly evident to outside observers.  
Nonetheless, there is evidence that such policies can be successful. In terms of the impact 
on  housing  market  activity,  Ahuja  and  Nabar  (2011)  using  data  on  49  emerging  and 
advanced economies find that LTV limits slow property price growth. In a case study of Hong 
Kong SAR, they find that tightening LTV limits reduced both transaction volumes and price 
growth,  albeit  with  a  lag.30  Wong  et  al.  (2011),  using  data  on  Hong  Kong,  Singapore  and 
Korea, find that the impact of LTV limits on property market activities is inconclusive, but that 
there is strong evidence that they restrict household leverage.31  
In terms of the impact on the banking sector, Lim et al. (2011) based on IMF survey data32 of 
countries’ experiences find that LTV and LTI limits and dynamic provisioning, among other 
instruments,  may  be  effective  in  reducing  credit  growth.  Ahuja  and  Nabar  (2011)  find  that 
LTV and LTI limits slow property lending and that LTV limits lower non-performing loans over 
the longer term, while Wong et al. (2011) find that LTV limits had a significant positive impact 
on banking stability in Hong Kong SAR.  
Conclusions 
The  financial  crisis  has  once  again  highlighted  the  risk  property  market  developments  can 
pose for financial stability. This is an important reason why central banks pay great attention 
to the developments in the housing area, including to the evolution of house prices, the rate 
of credit expansion, the cost and availability of mortgages and so on. 
There is now great attention being focussed by policy makers across the world on how to 
best  avoid  a  repetition  of  the  crisis.  Unfortunately,  the  property  bubble  in  Ireland  was 
particularly large, the resulting financial crisis was particularly severe, and the impact on the 
Irish economy is likely to be felt for many years to come. It is therefore important that we in 
the Central Bank think particularly carefully about housing developments and whether they 
pose risks to financial stability. 
To do so, we need to think about what macro prudential policy framework is suitable to us.33 
In  particular,  we  need  to  explore  whether  macro  prudential  tools  such  as  those  I  have 
discussed may play a useful role in Ireland. There is much work – which is highly technical 
and  will  involve  regulators,  economists,  statisticians  and  lawyers  working  together  –  to  be 
done.  
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                 
30  The lag is 1 year for transaction volumes, 2 years for price growth. 
31  See also Igan and Kang (2011), who find that LTV and LTI limits in Korea were related to declines in house 
price growth and transactions, and Benito (2006), who finds that higher loan-to-value ratios were associated 
with greater house price volatility in response to income shocks. 
32  See IMF (2011d) for a discussion of the survey 
33  In fact, the European Systemic Risk Board has recently asked its member countries to clarify and strengthen 
necessary: 
the  macro 
http://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/recommendations/2011/ESRB_2011_3.en.pdf?9697 
eb49d4116f8ed269b4d95326217b 
prudential  mandates 
responsible 
authorities 
national 
where 
of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
REFERENCES 
and 
IMF 
Make 
Paper, 
Busts”, 
Sense”, 
When?” 
Neglect’ 
Working 
Crunches 
WP/11/76. 
IMF  Working 
IMF  Working 
Ahuja,  Ashvin  and  Malhar  Nabar,  “Safeguarding  Banks  and  Containing  Property  Booms: 
Cross-Country  Evidence  on  Macroprudential  Policies  and  Lesson  from  Hong  Kong  SAR”, 
IMF Working Paper, WP/11/284. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11284.pdf 
Barrell,  Ray,  E.  Philip  Davis,  Dilruba  Karim  and  Iana  Liadze,  (2010),  “Bank  Regulation, 
Property Prices and Early Warning Systems for Banking Crises in OECD Countries”, NIESR 
Discussion Paper No. 330. http://www.niesr.ac.uk/pdf/dp330.pdf 
Benito,  Andrew,  (2006),  “How  does  the  Down-Payment  Constraint  Affect  the  UK  Housing 
Market?”, Bank of England, Working Paper No. 294, March. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/workingpapers/wp294.pdf 
BIS,  (2010),  “Macroprudential  instruments  and  frameworks:  a  stocktaking  of  issues  and 
experiences”, CGFS Papers No. 38. http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs38.pdf 
Bordo,  Michael  D.,  and  Olivier  Jeanne,  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices:  Does 
‘Benign 
Paper,  WP/02/225. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2002/wp02225.pdf 
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose and Marco E. Terrones, (2008a), “Financial Cycles: What? 
How? 
http://www.imf.org/ 
external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp1176.pdf 
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose and Marco E. Terrones, (2008b), “What Happens During 
Recessions, 
Paper,  WP/08/274. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2008/wp08274.pdf 
Crowe, Christopher, Giovanna dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan and Pau Rabanal, (2011a), “Policies 
for Macrofinancial Stability: Options to Deal with Real Estate Booms”, IMF Staff Discussion 
Papers, SDN/11/02. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2011/sdn1102.pdf 
Crowe, Christopher, Giovanna dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan and Pau Rabanal, (2011b), “How to 
Deal  with  Real  Estate  Booms:  Lessons  from  Country  Experiences”,  IMF  Working  Paper, 
WP/11/91. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp1191.pdf 
Dynan,  Karen,  (2012),  “Is  a  Household  Debt  Overhang  Holding  Back  Consumption?”, 
Brookings 
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/Programs/ES/ 
BPEA/2012_spring_bpea_papers/2012_spring_BPEA_dynan.pdf 
ECB 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/euhousingmarketsen.pdf 
Honohan,  Patrick,  (2010),  “The  Irish  banking  crisis,  regulatory  and  financial  stability  policy 
2003–2008”, a report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank, May. 
http://www.bankinginquiry.gov.ie/The%20Irish%20Banking%20Crisis%20Regulatory%20and
%20Financial%20Stability%20Policy%202003-2008.pdf 
Honohan,  Patrick,  and Luc  Laeven,  (2005)  (eds.),  Systemic  Financial Crises:  Containment 
and Resolution, Cambridge University Press, UK. 
Igan, Deniz and Heedon Kang, (2011), “Do Loan-to-Value and debt-to-Income Limits Work? 
Evidence 
http://www.imf.org/ 
external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11297.pdf 
IMF,  (2003),  “When  Bubbles  Burst”,  World  Economic  Outlook,  Chapter 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2003/01/pdf/chapter2.pdf 
IMF, (2009), “From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?”, World Economic 
Outlook, Chapter III, April. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/01/pdf/c3.pdf 
the  EU  Housing  Markets”,  March. 
IMF  Working  Paper,  WP/11/297. 
from  Korea”, 
“Structural 
II,  April. 
Institute, 
Factors 
(2003), 
March. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
an 
policy: 
(2011c), 
organizing 
“Macroprudential 
framework”,  March. 
IMF, (2011a), “Housing Finance and Financial Stability—Back to Basics?”, Global Financial 
Stability Report, April. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2011/01/pdf/chap3.pdf 
IMF, (2011b), “Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances”, World Economic 
Outlook, Chapter III. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/02/pdf/c4.pdf 
IMF, 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/031411.pdf 
IMF,  (2011d),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  An  Organizing  Framework  –  Background  Paper”, 
March. http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/031411a.pdf 
IMF,  (2012),  “Dealing  with  Household  Debt”,  World  Economic  Outlook,  Chapter  III,  April. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2012/01/pdf/text.pdf 
Jorda,  Oscar,  Moritz  Schularick  and  Alan  M.  Taylor,  (2011),  “When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working 
Paper 2011–27. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-27bk.pdf 
Kindleberger,  Charles  P.  and  Robert  Z.  Aliber,  (2011),  Manias,  Panics  and  Crashes  –  A 
History of Financial Crises, Palgrave Macmillan, 6th edition. 
Lim,  C.,  F.  Columba,  A.  Costa,  P.  Kongsamut,  A.  Otani,  M.  Saiyid,  T.  Wezel  and  X.  Wu, 
(2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  what  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?”  IMF  Working 
Paper, WP/11/238. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11238.pdf 
Mian,  Atif  and  Amir  Sufi,  “Consumers  and  the  Economy,  Part  II:  Household  Debt  and  the 
Weak U.S. Recovery”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Letter 2011–02. 
http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-02.pdf 
O’Connell,  Siobhán  and  Maria  Woods,  (2012),  “Ireland’s  Financial  Crisis:  A  Comparative 
Context”, Central Bank of Ireland, forthcoming. 
Reinhart,  Carmen,  M.,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff,  (2009a),  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight 
Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart, Carmen, M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, (2009b), “The Aftermath of Financial Crises”, 
American Economic Review, 99(2), pp. 466–472. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25592442 
Reinhart, Carmen, M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, (2008), “Is the 2007 US sub-prime financial 
crisis so different? An international historical comparison”, American Economic Review 98(2), 
339–44. http://www.jstor.org/stable/29730044 
Saurina,  Jesus,  (2009),  “Loan  loss  provisions  in  Spain:  A  working  macro-prudential  tool”, 
Revista 
11–26. 
http://bde.eu/webbde/Secciones/Publicaciones/InformesBoletinesRevistas/RevistaEstabilida
dFinanciera/09/Noviembre/ief0117.pdf 
Wong,  Eric,  Tom  Fong,  Ka-fai  Li  and  Henry  Choi,  (2011),  “Loan-to-Value  Ratio  as  a 
Macro-Prudential Tool – Hong Kong’s experience and cross-country evidence”, Hong Kong 
Monetary  Authority,  Working  Paper 
http://www.hkma.gov.hk/media/eng/ 
publication-and-research/research/working-papers/HKMAWP11_01_full.pdf 
Financiera, 
Estabilidad 
17,Banco 
España, 
01/201 
pp. 
de 
de 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Figure 4: Past and ongoing real housing price cycles and banking crises: 
peak- to-trough declines (left panel) and years duration of downturn (right 
panel) 
 
Source: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009b) 
Notes: Each banking crisis episode is identified by country and the beginning year of 
the crisis. Only major (systemic) banking crisis episodes are included, subject to data 
limitations. The historical average reported does not include ongoing crisis episodes. 
For the ongoing episodes, the calculations are based on data through the following 
periods: October  2008,  monthly,  for  Iceland  and  Ireland;  2007,  annually,  for 
Hungary;  and 2008:111, quarterly, for all others. Consumer price indices are used to 
deflate nominal house prices.
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
