Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Philippine banking – reaping the rewards from 
prudent reforms 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2nd  Asian  Banker  Philippine  International  Banking 
Conference, Makati City, 6 September 2012. 
 Colleagues in banking, fellow stakeholders, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organizers  for  holding  the  2nd  Asian  Banker  Philippine 
International  Banking  Conference….  When  you  have  a  2nd  (after  a  1st)  you  create  a 
series…It’s like the Rocky Series (for those who can still remember), or Harry Potter (to those 
of this generation), or Batman Series or the Ipad… the 1st one was a good experience and 
you want to have more of the same… The organizers did a good job the first time around… 
Today, they again provide a venue for us to take a closer look at the issues that confront us, 
as they relate to the Philippine banking system. And, we look forward, perhaps to a broader 
Asian Summit in the Philippines at an opportune time in the near future.  
Let  me  therefore  now  focus  on  today’s  agenda.  I  will  not  give  you  a  litany  of  numbers  to 
prove  that  the  Philippine  banking  system  has  remained  strong  in  contrast  to  other 
jurisdictions. The positive performance indicators are quite familiar to you. For instance, you 
all  know  that  system  resources  have  been  growing,  funded  by  increased  balances  of 
deposits and more loans extended to borrowers.  
Let me, however, share with you storylines that are not cited often enough… On the deposits 
side,  growth  was  faster  in  the  years  after  the  height  of  the  crisis  than  the  years  before. 
Between 1999 and 2007, deposits grew a little over 8% per year. But from 2007 – at the time 
that  the  mortgage  crisis  was  already  unfolding  in  the  US  –  Philippine  system-wide  deposit 
balances increased by 13.40% per year all the way to 2011… On the loan side, the numbers 
are  even  more  dramatic.  Loans  have  been growing  at  a 10.62%  pace per  year  in the  last 
4 years (2007 to 2011) when it was growing by only 3.67% p.a. in the 8 years from 1999.  
Add  to  this,  the  fact  that  increased  loan  portfolio  was  not  a  case  of  liquidity  chasing  after 
every credit exposure. A simple look at the numbers will show that the NPL ratio has actually 
been  falling  since  the  turn  of  the  century  just  as  the  coverage  ratio  has  been  rising.  For 
universal and commercial banks, our latest number is an NPL ratio of 2.06% and a coverage 
ratio of 135%. 
All of these metrics converge into the capital adequacy ratio which is the central, though not 
exclusive,  metric  under  the  Basel  Accord.  The  often-cited  statistic  is  that  our  banks  have 
consistently maintained, on average, capital ratios well above the regulatory thresholds. On a 
consolidated basis, system CAR is hovering at 17%, of which 14 percentage points pertain to 
the Tier 1 ratio.  
Most will leave the system review to the measures that I just shared. However, it is important 
for the BSP to make a point about access to the banking market because financial inclusion 
is much more than just a buzz word to us. Today, we have a wider reach not only from the 
significant  increase  in  physical  banking  officers (which  surged from  21,394  at  end  2007 to 
26,057 at end 2011) but also through ATMs (which grew from 7,155 to 10,659 over the same 
period) and the active use of technology through our mobile banking framework. Indeed, it 
can be said that we now have a wider footprint of banking services that caters to the needs 
of our differentiated public. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  all  of  these  positive  developments  neither  happened  overnight  nor 
happened on their own. We believe that they reflect the enabling environment which we have 
invested in with the active support of and coordination with market stakeholders. While we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
can itemize each and every circular and policy prescription we have issued, I believe that we 
can categorize them into six main areas. 
• 
I  would  start  with  governance.  This  is  most  critical  because  without  these 
overarching guidelines, the conflicts of interest inherent in finance would prove to be 
untenable. 
Risk  management  comes  to  mind  next  because  of  our  deliberate  shift  from 
transactions review to a risk-based supervisory framework. 
Microfinance  and  financial  inclusion  are  advocacies  which  we  have  pursued  well 
before it became popular to do so. 
To complement the prudential framework, there needed to be improvements in the 
delivery of banking services. 
We certainly could not and would not neglect contributing to the development of the 
capital market. 
As the other facets involved direct improvements of market components, we have 
not forgotten the needs of the banking public either for redress mechanisms or for 
financial education. 
     Each  facet  is  a  critical  component  without  which  our  prudential  framework  will  have  major 
deficiencies.  Taken  collectively,  they  represent  the  foundations  upon  which  we  envision  a 
thriving banking market that is responsive to the evolving needs of its public. 
This of course begs the question. If we have a prudential framework in place, which appears 
to have withstood the most intense of global shocks, is there anything else that needs to be 
done? The answer is… definitely, there is still much more that needs to be done. And as in 
the past, we look to those of you in the market to join us in the work ahead.  
There are, however, challenges. First, the policy questions before us are evolving. Second, 
conduct  and  the  performance  standards  that  market  participants  must  adhere  to  are  also 
shifting.  Then,  traditional  financial  relationships  aren’t  necessarily  still  true.  Finally, 
time-honored policy transmission mechanisms no longer seem to hold in the past. 
In response to these challenges, BSP has had to realign our own policy framework – to go 
beyond considering price stability as a sole objective to one that nurtures financial stability 
alongside  price  stability.  We  have  also  had  to  view  banking  policy  not  only  from  the 
perspective  of  ensuring  the  soundness  of  individual  banks  but  also  the  soundness  of  the 
system  as  a  whole. We  are  deliberately  developing  capacity  so  that  we  are  able  to  weigh 
issues holistically, with the view to achieving the broader objective of financial stability.  
Falling from this, we put in place a suitable governance structure. First, we adopted a formal 
definition  of  financial  stability  to  get  our  work  agenda  moving.  Our  definition  essentially 
focuses  on  four  areas:  (1) governance  (2) market  infrastructure,  (3) functioning  financial 
system and (4) thriving economic growth. These four have to be in place, symbiotic of one 
another for stability to be achieved. 
Second, to execute this agenda, we created a Financial Stability Committee which I have the 
pleasure  to  directly  oversee.  With  me  in  this  committee  are  six  of  our  most  senior  BSP 
officers.  The  work  itself  is  run  through  specific  committees.  Key  to  our  success  is  our 
capacity to think of the issues comprehensively even though we are traditionally structured 
along the three established pillars of Philippine central banking. 
I can tell you right now that making this new paradigm work is not a superficial challenge. We 
understand the difficulties this early but we nonetheless persevere. Having the governance 
structure in place is certainly not a panacea. We recognize that the work agenda is complex 
and  far  reaching.  Key  reform  initiatives  that  we  have  identified  include  Basel  3,  Corporate 
Governance, Consumer Protection and Financial Education, Financial Market Infrastructure 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and Crisis Preparedness. These initiatives are on our radar screen today in the context of 
unifying the prudential architecture of financial stability. None of these is trivial, each one of 
these requires a keen eye for details and a broader appreciation of how each interconnects 
with another, and each is essential in the pro-active management of any underlying pressure 
points that may be brewing. 
Let me also say that we do not underestimate how weaknesses in the West will leave their 
imprints  upon  Asia,  upon  us.  Although  better  off  than  other jurisdictions,  economies  in  our 
region  are  also  experiencing  an  economic  slowdown.  Coupled  with  the  deleveraging  in 
Europe,  Asia  will  feel  some  of  the  repercussions,  either  from  re-leveraging,  capital  inflows 
and/or stronger local currencies.  
These are not insignificant macroeconomic policy issues and they certainly will be formidable 
macro-prudential policy concerns. For us there is that added issue of domestic liquidity that is 
building  up  and  looking  for  suitable  outlets.  Some  say  it’s  a  positive  problem  that  is 
preferable to the case of liquidity drying up. That may be true, but to central bankers, it is still 
a concern, positive or otherwise. 
In retrospect, we believe that the Philippine banking system is in a position of strength. Such 
strength  has  been  achieved  through  the  reforms  that  we  have  invested  in  the  past  and 
whose benefits have come to fruition. Moving forward, we expect to further evolve with the 
needs of the public at large as well as the institutions that we oversee.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me reiterate – there is a role for the market in this framework. BSP 
does  not  expect  to  do  the  work  alone.  We  stand  not  only  as  your  banking  regulator  or 
monetary  policy  authority.  We  are  your  partner,  and  as  in  any  partnership,  we  expect  the 
different stakeholders to bear their proportionate load.  
Whether  it  is  in  managing  financial  risks  or  in  exemplifying  acceptable  conduct  in  market 
operations, the market has a definitive role. Stability is easier to achieve if we consider the 
bigger picture and not be shortsighted by our own bottom lines. Capital market development 
is  certainly  a  shared  responsibility  because  it  is  a  collective  gain.  And  providing  for  an 
inclusive financial market, with appropriate support for financial consumers, is itself a clear 
winning bet for tomorrow.  
Together, we have taken what was perennially a difficult financial market situation in the late 
90s  into  an  environment  that  has  withstood  global  shocks.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  today, 
OUR market is on every investor’s radar screen.  
I  ask  all  of  you:  where  do  you  want  this  market  to  be  as  we  hold  the  3rd,  4th  and 
5th Philippine  International  Banking  Conference  and  perhaps  the  1st,  2nd  and  3rd  Asian 
Banking Summit? 
I have every reason to believe that we all share the same answers. Let us then do our part 
as  we  lift  the  Philippine  banking  system  further  forward  as  a  responsive  platform  for  the 
needs of the Filipino in the Asian, if not global, platform. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
