John Murray: Monetary policy decision-making at the Bank of Canada 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Mortgage 
Brokers Association of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 7 May 2012. 
 Introduction 
I would like to thank the Mortgage Brokers Association of British Columbia for inviting me to 
speak to you this afternoon. The title of your conference is intriguing. 
F. Scott Fitzgerald’s novel, The Great Gatsby, was set in the Roaring Twenties, a period of 
notable advances coupled with economic excess  – and followed by the devastation of the 
Great Depression. 
I am not sure what the conference organizers had in mind when they picked the theme for 
today’s  events,  but  perhaps  they  wanted  to  draw  attention  to  the  parallels  between  this 
earlier  era  and  recent  events.  In  the  past  12  years,  we  have  witnessed  a  period  of 
phenomenal  growth  and  prosperity  in  the  global  economy,  followed  by  a  deep  and 
synchronous financial crisis in which we nearly repeated the experience of the 1930s. 
Canada weathered the financial crisis that erupted in 2007?08 better than most of its peers, 
thanks in part to the healthy condition of its banks, prudent regulation of the financial industry 
and  the  country’s  strong  fiscal  position,  which  allowed  the  government  to  implement 
aggressive countercyclical measures. 
The  Bank  of  Canada’s  monetary  policy,  guided  by  the  inflation-targeting  framework  put  in 
place  over  20  years  ago,  also  played  a  critical  role  in  Canada’s  performance  through  the 
crisis and recovery. It provided significant and timely monetary policy stimulus and, through 
its  hard-earned  credibility,  helped  to  anchor  household  and  business  confidence  in  a 
turbulent time. 
My  subject  today  is  monetary  policy  decision-making  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  and  my 
presentation  will  cover  three  related  topics  that  I  hope  you  will  find  interesting  and  useful, 
given the important role you play in Canada’s financial industry.1  
The first topic is how our monetary policy decision-making process is organized. Something 
that sounds rather simple in theory is quite complex in practice. 
The  second  topic  involves  the  information  that  is  collected  and  interpreted  as  part  of  this 
process. Monetary policy making, as you shall see, is very information intensive. 
The third and final part of my presentation focuses on three popular misconceptions about 
monetary policy that I would like to correct. 
A short primer on monetary policy 
Before jumping into a description of the decision-making process, however, it will probably be 
helpful to say a few words about monetary policy itself, by way of background. 
As I  mentioned earlier, at a conceptual level everything seems relatively simple.  Monetary 
policy in Canada has one objective – achieving and maintaining a low, stable and predictable 
level  of  inflation.  This  objective  was  formalized  in  1991  in  an  inflation-control  agreement 
between the federal government and the Bank. It identifies a specific target for the rate of 
                                                 
1  This presentation updates and extends T. Macklem, “Information and Analysis for Monetary Policy: Coming to 
a Decision,” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2002):11–18. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
inflation – the midpoint of an inflation-control range – as well as the price index that is to be 
used to measure inflation. 
Since 1995, the target level for the inflation rate has been 2 per cent (within a control range 
of 1 to 3 per cent), as measured by the 12-month rate of change of the total consumer price 
index (CPI). 
This  may  seem  like  a  rather  narrow  objective  –  a  topic  that  we  will  return  to  later  in  the 
presentation – but experience has shown that this is the best contribution that the Bank can 
make  to  the  economic  well-being  of  Canadians.  The  greater  certainty  that  it  provides  with 
regard to the future path of prices allows households and businesses to make more informed 
spending and investment decisions, and minimizes the inequity associated with unexpected 
movements in prices. Keeping inflation low, stable and predictable is a means to an end, not 
an end in itself. 
Under normal circumstances, this single objective is pursued using a single policy instrument 
or tool – changes to the overnight rate of interest.2 The overnight rate is set by the Bank of 
Canada  and  determines  the  rates  at  which  banks  and  other  selected  agents  are  able  to 
borrow  and  lend  at  the  shortest  end  of  the  yield  curve.  But  the  story  does  not  end  there. 
Movements  in  the  overnight  rate  set  in  train  a  number  of  other  changes  throughout  the 
economy that ultimately affect the rate of inflation. 
The transmission mechanism 
This  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  can  be  described  as  follows  (Figure  1). 
Changes  in  the  overnight  interest  rate  influence  the  interest  rates  that  the  market  sets  on 
securities further out the yield curve and with different risk and liquidity characteristics (for 
example, mortgage rates). They also influence the exchange rate – the external value of the 
Canadian dollar. Movements in these asset prices, in turn, affect aggregate demand in the 
Canadian economy by influencing the spending and investment decisions of both Canadians 
and foreigners. 
If strong aggregate demand pressures appeared likely to push output above the economy’s 
capacity  limits  and  lift  inflation  above  the  2  per  cent  target,  the  Bank  would  respond  by 
raising  the overnight  rate.  This  would  put  upward  pressure  on  other  interest  rates  and  the 
exchange  rate,  other  things  constant,  dampening  aggregate  demand,  eliminating  the  gap 
between  actual  and  potential  output,  and  stabilizing  inflation  to  the  2  per  cent  target.  The 
process would be reversed, of course, if demand were too weak and inflation seemed likely 
to fall below 2 per cent. The overnight rate would be reduced, boosting aggregate demand, 
narrowing  the  excess  supply  gap  and  lifting  inflation.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Bank 
takes  a  symmetric  approach  to  the  pursuit  of  its  monetary  policy  objective,  and  is  as 
concerned  about  undershooting  the  2  per  cent  target  as  overshooting  it.  Keeping  actual 
output at or near potential is the only way inflation can be maintained at a low, stable and 
predictable level. 
Establishing an explicit inflation target and consistently achieving it helps to build credibility, 
anchor the inflation expectations of businesses and households, and make monetary policy 
more effective. An explicit inflation target also provides a direct means by which the Bank’s 
performance can be judged, thereby improving accountability. 
                                                 
2 
In exceptional circumstances, central banks have a number of other, unconventional, monetary policy tools at 
their  disposal.  They  include  quantitative  easing,  credit  easing  and  conditional  commitments  concerning  the 
path of future interest rates. These tools have been used by a number of central banks in the past four years 
as a means of providing additional monetary policy stimulus once the overnight interest rate approached zero 
and hit its effective lower bound. For more information, see the appendix of the Bank’s April 2009 Monetary 
Policy Report. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This, then, is what the Bank tries to achieve and how it goes about it – through the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. 
Life  would  be  easy  if,  having  achieved  the  target  rate  of  inflation,  we  could  just  leave  the 
overnight rate of interest where it was and let the economy motor on. In reality, of course, 
this is impossible. The economy is constantly being buffeted by shocks of varying size and 
duration from both internal and external sources. These shocks are difficult to anticipate (if 
they  were  easy  to  foresee,  they  wouldn’t  be  called  shocks).  Indeed,  it  is  often  difficult  to 
identify the nature and potential intensity of a shock until well after it has occurred. Adding to 
the  challenge  is  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  operates  on  the  economy  with  long  and 
variable  lags.  Adjustments  to  the  policy  rate  that  we  make  now  typically  take  four  to  six 
quarters to have their full effect on economic activity, and six to eight quarters to have their 
full effect on inflation (essentially two years). Policy, therefore, has to be forward-looking and 
policy-makers are forced to make their decisions in conditions of considerable uncertainty. 
So a policy that at first glance appears to be relatively simple and mechanical to execute is in 
fact very complex and challenging. 
Fixed Announcement Dates (FADs) 
Prior to December 2000, the Bank had no fixed or pre-announced schedule for its interest 
rate  decisions.  Instead,  it  stood  ready  to  move  whenever  action  was  deemed  appropriate. 
While this may seem sensible and certainly allowed for a great deal of flexibility, experience 
here  and  elsewhere  showed  that  it  also  added  uncertainty  to  what  was  already  a  very 
uncertain  operating  environment.  Businesses,  households  and  market  participants  never 
knew if this was going to be the day when the Bank moved rates. It also made planning the 
forecasting and policy decision-making activities within the Bank challenging. 
In order to avoid these problems and render the process more predictable, the Bank moved 
to a system of fixed announcement dates (FADs). It now makes its interest rate decisions on 
eight pre-announced dates through the year, with a six- to seven-week interval between each 
one. In exceptional circumstances, however, the Bank reserves the right to change rates on 
dates that fall outside this schedule. The only two occasions when this has occurred over the 
past  12  years  were  on  17  September  2001,  following  the  terrorist  attacks  on  the  United 
States, and on 8 October 2008, as part of a synchronized policy easing with other central 
banks. 
The timing of the FADs corresponds to the release of key economic information used for the 
Bank’s  forecasting  and  monitoring  exercises.  Four  of  the  FADs  occur  shortly  after  the 
publication  of  the  quarterly  National  Accounts,  which  report  on  Canada’s  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP)  and  its  various  subcomponents.  The  other  four  FADs  are  situated  midway 
between  these  dates  and  are  also  timed  to  coincide  with  the  availability  of  important 
information. 
The most recent fixed announcement date was 17 April. 
Who decides? 
The  major  players  in  the  FAD  process  are  the  Governing  Council,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Review Committee, and the four economics departments at the Bank. 
Starting from the top, the Governing Council, which is responsible for making the interest rate 
decision,  is  comprised  of  the  Governor,  the  Senior  Deputy  Governor  and  four  Deputy 
Governors.  The  Monetary  Policy  Review  Committee,  which  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
discussions  leading  up  to  the  decision,  includes  the  Governing  Council  plus  five  to  six 
advisers – often supplemented with one or two special advisers – as well as chiefs from the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
four economics departments, representatives from the Montréal and Toronto regional offices, 
and certain other senior personnel. 
The  four  economics  departments  are:  Canadian  Economic  Analysis  (CEA),  International 
Economic  Analysis  (INT),  Financial  Stability  (FSD)  and  Financial  Markets  (FMD).  Most  of 
these titles are self-explanatory, but I’ll note that the Financial Stability Department focuses 
largely  on  the  activities  of  Canadian  and  foreign  financial  institutions,  while  the  Financial 
Markets Department concentrates on domestic and foreign financial markets. 
What  do  all  these  people  do?  For  the  most  part,  they  share  their  information,  analysis, 
experience  and  judgment  with  members  of  the  Governing  Council.  The  Bank  of  Canada 
makes  every  effort  to  minimize  the  inherent  uncertainty  and  risk  associated  with 
policy-making  by  drawing  on  whatever  useful  information  and  insights  are  available  both 
inside and outside the Bank. The latter includes data series from agencies such as Statistics 
Canada, current analysis and forecasts from other central banks, governments, international 
financial institutions and private sector economists, as well as research from academics. All 
of this is in addition to the contributions of our own staff. 
The information that flows from these sources is comprehensive and diverse and contributes, 
at each stage of the process, to the final decision. Let me give you a quick overview of what 
happens at each stage. 
A five-stage decision-making process 
The five key stages of the decision-making process are as follows (Figure 2).3  
Stage  1  –  the  presentation  of  the  staff  projection  to  the  Governing  Council  –  occurs  three 
weeks prior to the interest rate decision and has at its centre the Bank’s latest forecasting 
and  policy  simulation  model,  ToTEM2.4  Results  from  this  model  are  supplemented  with 
information drawn from a number of other sources and alternative models, which either look 
at a specific sector in greater detail (a satellite model) or view the economy using a different 
paradigm or set of data. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  ToTEM2  and  many  of  the  other  models  used  by  the  Canadian 
Economic Analysis Department rely critically on inputs provided by a Global Economy Model 
(GEM) and a detailed Model of the U.S. Economy (MUSE) constructed and overseen by the 
International Department, again supplemented with many other pieces of information. Since 
Canada is an open economy, international developments, such as movements in commodity 
prices,  growth  in  Asian demand  and  prospects  for  the  U.S.  economy,  play  a  major  role  in 
determining the path of the Canadian projection. 
The combined output of all these models and analyses is blended with judgment to produce 
a  base-case  or  most  likely  scenario,  which  is  presented  in  this  first  meeting  with  senior 
management.  A  number  of  key  risks  and  alternative  scenarios  are  also  identified  at  the 
meeting. Staff will then work on these scenarios over the next two weeks in preparation for 
Stage 2 – the major briefing. 
Unlike  Stage  1  –  the  presentation  of  the  staff  projection  –  which  mainly  involves  the 
Canadian Economic Analysis Department and the International Department, Stage 2 draws 
importantly on all four economics departments. There are six key inputs to this meeting: 
1. 
2. 
an updated monitoring of economic developments and risks; 
the Business Outlook Survey, compiled by the Bank’s five regional offices; 
                                                 
3  This is a very general description; the exact process may vary slightly for different FADs. 
4  The acronym stands for Terms-of-Trade Economic Model, version 2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
a report focusing on capacity pressures and alternative indicators of inflation; 
an analysis of money and credit conditions; 
the Bank’s Senior Loan Officer Survey; and 
an  overview  of  financial  market  conditions  and  monetary  policy  expectations  in 
Canada, the United States and the rest of the world. 
Stage 3 – the policy recommendations of staff – typically occurs on Friday, two days after the 
major  briefing.  A  senior  member  of  the  Canadian  Economic  Analysis  Department  or  the 
International  Department  is  asked  to  summarize  and  update  the  material  that  has  been 
presented in Stages 1 and 2, and to provide a recommendation regarding any policy action 
that should be taken. The overview and recommendation serve as the starting point for an 
extensive  discussion  by  the  entire  Monetary  Policy  Review  Committee.  Tactical  and 
communications  issues,  as  well  as  various  policy  options,  are  then  reviewed,  based  on  a 
note prepared by the Financial Markets Department. The meeting concludes with a tour de 
table at which each member of the MPRC, except for the six Governing Council members, is 
asked for a policy recommendation. 
Stage 4 – the decision by the Governing Council – begins on Friday afternoon, immediately 
after  the  Stage  3  discussions,  and  resumes  on  the  following  Monday.  Members  of  the 
Governing  Council  are  the  policy  decision-makers.  They  review  the  information  and 
recommendations  that  they  have  received,  exchange  views  and  explore  any  outstanding 
issues. Further discussions are held on Monday, a decision is reached, and a press release 
is drafted and approved. 
The fifth and final Stage of the process – Communication – focuses on the publication of the 
press release at 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday announcing the Bank’s decision and explaining the 
reasons behind it. Four times a year, this message is reinforced and expanded upon with the 
release  of  a  Monetary  Policy  Report  one  day  later.  The  Report  provides  a  more  detailed 
account  of  Canadian  and  global  economic  developments,  the  Bank’s  projections,  and  the 
major upside and downside risks that could affect the inflation outlook. 
In  addition  to  this  Report,  two  other  publications  are  released  four  times  a  year, 
approximately  one  week  before  the  interest  rate  decision.  The  Business  Outlook  Survey 
(BOS) summarizes the results of the quarterly interviews that the Bank’s five regional offices 
conduct  with  a  representative  sample  of  businesses  across  the  country.  This  survey  is  an 
important complement to the other material that the MPRC and the Governing Council rely 
on  and  serves  as  a  kind  of  “reality  check”  of  what  is  happening  on  a  regional  basis.  The 
second  publication  is  the  Senior  Loan  Officer  Survey,  which  is  based  on  interviews 
conducted  with  major  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  Canada  to  determine  whether 
lending conditions for businesses have eased or tightened in the previous three months. 
The  final  elements  of  the  Bank’s  communication  effort  around  these  four  Monetary  Policy 
Reports involve a press conference by the Governor and the Senior Deputy Governor and 
Parliamentary appearances at the House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, and 
the Senate Standing Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce. 
As should be clear from the process I have just described, the Bank places a great deal of 
importance  on  communication.  It  is  a  critical  part  of  our  accountability  to  Canadians  and 
enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy by deepening the public’s understanding of 
the economy and our actions. 
Three popular misconceptions about monetary policy 
Despite the emphasis that we put on communication and all the time that we devote to these 
activities, there is frequently some confusion in the minds of the public about what monetary 
policy does and the constraints that the Bank might operate under. I would like to take the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
last  few  minutes  of  my  presentation,  therefore,  to  discuss  three  of  the  most  popular 
misconceptions. They are: 
1. 
The Bank’s narrow focus on inflation ignores more important objectives such as full 
employment and a rising standard of living. 
Not true. Experience has shown that price stability is the most important contribution that the 
Bank can make to the economic well-being of Canadians. Since the introduction of inflation 
targeting  in  1991,  the  low  and  stable  inflation  environment  has  allowed  consumers  and 
businesses  to  manage  their  finances  with  greater  certainty  about  the  future  purchasing 
power of their savings and income. Interest rates have also been lower in both nominal and 
real terms across a range of maturities. More broadly, low, stable and predictable inflation 
has  helped  to  encourage  more  stable  economic  growth  in  Canada  as  well  as  lower  and 
less-variable unemployment. 
2. 
If the Canadian economy is operating close to capacity (i.e., near full employment) 
and inflation is close to or at the 2 per cent target, interest rates have to be close to 
their “normal” or “neutral” levels. 
Not true. If there were no forces acting on the economy to push it away from this desired 
state, the statement would be true. However, this is seldom the case. 
Headwinds  and  tailwinds  are  often  present,  threatening  to  push  economic  activity  and 
inflation higher or lower. Monetary policy needs to lean against these forces with opposing 
pressure from higher or lower interest rates in order to stabilize the economy and to keep 
inflation on target. Monetary policy is seldom static; it has to respond as these forces ease or 
escalate. 
3. 
Focusing on price stability limits the Bank’s ability to pursue its other major 
objective, financial stability. 
Not true. While at times there may appear to be tensions between these objectives, the two 
are in fact inextricably linked; it is impossible to achieve one of them without maintaining the 
other. Although other policy levers, such as bank regulation and macroprudential tools, are 
typically  the  first  lines  of  defence  in  ensuring  financial  stability,  monetary  policy  can,  in 
exceptional  circumstances,  play  a  complementary  role  in  achieving  this  end.  Fortunately, 
there is enough flexibility in the present monetary policy framework to do so while achieving 
our inflation target over the medium term. One is not sacrificed for the benefit of the other. 
Some concluding thoughts 
Canada’s  monetary  policy  framework  and  the  process  that  the  Bank  uses  to  make  its 
decisions have evolved over time. The move to inflation targeting in 1991 and the move to 
fixed  announcement  dates  are  certainly  the  most  noteworthy,  but  there  have  been  many 
other  refinements  in  the  way  policy  is  formulated  and  implemented.  The  process  for 
decision-making that I have described is intensive and collaborative. It has also proved to be 
very effective. Without doubt, there will be further refinements in the future as we learn from 
new experiences. The effort to improve the decision-making process is ongoing. 
Thank you for your interest. I would be pleased to respond to any questions you might have. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
