Mario Draghi: The future of the euro – stability through change 
Contribution  from  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  published  in 
“Die Zeit”, 29 August 2012. 
 Across  Europe,  a  fundamental  debate  is  taking  place  about  the  future  of  the  euro.  Many 
citizens are concerned about where Europe is heading. Yet the solutions presented appear 
to them unsatisfactory. This is because these solutions offer binary choices: either we must 
go  back  to  the  past,  or  we  must  move  to  a  United  States  of  Europe.  My  answer  to  the 
question is: to have a stable euro we do not need to choose between extremes. 
The reason this debate is taking place is not the euro as a currency. The objectives of the 
single currency remain as relevant today as they were when the single currency was agreed. 
To spread price stability and sustainable growth to all European citizens. To reap the gains of 
the  world’s  largest  single  market  and  make  the  historic  process  of  European  unification 
irreversible.  To  raise  Europe’s  standing  –  not  only  economically  but  also  politically  –  in  a 
globalised world.  
The debate is taking place because the euro area has not yet fully succeeded as a polity. 
Currencies ultimately depend on the institutions that stand behind them. When the euro was 
first proposed, there were those who said it would have to be preceded by a long process of 
political integration. This was because sharing a currency would imply a high degree of joint 
decision-making.  Member  countries  would  be  a  “Schicksalsgemeinschaft”  and  would  need 
strong common democratic underpinnings. 
But a deliberate choice was made in the 1990s not to give the euro such features. The euro 
was  launched  as  a  “currency  without  a  state”  to  preserve  the  sovereignty  and  diversity  of 
member  countries.  This  informed  the  so-called  “Maastricht  setup”,  which  laid  the  euro’s 
institutional foundations.  But  as  recent  events  have  shown,  this  institutional  framework  left 
the  euro  area  insufficiently  equipped  to  ensure  sound  economic  policies  and  effectively 
manage crises. 
For this reason, the way ahead cannot be a return to the status quo ante. The challenges of 
having  a  single  monetary  policy  but  loosely  coordinated  fiscal,  economic  and  financial 
policies  have  been  clearly  revealed  by  the  crisis.  As  Jean  Monnet  said,  coordination  “is  a 
method which promotes discussion, but it does not lead to a decision.” And strong decisions 
have to be made to manage the world’s second most important currency. 
A new architecture for the euro area is desirable to create sustained prosperity for all euro 
area  countries,  and  especially  for  Germany.  The  root  of  Germany’s  success  is  its  deep 
integration into the European and world economies. To continue to prosper, Germany needs 
to remain an anchor of a strong currency, at the centre of a zone of monetary stability and in 
a  dynamic  and  competitive  euro  area  economy.  Only  a  stronger  economic  and  monetary 
union can provide this.  
Yet this new architecture does not require a political union first. It is clear that monetary union 
does  entail  a  higher  degree  of  joint  decision-making.  But  economic  integration  and  political 
integration  can  develop  in  parallel.  Where  necessary,  sovereignty  in  selected  economic 
policy fields can and should be pooled and democratic legitimation deepened.  
How far should this go? We do not need a centralisation of all economic policies. Instead, we 
can answer this question pragmatically: by calmly asking ourselves which are the minimum 
requirements to complete economic and monetary union. And in doing so, we will find that all 
the necessary measures are firmly within our reach. 
For  fiscal  policies,  we  need  true  oversight  over  national  budgets.  The  consequences  of 
misguided  fiscal  policies  in  a  monetary  union  are  too  severe  to  remain  self-policed.  For 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
broader economic policies, we need to guarantee competitiveness. Countries must be able 
to  generate  sustainable  growth  and  high  employment  without  excessive  imbalances.  The 
euro  area  is  not  a  nation-state  where  persistent  cross-regional  subsidies  have  sufficient 
popular  support.  Therefore,  we  cannot  afford  a  situation  where  some  regions  run 
permanently large deficits vis-à-vis others. 
For financial policies, there need to be powers at the centre to limit excessive risk-taking by 
banks  and  regulatory  capture  by  supervisors.  This  is  the  best  way  to  protect  euro  area 
taxpayers.  There  also  needs  to  be  a framework for  bank resolution  that  safeguards  public 
finances,  as  we  see  in  other  federations.  In  the  U.S.,  for  example,  on  average  about  90, 
mostly smaller, banks per year have been resolved since 2008 and this had no impact on the 
solvency of the sovereign.  
Political union can, and shall, develop hand-in-hand with fiscal, economic and financial union. 
The sharing of powers and of accountability can move in parallel. We should not forget that 
60 years of European integration have already created a significant degree of political union. 
Decisions are made by an EU Council filled by national ministers and by a directly elected 
European  Parliament.  The  challenge  is  to  further  increase  the  legitimacy  of  these  bodies 
commensurate  with  increasing  their  responsibilities  and  to  seek  ways  to  better  anchor 
European processes at the national level. 
A  more  solid  political foundation  should  allow  for  agreement  on  a  basic  principle:  that  it  is 
neither  sustainable  nor  legitimate  for  countries  to  pursue  national  policies  that  can  cause 
economic  harm  for  others.  This  constraint  has  to  be  built  into  how  countries  design  their 
economic and social models. The only sustainable model is one that is consistent with the 
terms  of  a  common  currency.  Countries  have  to  live  within  their  means.  Competition  and 
labour  markets  have  to  be  reinvigorated.  Banks  have  to  conform  to  the  highest  regulatory 
standards and focus on serving the real economy. This is not the end, but the renewal of the 
European social model. 
From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  a  strong  economic  union  is  an  essential  complement  to  the 
single  monetary  policy.  Building  this  will  require  a  structured  process  with  correct 
sequencing. Yet citizens can be certain that three elements will remain constant. The ECB 
will  do  what  is  necessary  to  ensure  price  stability.  It  will  remain  independent.  And  it  will 
always act within the limits of its mandate.  
Yet it should be understood that fulfilling our mandate sometimes requires us to go beyond 
standard  monetary  policy  tools.  When  markets  are  fragmented  or  influenced  by  irrational 
fears,  our  monetary  policy  signals  do  not  reach  citizens  evenly  across  the  euro  area. We 
have to fix such blockages to ensure a single monetary policy and therefore price stability for 
all  euro  area  citizens.  This  may  at  times  require  exceptional  measures.  But  this  is  our 
responsibility as the central bank of the euro area as a whole.  
The ECB is not a political institution. But it is committed to its responsibilities as an institution 
of the European Union. As such, we never lose sight of our mission to guarantee a strong 
and stable currency. The banknotes that we issue bear the European flag and are a powerful 
symbol of European identity.  
Those who want to go back to the past misunderstand the significance of the euro. Those 
who claim only a full federation can be sustainable set the bar too high. What we need is a 
gradual  and  structured effort to  complete  EMU.  This  would  finally  give  the  euro the  stable 
foundations it deserves. It would fully achieve the ultimate goals for which the Union and the 
euro  were  founded:  stability,  prosperity  and  peace.  We  know  this  is  what  the  people  in 
Europe, and in Germany, aspire to. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
