Rodrigo Vergara: Chile – economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  seminars  held 
during the Annual Meeting of the Inter American Development Bank, Montevideo, Uruguay, 
12 March 2012. 
 I thank Luis Oscar Herrera, Enrique Orellana and Tatiana Vargas for helpful comments. 
I would like to thank you for inviting me to present our views on Chile’s economic situation at 
this  Conference.  These  last  years  have  been  particularly  challenging  for  policymakers 
worldwide. Periodically we must make decisions in an uncertain environment, weighing the 
costs  and  risks  of  alternative  scenarios.  For  this  reason,  we  welcome  opportunities  for 
meetings and discussions such as this, as they allow us to communicate our views in greater 
detail, as well as to hear other opinions. A better understanding of our decisions strengthens 
the effectiveness of our policies. 
More than four years have elapsed since the onset of the financial crisis that triggered the 
Great  Recession.  Nonetheless,  we  are  still  handling  its  legacy,  experiencing  periodic 
episodes  of  financial  stress  that  will  likely  continue  for  some  time.  The  situation  in  the 
Eurozone  is  complex,  due  to  the  interaction  among  fiscal,  financial  and  macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities. From a historical viewpoint, growth perspectives for developed countries are 
weak. The outlook for emerging economies is noticeably better, although we are witnessing a 
slowdown  whose  pace  is  difficult  to  assess,  particularly  for  China.  Additionally,  we  are 
confronting new risks, in the face of international tensions related to Iran’s nuclear situation 
and its impact on the oil market. 
These sources of uncertainty are beyond our control. Therefore, our role as policymakers in 
emerging  countries  is  to  preserve  flexibility  and  space  for  policies  that  will  enable  us  to 
respond to and buffer the financial and real effects that those risks pose on our economies. 
Over  the  last  years  we  have  gained  credibility,  flexibility  and  space  to  implement  a 
macroeconomic  and  financial  policy  framework  that  will  help  us  smooth  out  the  economic 
cycle. This framework rests on four pillars. First, monetary policy management is based on a 
flexible inflation-targeting regime, conducted by an autonomous central bank and supported 
by  a  floating  exchange  rate  system.  Second,  a  fiscal  policy  that  is  accountable  and 
predictable  thanks  to  a  structural  balance  rule.  The  significant  amount  of  savings 
accumulated  during  the  run-up  of  copper  prices  was  a  crucial  factor  in  bolstering  the 
resilience  of  the  Chilean  economy  and  in  providing  a  countercyclical  fiscal  boost.  Third,  a 
high  degree  of  commercial  and  financial  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Finally,  a 
sound  financial system,  with  globally  integrated,  well  capitalized,  and  adequately-regulated 
banks.  These  elements  allowed  us  to  be  less  affected  by  the  Great  Recession  than  by 
previous episodes. 
In  Chile,  the  effects  of  the  world  slowdown  of  the  second  half  of  2011  and  the  financial 
turbulences coming from Europe have so far been limited. In terms of output, third quarter 
data showed a marked slowdown that continued into the beginning of the fourth quarter, but 
which has tended to dissipate according to incoming information. The most recent data show 
that  this  deceleration  has  continued,  albeit  at  a  slower  pace  than  forecast.  Likewise,  as 
regards financial conditions, after a shift towards a tighter situation at the end of last year, 
more  recently  we  have  returned  to  a  more  normal  situation.  In  particular,  the  monetary 
market  frictions  that  occurred  in  late  2011  were  quickly  overcome  after  the  Central  Bank 
adopted transitory measures to provide greater liquidity. 
To  go  into  more  detail  regarding  Chile’s  current  economic  situation,  allow  me  to  provide 
some background on the challenges we face in light of last year’s economic developments in 
our country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Chilean economy in 2011 
In early 2011, several emerging economies, among them Chile, experienced an increase in 
inflationary  pressures  due  to  an  episode  of  rises  in  international  prices  of  commodities, 
particularly  oil  and  some  foodstuffs.  Additionally,  in  Chile  domestic  demand,  output  and 
employment recovered quickly, helping close output and labor market gaps. Likewise, in the 
face  of  rising  prices  of  oil  and  foodstuffs,  the  private  sector’s  inflation  expectations 
rebounded,  reflecting  a  greater  risk  of  inflation.  Core  inflation  measures  remained  at 
reasonable levels, below the minimum level of the target range. In this setting, the Central 
Bank Board decided to speed up the normalization of monetary policy during the first half of 
the year. Thus, between January and June of 2011, MPR (monetary policy interest rate) was 
raised  200  base  points.  The  level  reached  at  the  time  –  5.25%  –  was  within  ranges 
historically considered neutral. Further rises were not dismissed. However, events triggered 
during the second half of the year changed the bias of monetary policy. 
In the Eurozone, the situation that at first was confined to peripheral economies, began to 
take  its  toll  on  systemically  more  important  economies.  This  coupled  with  the  political 
difficulties  for  the  United  States  to  reach  an  agreement  on  how  to  consolidate  its  fiscal 
position.  Thus,  international  tensions  escalated,  with  sharp  increases  in  volatility,  risk 
premiums  and  liquidity  premiums,  together  with  significant  drops  in  stock  markets. 
Commodity prices halted the upward trend they had followed in the first half, and although 
they remained high for a while, they started to fall afterwards. Especially important for us was 
the drop in the copper price. In addition, in Chile it was confirmed that the pass-through from 
international  to  local  prices  had  been  limited,  and  signs  began  to  appear  that  domestic 
demand  was  decelerating.  This,  combined  with  monetary  policy  actions  helped  to  reduce 
inflation expectations. 
This  series  of  events  substantially  changed  the  economic  scenario  faced  by  the  Chilean 
economy. Thus, in August we eliminated the upward bias in our monetary policy releases. In 
October we said that if international economic events worsened, growth and inflation in Chile 
could  be  affected,  as  could  the  direction  of  monetary  policy.  The  MPR  was  not  changed 
during the second half of 2011. 
Our  December  Monetary  Policy  Report  highlighted  the  wide  range  of  existing  risks,  which 
originated mostly in the directions that the Eurozone situation could take. The possibility of a 
debt event occurring in a systemic sized economy or of a disruptive breakdown of the euro 
were among the worst risk scenarios envisaged although we also considered the possibility 
of the Eurozone authorities agreeing on a set of measures and reforms that would restore 
market confidence. Considering the deleveraging process that households and governments 
of developed countries would need to go through, these economies would continue to grow 
at low rates for a long time, regardless of the way that the Eurozone situation was settled. All 
in all, the international baseline scenario was more negative than previously considered, and 
would impact Chile’s growth and inflation rates. The working hypothesis of that Report was 
that  there  would  be  MPR  cuts  in  the  short  term,  coinciding  with  the  results  of  several 
expectations  surveys.  The  MPR  was  finally  lowered  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  of 
January 2012. 
Current dilemmas 
Tensions in financial markets stemming from the Eurozone crisis have recently eased. The 
European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  measures  to  supply  long-term  financing  to  banks,  the 
political agreements to define an institutional framework aimed at maintaining fiscal discipline 
in the medium term, and the announcement of a new rescue package for Greece, have all 
contributed to this. In the last few days there was wide adhesion from the private sector to 
the Greek debt swap, which warded off the possibility of a disorderly default, at least for now. 
Nonetheless,  the  situation  remains  complex.  The  ECB’s  recent  actions  open  a  window  of 
time  to  allow  implementation  of  fiscal  adjustments  in  Europe,  strengthening  of  banks  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
adoption  of  structural  measures  to  boost  growth.  Implementing  these  programs,  however, 
involves  facing  serious  difficulties.  Political,  social  and  economic  costs  are  paid  in  the 
short-run and may generate tensions, whereas benefits are to be seen only in the medium 
term. Therefore, we cannot rule out a rebound of financial tensions. All in all it seems as if, at 
least  in  the  short  run,  the  imminent  threat  of  contagion  to  economies  systemically  most 
relevant has diminished. This is reflected in risk, volatility and liquidity indicators that have 
dropped from the maximum levels of late 2011, while stock market and other asset prices 
have recovered so far in 2012. Outstanding among the latter are commodities. 
News in the United States is more encouraging, although recovery is still envisaged to be 
slow,  and  the  labor  market  continues  to  show  significant  imbalances.  However,  the  US 
evolution compensates the decline in the Eurozone. Data of emerging economies show that 
activity has decelerated. In several cases, it is difficult to distinguish how much is driven by 
international  forces,  how  much  by  natural  domestic  slowdown  or  by  specific  events.  An 
outstanding event has been the announcement by the Chinese authorities of a lower growth 
goal for this year. 
In Chile, the effects of the international crisis have been limited and lower than was foreseen a 
few months ago. Several effects that were noticeable toward the end of last year have been 
reversed to a great extent or have become less intense. Terms of trade have improved over 
the last months, due to rises in the copper price. Conditions for external financing have also 
improved, as a result of increased confidence in international markets. Local financial markets 
– one of the transmission channels of external crises towards the domestic economy – show 
that  stock  indexes,  risk  premiums  and  exchange  rates  have  gone  back  to  levels  similar  to 
those that existed before the intensification of international financial tensions. Other indicators 
such as amounts and terms of external banking sector financing have stopped the decline that 
occurred toward the end of last year. The Chilean peso has appreciated nearly 7% so far this 
year.  The  real  exchange  rate  is  close  to  its  average  level  of  the  past  15  to  20  years.  The 
movements  of  the  exchange  parity  have  matched  the  evolution  of  the  US  dollar  in 
international markets, in the face of calmer markets and a greater appetite for risk. This has 
occurred  with  the  price  of  copper  at  3.8  dollars  a  pound,  its  highest  level  of  the  last  five 
months. Its trend has been similar to that of other markets of commodities. 
As the Chilean peso, emerging market currencies have generally appreciated, and since the 
beginning  of  the  year  have  been  accompanied  by  a  return  of  capital  inflows  to  these 
economies.  The  continuation  of  this  phenomenon  brings  back  some  issues,  as  the 
abundance of capital may be difficult to accommodate in a small economy like Chile. Such 
episodes  are  not  new  to  us  and  bring  with  them  discussions  as  to  the  convenience  of 
exchange  market  intervention,  which  some  Latin  American  economies  have  undertaken  in 
recent weeks. 
We are convinced that a floating exchange rate regime is the most appropriate one for Chile, 
as it facilitates macroeconomic and external accounts adjustments. Nonetheless, there are 
circumstances that may lead to Central Bank intervention in the exchange market, either to 
sustain  an  adequate  level  of  foreign  reserve  assets,  or  to  respond  to  overreactions  in  the 
exchange rate that are not aligned with medium-and long-term fundamentals. Associated to 
this type of intervention, there are costs. A first one is that it may create confusion as to the 
monetary  authorities´  objective:  inflation  or  the  exchange  rate.  In  our  case,  we  have  dealt 
with  this  by  means  of  transparent  mechanisms  whereby  we  anticipate  the  amounts  and 
terms of interventions, and by maintaining exchange rate flexibility. A specific exchange rate 
level has never been a Central Bank objective; at most these interventions are conducted to 
prevent excess volatility or temporary diversions from its long-term equilibrium. It has always 
been made clear that the Central Bank of Chile pursues a price stability target. A second cost 
is of a financial nature. Foreign reserves are invested in highly liquid and secure instruments 
of  developed  countries,  whose  interest  rates  are  lower  than  those  of  the  domestic 
instruments  used  to  finance  their  acquisition.  This  originates  a  significant  cost  that 
deteriorates the Central Bank’s capital. The benefit of having these reserves is the enhanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
security in case of an abrupt cut of external financing. These benefits are hard to quantify, 
but it is reasonable to expect that they will diminish as the availability of reserves increases, 
as has been occurring in Chile since 2008. 
On  the  real  side,  the  deceleration  of  output  and  demand  has  been  slower  than  expected, 
reflecting the fact that the external scenario has had a lower than projected impact. Although 
there  are  differences  among  sectors,  economic  activity  in  general  shows  a  behavior 
consistent  with  convergence  towards  its  long  term  trend.  Some  sectors  have  performed 
poorly and have shown more cautious inventory management, while others such as Trade 
and Construction have performed solidly. 
There are several signs that activity and demand will decelerate in the coming months. On 
one hand, there is the behavior of imports of capital and consumer goods. Worth noting is 
the  drop  in  car  imports  that  has  taken  place  during  the  last  months,  consistent  with  the 
cautious  behavior  I  mentioned  a  few  moments  ago.  On  the  other  hand,  domestic  credit 
conditions  have  also  become  somewhat  tighter  these  last  months,  specially  for  consumer 
loans. These elements and the fact that MPR is within a range considered neutral, makes us 
believe that the deceleration of domestic demand will become more evident in the coming 
months. Nonetheless, this process will occur at a rate lower than what we expected a few 
months ago. 
A  significant  part  of  the  impulse  of  private  consumption  relies  on  the  strength  of  the  labor 
market.  The  unemployment  level  is  at  its  lowest  level  of  the  last  15  years,  in  spite  of  a 
deceleration in job creation. Outstanding is the quality of newly created jobs, with a greater 
share  of  wage  earners.  This  type  of  employment,  due  to  its  stability,  is  more  prone  to 
generate consumption of durable goods and increases households’ borrowing capacity, thus 
feeding  back  into  a  rise  in  consumption.  As  expected,  a  low  unemployment  rate  with  few 
output gaps is consistent with greater wage pressures. Real wages have increased between 
2  and  3%  during  several  months,  while  growth  of  nominal  wages  has  been  close  to  7%. 
Indicators  of  consumer  confidence  have  maintained  a  positive  trend  in  the  last  months, 
although they remain in a pessimistic zone. 
Investment in 2010 and 2011 was boosted by the acquisition of machinery and equipment. 
This has recently been changing, with a greater dynamism in Construction and Public Works. 
The  increased  importance  of  Construction  is  related  to  residential  construction  and 
infrastructure,  the  latter  linked  to  Mining  and  Energy  projects.  Residential  construction  is 
consistent with the high level of lending for housing and with interest rates that are still low 
when compared to historical levels. Overall, the strength in gross fixed capital formation is 
consistent  with  the  evolution  of  business  perspectives.  Although  these  expectations 
experienced  a  setback  in  2011,  they  were  never  in  the  pessimistic  range.  They  have 
rebounded during 2012, across different economic sectors. 
I do not want to skip mentioning the new National Accounts data that we will be releasing 
shortly, as result of the recently published 2008 Reference Compilation. Besides the update 
of the reference year from 2003 to 2008, the new national accounts volume measures will be 
compiled using chained moving bases, instead of the traditional fixed base measures. Thus, 
these  statistics  are  set  in  a  level  that  can  be  compared  with  that  of  other  OECD  member 
countries. 
As  I  stated  recently,  various  indicators  point  out  that  activity  and  domestic  demand  will 
decelerate in the coming months. Nevertheless, we believe that it will do so at a slower pace 
than we expected a few months ago. In our December Monetary Policy Report we projected 
a baseline scenario where growth ranged between 3.75 and 4.75%. Some of the risk factors 
that in December we envisaged could reduce growth during this year – accounting for the 
downward bias that we announced then – have had a better evolution than forecast at the 
time. Examples are the recent evolution of demand, which coupled with the signs of a tight 
labor market suggest that output gaps are fairly limited. Another example are the terms of 
trade, which take place in an environment where the likelihood of more catastrophic external 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
scenarios seems to have diminished. In March, private expectations point to a growth in GDP 
close to 4.5% this year, having been in the range of 4% at the end of 2011. 
At the same time that some risks have diminished, others appear. An important matter for us 
is the widening of the current account deficit, explained by the dynamics of spending. In spite 
of the high level of our terms of trade, and following current account surpluses in 2009 and 
2010, we estimate that in 2011 we had a small current account deficit and in 2012 it could 
expand further. This matter needs to be analyzed in depth. 
On the other hand, a lower deceleration of domestic demand, in the context of narrow output 
gaps, could give rise to inflation pressures. During the last months core inflation measures 
converged towards 3% at a speed higher than forecast. Although this evolution may well be 
a  lagged  adjustment  of  core  inflation,  after  it  remained  persistently  at  low  levels  during 
several months, its path must be carefully monitored, more so in the light of a narrowing of 
capacity  gaps  and  a  tightening  of  the  labor  market.  Overall,  in  recent  weeks,  market 
expectations have raised the projections of short-term inflation. 
In addition, in the short term, inflation is affected by supply shocks that can have significant 
effects.  Developments  in  the  international  oil  market  do  not  help  the  outlook  for  domestic 
inflation. Recent geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, which, among other consequences, 
led to an embargo on Iranian exports, and a harsh winter in the Northern Hemisphere have 
made the actual and expected oil price to escalate. The Brent price has risen more than 15% 
during the current year, while projections taken from futures contracts have also risen and 
point to an average price for oil of near US$120 per barrel during 2012. The persistence of a 
high  price  always  raises  worldwide  concern  because  of  its  implications  on  inflation  and 
growth. Concerns regarding inflation deal with the direct impact of fuel and energy inflation, 
and  also  with  the  secondary  effects  that  they  cause,  which  could  be  accentuated  in  an 
environment with a narrow output gap. 
Final thoughts 
Before I end my presentation, I would like to share some thoughts on monetary policy. 
As  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  presentation,  our  task  as  economic  policymakers  is 
made more difficult in a more uncertain environment. We make our best decisions based on 
whatever information is available at the moment. Currently, decision making relies on certain 
elements  that  point  to  opposite  directions.  On  one  hand,  the  international  scenario  is  very 
complex, even though when compared to a few months back, the tensions seem somewhat 
smaller.  Nonetheless,  depending  on  the  outcome  of  events,  there  could  be  contractive 
effects on emerging economies. Scenarios such as this back slacker monetary policies. On 
the other hand, the domestic scenario poses challenges in the opposite direction, inasmuch 
as the behavior of domestic demand may bring inflationary risks. Today, prudent monetary 
policy management has to be prepared for all kinds of scenarios and to adapt the amount of 
stimulus applied according to needs established on a case by case basis. In fact, in our latest 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  we  decided  to  maintain  the  Monetary  Policy  Rate  at  5%  for  a 
second month in a row. The greater caution in policy decisions that these events pose has 
been reflected in the fact that private expectations currently incorporate a higher probability 
of MPR to remain at 5% until the end of the year. 
With the Board we have conditioned future changes in MPR to the implications that domestic 
and external macroeconomic conditions may have on inflation perspectives. The Board has 
also  reaffirmed  its  commitment  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  flexible  fashion,  so  that 
projected  inflation  remains  at  3%  within  the  policy  horizon.  Without  a  doubt,  the  best 
contribution  that  central  bankers  can  make  to  prosperity  in  our  countries  is  to  conduct 
monetary policy aimed at maintaining low and stable inflation. This is perfectly clear for us at 
the Central Bank of Chile. As emerging economies we are long-time victims of inflation and 
are well aware of its devastating effects on our more vulnerable population. The objective is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
clear, but the difficulties we face are in its implementation, with the caution demanded by the 
complex macroeconomic environment. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
