Christian Noyer: Challenges facing France’s Prudential Supervisory 
Authority 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, President of the Prudential 
Supervisory  Authority  (Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel)  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the press conference of the publication 
of the Annual Report 2011 of the Prudential Supervisory Authority, Paris, 14 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  say  first  of  all  how  pleased  I  am  to  host  this  press  conference  which  has  been 
organised  to  coincide  with  the  publication  of  this  second  annual  report  of  the  Autorité  de 
contrôle prudentiel (ACP). 
The “newness” of this institution, which was officially set up in 2010, has no doubt contributed 
to the dynamism that it has shown during this crisis period. Independent, but operating under 
the  aegis  of  the  Banque  de  France,  the  ACP  has  acted  efficiently  and  quickly  to  ensure 
financial  stability  and  enhance  the  protection  of  customers  and  clients  of  banks  and 
insurance  companies.  It  has  also  effectively  projected  France’s  voice  in  international 
negotiations concerning its domains of competence. 
Before saying a few words about the challenges facing the Authority in 2012, I would like to 
develop two points that in my view best characterise 2011: the solidity of our financial system 
in a period of severe crisis on the one hand, and the evolution of our prudential supervision 
methods and instruments on the other. Jean-Philippe Thierry, Vice-Chairman of the ACP, will 
continue this overview by talking more specifically about the insurance and mutual insurance 
segment. 
I) 
My first point: the French financial sector has demonstrated its robustness in 
a context of severe crisis. 
Whereas the 2008 crisis was above all a global crisis triggered by the rapid deflation of the 
US  real  estate  bubble  and  its  associated  financing,  the  crisis  that  began  to  spread  as  of 
mid-2011 is focused on the euro area: a crisis of sovereign debt and financial institutions in 
the euro area. Because the French banks have the broadest geographic coverage in Europe 
and  because  they  have  the  most  internationally  open  scope  of  activities,  they  have  been 
particularly  affected  by  the  crisis.  In  just  several  weeks  last  summer,  French  banks  lost 
nearly  250  billion  dollars  in  US  money market financing,  their  share  prices fell  to  half  or a 
third of their value and their capacity to pursue a sustained activity of financing the economy 
looked  seriously  compromised,  especially  as  these  events  coincided  with  the  tightening  of 
regulatory constraints that put even more pressure on them. 
However,  this  was  not  the  case.  Of  course,  what  we  call  the  “cost  of  risk”  increased 
considerably in 2011 with the need to provision the risk associated with Greek debt. But the 
distribution  of  credit  remained  buoyant  and  the  net  banking  income  of  French  banks 
remained  stable  (–1.5%  for  the  five  main  banking  groups).  Their  aggregated  profit,  down 
36% compared with 2010 to 14 billion euro was substantially higher than the 2008 and 2009 
level, and this allowed them to significantly bolster their own funds and to continue financing 
the French economy. 
The  ACP’s  vigilance  has  been  decisive  in  helping  the  banks  to  maintain  a  satisfactory 
liquidity and solvency situation. In 2011, the ACP conducted 136 on-site inspections; the risk 
profiles of 700 institutions were analysed according to a harmonised procedure with, notably, 
a  sustained  pace  of  meetings  with  the  senior  managers  and  heads  of  the  main  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
lines, thereby allowing the ACP to draw up detailed maps of the main risks to which they are 
exposed.  
During  2011,  the  two  principal  dimensions  of  prudential  supervision  –  monitoring  credit 
institution liquidity and solvency – required particular vigilance by the ACP. Credit institutions’ 
liquidity  levels  were  monitored  more  closely,  particularly  in  its  dollar  resources  dimension; 
this  is  an  area  where  the  rationale  behind  the  ACP’s  being  placed  under  the  aegis  of  the 
Banque  de  France  –  which  is  responsible  for  central  bank  refinancing  –  is  clearly 
demonstrated. 
By ensuring that the adequate risk provisioning, the reduction of management’s and market 
participants’ compensation and the allocation of the bulk of profits to strengthen own funds, 
the ACP has managed to ensure – over the longer term – the solvency of the French banking 
sector. Today, all the major banking groups have Core Tier 1 own funds ratios above 9%. 
This  confirms  their  capacity  to  meet  the  targets  set  for  30 June 2012  by  the  European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA),  thereby  contributing  to  their  adaptation  to  the  future  Basel  III 
regulatory framework and the fulfilment of the objectives announced to the market. 
Lastly,  the  ACP  has  resolutely  placed  its  individual  supervision  within  a  macro-prudential 
perspective. Our Authority has been particularly attentive to the way banks fulfil their role in 
financing  the  economy  via  the  extension  of  loans  to  non-financial  companies  and  to 
households,  in  a  context  in  which  both  regulatory  changes  and  liquidity  constraints, 
particularly  in  dollars,  have  prompted  certain  groups  to  deleverage.  It  has  undertaken  an 
in-depth analysis and published studies on developments in household credit as well as the 
reallocation of households’ financial investments, particularly between bank savings products 
and insurance savings products. 
II) 
2011 – and this is my second point – was a year that saw the reinforcement of 
the methods used in prudential supervision.  
the  ACP 
the  year, 
inspected.  During 
It was above all the year in which the process of merging banking and insurance supervision 
was completed. 
Having been set up in the midst of the crisis that we are going through, the ACP continually 
reviews the methods it uses to deal with new challenges. 
On the one hand, the traditional activities of on- and off-site inspections have been enhanced 
by  taking  the  best  procedures  and  practices  from  each  of  the  two  sectors,  leading  to 
improved  quality  and  comparability  in  the  assessment  of  the  situation  of  the  different 
institutions  being 
thus  developed  a  more 
cross-functional  mode  of  operating,  thereby  responding  to  the  intention  that  led  the 
Government  to  merge  the  former  authorities  in  2010.  The  ACP’s  College  has  set  out 
priorities for the supervision of each of the two sectors in a coordinated manner, and the ACP 
has set up an autonomous and cross-functional research directorate.  
On the other hand, in line with international and European initiatives, the ACP’s supervisory 
methods are complemented by the “stress test” approach to ever more complex scenarios 
and  by  the  monitoring  of  the  systemic  nature  of  certain  institutions.  Organised  by  the 
European authorities (the EBA for banks and the EIOPA for insurance companies) and the 
Basel  Committee  respectively  and  implemented  concretely  in  France  by  the  ACP,  these 
approaches  supplement  the  individual  supervision  of  banks  and  facilitate  the  macro-
prudential supervision of the financial system. 
The  ACP’s  supervision  methods  have  also  fully  taken  on  board  its  remit  with  respect  to 
consumer protection, which is an essential condition for maintaining consumer confidence in 
the French financial sector. 
The ACP’s mandate is to promote, in coordination with the AMF – the report of our joint unit 
will be presented to you shortly – the sound conduct of market players’ commercial practices 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
without  hampering  responsible  financial  innovation  that  is  suited  to  each  category  of 
customers. 
In 2011, the ACP thus took a whole range of measures, of which I will only mention the main 
ones.  The  ACP  has  put  in  place  a  system  for  monitoring  advertising  and  contracts  that 
enable  it  to  analyse  promotional  material.  By  means  of  a  survey  conducted  among  over 
300 institutions,  the  ACP  also  checked  compliance  with  the  provisions  made  by  banks  to 
facilitate banking mobility. In addition, in order to reinforce its activities at local level, the ACP 
works with the Banque de France branch network, which is mobilised to carry out inspections 
of  insurance  intermediaries.  All  of  these  actions  have  made  it  possible  to  identify  good 
practices  in  the  area  of  the  marketing  of  banking  and  insurance  products  and  five 
recommendations  in  the  area  of  consumer  protection  were  published  during  2011.  I  may 
mention  in  particular  the  recommendation  relating  to  the  measures  that  insurance 
undertakings must implement to deal with conflicts of interest when consumers are offered 
unit-linked  insurance  policies  composed  of  bonds  and  other  debt  securities from  an  issuer 
that is financially linked to the insurance undertaking. 
To conclude on this point, I will add that, although the legislation applicable to the revised 
sanctions procedure was only published in the middle of the year, the ACP began to exercise 
its power to impose sanctions with three decisions that mainly concern breaches in terms of 
internal control and anti-money laundering procedures. 
III) 
2012 is a year of intense preparations for the forthcoming regulatory 
developments. 
Throughout 2011, the ACP actively participated in the preparation of the transposition of the 
“Basel III” agreements into European law which is due to be adopted in mid-2012 and in the 
negotiations preparing the entry into force of “Solvency II”. 
At national level, the preparation of banks for the new “Basel 2.5” and “Basel III” regulations 
was one of the priorities of the on-site inspections and of the teams responsible for preparing 
authorisations for the use of internal models notably for market risk. 
In  2012,  the  ACP  will  continue  with  its  work  helping  the  market  to  adjust  to  the  new 
regulatory  frameworks,  notably  by  putting  in  place,  in  coordination  with  the  supervised 
institutions, the new procedures for prudential reporting. 
With regard to banks, I also see a number of areas where decisive progress is expected in 
2012. Without going into detail at this stage, I will just mention: 
• 
the work  on  the  regulatory  framework  applicable  to  systemic  banks,  which  will  be 
pursued  with  the  idea  of  taking  into  account  that,  owing  to  their  size  relative  to  a 
domestic market, certain banks can generate major systemic risk in a given country; 
the  finalisation  of  liquidity  regulation,  which  must  revisit  the  stress  test  scenarios 
applied to banks’ assets and liabilities as well as the scope of assets deemed to be 
liquid; 
the adaptation of the French regulatory framework for all of the institutions that are 
currently credit institutions according to our national definition but which will lose this 
status under the new European definition, which is much more restrictive;  
the  overhaul  of  the  banking  crisis  resolution  mechanism,  with  the  French 
mechanism – in anticipation of the forthcoming European projects – not having been 
updated  to  integrate  the  more  powerful  crisis  management  instruments  resulting 
from the G20 guidelines; 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 the  deliberations,  in  both  the  European  and  French  frameworks,  about  better 
organisation  of  banking  activities  and  of  the  relationships  between  investment 
banking and retail banking. 
The ACP will ensure that there is coherence between these different initiatives so as to avoid 
any unanticipated negative impacts. 
 Before handing over to Jean-Philippe Thierry, I would like to stress that, although the difficult 
macroeconomic  context  persists,  I  remain  confident  about  the  robustness  of  the  French 
financial sector. It has the necessary fundamentals to actively participate in the financing of 
the economy and in particular of SMEs and VSEs, whose activity is mainly financed by bank 
lending. The return of growth in France and the health of the financial sector depend on this. 
It  is  a  fact  that  rigorous  risk  management  in  each  institution  is  indispensable  to  ensure 
financial  stability.  These  past  few  years  have  also  shown  the  full  scope  of  the  role  of  the 
supervisory authorities and have proved that the interventionist nature of their activities is a 
crucial element that regulation, however exacting, cannot replace. 
The forthcoming developments in prudential regulation in the banking and insurance sectors 
will only be fully effective if the efforts made by the institutions in 2011 to prepare and adapt 
are followed through. One of the ACP’s main tasks in 2012 will be to help them to do this.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
