Guy Debelle: Regulatory reforms and their implications for financial 
markets, funding costs and monetary policy 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Financial Services Institute of Australia, Adelaide, 18 September 2012. 
 Matt Boge provided invaluable help in the preparation of this speech. 
It is a pleasure to speak here today in my home town. Neil Grummitt has spoken about some 
of the details of the regulatory reform process currently underway in Australia and globally. 
My aim is to consider some of the broader implications of the reforms. 
Before doing so, there is an important point to make. The changes we all see the banking 
and financial system undergoing are not purely the result of regulatory changes. Rather there 
are a number of forces all pushing in the same direction. Some of the changes we see are 
self-imposed, as financial institutions look at the lessons learned over recent years and seek 
to  increase  their  own  resiliency  to  future  developments.  Some  are  being  imposed  by  the 
market  in  terms  of  the  availability  of  both  the  quantity  and  price  of  particular  channels  of 
financing. Others reflect pressure from rating agencies.  
Currently, all of these forces are generally aligned in changing the structure of the financial 
system in the same direction, although they may vary in terms of degree. In that sense, the 
impact of regulation may not be as large as it appears on the surface. Rather regulation is, in 
many cases, serving to reinforce the other forces at work. But the regulatory changes will be 
more binding when these other forces are no longer all pushing in the same direction. The 
experience over many years is that some of these forces are certain to wane when the credit 
cycle  is  in  full  upswing.  In  the  good  times,  self-discipline  can  falter  under  the  weight  of 
competitive  pressures,  as  can  market  discipline.  Hopefully  in  those  circumstances,  the 
regulatory framework will continue to impart the necessary restraint. 
Today,  I’m  going  to  focus  on  the  Basel III  reforms.  Other  reforms,  such  as  those  around 
central clearing and OTC derivatives are also having a significant impact on the way many of 
you  do  business,  but  I  will  leave  them  for  another  time.  The  Basel  III  measures  will 
strengthen the requirements for financial institutions’ liquidity and capital. It is the impact of 
some of these reforms on financial markets and on funding costs that I would like to address 
today.  
In  thinking  about  this  issue,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  intent  of  the  regulatory 
reforms is to alter the incentives for financial institutions and thereby bring about changes in 
behaviour.  The  prices  of  various  financial  products  will  change  from  their  pre-crisis  levels. 
This is not an “unintended consequence” (a phrase which personally I think is overused) but 
a desired outcome.  
So  let  me  give  a  quick  summary  of  the  Basel  liquidity  reforms.  The  40  or  so  largest 
deposit-taking intermediaries in Australia will be required to hold high-quality liquid assets in 
quantities  sufficient  to  withstand  a  30-day  period  of stress. This  liquidity coverage ratio,  or 
LCR, is a much tougher metric than that used in the past, both in terms of the severity and 
length of the stress period for which sufficient liquid assets need to be available, and in the 
criteria for what qualifies an asset as liquid.  
The test of whether an asset is liquid and of high quality is whether the asset would be able 
to  maintain  its  value  in  the  private  markets  during  periods  of  severe  stress.  The  financial 
crisis revealed that the universe of such assets was a lot smaller than banks (and some of 
their  regulators)  had  previously  assumed.  In  particular,  the  liquidity-generating  capacity  of 
private  sector  debt  deteriorated  significantly  during  periods  of  market  stress,  even  where 
such debt had been highly rated. This was the case for both securitised assets – such as 
asset-backed  commercial  paper  and  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  –  as  well  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
unsecured  paper.  For  many  of  these  assets,  the  only  source  of  liquidity  proved  to  be  the 
central bank. This was true in the Australian market as well as internationally.  
In recognition of this, the intent of regulatory reform globally is to require financial institutions 
to hold more of their liquidity in debt securities issued by sovereigns or other official sector 
bodies, subject to the requirement that these issuers are themselves highly rated and their 
securities are liquid. All else equal, this would be expected to widen the spreads between the 
yields on high-quality sovereign debt and the yields on private debt securities. However, to a 
large extent, such repricing occurred globally during the financial crisis as the market itself 
reached the same conclusion as to what constituted a liquid asset. That is, the self-evident 
lesser liquidity of much private sector debt prompted financial market participants themselves 
to  adjust  the  liquidity  risk  premia  they  required  on  this  debt,  quite  independently  of  any 
direction from regulators.  
Within the Australian market, a reassessment of risk and changes in investors’ tolerances for 
assuming  such  risk  have  been  important  in  driving  the  spreads  between  Commonwealth 
Government  Securities  (CGS)  and  yields  on  highly  rated  private  debt  securities.  Since  the 
financial crisis, there has been a considerable widening in these spreads (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
It is unlikely that any regulatory initiatives, and certainly not those related to Basel III liquidity 
requirements, have been behind the strong demand for CGS we have seen in recent years. 
Indeed,  the  major  source  of  demand  for  CGS  has  come  from  foreign  investors,  including 
central  banks,  sovereign  wealth  funds  and  pension  funds  attracted  by  the  comparative 
strength  of  the  Australian  economy  and  the  sovereign’s  credit  standing.  Non-resident 
investors now hold more than three-quarters of outstanding CGS. In contrast, the Australian 
banks own very few CGS (Graph 2).  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2 
 Within the Australian market, the only assets deemed to meet the Basel standard for liquidity 
are  CGS,  semi-government  securities,  cash  and  exchange  settlement  balances  at  the 
Reserve Bank. As is  well known, under any conceivable scenario, the supply of CGS and 
semis  in  Australia  will  be  insufficient  for  ADIs’  liquidity  requirements.  For  this  reason,  the 
Reserve  Bank  has  announced  it  will  establish  a  committed  liquidity  facility  (CLF).1  On  the 
payment of a 15 basis point fee, ADIs will be able to obtain a commitment from the Reserve 
Bank  to  provide  liquidity  against  a  broad  range  of  assets  under  repurchase  agreement. 
Eligible assets will include a range of highly rated private debt securities, including an ADI’s 
self-securitisations.  The  Bank’s  commitments  to  ADIs  to  provide  liquidity  against  these 
assets will be recognised by APRA for the purposes of compliance with the Basel III liquidity 
standards.  Central  bank  committed  liquidity  facilities  will  also  be  used  to  meet  the  Basel 
standards in certain other jurisdictions with insufficient liquid assets.  
As  I  have  said  before,  this  arrangement  is,  to  a  large  extent,  the  formalisation  of  the 
pre-existing  liquidity  arrangements  in  Australia  and  is  very  much  consistent  with  the 
principles of central banking described by Bagehot.  
The  imposition  of  the  fee  ensures  that  the  intent  of  the  Basel  standard  will  be  met.  By 
charging ADIs for the liquidity insurance the central bank provides, the appropriate incentive 
is established for ADIs to manage their liquidity risk. At the same time, the design of the CLF 
will  contain  the  impact  of  regulatory-induced  demand  for  liquid  assets,  in  an  environment 
where so few outside assets exist.2  
As noted already, CGS yields have fallen well beyond levels that could have been induced 
by the liquidity regulations. This is evidenced by the fact that banks own so few of them. For 
banks,  the  spreads  to  interbank  rates  at  which  many  CGS  currently  trade  implies  that 
                                                
1  See  RBA  (2011),  “The  RBA  Committed  Liquidity  Facility”,  Media  Release  No  2011-25,  16  November,  and 
Debelle G (2011), “The Committed Liquidity Facility”, Speech to the APRA Basel III Implementation Workshop, 
Sydney, 23 November. 
2  Outside assets are those not issued by the banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
settlement balances at the Reserve Bank would be a higher yielding investment and at least 
as free of risk. Similarly, the large negative spread to swap is confirmatory evidence of the 
shortage of CGS relative to the strong demand for the asset.3  
Recent trends within the Kangaroo bond market also illustrate that broader market dynamics 
have  had  a  greater  influence  on  the  relative  prices  of  debt  securities  than  prospective 
regulatory developments.  
When  APRA  was  making  its  initial  assessment  of  what  securities  would  qualify  as  liquid 
assets for the Basel III framework, there was concern expressed in some quarters about the 
consequences for the Kangaroo market if supranational and foreign agency debt  were not 
considered  level  1  assets.  Seen  from  the  perspective  of  today,  it  is  apparent  that  these 
concerns were overstated. As AAA rated Kangaroo debt will be eligible for the CLF, it is only 
the  payment  of  the fee,  or  liquidity  premium,  that  distinguishes  these  securities from  CGS 
and  semis  for  regulatory  purposes.  The  subsequent  repricing  of  much  Kangaroo  debt  far 
exceeds  the  size  of  the  fee.  In  many  cases,  this  repricing  has  rather  been  due  to  altered 
perceptions of their creditworthiness by ratings agencies and market participants.  
More generally, great store is often placed in terms of whether an asset is eligible for repo 
with the central bank or not. Reliance on repo eligibility does not strike me as the cornerstone 
of  a  resilient  issuance  program.  But  in  recent  months,  we  have  seen  a  number  of  non 
repo-eligible Kangaroo issues come to market, including from some first-time issuers. This 
indicates that there are other more important elements that determine investor demand than 
being considered a level 1 asset or repo eligibility. 
In addition to the issue of which securities can be held as liquid assets, the other dimension 
to  liquidity  regulation  is  how  many  of  these  assets  need  to  be  held.  In  this  regard,  the 
Basel III liquidity framework makes certain assumptions about the likely calls on liquidity that 
a bank would experience during a 30-day period of stress.  
One assumption, based strongly on the experience of the past five years, is that any liquidity 
commitments ADIs have made to other financial institutions, including structured investment 
vehicles  and  conduits,  will  be  called  upon  in  full  during  the  stress  scenario.  This  has 
significantly  lessened  the  incentives  for  structures  designed  to  exploit  opportunities  for 
regulatory  arbitrage,  such  as  the  conduits  that  issued  asset-backed  commercial  paper. 
Again,  though,  the  decline  of  many  of  these  structures  can  hardly  be  attributed  solely  to 
regulatory change. Their viability was undermined when investors and ratings agencies also 
came to the view that the quality of such instruments was largely tied to the quality of the 
supporting institution.  
This has also seen a decline in the number of mortgage warehouses, as the providers of the 
warehouses have significantly increased the price to account for the much greater liquidity 
risk. Most non ADI mortgage providers don’t really have a balance sheet to warehouse the 
mortgages on, so we have seen a marked decline in their number and market share over the 
past five years. 
In  terms  of the  support that  an  ADI  provides  to its  internal  business  units,  changes  to the 
regulatory framework will alter how ADIs price liquidity and capital usage across the different 
components of their businesses. By their nature, these internal prices are rarely transparent 
to outside observers, but the incentives created by such transfer prices can have significant 
implications for financial markets. This repricing across all product lines is going on currently 
and  still  has  some  way  to  run. We  have  already  seen  its  effect  on the  pricing  of  undrawn 
lines  of  credit,  for  example,  where  the  increase  in  the  price  resulting  from  their  increased 
liquidity cost has seen a marked reduction in their prevalence. 
                                                
3  Heath  A  and  M  Manning  (2012),  “Financial  Regulation  and  Australian  Dollar  Liquid  Assets”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
September, pp 43–52. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Another  example,  observed  by  the  RBA  through  our  market  operations,  has  been  the 
tendency  for  government  bond  dealers  to  fund  their  positions  at  rates  that  exceed  the 
unsecured  borrowing  rates  in  the  interbank  cash  market.  To  the  extent  that  unnecessarily 
high internal funding rates on these trading desks have fostered such an outcome, the new 
liquidity regulations may well encourage some revision to these practices.  
Calls on a bank’s liquidity will also arise when they are unable to roll over or maintain their 
existing  funding.  Assumptions  regarding  the  likelihood  of  this  are  based  on  the  regulators’ 
views  about  what  forms  of  funding  are  more  stable  than  others.  Going  forward,  these 
“run-off”  assumptions  should  be  expected  to  influence  the  funding  strategies  adopted  by 
ADIs.  
To  give  one  example:  the  incentive  for  ADIs  to  issue  short-term  debt  to  other  financial 
institutions  will  be  considerably  reduced  under  Basel  III,  as funds  borrowed  with  less  than 
31 days to maturity would need to be invested entirely in liquid assets. Thus there will be a 
marked decline in the provision of such debt by banks. 
At the same time, the demand for liquid bank debt from other financial institutions, such as 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds,  is  increasing,  in  part  as  a  result  of  regulatory 
developments in those sectors.  
So  there  is  a  decrease  in  supply  and  an  increase  in  demand  for  liquidity.  Normally,  in 
economics, such a situation would result in a change in the price (of liquidity in this case) to 
clear  the  market.  My  concern  is  that  it  is  not  clear  that  the  demand  and  supply  curve  for 
liquidity  provided  by  the  regulated  financial  system  will  intersect  at  any  reasonable  price. 
How this is resolved is not entirely clear. If it were to push the supply of liquidity outside the 
regulated system, that would not be a good development. 
In  any  case,  it  is  quite  probable  that  new  funding  instruments  will  emerge  that  seek  to 
accommodate  the  new  regulations.  In  some  other  jurisdictions,  a  greater  reliance  on  debt 
with  31-day  notice  periods  (given  the  30-day  liquidity  stress  scenario)  has  already  been 
observed. Regulators and financial institutions will need to ensure that this does not create a 
new stress point at 31 days as funding piles up at that maturity. 
One product where we are yet to see the effect of the new liquidity regulation on pricing is 
at-call deposits. Relative to other types of deposits, these products are very expensive from a 
liquidity point of view, but they still offer interest rates that are a large spread above the cash 
rate. As banks focus on the liquidity costs of such products, I would expect to see these rates 
decline  relative  to  those  on  other  types  of  deposits.  Indeed,  it  would  be  surprising  if  the 
repricing  doesn’t  occur  fairly  soon  given  the  liquidity  regulations  take  full  effect  at  the 
beginning of 2015.  
However,  our  liaison  with  banks  suggests  that  these  deposits  are  particularly  sensitive  to 
changes  in  pricing,  so  there  is  a  big  disadvantage  in  terms  of  losing  deposits  to  your 
competitors if you are the first to reprice for the new regulations. But if an institution has a 
large reliance on this source of funding, it won’t be able to change that reliance overnight on 
the  31st December 2014.  Just  like  supertankers,  funding  structures  take  a  long  time  to 
change direction, and that change of course needs to be occurring around now. 
On the subject of funding, one notable feature of banks’ funding over the past three or four 
years has been the shift away from short-term debt securities toward deposits, in particular, 
term deposits (Graph 3). This shift has been a deliberate strategy on the part of the banks 
and  has  been  brought  about  by  significant  changes  to  their  pricing  structure.  The  interest 
rates offered on term deposits to both retail and wholesale customers are now priced  well 
above  the  rates  at  which  the  banks  issue  equivalent  maturity  debt  securities,  such  as 
certificates of deposit (Graph 4).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 3 
Graph 4 
  Given  the  forthcoming  liquidity  regulations,  a  shift  toward  deposits  certainly  makes  sense. 
The Basel III framework views deposits as a much more stable source of funding, and has 
lower  run-off  assumptions  for  most  types  of  deposits  than  it  does  for  wholesale  debt 
securities.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, as with the relative price of liquid assets, one can’t explain all of the movement in 
deposit pricing in terms of prospective liquidity regulations. The intensity of the competition 
and the rates paid on some of these deposits far exceed the implied regulatory incentive.  
Why,  then,  are  banks  willing  to  pay  such  high  rates  for  this  type  of  funding?  To  a  large 
extent, the impetus has come from an internal reassessment of funding resiliency, the rating 
agencies  and  the  broader  market,  where  a  bank’s  ability  to  attract  deposits  has  received 
greater  attention  since  the  financial  crisis.  Quite  possibly,  some  of  the  focus  on 
deposit-to-loan  ratios  and  similar  metrics  is  misplaced.  Regardless,  while  term  deposits 
appear  to  be  a  very  expensive  source  of  funding,  in  the  current  environment,  banks 
presumably believe the alternatives would be even more expensive for their overall cost of 
funds.  
Nevertheless, the effects of changes in funding composition on the total change in funding 
costs for  ADIs  in  the  past five  years  has  been  fairly  marginal.  The  increase  in  the  cost  of 
funding for banks and, ultimately, their customers, has been driven considerably more by a 
fundamental  reassessment  within  financial  markets  of  the  risks  associated  with  credit  and 
liquidity exposures.  
The  regulatory  effort  towards  promoting  more  stable  sources  of  debt  funding  and  greater 
capital buffers for financial institutions is driven by a desire to foster financial system stability. 
As  has  been  noted  before,  and  as  is  apparent  from  the  intense  competition  for  deposits, 
changes  in  this  direction  have  also  been  pursued  by  the  banks  on  their  own  initiative, 
presumably in the belief that this will lower their overall cost of funding in the market. To the 
extent that regulations push ADIs to adopt a funding structure that market discipline would 
not make them otherwise adopt, the difference is likely to be small and the effect on overall 
funding costs would be smaller still. Moreover, as both APRA and the Reserve Bank have 
argued,  any  costs  of  this  magnitude  are  well  worth  paying  for  a  more  stable  financial 
system.4  
As regards the broader macroeconomic impact of the increase in ADIs’ funding costs, it is 
important  to  remember  that  in  the  setting  of  monetary  policy,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  is 
conscious of the various rates at which credit is being priced. Consequently, where there has 
been an overall rise in the funding cost structure for intermediaries, the Board is able to set 
its  cash  rate  target  to  appropriately  take  into  account  the  effect  on  lending  rates.  In  the 
current environment, there has been ample scope to lower the cash rate sufficiently so as to 
bring these other rates to where they need to be to achieve the desired stance of monetary 
policy, be they mortgage rates or business lending rates.  
In this regard, it is important to stress that the transmission of monetary policy is still  very 
effective in Australia. Not only do lending rates respond to changes in the Board’s cash rate 
target,  there  is  no  sense  in  which  the  aggregate  supply  of  credit  appears  to  have  been 
constrained by the ongoing changes in ADIs’ funding patterns.  
Finally, it has been suggested that while the regulations may not have a large impact on the 
supply of credit in the current environment, banks may have difficulty funding an increased 
demand for credit. However, I think this concern is misplaced. In an environment where the 
demand for credit has picked up because the world is a better place, funding conditions for 
intermediaries are also likely to be much easier. Moreover, from a macro perspective, there 
is unlikely to be a funding problem for the system as a whole when the world is a happier 
place, even if an individual institution is not 100 per cent sure where the next funding dollar is 
coming from. 
                                                
4   See,  for  example,  Laker  J  (2012),  “Bank  Regulation  and  the  Future  of  Banking”,  Remarks  to  the 
41st Australian Conference of Economists, Melbourne, 11 July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
So,  to  conclude.  There  have  been  a  number  of  significant  changes  to  the  structure  of 
financial markets over the past five years, in terms of pricing as well as the composition of 
funding and lending. Regulatory reforms have certainly played a role in those changes, but 
one  of  the  main  points  I  hope  to  leave  you  with  today  is  that  the  regulatory  reforms  have 
often  served  to  reinforce  changes  resulting  from  a  self-reassessment  or  resulting  from 
market  pressures.  While  these  forces  have  all  been  working  in  the  same  direction  in  the 
current environment, the regulatory reforms will aim to ensure that these changes to a more 
stable  financial  structure  endure  when  the  environment  is  less  conducive  to  self-discipline 
and as market pressures abate.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
