Ravi Menon: Forces driving the global economic outlook 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at 
Investment  Management  Association  of  Singapore  13th Annual 
Conference, Singapore, 14 March 2012. 
the 
 Mr Lester Gray, Chairman of IMAS, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
  Fragile equilibrium 
A. 
1. 
The  world  economy  appears  to  have  found  a  fragile  equilibrium.  There  are 
weaknesses in key economies balanced by pockets of growth elsewhere. More notably, the 
worst  fears  of  the  last  three  months  of  2011  have  not  materialised.  The  last  six  weeks  in 
particular have shown signs that the global economy has avoided imminent disaster. 
In the Eurozone, the threat of a major crisis has receded, at least for now.  
2. 
 
A deal  has  been  struck  on  the  second  Greek  bailout  package,  allaying  fears  of  a 
messy default situation.  
The ECB’s two tranches of Long-Term Refinancing Operation, or LTRO, amounting 
to more than 1 trillion Euros, has provided Eurozone banks much needed liquidity to 
meet their funding needs. 
The LTRO has also helped to compress sovereign yields significantly, particularly at 
the front end of the yield curve. 
In the United States, the risk of a double dip recession has waned. 
Employment data have surprised on the upside. 
New  orders  for  both  manufacturing  and  non-manufacturing  continue  to  indicate 
higher levels of activity for the next six months. 
In China, the odds have improved in favour of a soft landing. 
While  economic  growth  has  continued  to  ease  in  the  face  of  weakening  external 
demand, domestic demand has been holding up well. 
Inflation appears to have peaked, providing monetary policy more latitude to support 
growth if necessary. 
But the outcome for 2012 is by no means assured. Significant risks remain on the 
3. 
 
 
4. 
 
 First,  resolution  of  the  sovereign  debt  situation  in  the  Eurozone  is  still  a  work-in-
progress. With Europe sliding into recession, sovereign and banking vulnerabilities 
will remain a protracted concern. 
Second,  the  sustainability  of  consumer  spending  in  the  US  remains  critically 
dependent  on  further  improvements  in  the  labour  and  housing  markets  –  both  of 
which are uncertain. 
Third, a sharp spike in oil prices could potentially derail global economic growth. Oil 
prices,  which  have  already  started  rising,  are  highly  vulnerable  to  geopolitical 
developments in the Middle East. 
5. 
horizon: 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Barring  these  potential  shocks,  the  IMF  projects  the  global  economy  to  grow  by 
6. 
3.3% this year. The Eurozone will experience a mild recession. The US and Japan will have 
positive growth, but below trend. Developing Asia is expected to grow by 7.3%. Under these 
conditions,  the  growth  forecast  for  the  Singapore  economy  at  1–3%  this  year  remains  on 
track. 
7. 
But it is not this year’s growth that policymakers or asset managers should be most 
concerned about. It is the medium-term growth and inflation outlook that matters. There are 
several  structural  challenges  facing  the  global  economy.  I  want  to  elaborate  on  two  key 
driving forces that will shape the medium-term outlook in both the advanced and emerging 
economies: deleveraging and monetary expansion. 
Deleveraging 
8. 
Let me begin with deleveraging. From around 1990, debt levels began to rise rapidly 
in most advanced economies. Governments ran persistent fiscal deficits that were financed 
by borrowing. Total government debt in the OECD economies grew relentlessly, from 58% of 
GDP in 1990 to 98% in 2010. Households went on a consumption binge, financed by easy 
borrowings on the back of rising property prices and housing equity. Household debt in the 
developed economies also climbed, from 62% in 2000, to 76% in 2010. Deleveraging is the 
process by which this excessive debt is brought down to more sustainable levels. This will be 
long-drawn,  only  because  the  build-up  of  leverage  took  place  over  such  a  long  period  of 
time.  
The deleveraging process that is unfolding across the advanced economies is taking 
Synchronised deleveraging in the US and EU 
9. 
place across three fronts: 
Governments in the US and EU 
 
Households in the US 
 
Banks in the Eurozone 
 
First,  deleveraging  by  governments.  The  public  finances  of  the  US,  UK,  and  the 
10. 
Eurozone, have substantially deteriorated, due to pre-crisis fiscal profligacy and post-crisis 
discretionary  stimulus.  These  countries  have  now  embarked  on 
fiscal  adjustment 
programmes to varying degrees, primarily through austerity measures. Fiscal consolidation is 
expected to shave off a cumulative 2–2.5% points from GDP growth in the US, UK, and the 
Eurozone over the next three years. 
11. 
Second, deleveraging by US households. Since the bursting of the credit bubble in 
2008, US household debt has declined by 5% in absolute terms and 15% as a percentage of 
disposable incomes. More than two-thirds of the reduction in debt stock was due to default of 
mortgage and other consumer debt. It is hard to tell what is a sustainable level of household 
debt,  but  most  estimates  suggest  that  US  households  are  just  about  a  third  to  halfway 
through  the  deleveraging  process.  This  means  probably  another  3–5  years  of  sub-par 
household consumption growth in the US. 
12. 
Third, deleveraging by Eurozone banks. There are two factors at work here. One, 
the  quality  of  Eurozone  bank  assets  has  come  under  pressure.  Two,  Eurozone  banks  are 
required  to  improve  their  capital  adequacy  positions  so  as  to  buffer  against  shocks.  In 
particular, European banks are required to achieve a minimum core Tier 1 capital ratio of 9% 
by June this year. To the extent that banks cannot achieve the target capital ratios through 
retained earnings and capital raising, they will have to reduce their balance sheets. They can 
do this by selling assets or reducing lending. Both will have a dampening effect on economic 
activity. Given the global footprint of many Eurozone banks, the effects will be felt not just in 
Europe but elsewhere in the world. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Impact of deleveraging on Asia 
13. 
Emerging  Asia  will  not  be  immune  to  this  synchronised  deleveraging  in  the 
advanced Western economies. Fiscal consolidation and household deleveraging in the US 
and EU will have significant spillover effects on Asia, principally through the trade channel. 
Asia ex-Japan exports  about a quarter of its goods to the US and  Europe. Already, Asian 
export growth has decelerated from 25% at the beginning of 2011 to 10% in the last quarter 
of the year. 
While  Asian  economies  have  started  to  restructure  their  economies  towards 
14. 
increasing domestic demand, and intra-regional trade within Asia has been growing, these 
trends will, at best, cushion only part of the fall in demand from the  West. Rebalancing of 
demand is a long-drawn process. It is unrealistic to expect Asia to become the main engine 
of growth for the global economy over the next few years.  
15. 
The deleveraging of Eurozone banks will impact Asia mainly through  the financial 
channel, in the form of tighter credit. Euro area banks as a whole provide 36% of global trade 
finance loans, and French and Spanish banks together account for more than two-fifths of 
trade finance loans in Asia. 
16. 
To-date,  the  impact  on  Asia  of  deleveraging  by  Eurozone  banks  has  been  quite 
limited.  Through  most  of  last  year,  many  Eurozone  banks  substituted  the  drying  up  of 
interbank  funds  in  Asia  with  increased  inflows  from  head  office,  which  enabled  them  to 
continue  funding  activities  in  Asia.  But  towards  the  end  of  2011,  there  was  a  discernible 
pullback in trade finance, project finance, and syndicated loans by several Eurozone banks. 
Specialist lending lines like shipping and aviation also experienced cutbacks.  
17. 
Well-capitalised  global  and  Asian  banks  with  strong  liquidity  positions  have, 
however, stepped in to fill the gap. For example, Asian banks’ market shares of export bills 
for Singapore-originated trade activities rose from 36% before the crisis to 55% in the last 
quarter  of  2011.  A  similar  pattern  can  be  observed  for  trust  receipts,  where  Asian  banks’ 
market shares rose from 55% to 64% over the same period. In fact, aggregate trade finance 
activity has continued to grow. 
18. 
2012 will be more challenging though. On the positive side, the funding situation for 
Eurozone banks has improved, in the wake of the ECB’s LTRO. In January this year, there 
were net inflows from head offices to the Singapore branches of Eurozone banks.  
19. 
of Asian banks to fill the trade financing gap is limited: 
 
First,  the  US  Dollar  loan-to-deposit  ratios  of  Asia  ex-Japan  banks  are  already  at 
elevated levels and could be a constraint. 
Second, Asian banks may be more selective about the risks they want to take on, 
given the uncertain global growth outlook. 
Third, Asian banks which are generally smaller may be constrained by counterparty 
limits from taking over the trade finance lines of the large European banks. 
Fourth,  Asian  banks  will  take  time  to  build  expertise  in  areas  such  as  structured 
trade finance that the Eurozone banks have specialised in. 
20. 
Deleveraging  is  a  process  not  to  be  avoided  but  to  be  managed.  The  world  as  a 
whole  has  lived  beyond  its  means  in  the  years  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis.  Many 
advanced economies grew rapidly on the back of easy fiscal policies, low interest rates, and 
excessive  credit  expansion.  The  emerging  economies  benefitted  from  this  growth  through 
exporting to the advanced economies.  
21. 
The world must now work off these past excesses. Debt in the advanced economies 
must  come  down  to  more  sustainable  levels  before  these  economies  can  return  to  a 
But deleveraging by Eurozone banks is far from over. At the same time, the capacity 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
balanced growth trajectory. This must mean lower consumption and higher savings for some 
time. Emerging economies, especially in Asia, must increase domestic demand to help offset 
some of the impact of the slowdown in the G3 economies. But they will not be unaffected. 
They too will see slower growth.  
Monetary expansion 
22. 
A  second  driving  force  in  the  global  economy  is  the  widespread  phenomenon  of 
easy money. Since the beginning of the financial crisis in 2008, central banks in the US, UK, 
and the Eurozone have embarked on unprecedented monetary expansion. With fiscal policy 
constrained  by  sovereign  debt  concerns,  the  burden  of  supporting  growth  and  ensuring 
financial stability has fallen disproportionately on monetary policy. With interest rates close to 
the  zero  bound,  central  banks  have  been  relying  heavily  on  unconventional  measures, 
especially  large  scale  asset  purchases  aimed  at  lowering  long-term  interest  rates  and 
spurring  economic  activity.  Unconventional  as  these  measures  may  be,  they  have  been 
effective in preventing financial crisis and preserving market stability. 
23. 
While this unprecedented monetary expansion may be necessary in the context of 
the current situation in the advanced economies, it is neither without risk nor contagion. The 
key risk is that if monetary stimulus is not withdrawn at the right time, inflationary pressures 
could rapidly build up. 
24. 
Monetary  expansion  in  the  G3  economies  also  has  significant  cross-border 
contagion  effects.  Low  interest  rates  in  the  advanced  economies,  coupled  with  relatively 
favourable  growth  prospects  in  emerging  economies,  have  triggered  bouts  of  large  and 
volatile capital flows to the latter. 
25. 
Easy  monetary  conditions  are  appropriate  in  the  advanced  economies  given  the 
stage of the business cycle they are at, with significant negative output gaps. But emerging 
economies, especially in Asia, are at a different stage of the business cycle: 
 
Capacity  utilisation  is  above  pre-crisis  levels  in  many  Asian  countries.  Labour 
markets are tight. 
The output gap in many Asian countries has closed and turned positive, although 
the recent easing of exports has reduced the gap somewhat. 
26. 
Partly due to the tightening of monetary policy earlier on, inflationary pressures in 
many Asian countries have subsided. But as long as monetary conditions in the advanced 
economies remain easy, the risk of disruptive capital flows and surges in inflation, especially 
in asset prices, remains real. 
27. 
The  challenge  facing  Asian  policymakers  is  this:  how  to  adjust  policy  settings  to 
cope with slower economic growth while inflation has not been entirely tamed? While there 
has  been  some  normalisation  in  policy  rates  over  the  past  two  years,  real  interest  rates 
remain generally low to negative in the region. Credit growth is strong and bears watching. 
Persistent  low  real  interest  rates  can  distort  savings-investment  decisions  and  lead  to  a 
misallocation  of  resources.  Risks  may  build  up  in  specific  sectors,  like  real  estate  for 
instance. 
28. 
Asian  economies  have  mostly  coped  with  these  pressures  by  complementing 
standard  macroeconomic  responses  –  such  as  raising  interest  rates  and  allowing  some 
currency appreciation – with a variety of so-called macroprudential tools, such as tightening 
credit  standards  and 
for  property  purchases.  These 
unconventional  measures  have  been  fairly  effective  to-date  in  easing  asset  price  inflation. 
But  like  unconventional  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies,  these  measures  are 
also not without risk.  
loan-to-value  ratios 
lowering 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Shift in investment portfolios to Asia 
29. 
What do these driving forces mean for the asset management industry? One clear 
trend will be the shift of investment portfolios to Asia, as the driving forces accentuate the 
underlying shift in the world’s centre of economic gravity towards Asia. 
30. 
I described capital flows to emerging Asia earlier, largely in terms of cyclical factors 
relating  to  monetary  policy.  But  there  is  a  larger  secular  phenomenon  underpinning  these 
flows  to  Asia  –  the  structural  rebalancing  of  investment  portfolios  towards  emerging 
economies in general, and Asia in particular. Given the size of developing Asia, there is not 
enough  portfolio  investment  in  Asia  and  not  enough  portfolio  investment  by  Asia.  There  is 
scope for both to increase – dramatically. 
31. 
First, global investors will invest more in Asia. Advanced economies represent only 
half of world GDP but three-quarters of global market capitalisation. A reallocation of just 5% 
of advanced economy equity portfolios to emerging economies translates into a potential flow 
of US$2 trillion.  
You  know  the  story  well  –  strong  economic  growth,  sound  fundamentals,  and 
32. 
favourable demographics will support the valuations of Asian assets and draw a growing tide 
of  institutional  investor  interest  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  rapid 
urbanisation will mean large infrastructure needs in Asia – the ADB has estimated that Asia 
needs  about  US$8  trillion  through  2020  to  upgrade  its  infrastructure.  This  financing  need 
cannot  be  met  by  public  funds  alone.  Infrastructure  funds  are  set  to  play  an  increasingly 
important role in the asset management landscape in Asia. 
33. 
Second, Asian investors will invest more, both in Asia and globally. Rising affluence 
and a strong savings culture, coupled with increasing financial sophistication, will mean more 
Asians  moving  away  from  speculation  in  property  and  stocks,  towards  more  systematic 
planning for wealth enhancement through a globally diversified portfolio of assets.  
34. 
There are now more high net worth individuals in the Asia Pacific than in Europe. 
And they are younger – 41% of the high net worth individuals in the Asia Pacific are aged 
45 years and below, compared to only 10% in North America. They have a longer time span 
for  wealth  accumulation,  and  a  more  global  outlook  in  their  investment  strategies.  At  the 
same time, Asians are living longer and more Asian countries are seeing the need for well-
designed pension systems to provide adequate retirement incomes for their people. These 
pension funds will require professional management. 
In  the  same  vein,  I  expect  the  demand  from  the  official  sector  for  Asian  financial 
35. 
assets  to  grow.  Central  banks  and  sovereign  wealth  funds  will  likely  look  to  allocate  more 
funds to Asian markets, both to diversify risk and to enhance returns. Speaking for the MAS, 
we have always invested our official foreign reserves in a highly diversified global portfolio. 
As Asian markets develop in depth and sophistication, our allocation to emerging markets, 
especially in Asia, will grow. 
36. 
To  be  sure,  asset  management  in  Asia  is  not  a  one-way  bet.  Asian  markets  are 
more  fragmented  and  harder  to  operate  in,  compared  to  the  advanced  economies. 
Infrastructure finance is indeed promising, but has been promising for two decades now with 
little of the promise realised. There are a variety of country-specific risks – institutional and 
legal – that must be taken into account when operating in these markets. Managing risk and 
navigating a varied terrain are key to success. 
Singapore as the leading Asian asset management centre 
This  is  where  Singapore  comes  in.  Singapore’s  strong  physical  connectivity  and 
37. 
trade and financial linkages with the rest of Asia make it a key node in the flow of information 
and ideas. It is an ideal vantage point for asset managers to understand Asia and manage 
pan-Asian investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The asset management industry in Singapore is broad based. Top-tier global funds 
38. 
have  centralised  a  host  of  critical  functions  in  Singapore,  including  portfolio  management, 
investment  research,  trade  execution,  and  product  structuring  –  across  both  equities  and 
fixed  income  asset  classes.  Singapore  is  also  seeing  a  flourish  of  alternative  investment 
managers specialising in strategies or asset classes that provide return streams uncorrelated 
to the broader market, or as the industry terms it, “generating alpha”. 
New initiatives to develop Singapore’s capital markets 
39. 
A  key  component  of  the  broader  ecosystem  that  supports  the  asset  management 
industry in Singapore is the capital market. Over the years, MAS has been making concerted 
efforts to broaden and deepen Singapore’s debt capital market. I am pleased to announce 
today  three  initiatives  aimed  at  further  improving  efficiency  and  liquidity  in  the  Singapore 
dollar corporate debt market. 
40. 
First,  MAS  will  provide  swap  liquidity  to  primary  dealer  banks  handling  Singapore 
dollar debt issuance for foreign corporates. These offshore entities usually have no need for 
the Singapore dollar funds raised and mostly swap them into a foreign currency, usually US 
dollars. Although the pricing mechanism in the foreign exchange and cross currency swap 
market  is  efficient,  swap  markets  have  a  tendency  towards  one-way  flow  because  of 
Singapore’s  excess  savings  over  investments.  This  can  lead  to  uncertainty  in  the  pricing 
process  of  the  bond  issuance.  We  will  therefore  support  swap  transactions  at  market-
determined  prices,  which  will  ultimately  enable  swap  market  liquidity  to  build  in  the  longer 
tenors. 
41. 
Second, MAS will partner the industry to create a Singapore dollar corporate debt 
securities  lending  platform,  from  which  key  players  will  be  able  to  borrow  securities  for 
market making. By providing greater assurance that banks will be able to deliver any given 
security, this platform will reduce the risk of market makers being squeezed in the event they 
are unable to short-cover the bonds they have sold. Improved market liquidity will mean that 
asset  managers  can  be  more  certain  of  their  ability  to  enter  and  exit  their  positions  with 
minimal price slippage. 
Third,  MAS  has  initiated  a  price  discovery  platform  where  market  participants  will 
42. 
contribute  end-of-day  prices  for  a  universe  of  Singapore  dollar  corporate  bonds.  This  is 
targeted for completion by the second half of this year. This initiative will significantly improve 
transparency in the corporate bond market and provide reliable mark-to-market prices for the 
industry and asset managers alike. 
Let me conclude.  
Conclusion 
43. 
There are fundamental structural forces shaping the global economic outlook for the next few 
years.  The effects  of  deleveraging and  monetary  expansion  will  be  with  us  for  some  time. 
They pose twin risks: lower economic growth and higher inflation.  
44. 
But  the  Asian  growth  story  remains  intact,  and  Asia’s  rise  as  both  a  source  and 
destination  for  investment  augurs  well  for  the  asset  management  industry.  All  of  you 
gathered here belong to an industry that has been and will remain one of the star performers 
of Singapore’s financial sector. 
45. 
I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
