Klaas Knot: Dutch financial stability in the Asian era 
Speech by Mr Klaas Knot, President of the Netherlands Bank, at the symposium “The future 
of the Netherlands in the Asian era”, Center for Japanese Studies, University of Groningen, 
31 August 2012. 
With thanks to Jeroen Hessel. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is always a pleasure to be back here in Groningen. I find the two 
buildings on the conference invitation very  well chosen. They symbolise the common fears 
about  the  rise  of  Asia.  The  Dutch  Euromast  was  modern  and  imposing  when  it  was  built 
in1960, but now looks small and outdated compared to the brand new Sky Tree in Tokyo, the 
second-tallest building in the world at a height of 634 meters.1 The Euromast would also be 
dwarfed by the 492 meter Shanghai world financial center or the 509 meter Taipei 101. Does 
this indeed show that advanced economies like the Netherlands are not able to compete with 
the larger and more efficient Asian countries? 
I tend to be optimistic. I will discuss the rise of Asia with a focus on financial stability. Indeed, 
the rise of Asia implies profound changes for advanced countries. But as long as countries 
face the challenge and adjust their economies, this need not be problematic. On the contrary, 
Asia also  provides many opportunities. This applies especially to the Netherlands, with our 
centuries  of  experience  in  international  trade  and  finance.  After  all,  our  Verenigde 
Oostindische Compagnie had the only western trading post with Japan for over 200 years. 
Until 1859, a number of Dutch settlers  lived on Deshima, a tiny island just off the coast of 
Nagasaki. And already in the 1920s, banks like the Nederlandsch-Indische Handelsbank and 
the Nederlandsche Handelsmaatschappij had offices in Singapore, Shanghai and Bombay. 
INFLUENCE OF ASIA ON THE REAL SIDE 
The rise of Asia is not new. In fact, Asia accounted for over half of world GDP for centuries, 
and  only  started to  lag  behind  in  the  20th  century. In  a  way,  Asia  is  now  restoring the  old 
balance  of  power. We saw the rise of Japan in the 1960s and 70s, and the rise of Korea, 
Singapore,  Hong  Kong  and  Taiwan  in  the  1980s  and  90s.  But  the  recent  ascent  of  large 
countries like China and India dramatically increases the scale and speed of the shift. The 
share of emerging Asia in the world economy increased from 8% in 1980 to 26% in 2012. 
The rise of Asia primarily affects advanced economies on the real side of the economy. Trade 
and international competition have intensified. Trade with low wage countries has quadrupled 
the effective global labour supply since 1980.2 Companies more easily offshore stages of their 
production to these countries. Our iPhones were designed in the US but are assembled in 
China. So comparative advantages have not disappeared, but they are changing more quickly 
than before. The Dutch trade monopoly with Japan lasted for two centuries. By contrast, the 
top  position  in  the  mobile  phone  market  has  already  changed  several  times  in  the  last 
decades. It switched from 
                                                
1  After the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, which is almost 830 meters high. 
2  This measure of the effective global labour supply comes from the IMF (WEO April 2007) and is measured as 
the  size  of  national  labour  forces  scaled  by  trade  openness  (export-to-GDP  ratio’s).  More  trade  openness 
means a larger effective labour supply as more people work in the tradable sector worldwide. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Nokia  in  Finland  via  Blackberry  in  Canada  to  Samsung  in  Korea.  It  is  vital  that  Western 
countries  become  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  such  more  frequent  changes,  and  to 
prevent structural problems like long term unemployment. This would also help them benefit 
from  Asia’s fast-  growing domestic markets. Germany’s strong  exports to  China  show  that 
Chinese people enjoy driving an Audi or BMW as much as we do. 
The  rise  of  Asia  also  affects  inflation  in  advanced  economies  –  an  important  theme  for  a 
central banker. Inflation is  lower because consumers directly profit from cheap imports like 
camera’s, computers and clothing. More indirectly, domestic producers also keep prices low 
because they  are  afraid of  losing market  share to  Asian competitors. The  rise  of  Asia  has 
therefore contributed to the decline of inflation over the last decades, alongside other factors 
like  better  monetary  policy.  In  recent  years  however,  this  was  partly  offset  by  the  strong 
increase in food and commodity prices, which is driven by demand from emerging markets. 
China for instance accounted for 30% of the growth in oil demand between 2002 and 2005. 
INFLUENCE OF ASIA ON THE FINANCIAL SIDE 
While the rise of Asia has clear effects on the real side, the effects on the financial side are 
more controversial. Some people claim that Asia had a large influence on the exceptionally 
loose financial conditions that led to the financial crisis. In their view, the strong increase in 
global  liquidity  was  largely  driven  by  the  savings  glut  in  Asia,  particularly  in  China.  Asian 
countries had increased their current account surpluses after the Asian crisis in 1998. This 
was partly to reduce their vulnerability and partly due to export-led growth strategies. These 
savings were mostly held in official reserves, which increased six fold to around five trillion 
dollars  in  only  a  decade.  Because  financial  markets  within  Asia  are  underdeveloped,  the 
reserves  were  invested  in  advanced  economies,  for  instance  in  US  treasuries.  This  may 
have reduced long-term interest rates and fuelled the credit boom. 
While the savings glut did contribute to global liquidity, it is not the only explanation. After all, 
Asia  still  plays  a  relatively  modest  role  in  financial  globalisation.  Asia,  like  many  other 
emerging  markets,  is  not  so  financially integrated. The  average size  of  foreign assets  and 
liabilities is only  around 70% of GDP in emerging markets, against a much larger 220% in 
advanced  economies.  Emerging  markets  usually  have  smaller  financial  sectors,  less 
developed financial markets, and often a more domestic orientation. China has some of the 
largest banks in the world, but this is because of China’s enormous domestic market. Their 
international activities are  relatively limited,  if  only  because China still has  a  closed capital 
account.  Capital  flows  from  emerging  markets  therefore  mainly  consist  of  foreign  direct 
investment, which is relatively stable and not so harmful for financial stability. By contrast, the 
volatile international portfolio and banking flows are dominated by advanced economies. 
The  recent  literature  therefore  suggests  that  the  loose  liquidity  conditions before the  crisis 
largely came from financial sectors in advanced countries themselves. The great moderation 
fed the perception that large fluctuations were a thing of the past, and this has reduced risk 
premia and increased leverage. This was reinforced by low policy interest rates, which were 
possible thanks to  more  credibility in  monetary  policy  and  because globalisation contained 
consumer  price  inflation.  Credit  growth  was  fuelled  further  by  financial  innovations  like 
securitization, and by  the  internationalization of banks. Banks increasingly relied on foreign 
wholesale funding, which enabled them to expand credit much further than if they had only 
relied  on  domestic  deposits. The  US  housing  bubble, for  example,  was  partly  financed  by 
European  banks  that  bought  mortgage-  backed  securities.  The  banking  glut  in  advanced 
economies seems at least as important as the savings glut from Asia. 
CRISIS ACCELERATES THE SHIFT IN BALANCE OF POWER 
In retrospect, we should have been aware of the risks. The world became more financialised 
than ever, as the size of financial sectors and capital flows grew strongly. History shows that 
these  financial factors may  lead  to  recurrent patterns of  booms and  crises, as  the famous 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
book by Kindleberger reminds us. Recent examples are the Japanese crisis in 1991 and the 
Asian crisis in 1998. Still, most policymakers failed to notice the development of an almost 
global  credit  boom  since  the  mid-1990s.  Many  advanced  countries  witnessed  a  strong 
increase in credit and house prices. Housing bubbles developed in countries such as the US, 
the UK, Spain and Ireland. In the euro area, the boom interacted with inflexible product- and 
labour  markets,  leading  to  strong  wage  growth  and  a  severe  loss  in  competitiveness. 
Especially  southern  European  countries  had  not  adjusted  their  economies  to  the  loss  of 
exchange rates in the monetary union. Yet all these imbalances largely went unnoticed. Major 
changes  in  the  economic  landscape,  such  as  globalisation,  often  make  it  difficult  to  spot 
vulnerabilities. We are lead to believe that we are in a new era, while in fact we are close to a 
new crisis. 
The  consequences  are  familiar.  Almost  four  years  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
most advanced economies are still struggling. We are reminded that financial crises may lead 
to a longer period of relatively low growth, with Japan’s lost decade as the most pronounced 
example. Growth is reduced because banks remain fragile and hesitant to lend, households 
are saving to reduce debt, and governments are consolidating in order to counter the surge in 
public after the crisis. In the euro area, the situation is complicated further by the sovereign 
debt crisis. Sovereign bonds in southern Europe are under severe financial market pressure, 
while some countries are also experiencing capital outflow from the banking sector. 
Meanwhile,  emerging  Asia  has  remained  surprisingly  resilient.  Many  Asian  countries  had 
improved their economic fundamentals after the Asian crisis. Their exposures to the current 
crisis  were  also  limited,  because  of  lower  financial  integration  and  because  their  reserves 
were invested in safe assets. While the business cycle in these export-oriented economies is 
affected by demand from the West, their trend growth has clearly decoupled. Emerging Asia 
recorded an average annual growth of 8.5% per year over the last decade, against only 1.7% 
for advanced economies. The financial crisis has only accelerated the shift in the economic 
balance of power in the world, which has important consequences. It for instance changes the 
composition of international organisations like the IMF and the BIS. Asia is seeking a greater 
say  at  the  expense  of  advanced  economies,  especially  in  Europe.  The  recent  decision  to 
merge the Dutch and the Belgian constituencies at the IMF is a direct consequence of this. 
CHALLENGES FOR EUROPE AND THE NETHERLANDS 
The  rise  of  Asia  therefore  poses  important  challenges  for  advanced  economies,  and 
especially  for  Europe.  Industrial  countries  must  restore  financial  stability,  prevent  new 
instability  in  the  future,  and  implement  structural  reforms  to  compete  against  low  wage 
countries. The required adjustment is not easy, but is necessary to fully reap the benefits of 
real and financial globalisation in the Asian era. I see four policy priorities. 
The first is a further reduction of public debt, which this year stands at a staggering 108% of 
GDP  on  average  in  advanced  economies.  Lower  debt  reduces  refinancing  risks  and  the 
vulnerability to shocks. It also helps to calm financial markets in the euro area. Further debt 
reduction is absolutely necessary, even if it will probably reduce growth in the short run. After 
all, delays only require an even larger adjustment further down the road. Moreover, there is 
increasing evidence that high public debt levels reduce growth themselves. High debt may 
for instance crowd out domestic private investment or deter foreign direct investment. 
A  second  priority  is  therefore  to  increase  the  growth  potential  in  advanced  economies  via 
reforms. Structural reforms of product- and labor markets are especially urgent. The southern 
European product and labour markets belong to the most rigid in the world. A higher growth 
potential  makes  it  easier  to  reduce  debt.  Wage  and  price  flexibility  helps  to  restore 
competitiveness  and  reduce  current  account  imbalances  within  the  euro  area.  Finally, 
flexibility also facilitates adjustment to the more frequent shifts in comparative advantages due 
to trade globalization that I described before. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The third priority, related to the first two, is a lasting solution for the European debt crisis. In 
the  short  run,  a  credible financial backstop should  give  countries under pressure sufficient 
time to achieve a lasting adjustment. In the longer run, it is also vital that Europe repairs some 
of  the  design  flaws  in  the  monetary  union  that  the  crisis  has  revealed.  The  report  by 
EU president Van Rompuy provides a good starting point, although much will depend on the 
exact  design  of  the  various  elements.  European  countries  should  also  realize  that  further 
integration  is  the  only  way  to  preserve  our  position  in  a  world  where  Asia  is  gaining 
importance. This requires a strong and credible commitment from European politicians. 
A final priority is to prevent financial instability in the future. This requires a large number of 
different measures, such as the strengthening of banking sectors via the Basel III framework, 
and the development of macro prudential policy frameworks. As the challenges of financial 
globalization only  became  apparent  recently,  these  policies  still  require  time  and  analysis. 
Moreover, booms have been missed many times in the past. This should remind us that even 
new solutions may not always be bulletproof. 
CONCLUSION 
Allow me to conclude. Despite these challenges, the fears about the rise of Asia should not 
be exaggerated. Rotterdam’s Euromast may not be able to compete with Asian buildings, but 
its harbor is thriving thanks to trade with China. And meanwhile, Amsterdam’s buildings from 
the time of the Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie  increasingly attract Asian tourists. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
