Guy Debelle: Credo et fido – credit and trust 
Text of the 2012 Richard Searby Oration by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial 
Markets) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at Deakin, Melbourne, 25 September 2012. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  deliver  the  Richard  Searby  Oration  here  at  Deakin  University.  I  feel 
honoured  to  follow  the  esteemed  speakers  who  have  preceded  me.  Dr  Searby  has  had  a 
singularly  impressive  career  throughout  which  he  has  made  a  great  contribution  to  the 
community of Australia in many different arenas. As I read his record, one area with which he 
has had little direct involvement has been that of finance, perhaps unfortunately, as it could 
well have benefitted from his guidance. It is the current state of the financial sector that I will 
talk about today. 
As you are all aware, the global financial system has been in a state of turmoil for more than 
five  years  now.  The  repercussions  of  this  have  been  widespread,  although  thankfully 
Australia has been spared the worst of the impact. In other parts of the world, most obviously 
Europe, the United States and the United Kingdom, the fall-out from the financial crisis has 
seen millions lose their jobs, many for a number of years. This is most stark in Greece and 
Spain where around one quarter of the workforce is unemployed. Young people entering the 
workforce in those two countries have little prospect of finding meaningful employment any 
time soon; an experience that can scar their income prospects over their whole working lives 
and runs the risk of leading to a dangerous breakdown in social cohesion. 
The crisis has been very much financial in its genesis but with losses that have extended to 
all parts of the global economy. Unlike some recent downturns, the recovery in a number of 
countries has been particularly protracted this time around. In a number of countries, even 
some  five  years  on,  the  level  of  output  in  2007  has  still  not  yet  been  reattained.  This 
represents a sizeable loss of income and wealth. 
Tonight, I am going to talk about one of the elements that has contributed to this financial 
crisis being so long-lasting, and which might mean that there is still some way yet for it to 
run.  The  issue  I  want  to  focus  on  is  the  importance  of  trust  in  banking,  and  finance  more 
generally. Hence the title of my talk today. Credo is the Latin for “I believe”, from which we 
get  the  word  credit,  while  fido  is  the  Latin  for  “I trust”,  from  which  we  get  fiduciary  and 
fidelity.1 So credit is fundamentally an issue of trust. Without trust, we don’t have credit. That 
lack  of  credit  is  a  phenomenon  which  is  playing  out  in  a  number  of  countries  around  the 
world at the moment, again, thankfully, not here in Australia.  
The lack of trust is contributing to the unwillingness of financial institutions to extend credit 
and the difficulty some governments are having in obtaining funding. In turn, the lack of credit 
growth  is  exerting  a  major  restraint  on  the  economic  recoveries  in  a  number  of  countries 
around the world. In the post-war period, easier monetary policy has invariably helped foster 
a rebound in economic growth following a recession. An important transmission channel for 
monetary policy to take effect has almost always been a pick-up in lending to businesses and 
households. That is clearly not happening in many countries at the moment. Central banks in 
those  countries  are reaching  deep  into their  toolkits  to revive  lending  and foster  economic 
recovery.  But  the  lack  of  trust  is  significantly  curtailing  the  ability  of  the  normal 
implementation  of  macropolicy  tools,  both  monetary  and  fiscal,  to  engender  a  sustainable 
economic recovery. 
                                                
1   My  high  school  Latin  teachers  will  be  pleased  to  see  some  return,  if  a  few  decades  after  the  fact,  
from their efforts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  outline  of  my  talk  is  to  firstly  discuss  the  role  that  the  financial  sector  plays  in  the 
economy. Then I will examine the crucial role that trust plays in financial intermediation and 
in ensuring the financial system runs smoothly. Following that, I will document the breakdown 
of trust that has occurred over the past five years. To finish on a more positive note, I will 
outline some of the avenues that might be taken to restore trust in the financial system. 
Some of these themes were addressed in a speech entitled “Credit is Trust” delivered by my 
colleague at the Bank of England, Andy Haldane, in September 2009.2 Andy highlighted the 
reduction in trust that had taken place in the previous two years – what was then the first two 
years of the financial crisis. But three years on from 2009, the situation is even worse. The 
lack of trust in the financial system has intensified. Distrust has spread beyond the finance 
system to other institutions. This is particularly evident in Europe, where there is a lack of 
trust in some quarters in the longevity of the euro, and a lack of trust by bondholders of some 
European governments that they will be repaid in full. In the case of Greece, this lack of trust 
proved  to  be  well-founded.  This  diminished  trust  in  political  and  economic  institutions  is  a 
particularly worrying development. 
I fear that the path back will be a long one. In all walks of life, including finance, trust takes a 
long time to build, but can be quickly and easily shattered.  
The financial sector and the economy 
To set the scene, I will start with a brief description of what the financial sector does. I hope I 
can avoid being too jargonistic, but please forgive me if I lapse into economists’ speak every 
once in a while. 
The  financial  sector  plays  an  important  role  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  primarily 
through intermediation. Simply put, the financial sector sits between savers and borrowers. It 
takes the funds it raises from the savers through, for example, deposits, and then lends it to 
those who wish to borrow, be they businesses, governments, or households. If the system is 
working  well,  it  allocates  the  funds  to  their  most  productive  use.  This  benefits  the  savers 
whose money is being invested profitably, and the economy and society at large.  
It is important to note that the financial sector is an intermediate sector. It is not at the end of 
a  production  chain  producing  something  which  directly  generates  utility  for  society.  It  is  a 
critical link along the way, the oil that keeps the economy ticking over. When the oil dries up, 
the economic engine starts to malfunction and can ultimately grind to a halt. 
In that regard the financial sector is different from other parts of the economy. It is one of the 
reasons  it  is  subject  to  considerably  more  regulation  and  oversight,  although  clearly  the 
experience of the past few years indicates that in many parts of the world the oversight and 
regulation were deficient. When the finance sector stops functioning properly it has knock on 
effects to all parts of the economy in a way that other sectors generally don’t. The experience 
at the end of 2008 following the collapse of Lehman Brothers demonstrated this point starkly. 
The  contraction  in  the  global  economy  was  breathtaking  in  its  rapidity,  but  also  in  its 
simultaneity, in a way that hadn’t been seen before.  
I  will  now  step  a  bit  deeper  into the  process  of financial  intermediation  to  provide  a  better 
sense of where trust comes into the process. Again, apologies if this gets a bit too arcane, 
but hopefully you can bear with me. 
Why  do  financial  intermediaries  exist?  Why  don’t  I  as  a  saver  lend  directly  to  you  the 
company? 
                                                
2  Haldane  A  (2009),  “Credit  is  Trust”,  Speech  given  at  the  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers,  Leeds, 
14 September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One  of  the  main  reasons  is  because  of  the  presence  of  what  economists  refer  to  as 
asymmetric  information.  Asymmetric  information  arises  when  I  know  more  about  my  own 
situation than you do. It  would be difficult for individual savers to know  whether they  were 
lending to a business that was going to put the funds borrowed to a productive purpose and 
be in a position to repay the loan when it became due. 
A financial institution such as a bank that is practised in credit assessment can reduce these 
information asymmetries. When a bank makes a loan, it does the due diligence on the lender 
and assesses the capacity of the lender to repay. While the due diligence cannot completely 
eliminate the information asymmetry, it can allow the bank to make a reasonable assessment 
of  the  risk  incurred  in  making  the  loan.  On  the  basis  of  that  risk  assessment,  the  lender 
charges  the  borrower  an  interest  rate  to  compensate  for  the  risk  incurred.  With  an 
appropriately diversified portfolio of loans then, the bank should not be overly exposed to any 
particular development. The risk is mutualised. If there is a problem with one loan, the lender 
should be earning sufficient interest on the rest of its loan portfolio to cover the loss.  
The lender, and thereby the savers who provide the funds to the lender, are compensated for 
the risk incurred. Relative to lending their own funds directly, the savers are benefiting both 
from  the  (hopefully)  professional  risk  assessment  that  reduces  the  information  asymmetry 
and the risk mutualisation. 
One difficulty in this process that is apparent from what I have just said is the possibility that 
the risks in a portfolio of loans are correlated. In plain English, when one loan goes bad, how 
likely  is  it  that  other  loans  will  go  bad  at  the  same  time?  For  example,  in  an  economic 
downturn  where  there  is  a  rise  in  unemployment,  a  lender  might  find  that  more  loans  are 
becoming problematic than expected, because they are all being affected by the realisation 
of  the  same  risk.  The  interest  rate  charged  may  have  been  sufficient  to  compensate  the 
lender for one realisation of the risk but may not have been adequate for a large number of 
simultaneous realisations of risk. 
In addition to intermediating funds, one can also think of the financial sector intermediating 
risk. As I’ve just said, a financial institution has a wide range of loans on its books. By holding 
a diverse portfolio of risk, the institution is, in theory, less vulnerable to the realisation of any 
of those risks. 
But  a  financial  institution  doesn’t  always  hold  all  the  risks  on  its  own  books.  Through 
channels such as securitisation, a financial institution can also distribute the risk around the 
financial system to other institutions that are, again at least in theory, better placed to hold 
that risk. Who might be better placed to take on these risks? Some possible candidates are 
pension or superannuation funds and insurance companies that should have long horizons 
and a diversified portfolio of assets.  
It is an interesting question as to whether it is better for a bank to pool the risks on its own 
books  or  whether  it  is  better  for  the  risk  to  be  off  the  books  of  the  banks  and  instead  be 
distributed round the system. If the risks are distributed around the system, the bank making 
the loan may be less inclined to do the appropriate amount of due diligence, as they are no 
longer so directly exposed to the consequences. In principle, the entity which buys the risk 
from the bank should also do an appropriate amount of due diligence. But the experience of 
the past few years shows that the more chains there are in this process, the more removed 
the end-holder of the risk is from the originator of the risk and the worse the process of due 
diligence becomes.  
On the other hand, if the bank holds too much risk on its balance sheet, and if too many of 
those risks crystallise, the bank is likely to find that its ability to continue to intermediate funds 
is severely curtailed. It will cut back on its lending – what’s commonly referred to as a credit 
crunch – worsening the economic environment. There are plenty of examples of this through 
history, including in the current crisis. So conceivably, risk should be intermediated as much 
as funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
These considerations are currently at play in the debate over the Volcker rule in the United 
States and the “ring-fencing” proposed in the Vickers report on the UK banking system. The 
conclusion reached in both those cases is that it is better to separate the investment banking 
(or  risk  generation)  arm  of  financial  institutions  from  the  commercial  banking  or  regular 
lending arm of the institution. Then, if some risk blows up in the investment arm, there is not 
a  detrimental  spillover  to  the  commercial  bank  that  crimps  its  ability  to  continue  lending, 
thereby limiting the impact on the economy. 
Alternatively,  one  can  consider  a  world  of  fractional  risk  banking,  analogous  to  fractional 
reserve banking. With fractional reserve banking, I refrain from lending some portion of the 
funds  you,  and  others,  deposit  with  me  so  that  I  can  repay  you,  should  you  decide  to 
withdraw the funds at short notice. As long as all the depositors don’t want their funds back 
at the same time, that is, as long as there isn’t a bank run, then I am fine. In the case of 
fractional risk, I would retain some part of the exposure on my own balance sheet rather than 
pass it all on to you, to give me some incentive to monitor the risk and continue to do due 
diligence. This is often described as “skin in the game”.  
Trust and finance 
Having  spent  a  bit  of  time  setting  the  scene  by  describing  how  the  process  of  financial 
intermediation  works,  I  will  now  focus  on  the  main  argument:  the  role  that  trust  plays  in 
finance. 
Trust is pervasive at many levels of the financial system, in large part because of asymmetric 
information. There is the trust between the depositor and the bank. The depositor is trusting 
that her funds are safe with the bank. This is embodied in Frank Capra’s famous movie, It’s a 
Wonderful Life, where Jimmy Stewart saves the day with a paean to trust, to stop the run on 
the bank. 
Trust of this sort is particularly important because banks undertake maturity transformation, 
that is, borrow short and lend long. For example, banks are willing to let you deposit your 
money “at call”, but lend the money for periods considerably longer than that. If depositors all 
lost trust in a bank at the same time, as in a bank run, the bank would be unlikely to be able 
to repay the funds immediately. It could not call in all its loans. It would be forced to engage 
in a fire sale of its assets, which are mostly illiquid loans. To prevent this situation occurring, 
central banks provide a liquidity backstop, where they stand ready to lend money to banks if 
needed,  against  the  bank’s  assets  (collateral).  The  trust  in  these  arrangements  is  almost 
always enough for them not to be needed.  
There is trust between the borrower and the bank. The bank is trusting that the borrower will 
repay  the  loan.  The  bank  can  do  a  lot  of  due  diligence  on  the  borrower  to  be  reasonably 
confident that the lender will repay. But ultimately there will be some trust involved. The bank 
needs to trust that the borrower has provided accurate information and will act in good faith. 
There  will,  however,  always  be  a  gap  between  what  the  bank  can  learn  through  its  due 
diligence and what it needs to be completely confident the loan will be repaid in full. 
Because  the  process  of  financial  intermediation  often  has  a  number  of  links  in  the  chain, 
there also needs to be trust between financial institutions. Many financial transactions don’t 
just  involve  one  bank  lending  out  its  deposits  to  the  end-borrower.  Often  the  funds  are 
on-lent  to  one  financial  institution  after  another,  before  ultimately  finding  its  way  to  the 
end-borrower. So trust needs to be present at every stage in the chain. One breakdown in 
this  chain  of  trust  between  counterparties  can  throw  a  spanner  in  the  works  of  the  whole 
process. 
Ultimately there is only so much due diligence that can be done. Risk is always present in the 
financial system. Information asymmetries will always be present between the two parties in 
a  financial  transaction.  Transparency  can  reduce  but  not  eliminate  the  risk  from  these 
asymmetries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Finally, there has historically been trust between regulators and financial institutions. (I am 
not sure there is all that much of this trust at the moment, as I will discuss later.) “Trust me, I 
know what I’m doing”, was the banker’s exhortation for the light touch approach to regulation 
that  was  pervasive  prior  to  the  crisis  in  many  countries,  most  obviously  the  UK.  The 
argument  was  that  banks  should  be  broadly  left  to  their  own  devices,  with  the  discipline 
provided by the market deemed sufficient to keep them on track.  
The breakdown of trust 
Having described the critical role that trust plays in the process of financial intermediation, I 
will now describe how trust has broken down over the course of the financial crisis. 
The period leading up to the financial crisis saw what might be labelled, in the context of my 
talk today, the development of lazy trust. Things were generally going along fine, so my due 
diligence was that I will take you, the lender, at your word. I won’t really bother to verify that 
what  you  are  telling me  is  true. I  won’t  bother to  consider the  possible circumstances that 
might hinder your ability to repay me.  
Moreover,  with  long  chains  of  intermediation  involved,  there  was  often  too  much  distance 
between the ultimate holder of the risk and the source of the risk. Too many links means that 
details get lost or misheard. If the due diligence is necessarily incomplete by the very nature 
of financial transactions, then that incompleteness is likely to get magnified, the more chains 
there are in the transaction. The due diligence gets dissipated along the chain. There is a 
presumption that someone further up the chain did the due diligence. And when times were 
good, no-one thought to challenge that presumption. 
So complacency set in, encouraged by the seemingly benign growth in the world economy. 
That benign environment led to an incorrect pricing of risk. Now this need not be the case, 
but it does seem to be a trait of human behaviour that has been evidenced many times in 
financial history. Good times begets complacency.  
Let me take a quick detour here. Taken to the extreme, this line of argument leads to a view 
of  the  world  most  famously  associated  with  some  Austrian  economists.  Good  times  are 
always setting us up for the next disaster. It is not clear to me what the appropriate policy 
response should be to this. Certainly one should always remain alert to the possible dangers. 
And certainly it may be difficult to take away the punchbowl when the party is in full swing. 
(Maybe that is why central bankers are never invited to good parties…) But surely it doesn’t 
mean  we  should  never  have  good  times,  and  instead  endure  a  constantly  mediocre 
performance so that no-one ever gets carried away. 
Obviously there needs to be a balance. To some extent, one can do the calculus. The large 
costs of the current financial crisis does make one think hard whether one should have let 
the previous boom persist for so long, as great as the benefits of it were while they lasted. 
But another aspect of human nature is the belief that one can avoid the mistakes of the past 
by learning from them. Inevitably therefore, there is the ubiquitous assertion that this time it is 
different. And in many aspects, each time it is different. It is easier to assess the differences 
than  the  similarities  in  real  time.  The  similarities  only  generally  become  apparent  after  the 
fact. 
Thus, as mentioned earlier, we actually do need some level of distrust, at least initially, for 
the  financial  system  to  function  effectively.  I  shouldn’t  take  you  completely  at  your  word.  I 
should do some background checking to make sure that what you are telling me is true. I 
should check whether your circumstances have changed so I can be confident that you will 
still be able to repay me. 
So  back  to  the  breakdown  of  trust.  Some  time  around  2007,  it  became  clear  to  many  in 
financial markets that there had been a major mis-assessment of risk in many parts of the 
financial system. While some had been warning about this mis-assessment of risk prior to 
this,  and  some  had  even  positioned  themselves  to  benefit  from  this  mis-assessment,  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Michael Lewis described in the Big Short, it wasn’t until the middle of 2007 that this became 
a  more  widely  held  opinion.  Interestingly,  through  the  second  half  of  2007,  there  was  a 
marked disconnect between equity markets and credit markets. Credit markets came to the 
realisation significantly earlier that something was going badly wrong in the financial markets, 
but for quite  a  considerable  period  of time,  equity  markets  assumed  nothing  worse than  a 
garden variety economic slowdown was in prospect. 
Lazy  trust  evaporated.  The  financial  system  switched  rapidly  from  complacency  to  deep 
mistrust  in  a  short  period  of  time.  In  particular,  trust  broke  down  between  financial 
institutions,  best  illustrated  by  the  final  days  of  Bear  Stearns  in  March  2008,  and  then 
Lehman Brothers in September of that year (see House of Cards by William Cohan and Too 
Big to Fail by Andrew Ross Sorkin, that are amongst the many books written about those two 
events).  Both  institutions  experienced  a  run  on  them  by  their financial  counterparties,  who 
were unwilling to roll over their funding because of the concerns that the poor quality of the 
assets on their balance sheets might render the two institutions insolvent. 
The  crucial  distinction  between  uncertainty  and  risk  came  to  the  fore.  I  can  assess  the 
riskiness of an asset or an institution by assigning a probability to its likely value. I can then 
manage that risk appropriately. But if I am uncertain and unable to make a firm assessment 
about  the  value,  the  situation  is  a  lot  worse.  I  am  likely  to  pull  back  and  be  unwilling  to 
provide  any  finance  to  you,  except  on  steep  terms  and  probably  only  for  a  short  term. 
Uncertainty is much more pernicious than risk. As I have spoken about earlier,3 the famous 
Rumsfeld quote very much applies to the financial crisis. Risk is very much about the “known 
unknowns” but uncertainty is about the “unknown unknowns”. But maybe Mark Twain puts it 
a lot better: “It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s what you know for 
sure that just ain’t so.” 
Financial institutions and investors knew that many assets in the financial system were badly 
mispriced. In the case of some financial institutions, they knew about the mispricing on their 
own books and rightly assumed that the same was probably going on with their competitors. 
But they didn’t know how much.  
They did not know what exposure various financial institutions had to these mispriced assets. 
So what is termed “counterparty risk aversion” became all pervasive. The lack of trust meant 
that  financial  institutions  were  only  willing  to  lend  to  one  another  for  increasingly  shorter 
periods, ultimately only overnight. A financial markets version of the bank run portrayed in It’s 
a Wonderful Life took place. In the UK, in the case of Northern Rock, a traditional bank run 
occurred as depositors became concerned about the safety of their savings. They no longer 
trusted  the  institution  because  they  were  uncertain  about  its  ability  to  fund  itself,  given  its 
reliance on mortgage-backed securities for funding – a market that was no longer functioning 
at all because of a lack of trust in the value of these securities. 
This breakdown in trust led to a breakdown in intermediation. Central banks stepped into this 
hole to play their historical role of intermediary of last resort. Central banks can replace, to a 
reasonable extent, the decline in the intermediation of funds by the banking sector. But it is 
considerably more difficult for central banks to replace the lost trust.  
The extent to which central banks have needed to be intermediary of last resort is evident in 
the vast size of central bank balance sheets in major advanced economies: the euro area, 
the United States, Japan and also the UK. The central banks are standing between financial 
institutions that are unwilling to lend directly to each other.  
The euro area provides a particularly clear example of this. In the second half of 2011, banks 
in the euro area became increasingly unwilling to lend to each other. First of all, banks would 
only  lend  against  collateral  (secured  lending)  rather  than  lending  directly  to  another  bank 
                                                
3  Debelle G (2010), “On Risk and Uncertainty”, Address to Risk Australia Conference, Sydney, 31 August. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
without any security (unsecured lending). In plain English, this means that banks would only 
lend  to  another  bank  if  the  borrowing  bank  would  provide  something  like  a  government 
security  or  a  portfolio  of  mortgages  as  collateral  to  the  loan.  Then  even  if  collateral  was 
provided, the length of time they were willing to provide the loan for shortened, because of a 
concern that the borrower would not survive long enough to repay.  
This placed some financial institutions in significant financial difficulty. Concerns mounted as 
to whether some institutions would be able to fund themselves at all. As a result of this, the 
European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it would provide as much funds as banks in 
Europe  required through  three  year  loans.  So the  European  central  bank  has  become the 
intermediary of last resort for the European banking system because the banks do not trust 
each other. 
More recently, as the lack of trust of some of the governments of Europe has intensified, the 
ECB has had, in effect, indicated its willingness to act as intermediary of last resort to these 
governments too. One of the main reasons the ECB has decided to do this is because of the 
lack  of  trust  in  the  longevity  of  the  euro.  Investors  are  concerned  about  the  possibility  of 
redenomination risk:  the  possibility  they  are  left holding  an  asset  whose  value  is  markedly 
decreased, when a country leaves the euro area and re-introduces its own currency.  
As  a  result  of  this  mistrust,  we  are  witnessing  a  balkanisation  of  the  financial  system  in 
Europe.  Investors  in  one  European  country  don’t  trust  banks  or  governments  in  other 
countries.  They  pull  back  from  financing  across  borders,  preferring  instead  to  invest  their 
money close to home. This almost certainly is not an optimal allocation of funds to their most 
productive use. 
On top of this dangerous state of affairs in Europe, and amplifying the diminution of trust in 
the  financial  sector,  recent  controversies  in  the  banking  sector  have  hardly  provided  any 
justification for the public regaining trust in the banking system.  
To the extent that trust was slowly being restored in some parts of the banking system over 
the  past  few  years,  it  was  shattered  by  the  recent  revelations  surrounding  the  LIBOR 
scandal, allegations of money laundering and the like.  
The restoration of trust 
So all in all, the state of the financial system in many parts of the world is not in good shape. 
So  what  is  to  be  done  about  it?  As  in  the  old  Irish  saying,  the  first  response  is  to  say  I 
wouldn’t start from here. But unfortunately, here is where we are. 
Using the recent experience in Europe as an example, we can consider a number of possible 
avenues as to what might be needed to rebuild trust. 
When it comes to the distrust of the state of banks’ balance sheets, transparency about the 
true nature of the assets on the balance sheet will clearly help. But the transparency and the 
disclosures clearly need to be credible to reduce the information asymmetries. Stress testing 
of the balance sheet by a credible independent party such as the prudential regulator (APRA 
in  the  case  of  Australia)  can  give  depositors,  and  other  investors,  confidence  that  their 
money will be safe. These sorts of actions work to take the solvency risk off the table. For 
depositors,  this  is  reinforced  by  the  presence  of  deposit  guarantees.  But  often  it  is  the 
sovereign who is providing the deposit insurance. So if there is a lack of trust in the solvency 
of sovereign, this interlinkage between the financial sector and the government can amplify 
the problem, as has been evident in the case of Ireland and Spain, for example. 
The willingness of the central bank to provide a liquidity backstop, very evident in Europe at 
the moment, reduces liquidity risk concerns. Investors are not so concerned that they will be 
the ones left in the burning building when everyone else has already run to the exit. 
The  quid  pro  quo  for  this  support  is  that  banks  will  be  subject  to  more  comprehensive 
regulation  and,  at  least  as  important,  more  intensive  supervision  and  scrutiny  by  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
prudential  supervisors  than  was  the  case  before  the  crisis.  The  light  touch  is  no  longer 
acceptable. One can make a reasonable case that in Australia’s case, this doesn’t require 
much change. APRA has long exercised intensive scrutiny over the banks it supervises. But 
even here in Australia, there are a number of lessons learned through the crisis that are in 
the process of being applied.  
The regulatory regime for financial institutions has tightened considerably. While this might 
impose some costs on the financial sector and increase the cost of financial intermediation, 
the benefits are sure to outweigh those costs. This is particularly the case when we see the 
terrible costs of the high unemployment being experienced in a number of countries around 
the world at the moment in the aftermath of their financial crises. 
A  change  in  management  practice  at  financial  institutions  is  surely  also  necessary  in  a 
number of cases, and this must start at the top. The culture around risk management and 
risk tolerance clearly is an important element of this. The practices that became pervasive 
throughout  the  first  part  of  this  century  that  contributed  to  the  excesses  need  to  change. 
What was considered an acceptable way of doing business will no longer suffice.  
Given the role that the financial sector plays in the economy, there is a form of social contract 
between it and the general public. As I have mentioned earlier, the financial sector enjoys a 
level of support that is not present for other sectors of the economy, because of the crucial 
role it plays.  
But leverage implies financial institutions are more vulnerable. We need to consider what the 
safe  degree  of  leverage  is.  That  is  a  debate  that  is  being  had  currently.  The  rate  of 
profitability  in  the  financial  sector  is  also  a  debate  society  needs  to  be  having.  If  financial 
institutions  are  perceived  to  be  earning  too  high  a  rate  of  profitability,  particularly  if  the 
institution  is  enjoying  a  degree  of  support  from  the  public  sector,  that  too  will  impede  the 
restoration of trust. 
It will be a long road back to restore trust. Without trust, the process of intermediation and 
credit provision will be greatly curtailed. In turn, this will impede the path to global economic 
recovery with costs to all.  
We have to lay out the road ahead, put down the road rules in the form of regulations and 
other curbs on the financial sector. But then the journey still needs to be taken. There are no 
short cuts.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
