Jwala Rambarran: Strengthening financial stability in Trinidad and 
Tobago – staying ahead of the curve 
Speech by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at a 
breakfast  seminar,  hosted  by  the  CFA  Society  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Port  of  Spain, 
6 September 2012. 
 Salutations,  
At the outset, I would like to thank the CFA Society of Trinidad and Tobago for organizing 
this  forum  and  for  inviting  me  to  speak  on  the  very  relevant  and  timely  issue  of  financial 
stability.  
Over the past decade, the CFA Society of Trinidad and Tobago has played an important role 
in  promoting  principles  of  ethics,  education  and  professional  excellence  amongst  our 
country’s financial analysts, portfolio managers, and other investment professionals.  
At  a  time  when  investigations  are  on-going  behind  the  manipulation  of  one  of  the  world’s 
most iconic reference rates – the London Inter-Bank Offer Rate (LIBOR) – by top executives 
of several global banks, I commend the CFA Society for maintaining its strong ethical and 
moral thrust in the conduct of financial affairs.  
I do hope CFA Charter Holders and those aspiring to Charter Holder status will continue to 
resist  the  temptation  to engage  in  numbers-game  manoeuvres  to  meet ambitious financial 
performance targets. Remember, you are not too big to jail!  
As many of you are aware, on a mid-September morning four years ago, Americans awoke 
to  discover  the  unthinkable:  the  nation’s  financial  system  was  in  free  fall.  In  “Too  Big  To 
Fail”, Andrew Ross Sorkin, the award-winning New York Times columnist, provides a blow-
by-blow inside story of how Wall Street and Washington fought to save the financial system – 
and to save themselves. It is a cautionary tale for decades to come.  
This  true  story  is  not  only  about  financial  institutions  that  were  too  big  to  fail  –  Lehman 
Brothers,  Merrill  Lynch,  and  AIG  –  but  also  a  humbling  human  drama  about  the  most 
powerful men and women in finance and politics who, motivated by ego and greed as well as 
by  fear  and  self-preservation,  thought  they  themselves  were  too  big  to  fail.  Unfortunately, 
they were behind the curve.  
Confidence in global financial institutions and markets were badly shaken, igniting the worst 
financial crisis in generations. Since then, the global financial crisis has morphed and its new 
epicentre is in Europe, not the United States. Many argue that the crisis was similar to the 
attacks  of  September  11:  a  singular,  unprecedented  event,  catastrophic  and  next  to 
impossible to forecast. It was a black swan.  
Renowned economist Nouriel Roubini, who was ahead of the curve in predicting the financial 
meltdown in the United States, and Stephen Mihm, a journalist and professor of economic 
history, in their New York Times Bestseller “Crisis Economics”, argue otherwise. Far from 
being  the  exception,  crises  are  the  norm.  Crises  follow  consistent  trajectories  and  yield 
predictable  results.  All  crises  end,  but  their  aftershocks  can  linger  on  for  years,  if  not 
decades.  
Like  the  Americans,  Trinidadians  experienced  their  own  black  swan  event  on  January  30, 
2009. By lunch time, the Central Bank had announced its intervention in CLICO, the largest 
local insurance company and one of the largest in the Caribbean, CLICO Investment Bank 
(CIB), and British American Insurance Company (Trinidad) Limited (BAT), all subsidiaries of 
the CL Financial conglomerate. Large scale government intervention was needed to support 
these subsidiaries and to prevent the eruption of systemic risks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So, this morning, I want to talk about three things:  
• 
First, some of the key risks and challenges to global financial stability occupying the 
world’s attention four years after the free fall of the U.S. financial system;  
Second, current financial stability issues in Trinidad and Tobago, in the aftermath of 
our own CLICO crisis; and  
Third, the role of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago in strengthening financial 
stability, enhancing economic confidence and staying ahead of the curve.  
  Risks to global financial stability  
Let me begin with a brief overview of risks to global financial stability. Sadly, the news is not 
so good. The global financial system is facing a period of elevated uncertainty which is the 
Achilles’ heel to an economic recovery that was not strong from the start.  
The sovereign debt crisis currently unravelling in Europe has renewed financial turbulence, 
weakened investor confidence and may also threaten the fragile world recovery. The markets 
need  the  assurance  that  the  European  Central  Bank  and  key  partners  in  Europe  will  take 
bold  and  continued  policy  actions  to  avert  a  deeper  crisis.  The  actions  of  the  ECB  at  its 
meeting today will signal the outlook for the euro in the months ahead.  
There is little doubt that the euro area’s crisis remains the most immediate and most serious 
threat  to  global  financial  stability,  and  there  is  the  fear  that  conditions  could  worsen,  with 
many now contemplating the consequences of a black swan scenario in which Greece exits 
the euro zone.  
In  the  United  States,  the  upcoming  Presidential  election  is  characterized  as  “the  economy 
elections”,  and  the  campaigning  has  kicked  into  high  gear,  even  as  the  “fiscal  cliff”  looms 
dangerously near.  
The Congressional Budget Office has warned that spending cuts and tax rises due to take 
place in 2013 could push the US economy back into recession. On the other hand, cancelling 
some  or  all  of  the  scheduled  tax  increases  and  spending  cuts  would  add  to  the  widening 
US federal budget deficit and raise the odds of the United States facing a similar financial 
crisis to that which is occurring in Europe.  
Although both the Republican and Democrat parties want to avoid falling off the fiscal cliff, 
the  political  brinkmanship  –  reminiscent  of  the  August  2011  discussions  on  raising  the 
US debt ceiling – suggest that a compromise may be difficult to reach in an election year.  
Beyond these concerns, I would mention two other growing dangers to the global financial 
system. First, emerging market economies have not escaped contagion. Growth prospects in 
a few large emerging market economies have weakened, leaving them less able to deal with 
spill-overs from the euro area crisis or to address the build up of macro financial risks such 
as higher leverage, potential asset bubbles and inflationary pressures. For the first time in 
this century, China is likely to grow below ten per cent in 2012.  
Second, an unprecedented severe drought in the United States and a dry summer in Russia, 
Ukraine and Kazakhstan have abruptly pushed up global food prices. According to the World 
Bank Group President Jim Young Kim, prices for maize and soybeans have reached all-time 
peaks, threatening the health and well being of millions of people, particularly in the Sahel 
and  Eastern  Africa  regions.  Almost  1  billion  people  are  struggling  with  hunger  every  day. 
Most of them are children.  
The IMF is expected to release its flagship World Economic Outlook (WEO) Report in late 
September, but I am fairly confident that the main messages will be that the global recovery 
remains at risk and crisis management is a top priority.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial stability issues in Trinidad and Tobago  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this brings me to my second point. We, in Trinidad and Tobago, must 
be mindful of the challenges that the turbulent global economic environment poses and while 
our focus is growth, we must recognize the need for financial discipline.  
As  I  indicated  before,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  not  been  immune  from  severe  threats  to 
financial stability, arising from the global financial crisis, the CL Financial debacle, and the 
prolonged domestic economic slowdown which started in 2009.  
Notwithstanding these difficulties, banks which dominate the financial system in Trinidad and 
Tobago remain very well capitalized even during the crisis. As at March 2012, commercial 
banks’ regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets stood at over 25 percent from 20 percent in 
2009,  and  well  above  the  statutory  minimum  requirement  of  8  percent.  These  capital 
adequacy ratios are among the highest in the Caribbean region.  
Credit quality has deteriorated but this is not system wide. Banks’ non-performing loans rose 
to almost 7 percent of gross loans, up from around 1 percent at the end of 2007, prior to the 
onset  of the global  crisis.  Some  banks  have  seen  their  non-performing loan  ratio  increase 
above  10  percent,  mainly  reflecting  the  souring  of  a  few  corporate  loans  in  the  luxury 
segment of the real estate mortgage market. Excluding these loans, the system wide ratio of 
non-performing loans to total loans was much lower at around 5 percent in March 2012.  
Notwithstanding the  low  interest rate  environment,  banks  have  successfully  managed  both 
their  net  interest  margin  positions  and  operating  expenses,  which  supported  profitability 
through the slowdown in economic activity, the fall in real estate prices and the difficulties of 
CLICO that required extra provisioning by some banks.  
Commercial banks’ profitability ratios were, on average, much lower than in previous years, 
but were still quite strong by regional and international standards. The return on assets fell to 
an annual average of 2.5 percent in 2009–2011 from around 3.5 percent during the period 
2006–2008. The return on equity ratio slipped to an annual average of just over 18 percent in 
2009–2011, from nearly 27 percent in 2006–2008.  
While the direct exposure of local banks to foreign markets is low in relation to their asset 
base,  continuing  economic  stress  in  a  few  countries  calls  for  ongoing  monitoring  and 
vigilance. Total foreign country exposure fell to around 6 percent of gross assets at the end 
of March 2012, from just over 8 percent in 2007. Many banks, or the holding companies that 
own  them,  have  extended  their  presence  in  other  Caribbean  countries.  Exposure  to  the 
CARCIOM region, however, fell from almost 5 percent of gross assets at the end of 2007 to 
just over 3 percent at the end of 2011, before stabilizing at this fairly low degree of exposure 
at the end of March 2012.  
In  the  case  of  the  United  States,  local  banks’  exposure  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  major 
trading  partner  increased  from  around  1  percent  of  gross  assets  in  2007  to  almost 
2.5 percent  in  2011,  before  falling  to  a  little  above  2  percent  in  March  2012.  Local  banks, 
however, have little exposure to investment in the distressed Euro area.  
Risks  to  bank  stability  seem  relatively  modest  due  to  ample  capital  buffers,  conservative 
provisioning, and high profitability. Stress tests conducted by the Central Bank confirm the 
overall  strength  of  banks:  credit  risks  appear  limited  while  market  and  liquidity  risks  are 
generally low.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  life  insurance  companies,  excluding  CLICO  and  British  American, 
have  generally  strong  capital  positions  and  are  profitable,  despite  the financial  strains  and 
sluggish  economic  environment  of  recent  years.  Capital  adequacy  indicators  for  the  life 
insurance  sector  have  been  trending  downwards  since  2009,  as  the  industry  builds  its 
actuarial reserves to meet the new capital rules in the proposed Insurance Bill. The ratio of 
capital  to  technical  reserves  for  life  insurance  companies  stood  at  just  over  30  percent  in 
December  2011,  well  above  the  international  benchmark,  which  usually  ranges  between 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
7–10 percent. Return on equity in the life insurance sector increased from around 7.5 percent 
in 2008 to just below 10 percent in 2011.  
In the general insurance sector, most large companies are well capitalized, although some 
are exposed to the occurrence of a major natural disaster such as hurricanes. Many general 
insurance companies have been ceding a significant portion of their insurance business to 
international  re-insurers  in  order  to  mitigate  very  large  claims  arising  from  natural  disaster 
risk.  
Some  small  insurance  companies  specializing  in  third  party  motor  insurance  appear 
undercapitalized.  In  addition  to  poor  market  conduct,  third  party  motor  insurers  engage  in 
non-payment  and  under-reserving  of  claims.  It  is  instructive  to  note  that  the  Central  Bank 
intervened to close one motor insurer in 2010, after addressing insolvencies in the previous 
years,  and  has  issued  compliance  directions  to  several  companies.  Unless  these  smaller 
general insurance companies improve their pricing and capital positions, the Central Bank is 
likely to undertake further interventions in this part of the insurance sector.  
The Insurance Act requires insurance companies to maintain assets in their Statutory Fund 
to cover liabilities for policies owned by residents of Trinidad and Tobago. With the exception 
of one life insurance and two general insurance companies, all other insurance companies 
were compliant with their Statutory Fund requirements. The Central Bank is working with the 
non-compliant insurance companies to correct the deficiencies in their Statutory Funds. 
Strengthening financial stability and the Central Bank  
I now turn to my third and final point – the work of the Central Bank in strengthening financial 
stability.  
Although  it  does  not  have  an  explicit  statutory  financial  stability  objective,  maintaining  the 
safety and soundness of the financial system is a long standing responsibility of the Bank.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Central Bank takes its sacred responsibility for financial stability 
in Trinidad and Tobago very seriously and is working assiduously to reduce the possibility of 
future financial crises, and to limit the consequences if they do occur.  
I wish to remind the national community that this mandate of the Central Bank goes beyond 
the  medium  term  horizon  of  the  next  parliamentary  electoral  cycle.  We  are  guided,  as  an 
independent institution with national responsibility, by the long-term economic interests of the 
people and the state of Trinidad and Tobago.  
As  the  country’s  prime  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  authority,  I  give  you  the 
assurance that the Central Bank is prepared to take early and decisive corrective actions to 
prevent  a  build-up  of  unmitigated risks  in  individual  financial  institutions,  or  in  the financial 
system as a whole.  
There are several ways in which the Central Bank promotes financial stability. One is laying 
the foundation for low and stable inflation. Another is helping to facilitate economic growth. 
Perhaps the most direct way in which the Central Bank promotes financial stability is through 
regulation and supervision. On the regulatory front, modernization of the laws pertaining to 
the financial  services  industry  is  taking  place. We are focusing  on the  most  important  and 
urgent problems first. On the supervisory front, the Central Bank is strengthening its capacity. 
I now want to provide some details on key initiatives.  
Following  CLICO’s 
in 
strengthening the regulatory framework for insurance. The current Insurance Act dates back 
to 1980 and is not designed to adequately address the types of risks that are inherent in the 
current suite of products and services provided by insurers today. A new Insurance Bill has 
been drafted following extensive consultations with the industry and is waiting to be laid in 
Parliament, which is expected to re-open this month.  
the  Central  Bank  has  made  considerable  progress 
failure, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Implementation of a new actuarial valuation methodology;  
Implementation of a risk–based capital regime; and 
Implementation of a stress testing regime.  
The  proposed  Insurance  Bill  contains  a  modern  approach  to  insurance  regulation  and 
supervision, strengthening corporate governance of insurance companies, and establishing 
more effective protection of policyholders. It will address fundamental prudential deficiencies 
and  will  include  the  following  important  requirements  for  insurance  companies  which  are 
consistent with international best practice:  
• 
• 
• 
Like  the  insurance  industry,  the  credit  union  sector  has  operated  within  a  legislative 
framework that is outdated. The present legislation covering the credit union movement (the 
Co-operative Society Act) dates back to 1971 and does not deal with prudential issues.  
The  case  for  stricter  regulation  of  the  credit  union  sector  could  not  be  more  compelling. 
Credit unions account for more than 5 percent of total financial system assets, and have an 
extensive service foot print, reaching about one-third of the population. Some of the biggest 
credit  unions  have  assets  comparable  to  that  of  the  smallest  banks.  A  number  of  credit 
unions have taken on risky credit exposures and investments, which they do not have the 
capacity to properly address.  
We have drafted a Credit Union Bill which was distributed to the sector in November 2011 
and  are  considering  comments  from  the  industry  prior  to  finalizing  the  document.  The 
proposals took into account international standards set by the World Council of Credit Unions 
and best practices of jurisdictions with well developed credit union sectors. We expect to lay 
the revised Credit Union Bill in Parliament around the middle of 2013.  
The private pension industry continues to account for a significant proportion of the assets of 
the  financial  system.  Last  month,  the  Central  Bank  issued  a  revised  Policy  Proposal 
Document for the Establishment of an Occupational Pension Plans Bill for further review and 
comment. The revised document takes into consideration the numerous comments received 
on previous drafts and incorporates notable revisions to the proposals in key areas such as:  
• 
• 
• 
We plan to lay the Occupational Pension Plans Bill in Parliament in the first quarter of 2014.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  some  financial  institutions  outside  of  the  banking  and  insurance 
sectors  can  be  considered  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  The  size, 
complexity  and  inter-linkages  with  other  financial  institutions  and  markets  mean  that  SIFIs 
are too important to fail, or ignore.  
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  we  have  identified  three  additional  SIFIs  –  the  Unit  Trust 
Corporation  (UTC),  the  National  Insurance  Board  (NIB),  and  the  Home  Mortgage  Bank 
(HMB).  
The UTC holds more than one-tenth of the assets of the financial system. It is the country’s 
largest  mutual  funds  provider,  provides  a  full  range  of  investment  services  and  competes 
with  not  only  investment  banks,  but  also  –  at  least  according  to  public  perception  –  with 
commercial banks.  
The  state-owned  National  Insurance  Board  (NIB),  which  is  responsible  for  the  national 
pension  system,  commands  about  one-fifth  of  the  assets  of  the  financial  system.  As  the 
major shareholder of the Home Mortgage Bank (HMB), the Trinidad and Tobago Mortgage 
Finance  Company  (TTMF)  and  NIPDEC,  NIB  plays  an  exceptionally  prominent  role  in  the 
domestic economy and financial market.  
Rights of pension plan members and beneficiaries;  
Governance of pension plans; and  
Winding up of pension plans.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Although the Home Mortgage Bank is the smallest in the SIFI group, it is the only institution 
responsible for providing secondary mortgage financing.  
The  Financial  Stability  Board,  which  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  discussions  on  global 
financial  regulatory  reform,  has  proposed  stronger  regulatory,  supervisory  and  resolution 
frameworks  for  SIFIs.  The  elements  of  an  adequate  SIFI  policy  framework  include  the 
following components:  
1. 
More  stringent  capital  (possibly  liquidity)  requirements  to  limit  contribution  to 
systemic risk;  
Proactive and intense supervision consistent with the complexity and riskiness of the 
SIFI;  
Enhanced  transparency  and  disclosure  requirements  to  improve  market  discipline 
and monitoring;  
An  effective  resolution  regime  to  enhance  orderly  recovery  and  wind-down  in  the 
event of failure, including developing living wills or recovery plans; and  
Equitable burden sharing with the private sector to internalize costs by creditors and 
shareholders.  
2.  
3. 
4.  
5.  
25 banks and non-banks  
6 active life insurance companies  
16 active general insurance companies  
9 active composite insurance companies (including CLICO and BAT)  
256 active pension plans  
The  supervision  of  SIFIs  must  be  fully  encompassed  and  at  the  Central  Bank,  we  are 
considering the scope of such regulation for the local institutions.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  stability  requires  active  and  competent  supervision.  The 
Central Bank currently supervises the following entities:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
And,  as  I  indicated,  the  Bank  intends  to  supervise  some  100  active  credit  unions  and 
consider the supervision of SIFIs not under its current purview.  
It is clear that to effectively deliver on its challenging but crucial regulatory reform agenda, 
the Central Bank must strengthen its supervisory capacity.  
The IMF’s May 2010 Staff Position Note “The Making of Good Supervision: Learning to 
Say No” is what I consider a seminal piece of work on the future of financial supervision. It is 
a must read for Central Bankers. The paper focuses on the lessons drawn from failures in 
supervision during the global financial crisis that may help prevent future crises. The paper 
identifies  5  key  elements  of  good  supervision,  all  of  which  will  inform  how  the  function  of 
supervision  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  will  adapt  to  the  new  regulatory 
framework.  
These five elements and their application to the Central Bank are as follows:  
1.  
Good  supervision  is  intrusive.  Supervisors  must  not  stay  on  the  sidelines  of 
regulated  financial  institutions,  relying  solely  or  mainly  on  offsite  analysis.  The 
Central Bank must be a presence that is felt continuously.  
Good supervision is sceptical but proactive. Supervisors must question, even in 
good times, the industry’s direction or actions. Supervisors must have the capacity 
to identify risks, and to act on them. The Central Bank is most valuable when it is 
least valued.  
2.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3.  
4.  
5.  
Good  supervision  is  comprehensive.  Supervisors  must  be  constantly  vigilant 
about happenings on the edge of the regulatory perimeter. The Central Bank must 
not confine its interests to risks faced by its regulated entities and must go beyond to 
risks posed by other parts of the financial system.  
Good supervision is adaptive. Supervisors must be in a constant learning mode to 
respond to new products, new markets, new services, and new risks. The Central 
Bank  must  adapt  to  changes  at  the  regulatory  perimeter,  with  an  eye  to  new  or 
unregulated areas.  
Good supervision is conclusive. Supervisors must follow through conclusively on 
matters identified as these issues progress through the supervisory process to their 
final resolution. The Central Bank must take every identified issue, however, small, 
to its conclusion.  
Judgement,  not  rules,  is  the  key  here.  Supervisors  would  do  well  to  learn  the  secret  to 
success  of  Julie  Dickson,  head  of  Canada’s  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions,  and  who  supervises  the  world’s  strongest  banks.  Ms.  Dickson’s  secret  to 
success is to focus on bearish forecasters like Nouriel Roubini, assume the worst, and avoid 
complacency.  
Meanwhile, the Bank has augmented its supervisory expertise with specialists. Some of the 
more important initiatives included the establishment of an in-house Actuarial Unit headed by 
an experienced Actuary. This Unit allows the Bank to closely monitor, analyse and set direct 
attention to the sufficiency of actuarial reserves held by life insurers, as well as being able to 
verify the adequacy of outstanding claim reserves for non life companies. Going forward, the 
Actuarial  Unit  will  be  providing  needed  leadership  in  the  development  of  an  appropriate 
stress testing regime of the insurance industry. This, in turn, will support the Bank’s financial 
stability initiatives.  
The Bank has also increased its credit risk supervisory expertise. Over the past four years 
the  Bank  has  been  conducting thematic  reviews  of  credit  risk management  in  the  banking 
industry. This is an important step since credit risk is one of the main risks commercial banks 
face and has generally been responsible for past failures internationally and even nationally. 
Going forward, the Bank will be recruiting specialists with expertise in market and operational 
risks.  
At  the  national  institutional  level,  we  have  begun  work  on  the  development  of  a  National 
Crisis Management Plan to facilitate, if needed, a rapid response and coordinated action to 
financial  crises.  Work  is  also  underway  on  the  establishment  of  a  National  Financial 
Stability Council comprising officials from the Central Bank and other domestic regulators 
such  as  the  SEC  and  FIU.  At  this  high-level  Forum,  members  will  be  able  to  share 
information and views, discuss issues where responsibilities overlap and, if the need arise, 
co-ordinate responses to potential threats to financial stability.  
Conclusion  
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  my  respectful  view  that  the  Central  Bank  has 
performed  quite  well  in  carrying  out  its  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  But  we  cannot 
ignore the public perception – which is usually as important as reality – that the Bank faltered 
in relation to the failure of CLICO, CLICO Investment Bank, and BAT.  
Apart from balance sheet scars, the CLICO crisis may have left psychological scars on the 
population of Trinidad and Tobago. For many, memories of this failure are still fresh, causing 
an overestimation of the probability of a repeat disaster – the fear of fear itself.  
For the first time in its 48-year history, the Central Bank, through the Commission of Enquiry 
into these failed financial institutions, will be subject to public scrutiny about its regulation of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the  financial  system.  At  the  Commission  of  Enquiry,  the  Bank  will  be  transparent  in 
accounting for its regulatory and supervisory actions in respect of these institutions.  
As I close Ladies and Gentlemen, I once again, give you the assurance that the Central Bank 
will  continue  to  work  tirelessly  to  minimize  the  occurrence  of  another  financial  crisis  in 
Trinidad and Tobago. In this way, the Bank will remain ahead of the financial stability curve, 
regaining and rebuilding public trust and confidence.  
I thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
