Masaaki Shirakawa: Central banking – before, during, and after the crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  conference 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the International Journal of Central Banking, 
Washington DC, 24 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
The global financial crisis and the bubbles preceding it pose mounting issues for a central 
bank. The Bank of Japan was the first central bank among advanced countries to confront 
those issues in the postwar period. Japan’s  experience intellectually stimulated academics 
and  policy  makers  overseas,  which  led  to  the  Bank  being  flooded  with  policy  proposals, 
including highly experimental ones. With the exception of just a few cases, however, the low 
growth in Japan following the bursting of a bubble was often simply interpreted as a unique 
episode  caused  by  a  failure  to  implement  bold  policy  measures  in  a  prompt  manner.  As 
many of you may recall, there was an oft-quoted paper coauthored by a number of Federal 
Reserve economists entitled “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experience in the 
1990s” that was released in 2002.1 This paper argued as follows (Chart 1). 
“our  sense  is  that  much  of  the  failure  of  monetary  loosening  to  support  asset 
prices  and  to  boost  the  economy  owed  to  offsetting  shocks  rather  than  to  a 
genuine breakdown of the monetary transmission mechanism. …… there is little 
evidence that the transmission channels of monetary policy were so diminished 
as  to  have  obviated  the  benefits  of  faster  and  sharper  monetary  easing  in  the 
1991–95 period.”  
At  that  time,  I  found  that  such  a  view  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  was  too 
sanguine. 
Several years later, the housing and credit bubbles burst, this time in Europe and the United 
States,  triggering  a  financial  crisis.  Developments  in  real  GDP  for  the  United  States,  after 
U.S. housing prices peaked and again after a large-scale financial crisis occurred in the form 
of the Lehman shock, reveal surprisingly similar trends shared with Japan (Charts 2 and 3).2 
The  same  can  be  said  of  the  two  countries’  policy  responses,  including  the  virtually  zero 
interest  rate  policy  and  the  expansion  of  central  banks’  balance  sheets  (Charts  4  and  5). 
When the Bank of Japan was striving to devise new policy measures, not to mention the zero 
interest  rate  policy,  quantitative  easing,  a  policy  commitment  regarding  the  future  level  of 
interest rates, and – as referred to today – credit easing, little did I imagine that the Federal 
Reserve  would  adopt  similar  measures  within  such  a  short  span  of  years.  I  have  become 
painfully aware of the need to more closely study each of the countries’ experiences over the 
past quarter-century, and to draw true lessons that could be applied to future policy conduct. 
Relevant  topics  for  discussion  range  widely  from  monetary  policy  to  regulation  and 
supervision, payment and settlement systems, and so on. In my remarks today, I will raise 
                                                 
1  For more details, see the following. 
  Ahearne,  Alan,  Joseph  Gagnon,  Jane  Haltmaier,  Steve  Kamin,  and  others,  “Preventing  Deflation:  Lessons 
from  Japan’s  Experience  in  the  1990s,”  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  No.  729,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 2002. 
2  For  the  deleveraging  process  after  the  bursting  of  bubbles,  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Deleveraging  and 
Growth: Is the Developed World Following Japan’s Long and Winding Road?,” Lecture at the London School 
of Economics and Political Science (Co-hosted by the Asia Research Centre and STICERD, LSE), January 
10, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
several  points  with  particular  focus  on  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  maintaining 
macroeconomic stability at each of three phases: before, during, and after the financial crisis. 
Before the crisis: financial imbalances and monetary policy 
I. 
I would like to start from issues relevant in the periods preceding financial crises, focusing on 
the role of monetary policy. Conventional wisdom tells us that price developments serve as a 
trigger for changes in monetary policy. In fact, without exception, central banks pay attention 
to  output  gaps  and  inflation  expectations,  which  have  an  impact  on  future  inflation 
developments. In retrospect, however, when we look back at how bubbles were formed and 
then  developed  into  financial  crises,  the  most  significant  imbalance  that  destabilized  the 
macroeconomy  emerged  on  the  financial  front  instead  of  the  price  front.  The  financial 
imbalances took the form of a sharp and significant rise in asset prices and credit expansion 
associated  with  increased  leveraging  and  maturity  mismatches.  Financial  imbalances 
ultimately created a tremendous shock to financial institutions and the financial system, and 
led to a sharp and significant contraction of economic activity. While such acute pains wore 
off as a result of aggressive policy measures taken by the governments and central banks 
after  the  crisis  erupted,  the  chronic  affliction  of  low  growth  associated  with  balance-sheet 
repair remains. This experience has revealed the fact that the economy was not able to avoid 
a  prolonged  period  of  stagnant  growth  even  though  aggressive  monetary  easing  was 
adopted in a prompt manner after the bursting of bubbles. In this sense, policy priority should 
be  placed  on  ex-ante  measures  to  restrain  a  buildup  of  financial  imbalances  instead  of 
ex-post measures to clean up the mess after a bubble bursts. 
Regarding ex-ante policy measures to address financial imbalances, some argue that, based 
on  Tinbergen’s  rule  and  Mundell’s  assignment  principle,  the  authorities  should  assign 
monetary policy to price stability while tasking regulatory and supervisory measures with the 
challenge  of  addressing  financial  imbalances.  However,  such  a  policy  assignment  can  be 
effective only when the two policy objectives of price stability and financial system stability 
are independent from each other. A series of events in recent years have made it clear that 
the  two  policy  objectives  are  not  independent.  When  a  macroeconomic  environment 
including prices becomes stable, economic entities become more sanguine about risks and 
increase their appetite for risk-taking. Furthermore, with the growing expectation that a low 
interest rate environment will continue under price stability, financial institutions increasingly 
get  involved  in  “search  for  yield”  activity  by  increasing  leverage  and  mismatches  in  their 
assets  and  liabilities  with  respect  to  maturities  and  currencies  (Chart  6).  When  such 
imbalances  grow  beyond  a  certain  threshold,  they  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system and consequently that of the real economy and prices. 
Many central banks, including the Bank of Japan, were aware of the financial imbalances in 
the periods preceding financial crises. The most troublesome thing for central banks was the 
fact that inflation rates did not rise, or remained low, during the buildup of imbalances, which 
was ironic given their traditional emphasis on price stability (Chart 7). At least in the case of 
Japan,  when  inflation  rates  remained  low  amid  high  economic  growth,  those  who  tried  to 
justify an interest rate hike needed to defeat the strong counterargument that was predicated 
on what later became known as “the arrival of the new economy.” The continuation of a low 
interest  rate  environment  is  one  cause  of  financial  imbalances.  In  particular,  if  the  central 
bank commits itself to asymmetric conduct of monetary policy – more specifically, if it does 
not lean against a bubble so long as prices are stable but instead intervenes aggressively 
after the bursting of bubbles –, the situation could get worse through the following channels. 
First,  this  kind  of  put  option-type  monetary  policy  engenders  more  risk-taking  by  financial 
institutions.  Second,  if  monetary  policy  focuses  narrowly  on  price  stability  alone  and 
successfully engenders an extended period of a stable macroeconomic environment, it will 
further boost various economic entities’ expenditure and risk taking. Even though monetary 
policy  itself  leads  to  a  combination  of  high  growth  and  low  inflation,  on  the  surface,  it  is 
difficult to distinguish such a case from the arrival of the new economy. If the central bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
continues  with  monetary  easing  without  a  proper  diagnosis,  this  boosts  the  economy  and 
accelerates  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  under  seemingly  continued  price 
stability,  resulting  in  a  correspondingly  larger  shock  after  the  bubble  bursts.  This  could  be 
referred to as “a paradox of price stability.”  
Needless  to  say,  it  is  inappropriate  to  blame  only  monetary  policy  for  an  accumulation  of 
financial imbalances that are in fact formed through a much more complicated mechanism. In 
this regard, nobody disagrees with the claim that regulations and supervision play important 
roles in addressing financial imbalances, and that macroprudential perspectives are crucial. 
So, what about the argument that the authorities should assign regulatory and supervisory 
measures  to  financial  imbalances?  My  answer  is  simple:  we  need  to  employ  appropriate 
monetary policy in tandem with regulations and supervision. It does not seem promising to 
address  financial  imbalances  only  through  macroprudential  measures  and  regulations 
without  monetary  policy  responses.  This  is  just  like  endlessly  bailing  out  water  that  is 
overflowing from a bucket without turning off the tap. 
During the crisis: the importance of the lender of last resort role 
II. 
Now  I  would  like  to  move  on  to  the  next  phase:  the  midst  of  the  crisis.  In  this  phase,  the 
essential  role  of  the central  bank is  to  act  as the  “lender of  last  resort.”  The  time-honored 
importance  of  the  lender  of  last  resort  function  has  also  been  demonstrated  by  the 
aggressive measures taken by central banks in the midst of the recent crisis, which proved to 
be  very  effective  in  preventing  a  sharp  drop  in  economic  activity.  Taking  the  examples  of 
quantitative  easing  by  the  Bank  of  Japan,  credit  easing  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the 
three-year  LTRO  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  effectiveness  of  all  these  measures 
essentially hinges on these central banks’ role as the lender of last resort. 
In association with the lender of last resort function, I would like to stress the importance of 
policies regarding payment and settlement systems (Chart 8). Only the central bank is able 
to issue currency that private economic agents can accept without conditions. Therefore, in a 
financial crisis where the credibility of counterparties is undermined, the role of the central 
bank  becomes  extremely  important.  In  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  it  is  crucial  that  financial 
institutions and investors manage the counterparty risk by controlling not only the amount of 
exposure at the end of the day but also that of intraday credit. In the past twenty years or so, 
it  has  been  the  role  of  the  central  bank,  as  a  bank  of  banks,  to  make  various  efforts  to 
improve the safety and efficiency of payment and settlement systems. Such efforts have led 
to the introduction of real-time gross settlement, delivery versus payment, and simultaneous 
settlement of foreign exchange (Chart 9). Without such efforts made by central banks, the 
Lehman shock could have induced a complete termination of financial transactions. If I am 
asked  what  the  most  significant  contribution  by  central  banks  is  in  terms  of  securing 
economic  and  financial  stability  in  the  past  quarter  of  a  century,  I  could  point  to  their 
unceasing efforts to improve payment and settlement systems. 
After the crisis: the effects and limits of aggressive monetary policy 
III. 
Lastly I would like to discuss the role of monetary policy in the aftermath of the financial crisis 
–  specifically,  when  the  economy  has  overcome  acute  pains  but  still  suffers  from  chronic 
affliction  of  low  growth  associated  with  balance-sheet  repair  (Chart  10).  When  taking 
monetary easing steps, it is essential to conduct a careful analysis of their intended benefits 
as well as unintended costs. While aggressive monetary easing is definitely needed after the 
bursting  of  bubbles,  its  side  effects  and  limits  should  also  be  taken  into  consideration. 
Although  there  is  no  universal  conclusion  to  such  cost  and  benefit  analysis  for  monetary 
easing, as it depends on countries and phases, I would like to call attention to the following 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
four  aspects,  which  have  not  been  paid  sufficient  attention  in  traditional  arguments  made 
before the recent crisis.3 
The first is the burden of balance-sheet repair. Even with monetary easing, economic entities 
with excess debt neither increase expenditures nor embrace more risk taking until their debts 
are reduced to an appropriate level. Monetary  easing only mitigates pains associated with 
balance-sheet  repair.  Moreover,  employing  this  mitigator  for  a  prolonged  time  comes  with 
costs,  as  it  reduces  incentives  to  lessen  excess  debt  and  causes  delays  in  balance-sheet 
repair, which ultimately is necessary for economic recovery. Needless to say, the effect of 
low interest rates is extended to those economic entities that have not suffered any damage 
to  their  balance  sheets.  If  they  bring  forward  future  demand  to  the  present  by  taking 
advantage of a low interest rate environment, this leads to an increase in aggregate demand. 
As  balance-sheet  adjustment  continues  for  a  long  period  of  time,  however,  the  amount  of 
future demand that could be brought forward gradually diminishes even in a low interest rate 
environment. The above-mentioned cost of reducing incentives to lessen excess debt is not 
only an issue for private economic entities but also for the government. Once the increased 
level of government debt is perceived to be unsustainable, this threatens both price stability 
and financial system stability, as in the case of the European debt problem. 
The second aspect is the impact of low interest rates on the supply side of the economy. If 
low  interest  rates  induce  investment  projects  that  are  only  profitable  at  such  interest  rate 
levels,  this  could  have  an  adverse  impact  on  productivity  and  growth  potential  of  the 
economy  by  making  resource  allocation  inefficient.  While  central  banks  have  typically 
conducted monetary policy by treating a potential growth rate as exogenously given, when 
the economy is under prolonged shocks arising from balance-sheet repair, we may have to 
take into account the risk that a continuation of low interest rates will affect the productivity of 
the overall economy and lower the potential growth rate endogenously. 
The  third  aspect  is  the  impact  on  financial  intermediaries.  The  effect  of  monetary  easing 
usually materializes when firms and households increase their expenditures, induced by low 
interest  rates.  Within  that  process,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  there  are  financial 
intermediaries and financial markets that connect monetary policy conducted by the central 
bank with firms and households. Once such intermediaries stop functioning properly, we can 
no 
transmission  of  monetary  easing.  Maturity 
transformation  is  an  important  intermediation  function  of  banks,  which  benefit  from  the 
spread between short- and long-term interest rates. Monetary easing widens this spread and 
increases  the  interest  margins  of  financial  intermediaries.  This  is  one  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanisms  that  enhance  the  stimulative  effect  on  the  economy  through  the 
banking sector. Beyond a certain threshold, however, further monetary easing could instead 
squeeze the margins and discourage financial intermediation, resulting in lower efficiency in 
resource allocation and lower growth potential in the long run. A similar problem arises for 
institutional investors in the form of a negative spread – that is, investment returns on assets 
fall below the promised return on long-term liabilities. 
The fourth aspect is the international spillovers of monetary easing and the feedback effect 
on  a  country’s  own  economy.  When  the  domestic  economy  is  in  the  process  of  balance-
sheet repair, the effect of monetary easing tends to materialize in the form of a search for 
yield activities by global investors and the depreciation of foreign exchange rates, instead of 
increased  expenditures  by  domestic  private  economic  entities.  If  emerging  economies 
become the destination of a search for yield activities by global investors, monetary easing in 
advanced economies, combined with an inflexible foreign exchange rate policy in emerging 
economies, is likely to lead to expansion in emerging economies and a rise in international 
to  see  a  successful 
longer  expect 
                                                 
3  As for quantitative analysis of the effect of various policy measures adopted during the period of quantitative 
easing in Japan, please see Hiroshi Ugai, “Effects of the Quantitative Easing Policy: A Survey of Empirical 
Analyses,” Monetary and Economic Studies Vol. 25, No.1, March 2007. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
commodity  prices.4  Even  though  such  a  rise  in  commodity  prices  is  affected  by  globally 
accommodative monetary conditions, individual central banks recognize that the fluctuation 
in commodity prices is an exogenous supply shock and focus on core inflation rates which 
exclude the prices of energy-related items and foods. The resulting reluctance of individual 
central  banks  to  counter  rising  commodity  prices,  when  aggregated  globally,  could  further 
boost these prices. From a global perspective, such a situation represents nothing more than 
a case where a hypothetical “World Central Bank” fails to satisfy the Taylor principle, which 
ensures  the  stability  of  global  headline  inflation  (Chart  11).  While  it  is  understandable  that 
central banks would pursue the stability of their own economies in the conduct of monetary 
policy,  it  is  increasingly  important  to  take  into  account  the  international  spillovers  and 
feedback effects on their own economies. 
Concluding remarks: monetary policy challenges for the future 
So far I have raised points relevant to discussing central banking in terms of three phases – 
before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  In  closing,  I  would  like  to  offer  a  change  in 
perspective by pointing out future challenges for central banks as organizations. 
The  first  is  the  framework  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  regard,  a  consensus  is  already 
emerging. Most central banks of the advanced economies are now conducting policy with the 
aim of maintaining price stability in the medium to long term, regardless of the difference in 
the  label  attached  to  their  monetary  policy  framework.  Furthermore,  it  has  also  become 
apparent that an excessive focus on short-term inflation development may ultimately result in 
larger  swings  in  the  economy  through  the  buildup  and  inevitable  correction  of  financial 
imbalances.  The  Bank  of  Japan  is  probably  not  alone  in  trying  to  incorporate  its  view  on 
financial imbalances – in other words, the macroprudential perspective – into the conduct of 
monetary policy. The remaining issue here is to weave such a desirable framework into the 
political  foundations  of  central  bank  independence,  which  is  the  cornerstone  of  economic 
stability and prosperity. It is relatively straightforward to hold the central bank to account for 
hitting or missing a certain inflation number. In that sense, the spotlight accorded to specific 
levels of inflation has been a quid pro quo for entrusting an important slice of economic policy 
to  a  technocratic  institution.  In  contrast  to  this,  macroprudential  considerations  are  much 
more nebulous – containing more elements of art rather than science – and will inevitably 
test the limits of democratic deference to the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  second,  and  related,  challenge  is  to  strengthen  the  decision-making  processes  and 
economic  analyses  at  central  banks.  Good  decision  making  and  research  supporting  a 
central bank are the real foundation of its independence. The recent crisis has revealed that 
we  miss  many  important  points  when  we  look  at  the  economy  only  from  traditional 
macroeconomic perspectives. We need to make efforts to avoid falling into this trap and to 
break  free  from  the  habit  of  groupthink.  It  is  essential to develop  an  institutional culture  in 
which  a  variety  of  information  vital  to  decision  making  in  monetary  policy  –  related  to  the 
macroeconomy,  financial  markets,  and  financial  institutions  –  is  fully  utilized  in  a  well-
balanced manner. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
4  As to the background of international commodity price developments and its policy implications, please see 
Report of the G20 Study Group on Commodities under the chairmanship of Mr. Hiroshi NAKASO, November 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
