Miroslav Singer: The role of creditors and debtors in the world economy 
Speech by Mr Miroslav Singer, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the World Banking 
and  Finance  Summit  2012,  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF), 
London, 26 June 2012. 
 1.   First,  let  me  apologize  for  not  being  an  eloquent  academician  addressing  world 
matters. I am a humble central banker from a small central bank in a far away country which 
some people know very little about. So, I fear I am not going to be a great substitute for the 
announced  speaker.  I  understand  that  his  speech  was  to  have  focused  on  how  awful, 
extraordinary, and incredible it is that without German willingness to sponsor the solution to 
the eurozone crisis there is a strong chance that the financial crisis the eurozone faces will 
deepen even further. Not even daring to mimic, I will just raise few points and issues. Since I 
doubt I can add value with an analysis of Pacific trade and financial flow patterns carried out 
from  the  remote  distance  of  Prague,  I  will  ignore  the  global  dimension  of  the  current 
problems and instead focus on Europe. At the end, I will try to make up for this shortcoming 
with questions on global issues for the other panelists to elaborate on. 
2.   Now, let me give you a few facts about the Czech Republic: 
It is a net creditor country in terms of its financial sector. 
a. 
It is generally a country of small savers. The median household has more financial 
b. 
assets than liabilities. 
There  is  no  significant  stress  in  its  financial  sector  at  the  moment,  and  none  is 
expected  by  my  central  bank  in  its  role  of  both  macroprudential  authority  and 
financial market supervisor. 
We  have  an  extremely  open  economy.  Exports  and  imports  are  roughly  equal  to 
80% of GDP, mostly with the EU. 
Our major trading partners are the EU and Germany, where there are still quite a 
few opportunities. 
d. 
e. 
c. 
Consequently, like all of us I have no desire to see the crisis deepen.  
3. 
However,  before  I  stress  a  few  different  issues  than  the  intended  speaker,  let  me  borrow 
some  introductory  sentences  for  these  topics from  Philip  Coggan’s  Paper  Promises:  Debt, 
Money, and the New World Order, 2011: 
“Economic history is a battle between creditors and debtors, with the nature of money the 
territory  over  which  they  fight.  Money  has  two  core  functions;  as  a  means  of  exchange 
(paying for your daily Starbucks) and as a store of value (making sure you can still afford a 
Starbucks  in  old  age).  Historically,  those  two  functions  have  been  in  conflict;  …Broadly 
speaking,  the  money  expanders  have  been  debtors  and  the  money  restricters  have  been 
creditors.”  As my  last  speech  here  at the  OMFIF  was  motivated  by  the  anniversary  of  the 
Bretton Woods  collapse,  I  am  particularly  fond  of  this  observation:  “Over  history,  creditors 
have tended to impose systems that control the supply of money – the gold standard, the 
Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  the  euro  –  that  prevent  borrowers  from 
repaying their debts in debased currencies. The strain of keeping up this discipline is intense 
in democracies where more people are debtors. The gold standard broke down in the 1930s, 
Bretton Woods in the 1970s and the euro is struggling today, as is what might be called the 
post-Bretton Woods system of independent central banks and inflation targets.” 
4. 
And now a few humble observations of my own: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
2 
 Beginning  with  the  fiscal  solutions  story,  this  crisis  is  a  deep  crisis  of  the  market 
economy and of financial systems as managed, regulated, and supervised in just a 
minority of market economies, most of which can now be found in the EU. The USA 
might have contained the source of the fire, but for three years it has not played a 
major role in the eurozone and its main role has turned out to be a stabilizing one. 
Thanks mainly to Fed swaps, EU savers and investors do not have to worry about 
the general liquidity position of the eurozone. I almost pray that forthcoming political 
events in the U.S. do not alter this situation. 
The  solution  to  this  crisis  involves  controlled  de-leveraging  and  the  restoration  of 
European and eurozone competitiveness in the developed world. The need for de-
leveraging is clear, but the restoration of competitiveness in Europe is also a must, 
despite  the  fact  that  the  CA  of  the  eurozone  and/or  the  EU  is  roughly  balanced. 
Otherwise,  the  EU  will  not  be  able  to  restore  the  real  growth  rates  necessary  to 
stabilize eurozone sovereigns in the context of the chief mandate of the ECB, i.e., in 
a  non-inflationary  context.  I  am  afraid  this  may  involve  quite  a  few  of  my  fellow 
European citizens engaging in a bit of metaphorical trench-digging. Hopefully, they 
will  also  try  other  types  of  productive  activities  with  more  value  added.  I  am  fully 
aware  of  the  pain  this  process  is  causing,  as  my  country  has  undergone  quite  a 
similar process recently. 
A  lot  of  commentators  have  said  that  Germany  has  benefited  the  most  from  the 
eurozone,  or  at  least  has  benefited  more  than  the  eurozone  countries  that  are 
suffering now. However, quite a significant proportion of those observers have also 
noted  that  Germany  has  recorded  the  slowest  growth  in  wage  costs  and  other 
income measures in the eurozone throughout the existence of the latter. As a matter 
of fact, in order to fall to the German level of growth the income measures of most of 
the troubled “southern” countries would still need to decline by more than one tenth 
of  the  growth  recorded  during  the  eurozone’s  existence,  and  in  some  of  them  it 
would need to fall by significantly more. As I have become accustomed to a rather 
more pragmatic interpretation of the benefits of the eurozone, I find it quite difficult to 
reconcile these two statements. The fact that German citizens are being asked to 
pay up for a second time makes this second payment a less clear moral imperative 
than many suggest.  
BTW, talking about growth we have almost forgotten now that the major “marketing” 
point of the eurozone project was that it was supposed to speed up EU growth. We 
have forgotten this because we are, unfortunately correctly, too preoccupied with the 
fear of the consequences of a chaotic breakdown of this project to have a chance to 
pause to contemplate and remember. 
Returning to Germany, one of the neglected features of its export patterns over the 
past  decade  is  the  fact  that  the  eurozone  now  accounts  for  roughly  40%  of  its 
exports, whereas it used to account for the majority of them (I believe about 60%).  
Even  Germany’s  debt  is  not  so  low.  Its  perceived  sovereign  risk  is  really  low.  In 
recent weeks, the yields on German sovereign debt have on a few occasions started 
to move together with the yields of the periphery... 
Let’s  turn  our  attention from  clear fiscal  solutions  to monetary  solutions  and  other 
ideas. Currently a lot of plans are being motivated by the idea that a eurozone-wide 
political commitment to a long-term plan for a deeper integration project is going to 
stabilize the markets. I will neglect the fact that to many observers these plans look 
like better or worse masked commitments to significant future fiscal transfers within 
the  eurozone  and  that  the  markets  are  rather  skeptical  about  Europe’s  long-term 
projects. After all, the eurozone was one such project. In addition, the route to even 
the earliest targeted dates – in the second half of this decade – takes in one or more 
elections in most of the countries in question. Perhaps the markets would appreciate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
h. 
i. 
j. 
a nearer-term plan, one that signals, for example, that political players are willing to 
shift the voting powers on some pan-European solutions to bigger economies with 
larger stakes and more resources to spend in absolute terms. 
Let’s  go  back  to  Philip  Coggan’s  observation  that  a  “majority  in  failure”  breaks 
financial  systems  based  on  the  interests  of  savers.  There  are  seven  clearly 
conservative creditor countries in the eurozone: Estonia, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Finland, Slovakia, Austria, and Luxembourg. Seven is some way short of a majority 
in a group of 17. I wonder whether the ECB’s behavior has been limited much more 
by its status than by the country in which it is headquartered. I suspect even more 
that Germany’s insistence on strict observance of ECB rules stems from a fear that 
any lenient interpretation will lead sooner rather than later to the total subordination 
of  minority  interests  in  the  eurozone,  i.e.,  the  interests  of  savers,  i.e.,  German 
interests. 
Anyway, I am afraid that the ability of economic-based reasoning to influence events 
is gradually declining. Future events will be influenced more and more by decision-
makers’ communications and gestures or by accidents unplanned by anybody. As 
an example of the latter, consider how Greece’s tourism income might develop this 
year and the next if its major electricity supplier occasionally switches off supplies 
due to payment problems, thereby shutting down air conditioning in hotels. 
But  now  I  am  straying  away  from  the  topic  of  imbalances,  so  I’d  better  pause  to 
venture one final observation. Germany is currently under financial stress and is full 
of middle-class savers who are angered by the perceived failure of their state. This 
situation, I believe, has never been in the interests of my country or in the interests 
of Europe. Some of us may like to contemplate this a bit. 
Possible questions for the panelists (as I have already spoken enough I will reserve myself 
for the second round of Q+As): 
a. 
How  has  the  financial  crisis  modified  the  world-wide  pattern  of  creditor-debtor 
countries?  
What are the major causes of the current world imbalances?  
Do imbalances impede world growth?  
What are the best (domestic/global) policies to mitigate the imbalances? Are there 
any chances for (efficient) international cooperation? Who should do what?  
How are the current changes in regulatory and supervisory frameworks influencing 
EU-wide imbalances? Are they mitigating them or deepening them? 
Can creditor countries (such as China or Germany) act as “locomotives of growth” 
given that the juan is quasi-fixed against the US dollar and the “German currency” is 
fixed against the “currencies” of many trading partners in the eurozone? And what 
proportion  of  the  potential  fiscal  impulse  will  merely  benefit  those  mainly  Asian 
countries whose products are becoming more and more competitive on EU markets. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
