Malcolm Edey: The current agenda in retail payments regulation 
Address by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Cards & Payments Australasia 2012 Conference, Sydney, 20 March 2012. 
 Once again I thank the organisers of Cards and Payments Australasia for the invitation to 
speak here today, my third time at this event. Looking at the conference agenda for these 
two days, what stands out to me is the intense focus on innovation. This is an industry where 
there is a great deal of work going on in areas like online payments, mobile payments, new 
card-payment  products,  and  improvements  in  security.  All  of  these  are  signs  of  a  vibrant 
industry.  
My subject for today is the current agenda in retail payments regulation.  
The Reserve Bank has had a direct role in payments regulation since 1998. Following the 
report  of  the  Wallis  Committee,  the  Payment  Systems  (Regulation)  Act  in  that  year 
established the basic governing structure that we have today. It set up the Payments System 
Board within the Reserve Bank with a mandate to promote efficiency and stability. And the 
Act  gave  the  Bank  significant  powers  to  that  end.  They  include  the  power  to  designate  a 
payment system and to set standards in areas like network pricing and various aspects of a 
payment system’s internal rules.  
One of the first areas of focus for the Board was on credit card schemes. But the remit of the 
Payments System Board extends much more broadly than just card payments, or even retail 
payments  more  generally.  The  Board  also  has  oversight  responsibilities  in  the  high-value 
system  as  well  as  for  clearing  and  settlement  facilities  in  Australia,  and  it  has  been 
increasingly devoting attention to the second of those areas. I expect that trend will continue, 
given the rapid changes that are taking place internationally.  
Today, though, I want to focus on our work on retail payments.  
Public  consultation  is  an  important  part  of  that  work.  In  some  matters  we  have  a  formal 
obligation  to  consult,  but  that  is  not  the  only  reason  for  doing  it.  The  issues  involved  in 
payments  regulation  are  often  complex  and  we  see  it  as  very  important  to  engage  with 
industry, and other stakeholders, to make sure we have all the relevant facts when we make 
our decisions.  
Currently there are four areas of retail payments regulation where we are in various stages of 
public consultation. I want to take the opportunity to review those briefly today.  
The first is the surcharging standard for card payments.  
The  question  here  is  a  simple  one:  should  card  schemes  be  allowed  to  place  limits  on 
merchant  surcharging  for  card  payments,  and  if  so,  in  what  form?  That  question  was  first 
examined by the Payments System Board during its initial round of credit card reforms, which 
were announced in 2002. The Board’s decision, as you know, was to require the removal of 
rules  against  surcharging.  That  was  part  of  a  wider  reform  package  that  also  included  a 
standard for interchange fees.  
A  newcomer  to  this  debate  might  ask  the  question,  why  did  we  take  action  against 
no-surcharge rules when the effect would be to make some cardholders pay more for their 
transactions?  
It’s worth briefly re-capping the answer to that.  
One  of  the  distinctive  features  of  card  payment  systems,  historically,  has  been  a  lack  of 
alignment between pricing and decision-making power. In a typical credit card transaction, 
the person who makes the choice of payment instrument is usually the cardholder, but the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
transaction  fee  is  incurred  by  the  merchant.  In  simple  terms,  the  cardholder  makes  the 
decision but the merchant pays the fee.  
The interchange arrangements that underpin this fee structure have tended to be configured 
in a way that rewards issuance and usage of cards while adding to merchant costs. We have 
observed in this structure that competition tends to push fees up rather than down because, 
the  higher  the  fee,  the  greater  the  capacity  to  reward  cardholders  for  using  a  given  card. 
Scheme rules prohibiting surcharging have had the effect of reinforcing that pattern, because 
they prevent price signals from flowing to the person who chooses the payment instrument. 
This  was  the  basic  logic  for  the  decision  to  prevent  schemes  from  making  rules  against 
surcharging.  
A decade later, what can we say about the effects of that decision?  
I can best answer that by describing the results of the reform package as a whole, because 
the  different  elements  of  it  were  closely  inter-related.  The  clearest  impact  has  been  a 
reduction  in  card  payment  costs.  In  the  case  of  the  four-party  credit  card  schemes,  the 
average merchant service fee has fallen by about 60 basis points. Although the three-party 
schemes  are  not  regulated  in  this  way,  they  have  voluntarily  accepted  the  surcharging 
standard  and  have  been  subject  to  some  of  the  same  competitive  pressures.  As  a  result, 
merchant service fees for the three-party schemes have fallen by a similar amount.  
Since the adoption of the reforms, the prevalence of surcharging has significantly increased. 
According  to  data  from  East  &  Partners,  around  one-third  of  Australian  merchants  now 
impose a surcharge on at least one of the credit cards they accept. The figure is higher for 
the largest merchants1, where the proportion surcharging is slightly over half. It also seems 
likely  that  surcharging  will  become  more  widespread  in  the  future  –  only  12 per cent  of 
merchants say they are not at least considering applying a surcharge.  
In the early stage of the reform process the Payments System Board considered, but did not 
proceed with, an alternative approach that would have allowed schemes to limit surcharging 
to  an  amount  linked  to  the  cost  of  acceptance2.  The  Board’s  view,  on  balance,  was  that 
giving merchants the right to surcharge was important in realigning incentives and in giving 
merchants more bargaining power in the determination of fees. The Board also took the view 
that market forces could be expected to work as a discipline against excessive surcharging.  
The growth of surcharging has, however, brought to light practices that look inconsistent with 
the  efficiency  objective.  While  comprehensive  data  are  not  available,  there  is  significant 
anecdotal  evidence  of  some  surcharging  that  is  not  reasonably  related  to  the  cost  of 
acceptance. One example is the practice of blended surcharging, where a merchant might be 
recovering costs on an average basis without distinguishing between high- and low-cost card 
payments. Another would be where a surcharge simply exceeds any reasonable estimate of 
the cost of acceptance. Although these practices do not appear to be widespread, they are of 
concern from a payments efficiency point of view because they can distort consumer choices 
about the payment methods that they use. They go against the principle I stated earlier of 
allowing  the  efficient  flow  of  price  signals  to  the  economic  decision  maker.  It  is  for  these 
reasons that the Bank reopened consideration of the surcharging standard last year  
A draft revision to the standard was released in December, and is now in the final stage of 
consultation.  If  adopted,  the  revised  standard  will  allow  schemes  to  limit  surcharging  to  a 
reasonable  cost  of  acceptance,  but  schemes  will  not  be  able  to  prohibit  surcharging 
altogether  or  prevent  merchants  from  recovering  their  costs.  For  this  purpose,  the  cost  of 
acceptance will be defined as including, but not being necessarily limited to, the merchant 
service fee.  
                                                 
1  Currently, those with annual turnover greater than $530 million. 
2  The existing Standard does allow the merchant and the acquirer to agree to do so. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  want  to  stress  that  we  should  not  view  this  change  as  a  panacea  that  will  do  away  with 
every consumer complaint. It is also important to make clear that the Reserve Bank is not 
setting itself up as a regulator of merchant behaviour. What the proposed standard does is to 
empower the schemes to take action where surcharging is clearly excessive. It will be in their 
own  interests  to  make  use  of  this  power.  At  the  same  time,  the  proposal  preserves  the 
original goal of giving merchants the right to recover their costs. In that way I think it strikes a 
reasonable  balance  and  it  should  strengthen  the  incentive  for  schemes  to  compete  in 
lowering their fees to merchants. The less a scheme costs to merchants, the lower will be the 
permissible surcharge.  
The  second  policy  area  I  want  to  talk  about  is  the  Reserve  Bank’s  strategic  review  of 
payments innovation.  
This was the subject of my talk here a year ago and so I can be much briefer in my remarks 
today.  
When we talk about innovation, we need always to keep in mind the distinction between what 
is proprietary and what is systemic. The proprietary sphere covers any area where a service 
provider  can  act  independently  and  use  an  innovation  to  gain  a  competitive  edge.  The 
payments industry is very good at innovating in that way, and we see the evidence of it in 
many of the things that are being talked about in today’s conference. Systemic innovation is 
much harder to achieve because it requires co-operation in the collective interest, even when 
there may be no strong proprietary benefits at the level of the individual service provider  
It’s this second area that is the focus of the current review. We are asking the question, are 
there any gaps in the system that can only be addressed collectively, and if so, how do we 
make that happen?  
Submissions to the review have been helpful in identifying a number of gaps of that nature. 
Here are the main ones:  
 
is  widespread  acknowledgement  within 
Transmission  of  data  with  payments.  This  has  been  a  long-time  concern  of 
businesses, who often find the 18 character limit under the Direct Entry system too 
restrictive.  Often  this  drives  businesses  to  use  cheques  so  that  paper-based 
information,  like  an  invoice,  can  accompany  the  payment.  Alternatively  they  might 
separate the payment and the remittance information, and then rely on a separate 
process to reconcile them at a later stage. This is likely to be expensive and error 
prone.  
Use of international standards. I won’t dwell on this one, but in some ways it is 
related  to  the  previous  point,  because  the  international  framework  for  messaging 
standards provides for transmission of a significant amount of additional data. I think 
there 
that 
international standards should be adopted wherever possible.  
Timeliness of Payments. As communications technology advances, there is little 
doubt that people are expecting greater immediacy in many areas, and payments 
are no exception. It is currently not possible for me to make a payment to someone 
who banks with another bank and for them to be able to use those funds within a 
short space of time. In some circumstances this lack of capacity can be a significant 
problem  –  for  instance  when  someone  is  waiting  on  an  emergency  government 
payment.  This  seems  like  an  area  we  could  improve  on  and  it  is  increasingly 
becoming a focus overseas. Likewise, the fact that payments cannot occur between 
banks out of normal business hours seems out of line with the ‘always on’ world we 
now live in.  
Addressing Payments. Cheques are always a good reminder of the things that are 
missing  in  our  electronic  payments.  I  can  pay  someone  with  a  cheque  when  all  I 
know  about  them  is  their  name.  But  if  I  want  to  make  an  electronic  payment,  I 
the  payments 
industry 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
typically need to know a 6-digit BSB number and a 9-digit account number, things 
the receiver probably cannot readily provide. People are finding partial workarounds 
that make use of mobile phone numbers or email addresses, but we are yet to have 
a truly seamless system.  
All of these are areas where any progress will have to be made co-operatively, because they 
are characteristics of the network, not just of the individual players. But that also means that 
a decision to move ahead in any of these areas needs to take into account the costs and 
benefits across the system as a whole, both for service providers and end-users.  
That  raises  the  broader  question  of  whether  there  needs  to  be  a  change  in  governance 
arrangements in the industry, so as to make them more conducive to innovation in general. 
There are a number of reasons why co-operative innovation can be hard to achieve. Industry 
participants  have  differing  commercial  interests,  and  even  factors  like  the  timing  of  their 
investment cycles can make coordinated actions difficult. A change in messaging standards 
or timeliness of payments might benefit the public, yet remain hard to achieve because there 
is no proprietary benefit to the individual service providers. The challenge is to find a way of 
determining when innovations of that nature are in the public interest and, if so, to ensure 
they go ahead. Industry-level decision making may be only part of the answer.  
Along  with  these  questions  of  governance,  the  critical  decisions  of  the  review  are  likely  to 
relate to the architecture of the payments system. By that I mean in particular the question of 
whether  there  is  a  place  for  additional  centralised  architecture  in  the  Australian  payments 
system. A possible argument for that proposition is that centralised systems may be better 
able to innovate than bilateral systems. They may also be structurally more efficient when a 
network  has  a  large  number  of  participants,  and  better  suited  to  providing  open  access  to 
new players. The possible need for a centralised architecture is also relevant to the question 
of faster (or real-time) payments at the retail level.  
The consultation process has brought out a range of views on this subject. Some argued that 
the existing architecture provided a sufficient level of centralisation, or pointed to the potential 
cost of moving existing systems onto a hub. Others focused on the potential for some form of 
hub  to  provide  real-time  retail  transfers  and  went  as  far  as  proposing  a  governance 
framework for such a system. We should be in a position to announce some conclusion on 
that in the near future, along with the other matters I’ve outlined today.  
Let me turn briefly to the third and fourth areas of current policy work.  
Issue number three is the regulatory framework for the eftpos system.  
One of the very significant developments in recent times has been the establishment of ePAL 
as  a  national  scheme  for  eftpos  payments.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  welcomed  that 
development because we see it as strengthening competition among card payment schemes 
in the domestic market.  
As a consequence of the establishment of ePAL, the eftpos system now works largely as a 
multilateral  network.  But  much  of  the  existing  framework  –  the  Access  Regime  and 
interchange  fee  standards  –  was  designed  in  reference  to  the  earlier  bilaterally-based 
system. As a result, the relevance and applicability of the existing framework will need to be 
reviewed.  
One  change  that  has  already  been  made  was  the  decision  in  November  2009  to  bring 
multilateral eftpos fees under the same interchange fee standard as applies to scheme debit 
cards. But further changes to all elements of the regulatory framework for the eftpos system 
will need to be considered. Some of the reasons for that are purely technical, because the 
regulations  as  they  stand  do  not  reflect  the  system’s  current  structure.  But  there  are  also 
some more substantive questions as to whether we need to maintain the currently existing 
arrangements  and,  if  so,  in  what  form.  We  expect  to  complete  the  consultation  on  those 
questions and reach conclusions later in the year.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The fourth issue on which we are currently consulting is retail payments system resilience.  
Much of the work of the Payments System Board over the years has been in regulation and 
oversight of what we might call self-contained systems: things like a credit card network, or a 
clearing and settlement facility. But the Board’s remit extends more broadly to the efficiency 
and  stability  of  the  payments  system  as  a  whole.  On  any  common  sense  reading,  the 
payments  system  encompasses  the  capacity  of  person  A  to  make  a  payment  to  person 
B when they bank with different banks. The ability of the system as a whole to deliver that 
basic service, dependably and efficiently, clearly comes under the Payments System Board’s 
overall policy mandate.  
That is why it is appropriate for the Board to be conducting the innovation review that I’ve just 
outlined. It relates to the efficiency of the system as a whole. It is also why it is appropriate 
for the Board to take an interest in the operational resilience of individual payments service 
providers.  
In recent years there have been a number of high-profile outages affecting the availability of 
services  to  significant  numbers  of  customers.  Obviously  individual  banks  have  a  strong 
incentive to minimise the risk of these sorts of incidents. It affects their own reputation when 
something goes wrong and it impairs their ability to meet the needs of their customers.  
But there is also a system-wide dimension to these problems. All participants in the system, 
and  all  users  of  payments  services,  have  an  interest  in  high  standards  being  maintained 
across the system as a whole, not just their own component of it. When Bank A’s systems go 
down,  customers  of  all  the  other  banks  are  affected,  because  their  capacity  to  exchange 
payments with customers of that bank is impaired.  
For  some  time  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  monitoring  significant  retail  payment  outages, 
and following up with the relevant banks as to diagnosis and appropriate remedial actions. 
So in a sense, a role for the RBA in this area is not new. What we are now proposing is to 
formalise that role in two ways. First, we have announced that we will be putting in place a 
more  systematic  reporting  regime  for  retail  outages.  And  second,  we  have  begun  a 
consultation process with the banks as to whether further measures are needed to improve 
operational resilience across the system.  
Conclusion 
Those  then  are  the  four  areas  in  retail  payments  regulation  where  the  Reserve  Bank  is 
currently conducting consultations with industry, and with other interested parties. What ties 
all  of  these  things  together  is  the  focus  on  efficiency  and  competition.  In  many  ways 
competition  is  working  well  to  deliver  benefits  to  end  users.  But  in  an  industry  of  complex 
network  interactions  like  this  one,  there  is  an  important  role  for  regulation  in  promoting 
efficient outcomes.  
As I said earlier, in carrying out that role the Payments System Board takes very seriously 
the  need  to  consult,  both  with  industry  and  end-users.  Many  of  you  here  today  will  have 
participated in that process, and I take the opportunity to thank you for your co-operation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
