H R Khan: Towards vibrant debt markets – a 7iframework 
Keynote address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
13th  FIMMDA-PDAI  Annual  Conference  on  “Asian  money,  bond  &  derivatives  in  the  new 
global economy”, Kuala Lumpur, 27 January 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions from Shr. N.R.V.V.M.K. Rajendra Kumar, Shri Himanshu Mohanty 
and Shri Surajit Bose. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  amidst  you  all  for  the  9th  Annual  meeting  of  the  Fixed 
Income  Money  Market  Derivatives  Association  (FIMMDA)  and  the  Primary  Dealers 
Association of India (PDAI) in this enchanting and energetic city of Kuala Lumpur. Relations 
between our two great nations, India and Malaysia, date back to ancient times. Indeed the 
name Malaysia is believed to have been derived from the Sanskrit root Malayadvipa which 
means “peninsula of mountains”. This land had attracted hordes of traders from India in the 
ancient  times  and  the  exchange  was  not  confined  not  merely  to  merchandise  but  also 
extended to deep socio-cultural ties including customs and cuisine. The tradition continues. I 
am happy to note that this meeting has attracted a different breed of traders from India and 
elsewhere, the bond and derivative traders, to introspect on the challenges facing us in these 
exciting times. Risks from the global macroeconomic environment remain elevated even as 
growth  remains  subdued  &  unemployment  high  in  most  of  the  advanced  economies.  The 
Euro-area remains under stress. Neither default by one or more of the peripheral countries 
nor the severe austerity measures put in place to avoid a default forebode good tidings for 
the economy or the markets. Though the emerging economies have been less bruised in the 
process,  funding  constraints  in  international  financial  markets  pose  a  threat  to  both  the 
availability and cost of capital and in turn on their growth prospects. 
In these challenging times, the imperative from our perspective is to ensure that the funding 
needs of expanding economies like India and Malaysia are met so that the growth trajectory 
upon which realisation of the aspirations of millions of our underprivileged people depends is 
not derailed. At the same time, the crisis has reinforced global concern for financial stability 
and it is equally important to ensure that latent fault lines in the financial sector do not herald 
a crisis with even greater suffering than tardy growth. Speaking here in Kuala Lumpur, one 
cannot help recollect the crisis of the late 1990’s which besieged the rapidly growing “miracle 
economies”. Most of these economies faced a substantial GDP contraction during 1998 and 
moderation  in  the  growth  during  the  following  years.  The  countries  dealt  with  the  crisis  in 
their own way but two features common to all of them are accumulation of sizeable foreign 
currency reserves and development of a robust local currency bond market. The size of the 
local currency bond market in the East Asian economies excluding Japan has been growing 
at a rate exceeding 20 percent which is more than twice the growth rate of the global bond 
market  and  this  is  evident  in  the  corporate  bond  market  segment  as  well.  An  interesting 
observation from the data on corporate bond markets in Asia is that the value of outstanding 
increased during the period of recent global financial crisis. The outstanding increased from 
US$ 929 million as of end-December 2007 to US$ 1617 million as of end-December 2010 
This underlines the continued attraction for investments even during the period of financial 
turmoil in the global markets. In fact, post global financial crisis, the Asian bond markets are 
witnessing a gradual shift away from the government bond driven to a corporate bond driven 
market growth. 
Indian bond and derivatives markets 
Over the past two decades since we began the financial sector reforms, Indian bond markets 
have come a long way. The annual gross market borrowing of the Government of India and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 122.83  billion  in  1991–92  to 
 5,833.92  billion  in 
the  State  Governments  increased  from 
2010–11.  The  amount  of  outstanding  Government  of  India  securities  increased  from  
 780.23 billion in 1991–92 to 
 21569.14 billion in 2011–12. Government securities market 
(G-Sec) has become broad-based in terms of participation and the sovereign yield curve now 
spans  up  to  30  years.  The  monthly  volume  in  secondary  market  on  the  electronic  trading 
platform – Negotiated Dealing System-Order Matching (NDS-OM), which accounts for about 
90  per  cent  of  the  trading,  has  increased  from 
 314.30  billion  in  August  2005  to  
 1480.86 billion in March 2011. The bid-ask spread of on-the-run securities continues to be 
low at 1–2 basis points (bps) and the impact cost of the on-the-run securities is observed at 
around 3 bps for a trade size of 
 500 million. In case of corporate bonds, trading volumes 
have increased manifold from 
 5986.04 billion in 2010–11. 
Yet we have quite some distance to traverse to catch up with our neighbours in the Far East, 
let alone the advanced western countries. 
 1458.28 billion in 2008–09 to 
The 7i framework 
In this backdrop, I intend to discuss the development of the debt and the derivatives market 
in  India  from  the  perspective  of  a  central  bank  and  a  financial  sector  regulator  with  a 
mandate to facilitate development of debt markets of the country. I shall briefly cover some of 
the important initiatives taken so far and also draw the contours of future development. My 
discussion will be structured within what I call the 7i framework – the seven I’s standing for 
Investors,  Issuers,  Instruments,  Infrastructure,  Intermediaries,  Incentives  and  Innovation  – 
each  an  important  and  critical  component  of  any  well-functioning  and  vibrant  financial 
market. 
Investors 
Any discussion of development of a bond market has to begin with the investor. High savings 
rate,  large  set  of  domestic  institutional  investors  and  active  interest  from  foreign  investors 
can create a large and heterogeneous group that is necessary for an efficient bond market. 
The  traditional  investor  base  for  G-Sec  in  India  comprised  banks,  provident  funds,  and 
insurance  companies.  With  the  entry  of  co-operative  banks,  regional  rural  banks,  pension 
funds, mutual funds and non-banking finance companies, the institutional investor base has 
been reasonably diversified. Notwithstanding the predominantly institutional character of the 
G-Sec market, Reserve Bank of India has recognised merit in promoting retail participation 
and has initiated certain policy measures to this end. Some of these include enabling small 
and  medium  sized  investors  to  participate  in  the  primary  auction  of  G-Sec  through  a 
“Scheme  of  Non-competitive  Bidding”,  improving  access  to  the  market  for  mid-segment 
investors  by  permitting  well-managed  and  financially  sound  Urban  Cooperative  Banks 
(UCBs)  to  become  members  of  NDS-OM  and  revision  of  authorization  guidelines  for  the 
Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  mandating  achievement  of  minimum  retailing  targets.  To  ease  the 
process of investment by retail/mid-segment investors, a web-enabled platform which would 
seamlessly integrate their funds and securities accounts has been planned by the Reserve 
Bank of India. Some major banks have also initiated measures like on-line trading portal for 
the retail investors. 
An  important  feature  of  investor  profile  of  the  G-sec  market  is  the  dominance  of  domestic 
investors and limited foreign participation but this is an aspect of a policy framework rather 
than  indicative  of  lack  of  interest  by  overseas  investors.  Investment  limits  for  the  Foreign 
Institutional Investors  (FIIs)  have  been  enhanced  in  a  phased  manner  to  US$  15 billion  in 
G-sec  and  US$  45  billion  in  the  case  of  corporate  bonds  (including  US$  25  billion  for 
infrastructure  sector  bonds/units).Some  observers  argue  that  in  the  absence  of  significant 
investments by foreign investors, markets are deprived of not only a large and liquid pool of 
savings  but  also  active  global  trading  strategies  which  can  contribute  to  the  much  needed 
trading liquidity. The counter argument is that the willingness of foreign investors to take a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
long-term  view  and  remain  engaged  is  highly  sensitive  to  global  economic  factors  and 
possible sudden reversals arising from “hot money” strategy of foreign investors has potential 
to impact the systemic stability. Let me add that the participation of foreign investor in the 
domestic bond markets also needs to be examined in the light of our policy stance relating to 
calibrated  approach  to  capital  account  convertibility  and  the  possibility  of  interest  rate  and 
exchange rate volatility due to large scale reversal of capital flows. 
A recurrent theme in the government bond market is the lack of liquidity as seen from the low 
trading volumes. The daily trading volume is less than one percent of the outstanding stock. 
The  banks  and  insurance  companies  between  themselves  hold  about  70  per  cent  of  the 
outstanding stock. The investment strategy of insurance companies and pension funds are 
usually  dictated  by  Asset  Liability  Management  (ALM)/actuarial  considerations.  In  India 
because banks are mandated to hold as much as 24 per cent of their liability in the form of 
government  securities,  under  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  framework,  they  have  been 
permitted to classify these holdings as held-to-maturity (HTM) with a view to protecting their 
balance sheets from volatility arising out of interest rate fluctuations. With a dominant part of 
the outstanding stock thus residing in HTM portfolio and out of the market the low volume of 
trading is but natural. The term HTM, however, appears to be an illusion as securities are 
almost  never  held  till  they  mature  but  are  sold  at  an  opportune  time.  Such  an  investment 
strategy impacts liquidity of the security, in particular, and the market, in general. While the 
changes  imminent  in  accounting  norms  under  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS)  may  force  transformation  of  the  strategies  of  banks,  there  is  a  need  for 
debate  on  the  issue  of  reduction  in  the  HTM  category  dispensation,  albeit  in  a  phased 
manner. 
In  the  corporate  debt  market,  investor  base  is  mostly  confined  to  banks,  insurance 
companies,  provident  funds,  Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  and  pension  funds.  Of  late,  the  retail 
investors  have  been  showing  interest  in  corporate  bonds,  especially  bonds  issued  by  the 
infrastructure companies that entail tax incentive. While investors are not shy of debts issued 
by the top rated firms, they are reluctant to subscribe to the lower rated instruments. This is 
an  anomaly  because  lower  rated  companies  do  have  access  to  bank  financing.  Credit 
enhancement by banks can perhaps make such instruments attractive to investors. But on 
the flip side, credit enhancement essentially involves transfer of the credit risk to banks and 
this  will  not  only  hamper  the  development  of  corporate  bond  market  by  stunting  the  price 
discovery process but also increase the risk in the banking system. The focus must be on de-
risking banking system, and at the same time, building/encouraging institutions that provide 
credit enhancement. 
Investor interest in the interest rate derivatives market ought to be dictated by their exposure 
to  the  cash  market.  While  investors’  cash  market  exposure  is  substantial  and  has  been 
increasing over time, the accounting hedge through HTM classification insulates the holders 
against  market  risk.  Therefore,  we  observe  skewed  and  limited  participation,  resulting  in 
shallow  markets.  Though  the  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS)  was  launched  in  1999,  the  only 
product  where  the  market  volumes  have  grown  substantially  is  the  overnight  index  swap 
based  on  the  overnight  money  market  index.  Here  too  the  participation  is  not  significantly 
broad-based.  Foreign  banks  (owning  only  7  percent  of  the  banking  sector  assets)  are  the 
most  dominant  players  in  the  IRS  market  followed  by  the  private  sector  banks  while  the 
participation of the public sector banks who own as much as 74 percent of the banking sector 
assets  remain  miniscule.  Notwithstanding  the  large  trading  volume  and  value  of  contracts 
outstanding,  the  skewed  participation  leads  to  pricing  anomalies  and  also  puts  a  question 
mark on the economic utility of the product. 
Issuers 
Sovereign securities dominate the fixed income markets almost everywhere. In India too, the 
central  and  state  governments  remain  the  main  issuers.  Two  observations  are  in  order. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Traditionally,  marketable  securities  of  the  Central  and  the  State  Governments  constituted 
only  a  part  of  their  respective  liabilities  and,  therefore,  the  size  of  the  government  bond 
market as measured by the outstanding stock was relatively small compared to the debt-to-
GDP  ratio.  Secondly,  if  one  excludes  the  securities  held  by  the  Reserve  Bank  under  the 
Open Market Operations (OMO) and other buy-and-hold entities, the market size becomes 
even smaller.  
In recent times, market borrowings have emerged as the largest source of financing fiscal 
deficit.  The  auction  based  issuance  process  is  transparent  with  publication  of  auction 
calendars  well  in  advance  enabling  the  market  participants  to  plan  their  investments.  The 
large supply of securities, due to enhanced borrowings, has enabled creation of benchmark 
securities  with  sufficient  outstanding  stock  and  issuances  across  the  yield  curve.  The 
issuances across the risk-free yield curve in turn have provided benchmarks for valuation of 
other bonds/financial assets.  
Despite  economic  recovery  in  2010–11  and  resumption  of  fiscal  consolidation  path,  the 
market  borrowing  of  the  Government  has  remained  at  elevated  levels  in  India.  The  Union 
Budget  of  India  2011–12  estimated  gross  fiscal  deficit  (GFD)  at 
 4128.17  billion  and 
budgeted  gross  market  borrowings  of 
 4170.00  billion.  The  market  borrowings,  however, 
through  dated  securities  for  the  current  year  has  been  increased  by  about 
 930.00  billion 
due to shortfall in other financing items, primarily due to moderation in the growth rate of the 
economy and increased expenditure. Besides inflationary implications, such large overhangs 
of debt and increasing annual borrowings have impeded the growth of flow of resources to 
the private sector by way of both loans and bonds. More importantly, lack of fiscal flexibility 
has  not  facilitated  creation  of  limited  number  of  benchmarks  and  active  consolidation  of 
illiquid securities. This fragmented G-Sec market has neither been beneficial to the issuer nor 
the investors. 
In spite of some passive consolidation of government securities undertaken by the Reserve 
Bank  of  India,  the  market  remains  fragmented  with  many  stocks  with  relatively  small  size. 
Nearly  fifty  percent  of  the  outstanding  stocks  has  volume  less  than 
 200  billion.  There  is 
merit in pursuing active consolidation with focus on buy-backs and switches to build volumes 
and improve liquidity. Reserve Bank is in consultation with the government to achieve some 
degree of consolidation in G-Sec in the near future. Reserve Bank has recently constituted a 
Working  Group  (Chairman:  Shri.  R  Gandhi,  Executive  Director,  Reserve  Bank  of  India)  to 
examine  ways  to  improve  liquidity  in  Government  securities  and  interest  rate  derivatives 
market as well as suggest measures for active consolidation of the securities. 
Corporates in many developed markets – predominantly in the US and increasingly in other 
jurisdictions – have a marked preference to tap the bond market rather than to seek bank 
loans for meeting their external finance requirements. In India, however, companies continue 
to  depend  on  the  banking  system  for  funds  because  of  ease  of  availing  bank  finance, 
absence of credit risk mitigation mechanisms and a host of other factors, such as, absence 
of  sound  bankruptcy  framework  and  lack  of  active  interest  of  long-term  investors  like 
insurance companies.  
An examination of the issuer profile of corporate bonds reveals that issuances are dominated 
by  banks  and  public  sector  companies.  Private  sector,  non-financial  corporate  issuers 
represent a smaller proportion. As mentioned earlier, issuers with triple-A ratings raise funds 
with  ease  from  the  markets  as  compared  to  firms  with  lower  ratings.  Private  placements 
mostly dominate the primary segment of the corporate debt market accounting for more than 
98  per  cent  of  the  total  issuance  of  corporate  debt  (2010–11)  in  India.  Corporates  prefer 
raising funds through private placements as against public issuances because of operational 
ease of issuance under private placements with minimum disclosures, low cost of issuance 
and the speed of raising funds. The issuance process is also impacted by costs, such as, 
stamp  duties,  transfer  costs,  etc.  which  needs  rationalisation.  Preference  for  private 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
placement  is  also  dictated  by  the  profile  of  investors  which  is  mostly  institutional  and  a 
narrow base at that.  
Instruments 
For  a  market  to  meet  the  diverse  funding  and  hedging  needs  of  the  participants,  there  is 
need  for  a  wide  array  of  instruments  and  products  which  would  also  offer  benefits  of 
diversification  in  the  portfolio.  In  the  process  of  development  of  new  instruments,  Reserve 
Bank’s  endeavour  has  been  to  ensure  calibrated  and  orderly  development  of  the  markets 
with emphasis on prudent risk management and promotion of financial stability.  
Over the years, several instruments like zero-coupon bonds, capital-indexed bonds, floating 
rate  bonds,  STRIPS  and  bonds  with  call  and  put  options  have  been  introduced  after  wide 
consultations with market participants and with product features comparable to those of the 
most popular and liquid instruments elsewhere. In the case of short term instruments Cash 
Management  Bills  (CMBs)  have  emerged  as  a  new  class  of  instrument  providing 
opportunities  for  secured,  shorter  term  investment  in  sovereign  paper.  The  size  and 
frequency of issuance of CMBs are likely to increase given the uncertainty in cash inflows 
and outflows of the Government whose income and expenditure has been growing rapidly. 
Issues, such as, very short notice for issue of CMBs, more demand for treasury bills, which 
have structured tenors, may come in the way of large demand for CMBs. There is a plan to 
launch a new long-term instrument – the Inflation Indexed Bonds (IIBs) wherein both capital 
and  interest  would  be  provided  protection  against  inflation.  It  is  expected  that  institutional 
investors,  such  as,  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  would  exhibit  interest  in 
investing in the IIBs. The expectation is based on the fact that the IIBs give investors long-
term  assets  with  a  fixed  long-term  real  yield,  insulating  them  against  inflation  as  their  real 
yields are indexed to actual inflation. Further, it is also being contemplated to increase the 
non-competitive  portion  for  IIBs  to  have  significant  participation  of  retail  investors  in  these 
instruments.  
Plain  vanilla  fixed  coupon  bonds,  however,  remain  the  mainstay  of  issuances.  With  the 
exception  of  an  innovative  product  like  Collateralized  Borrowing  and  Lending  Obligations 
(CBLO), the market has not displayed any appetite for instruments with varied structure. A 
similar  response  pattern  has  been  observed  in  respect  of  products  such  as  interest  rate 
futures (IRFs) (based on 10-year bond and 91-day T-Bill), repo in corporate bonds and new 
issuance of Floating Rate Bond (FRB). One plausible reason for lack of interest is illiquidity in 
the underlying bond market. The dilemma is that while participants do not want to trade till 
liquidity improves, liquidity will not improve till the participants trade giving rise to the typical 
“chicken and egg problem”. The bottomline is that the market participants need to be more 
active in trading across the yield curve and across products and this requires an urgent and 
serious introspection by them.  
Recently, the guidelines on the interest rate futures of two and five year tenors have been 
issued. These futures will be cash settled with settlement price computed through a polling 
process  managed  by  the  FIMMDA.  As  the  product  design  has  been  finalised  after  due 
consultation with the market participants and the issue of illiquidity in underlying cash market 
has been dealt with by permitting cash settlement, it is expected that the product will attract 
active interest. Another significant step is the extension of the period of short sale to three 
months,  effective  from  February  1,  2012.  This  will  enable  the  participants  to  express  their 
interest  rate  views  more  effectively  and  is  expected  to  give  fillip  to  term  repo  market. 
Similarly,  the  Credit  Default  Swap  (CDS)  on  corporate  bonds  has  been  introduced  to 
facilitate  hedging  of  credit  risk  associated  with  corporate  bonds.  Introduction  of  credit 
enhancement  for  corporate  bonds  through  CDS  may  also  increase  investors’  interest  in 
corporate bonds.  
Several episodes in international markets underscored the importance of risk management in 
the  use  of  financial  products.  Learning  from  these  episodes,  the  approach  of  the  Reserve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Bank of India towards regulation and risk management has been oriented to ensure orderly 
development  of  financial  markets  and  products.  This  objective  is  achieved  by  establishing 
efficient  infrastructure,  addressing  systemic  stability  issues  and  also  supporting  market 
development. The pre-dominant motivation has been to strike a balance between systemic 
stability and financial market development. 
that 
term 
includes 
infrastructure 
is  a  comprehensive 
Infrastructure 
Market 
the  entire  gamut  of 
arrangements  for  the  transactions  to  be  carried  out  and  settled  in  an  efficient  and  safe 
manner.  Infrastructure  plays  an  important  role  in  development  of  markets  and  want  of  an 
efficient,  transparent  and  robust  infrastructure  can  keep  market  participants  away  on  one 
extreme or cause market crisis on the other. Reserve Bank of India has pursuing a strategy 
for creation of an efficient market infrastructure to enhance market activity and also to create 
a  supporting  institutional  framework.  In  the  government  bond  market,  a  state  of  the  art 
primary  issuance  process  with  electronic  bidding  and  fast  processing  capabilities,  an 
efficient,  completely  dematerialized  depository  system,  Delivery-versus-Payment  (DvP) 
mode  of  settlement,  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS),  electronic  trading  platforms 
(Negotiated  Dealing  Systems  and  Negotiated  Dealing  Systems-Order  Matching)  and  a 
separate  Central  Counter  Party  (CCP)  in  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd  (CCIL)  for 
guaranteed settlement are among the steps that were taken by the Reserve Bank over the 
years towards this end. In fact, thanks to these efforts, India can boast of being one of the 
few emerging countries with such a state of the art financial market infrastructure for the G-
Sec  market.  Creating  a  robust  risk  management  structure  for  the  CCP  to  mitigate  its 
increasing  concentration  risk  and  enabling  an  assured  liquidity  support  framework  for 
meeting its emergency liquidity needs are some of the challenges before the Reserve Bank 
of  India.  We  are  closely  monitoring  how  the  international  consensus  is  evolving  on  these 
areas. 
To  strengthen  the  market  infrastructure  for  corporate  bonds  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  in 
consultation  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI),  has  permitted  the 
clearing  houses  of  the  exchanges  to  have  a  transitory  pooling  account  facility  with  the 
Reserve Bank. This will facilitate settlement of OTC corporate bond transactions on a DvP-I 
basis. The infrastructure has been bolstered by support of the market bodies with FIMMDA 
establishing  and  operating  reporting  platforms  for  corporate  bonds,  Commercial  Papers 
(CPs)/Certificates of Deposit (CDs). This collaboration between the regulator and the market 
participants has laid the foundation for enhanced transparency and vibrancy in the market. 
The financial crisis in 2008 revealed several deficiencies of the OTC derivatives market. The 
importance  of  improving  transparency,  mitigating  systemic  risks  and  protecting  against 
market  abuse  came  to  the  forefront.  In  September  2009,  the  G-20  leaders  mandated  that 
OTC  derivative  contracts  should  be  reported  to  trade  repositories;  all  standardised  OTC 
derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where 
appropriate; and all standardised OTC derivatives contracts should be cleared through the 
CCPs.  In  this  regard,  a  considerable  amount  of  work  on  infrastructure  to  make  OTC 
derivatives trades transparent has been done in India. As early as in 2007, Reserve Bank 
had mandated the reporting of all inter-institution OTC interest rate derivatives on a platform 
developed for the purpose by the CCIL. Introduction of CDS was accompanied by putting in 
place  a  reporting  arrangement  simultaneously.  On  the  basis  the  recommendation  of  a 
working  group,  a  comprehensive  and  efficient  single  point  reporting  arrangement  for  all 
interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives is also in the process of implementation.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Intermediaries 
Intermediaries  play  an  important  role  in  development  of  the  market  by  facilitating  the 
transactions, providing value-added services and increasing efficacy of the processes. With 
regard to bond markets in India, I would like to elucidate the role of four major intermediaries 
viz.  PD  system,  industry  associations  like  FIMMDA/PDAI,  Gilt  Mutual  Funds  and  the 
Infrastructure Development Funds (IDFs), which are in the offing. 
The  system  of  Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  was  established  to  provide  support  to  the  market 
borrowing  programmes  of  the  Government  and  also  to  impart  liquidity  in  the  secondary 
markets.  Subsequent  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  from  the  primary 
market,  as  mandated  by  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act  2003,  the  PD 
System has been underwriting the entire Government of India market borrowing. PDs have 
actively  supported  the  bond  issuances  and  their  role  in  successful  completion  of  sizeable 
issuance programmes over the past three years has been commendable. Recently, Reserve 
Bank  has  revised  the  guidelines  on  authorisation  of  PDs  with  focus  on  their  market 
experience as well as increase in retail/mid-segment investor participation so as to widen the 
investor base. The revised guidelines prescribe a seasoning requirement of at least one year 
prior  to  submission  of  application,  reasonable  experience  in  G-Sec  market  with  at  least 
15 per cent of their assets and turnover in G-Sec and a commitment to achieve a minimum 
turnover  of  75  per  cent  of  their  minimum  NOF  in  G-Sec  on  behalf  of  retail/mid  segment 
clients. We expect the PDs would continue to support the market borrowing programmes, act 
as market makers by providing fillip to secondary markets and retail investors and proactively 
deal  in  the  financial  products  such  as  CDS,  IRF,  etc.  Reserve  Bank  is  also  exploring  the 
possibility of enabling banks/PDs to make markets in corporate bonds through appropriate 
supportive measures. 
Changing nature of financial markets necessitate that organisations, such as, FIMMDA and 
PDAI, play a more proactive role in bringing orderliness in market activities and desired level 
of  discipline  amongst  market  participants.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  regularly  engages  with 
FIMMDA and PDAI on various issues of policy and provides inputs and perspectives of the 
market  participants.  FIMMDA  has  been  entrusted  with  responsibilities,  such  as,  publishing 
model prices for G-Sec and non-G-Sec to be used in valuations, formulation of model code 
of  conduct  for  market  participants,  development  and  operationalization  of  critical  market 
infrastructure like reporting platform for corporate bonds, repo in corporate bonds, CPs and 
CDs, accreditation of brokers in the OTC interest rate derivatives market, development of the 
daily  CDS  curve  for  valuation  of  open  positions,  etc.  The  entrusted  responsibilities  and 
activities/functions  of  FIMMDA  in  the  underlying  market  clearly  indicate  its  potential  for 
self-regulatory  role.  There  is,  however,  an  urgent  need  for  FIMMDA  to  further  strengthen 
itself, build competencies, both technical and financial, and broaden its mission to carry out 
tasks  commensurate  with  the  developments  in  the  market  and  to  undertake  additional 
responsibilities as Self Regulatory Organization (SRO). I suggest that FIMMDA may draw up 
an action plan in this direction with clear goals to be achieved with appropriate time lines. 
Gilt Mutual Fund industry has grown manifold but the Mutual Funds (MFs) continue to invest 
predominantly  in  short-tenor  fixed  income  assets,  thereby  exhibiting  low  demand  in  the 
G-Sec market. This is a cause of concern and requires an urgent need to examine ways for 
Huge requirement of investment in infrastructure sector underscores the importance of the 
IDFs.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has,  as  a  special  case,  has  permitted  several  prudential 
relaxations  for  setting  up  IDFs  including  enhanced  exposure  norms,  assigning  lower  risk 
weights  for  capital  adequacy  purposes,  etc.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  also  allowed 
investment  on  full  repatriation  basis  by  new  class  of  eligible  non-resident  investors  (viz. 
Sovereign Wealth Funds, multilateral agencies, pension funds, insurance funds, endowment 
funds)  in  Rupee  and  Foreign  Currency  denominated  bonds  to  be  issued  by  IDF-NBFCs 
registered by the Reserve Bank of India and Rupee denominated units issued by IDF-MFs 
set up as SEBI registered Mutual Funds. Given our calibrated approach towards opening up 
of our debt markets to foreign investors, all such investments (excluding those by NRIs) will, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
however, be within an overall cap of US$ 10 billion (which would be within the overall cap of 
US$ 25 billion for FII investment in infrastructure debt). IDFs will, in days to come, act as a 
major source of channelizing huge quantum of  funds from long term domestic and foreign 
investors to the corporate debt markets in the critical infrastructure sector of the country and 
will indeed be a gamechanger with a potential of redefining various facets of the markets.  
Incentives 
Incentives,  both  positive  and  negative,  play  a  major  role  in  shaping  human  behaviour  and 
markets  are  no  exception  to  this  rule.  For  illustrative  purposes,  I  would  like  to  cite  a  few 
instances  where  incentives  played  important  role  in  shaping  the  development  of  the  debt 
markets. Existence of easy access to bank loans incentivised corporates to approach banks 
rather  than  rely  on  corporate  bond  market.  This  excessive  reliance  on  bank  finance 
hampered the development of deep and liquid bond markets and was partly responsible for 
the financial instability during the Asian crisis.  
The  illiquidity  in  the  Indian  corporate  bond  markets  can  be  attributed  to  the  apparent 
preference of the corporates to finance their requirements through private placement and rely 
on  external  commercial  borrowings.  The  level  and  complexity  of  stamp  duty  on  corporate 
bonds encourages an arbitrage-based approach to corporate finance and decisions are often 
tax-driven  rather  than  strategy-driven.  Differential  tax  treatment  further  complicates  the 
matter  as  it  tends  to  incentivise  certain  investors,  e.g.,  insurance  companies  and  mutual 
funds who are exempt from TDS on interest income from corporate bonds.  
The regulatory dispensation of HTM classification has protected balance sheets of the banks 
and  encouraged  them  to  invest  in  G-Sec  but  promoted  illiquidity  in  government  bonds. 
Different  incentive  structures  in  treasuries  of  public  sector  banks  and  private/foreign  bank 
treasuries partly explains the level of participation in derivative markets in spite of existence 
of similar risks on the balance sheets. While differences in incentives in public and private 
banks with regard to treasury operations exist, the reasons for lack of interest shown by most 
of the public sector in spite of the fact that they hold very high interest rate sensitive portfolio 
and have the balance sheet capability to participate in the market needs to be examined in 
depth and debated. 
An  understanding  of  the  incentives  is  essential  for  both  policy  makers  and  market 
participants so that the market activities can be directed towards attainment of objectives of 
efficiency and effectiveness. While Reserve Bank tries to align incentives by regulation and 
supervision, regulation itself could create unintended incentives/disincentives as in the case 
of requirement regarding “HTM”. For instance, the ability to buy CDS without an underlying 
has resulted in perverse incentives in the developed markets. Reserve Bank, while framing 
the CDS policy, has designed regulation to curb such skewed incentives by restricting users 
to buy CDS only to hedge an underlying exposure. Physical settlement has been mandated 
after  the  credit  event.  A  nuanced  understanding  of  the  incentives  would  help  in  design  of 
regulation that promotes market development without jeopardising financial stability.  
Innovation 
With the world still smarting under the financial crisis believed to have been unleashed by 
“innovative”  products,  one  has  to  talk  about  innovation  with  some  degree  of  caution. 
Financial innovation is an essential feature in the history of development of financial markets. 
Bypassing  the  tax  or  the  regulatory  regime  has,  of  course,  been  a  major  motivation  for 
innovation, the social and economic utility of which is often questionable. An example is the 
Negotiable Order of Withdrawal (NOW) accounts in the US that were a result of Regulation Q 
restrictions on interests on demand deposits. But innovations that are motivated by the need 
to  match  the  needs  of  the  investor  and  the  issuer  or  made  possible  by  advancement  in 
technology or knowledge are essential for evolution of financial markets. One can cite many 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
examples – demat accounts, ATMs, credit and debit cards, explosion of options contracts, 
inflation indexed bonds, Fixed Rate Capital Securities, IRS, CDS and so on. It is true that 
financial  innovation  has  also  resulted  in  complex  products  which  package  and  redstribute 
risks in a way that is scarcely understood. As observed by Lord Turner of the UK Financial 
Services Authority, financial innovation has produced some products of very dubious social 
value.  It  is  vital  to  understand  that  financial  innovation  is  not  an  objective  in  itself  but  a 
process and has to cater to the products to the felt need of the market in particular and wider 
economy in general without compromising on financial stability. The old adage “Innovate or 
Perish”  should  read  “Innovate  with  Caution  or  Perish”  in  so  far  as  the  financial  sector  is 
concerned.  
Innovation and risk are two aspects of financial markets between which there is a great deal 
of  tension.  As  such,  inadequate  risk  management  framework  can  make  the  difference 
between  survival  and  death  for  an  institution,  particularly  a  financial  institution.  Several 
episodes in international markets have repeatedly underscored this – Orange County, LTCM, 
BCCI, Enron, Barings, Northern Rock – one can go on. We have just seen that innovative 
products  like  the  CDOs  and  innovative  institutional  arrangements  like  the  SPVs  without 
adequate  appreciation  of  embedded  risk  and  an  appropriate  regulatory  framework  for  risk 
management  could  wreck  havoc.  Nearer  home,  ill-judged  use  of  some  exotic  foreign 
exchange  derivative  by  some  corporates  led  to  substantial  losses  and  created  fracas 
between them and the banks that had sold them the products.  
The respective Boards of the financial institutions need to ensure appropriate oversight of the 
functioning  of  treasuries.  The  Board  must  put  in  place  risk  policies  and  also  ensure  strict 
adherence of the limits and standards. There should be clear procedures for assessing and 
monitoring risk, with adequate accountability, clear lines of authority and separation of duties. 
The  approach  of  Reserve  Bank  towards  regulation  and  risk  management  is  oriented  to 
ensure  development  of 
financial  markets  and  products  by  establishing  supportive 
infrastructure,  address  systemic  stability  issues  and  also  support  market  development. 
Maintaining a balance between systemic stability and financial market development remains 
the main focus of the Reserve Bank of India. Therefore, the emphasis is towards creation of 
a robust regulatory/supervisory framework to prevent systemic weaknesses.  
Often, there is a tendency to look towards more advanced markets and mimic their practices 
without subjecting such products and practices to customization as would be required in the 
eco-system  of the adopting country. Like the Meiji Restoration scientists, who after having 
received scientific training in various European countries, returned to Japan and wanted to 
carry forward their work in the language in which they had received instruction, the financial 
sector  professionals  have  a  tendency  to  crave  for  the  products  that  they  are  familiar  with. 
The success of innovative products/processes such as the CBLO, which is a variant of tri-
partite  agreement,  infrastructure  such  as  electronic  trading  platforms  (NDS,  NDS  Call  or 
NDS-OM) and transitory pooling of accounts for settlement of corporate bonds in the books 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  strengthens  the  case  for  looking  inwards  for  inspiration  to 
evolve customized innovations 
In  India,  innovation  has  been  rather  muted  and  even  the  reception  for  new  products  has 
been rather insipid. The regulators are not against innovative products; their concern is that 
neither should the innovation be oriented towards skirting the regulatory regime nor should 
they  lead  to  build-up  of  systemic  risk.  It  is  imperative  for  the  market  participants  and  the 
industry  association  to  ensure  that  adequate  risk  management  systems  and  corporate 
governance structures are in place before embarking on innovations. As you all may have 
observed, Reserve Bank has followed and will continue to follow a measured approach in the 
introduction  of  innovative  products  through  adoption  of  appropriate  risk  management 
framework suitable to our eco-system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Concluding remarks 
To summarize, I have briefly described the 7i framework which focusses on the structure and 
developments  of  our  debt  market  and  the  possible  future  direction  to  invigorate  our  debt 
markets with reference to this framework. We need to realise that development and adoption 
of new products in emerging market economies is not often easy. It requires considerable 
amount of patience, hand-holding and fine-tuning depending on the needs of the respective 
eco-system.  It  is  equally  important  to  remember  that  market  liquidity  is  a  consequence  of 
active participation of market players. New financial products and instruments are designed 
to  cater  to  funding  and  hedging  needs  but  the  need  to  be  actively  used  by  the  market 
participants without, of course, increasing the risks to the financial stability and jeopardising 
the interest of the ultimate end-users/customers. The lack of market interest, if any, must be 
introspected and debated seriously to draw up remedial action plan. 
At the end, I would like to reiterate that in the context of a developing market like India the 
Reserve Bank of India, other concerned regulators, Government, FIMMDA, PDAI and all the 
market participants are all joint stakeholders in the development of the debt markets. All of us 
have to work towards this common objective and a conclave like this would go a long way in 
generating  useful  insights  and  inputs  in  this  direction.  With  these  thoughts  I  wish  the 
conference and participants all the very best for productive and useful deliberations mixed 
with the pleasure of exploring this beautiful country. I thank FIMMDA and PDAI for giving me 
this opportunity to share some of my thoughts with all of you. I would also like to specially 
thank Dr.Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor, Bank Negara Malaysia for spending her valuable time in 
our midst and sharing her insights with us.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
