Dimitar Bogov: Republic of Macedonia – celebrating monetary 
independence 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  gala  event  on  the  occasion  of  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  monetary 
independence of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, 26 April 2012. 
 Honorable President of the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia,  
Honorable fellow Governors of central banks,  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me wish you all a very warm welcome and thank you for accepting our invitation to attend 
this gala event on the occasion of our landmark anniversary – twenty years of the monetary 
independence of the Republic of Macedonia.  
On  this  day,  April  26,  we  recall  the  numerous  challenges  that  we  faced,  the  numerous 
difficulties we have gone through in the past twenty years exactly.  
On this day, we are reminded that the beginnings were not easy and that those beginnings 
emerged  in  a  period  of,  I  can  say  without  false  exaggeration,  huge  enthusiasm  of  all 
individuals  involved  in  creating  our  own  independent  state  with  all  attributes that  this  state 
should have.  
In  this  reminiscence  of  the  persons  who  were  involved  in  the  monetary  independence,  I 
especially feel the need to point out the name of the first Prime Minister of the independent 
Republic of Macedonia, the academician Nikola Kljusev, who played one of the leading roles 
not  only  for  the  monetary  independence,  but  also  for  many  other  decisions  of  that  time, 
important  for  the  completion  of  statehood.  On  his  initiative,  on  December  19,  1991,  the 
Government  adopted  a  Decision  which  obligated  the  National  Bank  to  start  printing  value 
coupons.  This  Decision,  adopted  in  greatest  secrecy,  was  a  legal  basis  for  all  operational 
actions that allowed the new currency, the Denar, to be presented to the public on April 26, 
the following year, 1992. On this day, also on the initiative of the academician Kljusev the 
systemic  laws  were  adopted,  as  well  as  the  document  on  the  Anti-inflationary  program, 
which, unfortunately, did not survive the fall of his Expert Government.  
On this day, besides recollecting the past, we are called to look towards the future. Here we 
look at the importance of low inflationary expectations for the efficiency of the economy and 
the role of the National Bank in maintaining these expectations. In fact, academician Kljusev 
had devoted his entire scientific work to the issue of efficiency of economic policies.  
For  the  central  bank,  as  well  as  for  the  commercial  banks  that  the  central  bank  closely 
cooperates  with,  basically  there  is  only  one  true  treasure  on  which  the effectiveness  of  its 
policies is based and that is the confidence of the public. It is impossible to imagine a stable 
bank without having to imagine the confidence of citizens who are its customers. Also, it is 
impossible to imagine confidence in a central bank without simultaneously having confidence 
in its objectives. Consequently, the essential question for the monetary independence comes 
down to whether it contributed to building confidence in the specific context in which it was 
accomplished.  
The answer to this question in the last fifteen out of the twenty years that have passed since 
the monetary independence is an unambiguous YES. Even though we lost a lot of effort in 
dealing  with  the  consequences  of  premature  abandonment  of  the  said  Anti-inflationary 
program,  the  National  Bank  has  been  successful  for  fifteen  years  in  achieving  its  main 
objective – maintaining price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Stable  exchange  rate  is  an  intermediate  objective  for  achieving  the  main  objective.  The 
interest rate on the main instrument of the National Bank is an operational signal that we are 
truly determined to maintain the stable exchange rate. Of course, there were and there will 
be speculations on the currency market, as there were and there will be debates, to some 
extent caused by partial economic interests, regarding the overall structure of the monetary 
policy. The former are an integral part of the market economy, and the latter are part of the 
public debate. The National Bank has the capacity to respond to a speculative attack on the 
exchange  rate  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  an  active  participant  in  theoretical  debates  and 
empirical studies.  
For example, we successfully dealt with three major attacks on the Denar exchange rate, in 
the spring of 2001, in the autumn of 2004 and in the spring of 2009, although these attacks 
were  caused  by  quite  different  reasons.  With  this  action  we  justified  the  confidence  of 
citizens,  the  confidence  that  is  the  greatest  treasure,  the  greatest  reserve  of  the  National 
Bank.  
Also, the careful study of economic theory leads to the perception that the conditions under 
which the weakening of the domestic currency would lead to improved net exports are not at 
all  present  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  The  increased  sales  of  Macedonian  goods  and 
services abroad, but at lower prices expressed in Euros, would not lead to foreign exchange 
inflows,  which  could  offset  the  more  expensive  imports  of  energy  and  machinery.  In  the 
imports of the latter, we depend almost exclusively on the world rather than on the domestic 
prices of production, so the result could be even worsening, instead of improving the balance 
of goods and services. To the same end are the different, but more emphasized arguments 
based on empirical studies: the competitiveness of the Macedonian economy is not reduced 
and the research of the effective exchange rates continuously shows their adequacy.  
This policy of stable exchange rate has caused the inflation in the Republic of Macedonia in 
the  last  fifteen  years  to  average  2.1  percent,  versus  1.9  percent  in  the  countries  of  the 
Eurozone.  With  a  difference  of  only  0.2  percentage  points,  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  is 
among the most successful countries in transition.  
In this context, it is worth emphasizing one more comparison from the past fifteen years. The 
Republic of Macedonia has avoided the continuous appreciations of several years that during 
the  crisis  were  followed  by  depreciations,  a  cycle  to  which  the  countries  of  the  region  of 
Central and Eastern Europe with fluctuating exchange rates had been exposed to. Thus we 
avoided the illusion of increased productivity – an illusion that these countries had to pay for 
in the crisis years.  
Given this background of successful monetary independence and the Denar as a means for 
building confidence, I believe it is fair to point out that in the past fifteen years, the attracting 
of savings in Denars and the impartial and rigorous channeling of those savings to the most 
efficient  and  most  effective  economic  projects  by  the  commercial  banks  have  also  been 
achieved to the extent possible.  
This  "to  the  extent  possible"  is  partly  a  result  of  the  trauma  caused  by  the  numerous 
devaluations  of  the  domestic  currency  in  the  not  so  distant  past,  when  savings  became 
almost worthless. But this past means that in the previous fifteen extremely successful years 
for the monetary policy, there is an expected, though irrational stigma on the Denar, which 
however  becomes  rational  because  it  is  rewarded.  In  other  words,  depositors  believe  that 
they  need  very  high  nominal  interest  rates  in  Denars,  in  order  to  have  a  real  return  on 
savings, which leads to high interest rates on loans. This phenomenon was not and is not a 
result of the mistrust in the banking system. Mistrust of depositors comes from the fear that 
due  to  possible  devaluation  followed  by  inflationary  transmission  effects,  saving  in  Denars 
would be insufficiently compensated if interest rates on savings deposits in Denars come too 
close to the interest rates on deposits in Euros.  
The stability of the exchange rate which established the idea that price stability is a public 
good one cannot live without, is the reason why depositors are no longer so much under the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
influence of this phenomenon. The latest data on the increased saving in Denars, compared 
to saving in Euros, point to this conclusion.  
The  expectation  that  the  stable  exchange  rate  level  will  be  maintained  simultaneously 
indicates that the difference between real interest rates in Denars and real interest rates in 
Euros continues to decrease gradually, certainly without any of them remaining on negative 
territory for a longer time. The National Bank will continue not to hesitate to intervene in the 
foreign  exchange  market  and  increase  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  instrument  which 
represents  an  operational  signal.  Through  these  policies  the  National  Bank  confirms  its 
capacity  and  institutional  determination.  Market  participants  recognize  this  successful 
defense of the exchange rate in the past fifteen years, although in a short run any change 
may  cause,  through the  transmission  effects,  only  temporary  increase  of  the  nominal,  and 
thus of real interest rates in the economy.  
A logical consequence of all this is that a possible reflation in the Eurozone means that the 
Republic of Macedonia will not become an isolated island doomed to disinflation and, vice 
versa, that if the Euro continues to prove effective in delivering low inflation in the Eurozone, 
in the Republic of Macedonia internal depreciation will be the preferred course of adjustment. 
The differences between inflation rates in the Republic of Macedonia and the Eurozone will 
remain temporary and limited.  
In fact, this marks the success of the stable exchange rate as an intermediate target of the 
monetary  policy  which  consists  of  the  aforementioned  difference  of  0.2  percentage  points 
between the inflation in the Republic of Macedonia and the inflation in the Eurozone. In the 
long run, this enables economic agents to have more definite expectations about the general 
price level and denotes support to the economic environment.  
In  such  monetary  policy  setting  it  should  be  noted  that  the  National  Bank,  as  a  public 
institution,  constantly  needs  to  cooperate  with  the  Government  without  undermining  the 
autonomy of any of these two  institutions. From the perspective of the National Bank, this 
means that the Government is trying to anticipate the policies that we implement to maintain 
the level of the exchange rate and it takes them into consideration when adopting the budget. 
It is clear that the National Bank and the Government may adopt essentially good decisions 
in  their  respective  spheres  of  action  if  they  cooperate  even  during  the  discussions  which 
precede the decisions.  
The cooperation with the Government would also be in terms of creating conditions for the 
social dialogue to take into account the challenge we face in conducting the monetary policy. 
This actually means that the inflationary pressures which in themselves would result in faster 
development of the domestic economy, as well as more positive output gap compared with 
the  countries  of  the  Eurozone,  would  also  lead  to  more  pronounced  interaction  with  the 
increase in unit labor costs. The perception of close coordination between the Central Bank 
and the Government in dealing with this challenge would mean that both public institutions 
are  aware  of  the  need  to  adjust  to  the  conditions  that  the  maintenance  of  price  stability 
through the exchange rate brings. This adjustment would prompt the Government, through 
dialogue  with  social  partners,  to  advocate  a  moderate  growth  of  wages,  i.e.  wage  growth 
which will take into account productivity in both the tradable and non-tradable sectors. This 
would  lead  to  increased  employment,  while  simultaneously  improving  the  competitive 
position of enterprises, which would alleviate the emergence of imbalances in the economy 
as a whole.  
Finally, I would add that we, at the National Bank, have learned a lot from the mistakes that 
economic  policy-makers  have  done  in  the  past.  But,  as  confirmed  by  the  history  of  our 
institution, monetary independence is perhaps the decision that best helped us to contribute 
to  the  improvement  of  the  efficiency  of  the  economic  policies,  and  thus  improve  the  living 
standard generally, in a state-making, institutional, economic and practical way.  
Long live this great anniversary!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
