Miroslav Singer: Sovereign debt crisis in Europe – assessing the current 
European instruments – addressing the challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Miroslav  Singer,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  European 
Parliament  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Public  Hearing,  Brussels, 
23 January 2012. 
 Members of the European Parliament, 
Thank  you  for  inviting me  to  this  forum  and  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  comment  on  the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). The last few weeks have brought us three new 
events that are rightly or wrongly regarded as game changers and I would like to discuss the 
EFSF in the context of those events. They are: 1) the ECB’s long-term loans to commercial 
banks and the widening of the range of guarantees which the ECB accepts from commercial 
banks for them, 2) the fiscal pact and 3) the rating downgrades. I would like start by saying 
that  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  commercial  banks  in  Europe  by  the  ECB  gives  us  time  to 
define  more  precisely  the  mission,  design  and  operation  of  the  Facility  as  well  its  position 
among  the  institutions  charged  with  resolving  the  debt  crisis.  If  we  want  to  reduce  the 
probability that some European nations and their banking groups will face liquidity problems 
that they cannot solve by obtaining funds from the market, we need to eliminate the following 
uncertainties relating to the EFSF: 
1. 
It  is  not  clear  what  benefits  we  expect  from  the  EFSF  or  how  it  is  supposed  to 
generate them. Many objectives have been hinted at in the more than 18 months 
since it was created, but nothing specific has been implemented so far. Yet each of 
the objectives is highly important,  be it the issuing of protection certificates or the 
establishment  of  the  special  purpose  vehicle  or  the  purchasing  of  peripheral 
countries’ bonds in the secondary market. 
The ambiguity in the definition of the Facility’s mission is indicated by the changes 
made both to its guarantee structure, even though the structure remains based on 
the “per partes” principle, and to its rules of operation during its short lifetime. The 
fact  that  the  term  EFSF  2  has  caught  on  for  the  new  structure  reveals  just  how 
fundamental these changes are seen to be. 
Uncertainty also exists on the issue of increasing the effective capital strength of the 
Facility  using  concepts  such  as  leverage  (via  an  SPV),  protection/insurance,  loss 
tranches  and  short-term  funds.  From  the  reputational  perspective,  these  are 
exceptionally controversial issues, because many market participants interpret them 
as a mere attempt to disguise the fact that the euro area countries do not currently 
have  enough  resources  for  a  credible  rescue  plan  for  Italy  and  Spain.  If  they  did 
want to create such resources, they would be  putting their own debt arithmetic at 
risk, because under Eurostat methodology the guarantees for the EFSF’s bonds are 
included  in  the  guarantors’  gross  government  debt.  If  the  Facility  is  to  provide 
effective assistance in stabilising the larger European economies, it will need more 
funding. Each of the concepts poses a serious threat to the reputation and credibility 
of the Facility.  
a. 
Excessive  leverage  is  now  regarded  as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  financial 
crisis. 
The  proposals  for  protection  and  a  first  loss  tranche  of  20%  of  the  nominal 
debt are also laden with problems. The example of Greece demonstrates that 
the losses may run to 60%. There is great uncertainty about who would pay 
for  the  difference  between  the  insured  loss  and  the  actual  loss  if  the  Greek 
b. 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
scenario was to be repeated in other countries. Likewise, it is not clear how 
freely tradable protection certificates would be traded, priced, settled and, in 
the event of default, enforced if they were to be introduced. Such certificates 
would de facto be quasi CDS instruments underwritten by the official institution 
of  a  community  of  countries  that  are  simultaneously  waging  a  campaign 
against credit derivatives because they regard them as one of the causes of 
the crisis. 
The  signs  of  a  gradual  shift  towards  short-term  funding  of  the  EFSF  are  a 
worrying  signal.  The  risk  arising  from  financing  assets  that  are  by  definition 
long-term and illiquid (primarily rescue loans) through a programme of short-
term  debt  instruments  (liability  rollover  risk)  is  more  than  clear.  This  ALM 
model  proved  to  be  extremely  risky  during  the  financial  crisis  when  the 
commercial paper market dried up. 
c. 
Another uncertainty is related to the project of purchasing bonds in the secondary 
market. To fund these purchases, private capital will be needed (e.g. in the form of 
senior  tranches  of  SPV  debt).  Therefore,  this  project  lacks  the  firm  official 
commitment  which  similar  central  bank  (BoE,  Fed)  programmes  not  reliant  on 
private investor participation have. 
The  latest  uncertainty  is  the  adjustment  of  the  entire  EFSF  project  to  the  loss  of 
France’s (and Austria’s) AAA rating from S&P, followed by the downgrading of the 
EFSF’s own rating from AAA to AA+. In its comments on this change, S&P stated 
explicitly  that  the  EFSF’s  rating  has  a  developing  outlook,  which  means  that  the 
agency foresees the possibility both of returning the rating to AAA (if offsetting credit 
enhancements  are  adopted)  and  of  downgrading  it  further  to  below  AA+  (if  key 
guarantor  countries  are  downgraded).  A  lower  EFSF  rating  would  probably  be 
associated  with  higher  interest  costs  of  refinancing.  There  might  even  be  a  fall  in 
liquidity in the EFSF bond market owing to the exit of some institutional investors, 
who primarily target the AAA segment of issuers. 
On  a  more  general  level,  the  lack  of  coordination  of  resources  for  supporting 
European countries is disturbing. It is resulting in fragmentation of resources and a 
lack  of  transparency  in  the  setting  of  parameters  such  as  “who”,  “how  much”,  “to 
whom”  and  “how”.  Specifically,  the European  Union,  or  the  euro  area, is  planning 
simultaneously to lend to the International Monetary Fund, to guarantee the EFSF 
and to guarantee the ESM, while central banks guarantee the capital of the ECB. If 
a non-European country wanted to help Europe, there is the question of whether it 
should  send  the  money  to  the  IMF  or  use  it  to  purchase  EFSF  bonds,  a  senior 
tranche of the SPV, or the peripheral countries’ debt, i.e. with no intermediation. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
The many uncertainties associated with the specific operation of the EFSF are giving rise to 
general  doubts  about  the  appropriateness  of  the  current  approaches  to  overcoming  the 
ongoing debt crisis in the euro area. I cannot help feeling that many solutions to the problems 
have been wrongly chosen in part because the main causes of the financial and debt crisis 
have not been correctly identified. 
Greece  gets  too  much  attention  from  decision-  and  policy-makers.  It  represents  a  mere 
1/50 of the European economy. I believe that without the political will to provide Greece with 
massive support from European funds to restore its competitiveness – and I see little such 
will at the moment – its exit from the euro area will be inevitable, since depreciation of the 
Greek currency will become part of the measures to restore competitiveness. The provision 
of loans to Greece has so far primarily bought time. This has enabled wealthier Greeks to 
transfer their savings out of the country. The costs of such action have been a reduction in 
Europe’s  credibility  and  harm  to  the  reputation  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  its 
ability to raise funds outside Europe. I am therefore very glad that this session is devoted to 
the Facility, whose importance to Europe and especially to the euro area is much greater. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  could  list  other  problems,  such  as  the  delayed  consolidation  of  the  European  banking 
system and the related recapitalisation of banks, and in particular the fact that the existence 
of the euro area has widened the long growing imbalance in the exchange of goods, capital 
and savings between euro area countries. The short-term rescue of the euro will not directly 
solve  the  long-term  problem  of  imbalances,  and  in  particular  the  gradually  emerging  path 
towards  a  fiscal  pact  with  no  significant  redistribution  of  resources  at  European  level  will 
require the elimination of, or at least a considerable reduction in, the imbalances in the euro 
area. 
In the context of the three change drivers I mentioned earlier, I would like to say that the time 
that the ECB’s pre-Christmas actions gave the euro area, the European financial sector and 
many  European  states  to  solve  their  problems  is  useful  but  not  infinite.  I  believe  that  the 
potential of the fiscal pact to become a true change driver is smaller than generally assumed, 
and  I  expect  that  the  future  formulation  of  the  pact  in  the  constitution  of  each  country  will 
contain (abusable) escape clauses. I base this view in particular on the fact that throughout 
its existence the euro area has had a tendency to soften or bend the criteria for its operation. 
Be  it  the  not-always-proper  manner  of  fulfilment  of  the  Maastricht  criteria  by  accession 
countries  or  the  revision  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  or  the  purchase  of  government 
bonds by the European Central Bank, we have repeatedly seen how things that are initially 
unthinkable  become  reality  over  time.  I  am  doubtful  that  investors,  who  are  well  aware  of 
Europe’s relationship to the rules, will change their attitude as a result of the fiscal pact. 
My overall view on the current design of the Facility is none too optimistic. To enhance its 
ability to face the debt crisis, we need to find a clear consensus on its mission. We need to 
precisely identify whom it is supposed to help, under what circumstances and to what extent, 
and to derive from that the amount of funding it needs. This will predetermine the solutions to 
all the issues surrounding its operation. We have time to solve all these problems, but not 
much time. 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
