Vítor Constâncio: Completing and repairing EMU 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Hyman P Minsky Conference, organised by the Levy Economics Institute and ECLA of Bard 
with support from the Ford Foundation, The German Marshall Fund of the United States, and 
Deutsche Bank AG, Berlin, 26 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  participate  at  this  event  organised  by  the  Levy 
Institute. It is fair to say that, intellectually, the Levy Institute has had a “good crisis”. Building 
on  the  post-Keynesian  analysis  of  Minsky’s  Financial  Instability  Hypothesis  and  Wynne 
Godley´s  theory  of  sectoral  balances  and  stock-flow  consistent  models,  the  work  of  the 
Institute´s resident scholars predicted and explained many of the challenges we are facing 
today.  
This  serves  as  a  reminder  of  the  importance  for  policy-makers  to  keep  an  open  mind  in 
continuously  refining  our  economic  thinking.  It  is  today  clear  to  us  that  conventional 
macroeconomic models were ill-equipped to capture the key role of financial markets. Our 
theoretical  foundations  proved  to  be  misplaced  when  tested  in  reality.  The  way  forward 
therefore has to involve taking the lessons from this empirical test: using the knowledge we 
have gained so far to better understand the necessary conditions for economic and monetary 
union to function. What this implies for the euro area will be the subject of my address today.  
first, 
three  convictions: 
Its  construction  rested  on 
Shortcomings in EMU’s architecture 
EMU was designed with a centralised monetary policy but decentralised fiscal, economic and 
financial  stability  policies. 
the 
synchronisation  of  business  cycles  in  the  euro  area;  second,  a  sufficiently  flexible  and 
competitive internal market; and third, the existence of sufficient “shock-absorbers” to deal 
with country specific developments.  
Where do these convictions of the EMU designers come from?  
Well,  the  general  expectation  was  that  the  first  two  would  be  supported  by  the  common 
currency  itself.  The  euro  would  boost  trade  and  financial  market  integration  within  the 
European  Union  by  eliminating  exchange  rate  risk  and  lowering  cross-border  transaction 
costs.  This  deeper  market  integration  would  lead  to  greater  synchronisation  of  business 
cycles, thus making the stance of a single monetary policy appropriate for all Member States. 
At the same time, the existence of the euro would strengthen the single market and create 
greater flexibility, in turn making it easier and faster to rebalance after economic shocks. In 
this  sense,  while  the  euro  was  ostensibly  devised  to  maximise  the  benefits  of  the  Single 
Market, those same benefits would create the conditions to sustain the single currency. 
The third  conviction  –  that  the “shock-absorber” function  can  be fully  achieved  by  national 
fiscal  policies  –  was  founded  on  the  belief  in  sound  fiscal  positions  that  would  allow  the 
automatic  stabilisers  to  play  out  in  full  during  downturns.  As  an  additional  safeguard  for 
disciplining fiscal policies, a fiscal brake was included in the Treaty to prevent Member States 
running excessive deficits.  
Aside  from  a  single  currency  and  a  fiscal  brake,  EMU’s  institutional  architecture  was 
minimalist:  governance  of  economic  and  financial  policies  remained  firmly  a  national 
competence. 
What  lay  behind  these  expectations?  Of  course,  political  considerations  were  a  dominant 
factor,  insofar  as governments  had  incentives  to  limit  the centralisation of fiscal,  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and financial policies. But to an extent, it also reflected the economic thinking that prevailed 
at that time. 
The rational  expectations,  perfect foresight  paradigm  was  –  and  to  a  large  extent  still  is  – 
dominant.  Many  of  its  followers  are,  of  course,  aware  of  its  limitations  but  hope  to 
successfully  expand  the  theory  to  encompass  new  aspects  of  reality.  Standard  models 
feature  unboundedly  rational  agents  and  complete  knowledge  of  all  variables’  probability 
distributions in all possible future states of the world. They do not foresee significant credit 
cycles  or  irrational  asset  price  bubbles.  Moreover,  information  is  fully  symmetric  and 
complete state-contingent contracts can be written and enforced.  
Default – a situation in which debtors cannot repay due debt in some states of the world – 
was  also  ruled  out.  The  optimal  lending  contracts  in  such  an  environment  do  not  even 
resemble a debt contract. Agents use so-called “Arrow-Debreu” securities. The set-up allows 
a  different  payback for every  future  eventuality  so  that  borrowers  are  always  able  to  meet 
due repayments. 
The normative Ramsey model of 1928, devised for a central social planner to decide about 
the optimal intertemporal path of saving and investment was surprisingly put at the centre of 
macroeconomics, with the assumption that it could serve as a good descriptive model of the 
way  a  capitalist  market  economy  really  works.  Considered  a  general  equilibrium  model  of 
representative agents, the model initially had no money. Money was later inserted back in via 
the  unkeynesian  assumption  of  rigid  prices  and  wages  but  finance  remained  completely 
excluded as if it didn´t matter to explain real economy fluctuations. 
The crisis has put into question these standard models as good and useful representations of 
how the economy works. Several researchers, followers of the paradigm, are now working 
hard to incorporate as many financial frictions as possible into their models. However, other 
academics belonging to the core paradigm have been raising more fundamental doubts. For 
instance,  Ricardo  Caballero  wrote:  “Rational  expectations  is  a  central  ingredient  of  the 
current core; however, this assumption becomes increasingly untenable as we continue to 
add the realism of the periphery into the core”.1 Willem Buiter, questioned the paradigm more 
acidly: “Most mainstream macroeconomic theoretical innovations since the 1970s ( the New 
Classical  rational  expectations  revolution  ...and  the  New  Keynesian  theorizing  ...)  have 
turned out to be self-referential, inward-looking distractions at best. Research tended to be 
motivated by the internal logic, intellectual sunk capital and aesthetic puzzles of established 
research  programmes rather  than  by  a  powerful  desire  to  understand  how  the  economy 
works”.2 
Much earlier, Minsky had already stated the same type of acid test “...for an economic theory 
to be relevant, what happens in the world must be a possible event in the theory”.3 
Under  the  ideal  imagined  conditions  of  prevailing  thinking  before  the  crisis,  the  market 
mechanism  operates  smoothly  and  since  financial  frictions  are  disregarded,  financial 
intermediaries  were  generally  absent  from  macro  models  and  without  leveraged  financial 
intermediaries, financial instability is not an issue. It is true that there some frictions linked to 
the  credit  channel  had  been  included  in  macro  models,  basically  related  to  the  Financial 
Accelerator  developed  by  Bernanke  and  Gertler  and  Gilchrist.4  This  is,  however,  only  a 
                                                
1   Caballero,  R  (2010)  “Macroeconomics  after  the  Crisis:  Time  to  Deal  with  the  Pretense-of-Knowledge 
Syndrome” NBER WP n. 16429. 
2   Buiter,  W.  (2009)  “The  irrelevance  of  most  ‘state  of  the  art’  academic  monetary  policy”,  available  at 
www.voxeu.org. 
3   Minsky,  H.  (1986)  “Stabilizing  and  unstable  economy”  in  Chapter  12  “Introduction  to  policy”,  McGraw-Hill 
Professional, new edition, 2008. 
4   Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business 
Cycle Framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and Michael Woodford editors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  states 
mechanism  that  could  aggravate  an  on-going  crisis,  but  was  not  strong  enough  to  trigger 
one.  Recently,  Adrian,  Colla  and  Shin  examined  which  frictions  should,  at  a  minimum,  be 
included  to  be  relevant.  They  concluded  from  the  evidence  of  the  crisis  that  at  least  five 
stylized facts should be reflected in macro-financial models: coexistence of bank and bond 
finance,  substitution  from  bank  to  bond  financing,  increasing  credit  spreads,  stickiness  of 
equity prices and endogenous procyclicality of bank leverage.5 
In the pre-EMU economic modelling world, therefore, there was no need to counter financial 
imbalances and financial instability as the financial sector did not play a crucial role from a 
macroeconomic  perspective.  Similarly,  under  the  assumption  of  self-equilibrating  markets, 
there  was  no  need  to  monitor  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  disequilibria  on  the  labour, 
product or financial markets. With an assumed stable private sector, apart from exogenous 
shocks,  the  only  source  of  instability  acknowledged  were  governments  and  their  fiscal 
profligacy.  This  supported  the  decision  to  elevate  only  governance  of  fiscal  policies  to  the 
European level.  
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  obvious  that  this  architecture  was  unstable.  Like  the 
neglected build-up of financial imbalances and high indebtness that led to the crisis, the initial 
design  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  was  a  victim  of  the  economic  thinking  then 
dominant. A few lessons have to be drawn now.  
Lesson number one: the greater integration of euro area financial markets implied that our 
economies  became  more  prone  to  contagion.  Financial  integration  run  ahead  and 
European-level  financial  supervision  was  non-existing.  The  financial  trilemma  of  Dirk 
Schoenmaker,6 
integration,  financial  stability  and  national 
supervision are not compatible, was disregarded and the consequences were significant in 
terms of the enormous capital inflows channelled by the banks of core countries to banks in 
the periphery, significantly contribute to the subsequent macroeconomic imbalances. Initially 
no one thought about banking union. 
Lesson number two: the financial and economic shock of the crisis vastly outran the shock 
absorption capacity at the national level. Nothing was foreseen to deal with liquidity crises 
that could emerge from contagion and multiple equilibria generated by market perceptions. 
Only later the EFSF and the ESM were created to address crisis management.  
Lesson number three: the existing rules on the fiscal front were insufficient in pre-crisis times, 
and even more so in crisis times when crisis management was key. Initially, no one talked 
about fiscal union to introduce more discipline and help with shock absorption.  
Lesson  number  four:  the  development  of  macro  and  external  imbalances  was  significantly 
driven  by  private  sector  indebtness,  proving  that  the  fiscal  brake  was  not  enough  to 
guarantee macro stability and excessive heterogeneity among member states. This provided 
the  rationale  for  the  recent  creation  of  a  formal  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  to 
monitor  and  promote  timely  policy  measures  to  avoid  the  building  up  of  macroeconomic 
instability in member states. 
The deep integration of financial markets led to very large imbalances within the euro area. 
This was in part because fiscal rules were implemented weakly, not applied rigorously and 
subsequently watered down. Some countries therefore ran persistent deficits in good times 
or maintained high levels of debt. But the greater imbalances in fact emerged in the private 
sector.  Looking  at  the  data  for  EMU’s  first  decade,  imbalances  in  the  private  sector  far 
exceeded those in the public sector. 
that  financial 
                                                
5   Tobias Adrian, Paolo Colla and H. Song Shin (2012), “Which financial frictions? Parsing the evidence from the 
Financial Crisis of 2007–2009”, Federal Reserve of New York Staff Reports. 
6   Schoenmaker, D. (2011): “The Financial Trilemma”, in Economics Letters, 111 pages 57–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Between  1999  and  2007,  the  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  in  EMU  declined  on  average  by 
5.6 percentage  points.  But  in  the  same  period,  the  ratio  of  private  sector  debt  to  GDP 
increased  by  26.8  percentage  points.  For  the  same  period,  in  the  stressed  countries,  the 
cumulative increase in the private debt ratio to GDP versus the public debt one, amounted 
respectively, to 49 and 24 per cent for Portugal, 75 and minus 35 per cent for Spain, 101 and 
minus 10 per cent for Ireland, 217 and 4 per cent for Greece. 
Private debt levels were able to increase so significantly because the integration of national 
markets  allowed  for  higher  borrowing  from  abroad  and  increased  leverage.  For  instance, 
from 2001 to 2006 MFI holdings of cross-border securities issued by non-MFIs increased by 
almost  44%.  And  as  we  now  know,  these  flows  were  not  perfectly  optimised  by  rational 
private agents. Real estate bubbles in some countries, widening current account deficits and 
generalised  losses  in  competitiveness.  The  minimalist  institutional  construction  of  the  euro 
area lacked the tools to discourage these developments. 
When  these  bubbles  burst,  the  shock-absorption  capacity  of  EMU  was  lower  than 
anticipated.  Indeed,  financial  integration  acted  as  a  shock-amplifier.  Cross-border  capital 
flows  rapidly  reversed  and  created  contagion.  This  was  in  part  because  private  agents 
realised  that  there  were  no  mechanisms  to  ensure  the  continued  solvency  of  banks  and 
governments  in  situations  of financial  distress.  Financial  assistance  at  the  European  level, 
such that it existed, was reserved only for non-euro area countries. Moreover, there were no 
federal  institutions  –  like  the  FDIC  in  the  U.S.  –  to  remove  the  burden  of  repairing  the 
financial system from individual Member States. 
The  official  bodies  that  could  –  and  perhaps  should  –  have  intervened  to  prevent  these 
developments were national supervisors. Yet they lacked the perspective to do so and also 
the instruments to contain private capital flows that were considered to result from optimizing 
self-equilibrating markets. Only macro-prudential measures made possible by a consensus 
at  the  European  level  could  have  dealt  with  the  situation.  In  other  words,  there  was  a 
mismatch between the degree of integration and the scope of governance.  
In retrospect, the euro area was not prepared to deal with the build-up of systemic risks. This 
was in a large part because it had not equipped itself with the institutions commensurate with 
a  highly  financially  integrated  monetary  union.  This  shortcoming  has  clearly  contributed  to 
the situation we face today. Unwinding its consequences is the key challenges the euro area 
faces. So let me now discuss how we can address that challenge. 
Fixing EMU for the long-term 
Unwinding the euro area’s imbalances 
What is the way out of this situation for the euro area? 
First and foremost, the imbalances that accumulated in certain euro area countries have to 
be remedied by those countries themselves. Under present rules, other member states can 
only provide some interim financial assistance and have indeed done so via the EFSF/ESM. 
The  indispensable  national  consolidation  effort  by  the  more  indebted  countries  is  the 
implication  of  a  system  where  fiscal,  economic  and  financial  policies  are  basically 
decentralised. But despite a difficult start, a significant rebalancing is now happening within 
the euro area. 
Across the euro area, strong budgetary consolidation is taking place. The IMF forecasts that 
the euro area’s primary budgetary position will be almost in balance this year. This is quite an 
achievement in an international context: Japan, for example, will have a 9% of GDP primary 
deficit  this  year,  the  U.S.  6.5%  and  U.K.  more  than  5%.  And  the  euro  area  is  not  only 
performing  well  on  average:  each  individual  member  country  will  have  this  year  a  primary 
budget deficit lower than those three countries.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Important improvements are also taking place in competitiveness. Member States have now 
started  to  undertake  structural  reforms  to  facilitate  intra-euro  area  adjustment.  There  have 
been  determined  efforts  to  address  product  and  labour  market  rigidities,  reform  tax  and 
pension systems, and increase the efficiency of judicial systems. And some positive effects 
are already visible in the data.7 
For example, the three countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen unit labour costs 
improve by around 10% since 2008, relative to the euro area average. This has translated 
into current account deficits that are on average around 8 percentage points of GDP lower 
than they were then. At the same time, exports of goods and services in volume since 2009, 
increased by 22% for Spain, 15% for Ireland, 22% for Portugal, 19 % for Italy, this against an 
average of 21% for the euro area.8  
While  there  are  clear  cyclical  drivers  behind  these  developments,  there  are  also  signs  of 
structural improvements. Moreover, drivers of the previously unsustainable domestic demand 
in  some  countries,  like  the  housing  market,  now  seem  to  provide  structurally  lower 
contributions  to  growth,  thereby  facilitating  the  way  towards  a  more  sustainable  growth 
model. 
It is no secret that this necessary process of adjustment, and the reallocation of resources it 
implies between sectors, is having a negative effect on economic activity. Economic growth 
is subdued in the euro area, and is expected to remain so for the rest of this year. There is 
also considerable heterogeneity between euro area countries. 
In  these  circumstances,  monetary  policy  in  maintaining  price  stability  on  a  medium  term 
perspective, contributes also to reduce the output gap, as the literature on flexible inflation 
targeting has shown long ago.9 With risks to inflation well-contained, the ECB has lowered its 
policy  interest  rate  to  the  historic  low  level  of  0.75%  and  provided  banks  with  access  to 
unlimited liquidity at this price. However, before September this year, the transmission of our 
policy rate to the real economy was seriously disrupted across countries. 
For instance, when the ECB cut interest rates by 125 basis points between November 2002 
and  August  2003,  lending  rates  to  non-financial  corporations  across  euro  area  countries 
responded  homogeneously.  By  contrast,  following  the  75  basis  point  cuts  implemented 
between October 2011 and July 2012, the range of bank lending rates across the euro area 
widened significantly. Indeed, in some countries interest rates for non-financial corporations 
actually increased.  
In an economy like the euro area where more than two thirds of firms’ financing comes from 
banks, a disruption in monetary policy transmission has material effects for investment and 
employment.  But  this  effect  is  particularly  exaggerated  when  countries  are  simultaneously 
undertaking  large  fiscal  and  structural  adjustment.  Indeed,  it  was  the  countries  with  the 
greatest adjustment needs that were being most cut off from monetary policy support. They 
were at risk of entering a vicious circle of rising interest rates, falling growth and deteriorating 
public finances. 
It was against this background that the ECB introduced its programme of Outright Monetary 
Transactions,  or  OMTs.  It  aims  to  address  disruption  in  monetary  policy  transmission  by 
tackling  one  of  its  root  causes:  unfounded  fears  about  a  break-up  of  the  euro  area.  By 
providing a fully effective backstop against disaster scenarios, it sends a clear message to 
investors that their fears are baseless. This should restore confidence and help normalise the 
                                                
7   See EU Commission (2012) “The ageing Report”, May. 
8   See EU Commission (2012) Autumn Economic Forecasts, October. 
9   Svensson,  L,  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring  Inflation  Targets,”  European 
Economic Review 41 (1997) 1111–1146. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
pass-through of interest rates. Indeed, the mere announcement of the programme approval 
by the ECB Governing Council led to substantial declines in yields and spreads of stressed 
countries whose net private capital outflows also decreased significantly since July.  
However,  countries  can  only  qualify  for  OMTs  if  they  implement  an  ESM  adjustment 
programme  with  strong  conditionality.  This  ensures  that  they  continue  to  improve  their 
economic  fundamentals  while  the  ECB  is  active.  In  this  way,  we  aim  to  set  the  right 
incentives for governments and create a framework where the positive effects of our actions 
are sustainable. 
Taken together, these measures will help unwind the euro area’s imbalances and stabilise 
the financial situation over the near term. Member States are correcting the excesses of the 
last  decade 
finances,  unsustainable  credit  growth  and 
competitiveness losses. The ECB is taking measures to ensure the proper transmission of its 
monetary policy and maintain price stability, which buys time for this adjustment to continue. 
terms  of  weak  public 
in 
Completing the euro area’s institutional architecture 
To stabilise EMU over the long-term, however, requires a more fundamental reform of the 
institutional  architecture.  The  minimalist  approach  pursued  at  Maastricht  was  found  to  be 
inadequate  in  the  context  of  highly  integrated  financial  markets.  In  recognition  of  this,  the 
Presidents of the European Council, Commission, Eurogroup and ECB have been asked to 
lay  out  a  roadmap  to  complete  EMU  over  the  next  decade.  They  presented  their  interim 
report to the European Council in July and will present a final version in December 
This Report does not aim to identify what features we would ideally like for the euro area, but 
rather what features it cannot do without. Having been thoroughly stress-tested over the last 
three years, we now have a much clearer idea of what rules and institutions are essential for 
monetary  union  to  function  effectively.  In  the  view  of  the  Four  Presidents,  a  stable  EMU 
needs  to  be  built  on  four  pillars:  financial  union,  fiscal  union,  economic  union  and  political 
union. Let me explain each in turn. 
Financial union  
The first and most urgent pillar is financial union or, as it is more commonly known, banking 
union. Bearing in mind what we have learned about the importance of financial markets in a 
highly  integrated  monetary  union,  taking  measures  to  ensure  a  stable  and  well-ordered 
financial system in the euro area has to be our first priority. 
What does this imply in practical terms?  
First of all, a single supervisory mechanism for banks. As I outlined above, a single financial 
market  combined  with  national  supervision  is  not  sustainable.  Before  the  crisis,  it  led  to  a 
lack of oversight of cross-border activity. Since then, it has facilitated a retrenchment of bank 
lending behind national  borders. A single system of supervision can reduce these risks by 
allowing for an aggregated view of the euro area financial market; by providing a safeguard 
against regulatory capture; and by ensuring that national interests are not put ahead of the 
European interest. 
With this in mind, the Commission has presented a proposal for the establishment of a Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  entrusting  the  ECB  with  specific  supervisory  tasks.  This  is  a 
welcome development and the ECB is ready to assume these tasks. However, it is essential 
for the credibility of supervision, and for the ECB’s reputation, that the legal framework allows 
us to implement these tasks in an effective and rigorous way. Another necessary principle, 
as I have argued elsewhere,10 implies that “there should be a clear organizational separation 
                                                
10   Constâncio, V. (2012) “Towards a European Banking Union” Lecture held at the start of the academic year of 
the  Duisenberg  School  of  Finance,  Amsterdam,  7  September  2012,  available  at  http://www.ecb.int/press/ 
key/date/2012/html/sp120907.en.html. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
between monetary policy and supervision. This can be realized at all organisational layers, 
from the analytical and informational level to the decision-making level”. The Commission´s 
proposal includes the creation of a Supervisory Board in the ECB composed basically by the 
Heads of Supervision of the participant countries and that Board will be the vital component 
of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). This can also open the door to the participation 
of  countries  that  are  not  members  of  the  euro  as  they  could  have  equal  treatment  in  the 
Supervisory Board.  
But supervision is only one leg of a genuine financial union. It also requires an effective tool 
to deal with bank failures without triggering financial instability, without long squabbles about 
burden-sharing, and without dragging sovereigns into a deadly embrace with their domestic 
banks. In the view of the Four Presidents, this requires elevating resolution responsibilities to 
European  level,  and  putting  them  in  the  hands  of  an  independent  European  Resolution 
Authority (ERA). There are three main reasons for this.  
First,  an  ERA  would  ensure  more  effective  decision-making  when  cross-border  banks  run 
into difficulties. Centralising decision-making would bypass many of the current obstacles to 
effective  resolution  such  as  the  need  for  cooperation  and  coordination  between  multiple 
authorities. This would in turn lead to quicker decisions and reduce resolution costs, as early 
action would help to maintain the economic value of the bank in question. 
Second,  an  ERA  would  be  more  effective  in  minimising  the  cost  for  taxpayers  of  bank 
failures.  A  bank  may  be  “too  expensive”,  “too  complex”,  or  even  “too  well-connected”  to 
resolve  at  the  national  level,  making  bail-out  the  preferred  strategy.  An  ERA,  on  the  other 
hand, would have the financial, legal and administrative capability as well as the necessary 
independence to carry out effective resolution. By imposing burden-sharing on shareholders 
and creditors and by financing residual costs through a European Resolution Fund financed 
ex  ante  by  all  the  banks,  the  ERA  could  ensure  that  the  private  sector  bears  the  primary 
burden of bank resolution costs. European resolution, similar to what the FDIC does in the 
US, is not about bail-out of banks by state recapitalisation efforts, but the use of wide bail-in 
powers to resolve banks with little use of tax-payers money.  
Third, an ERA is a necessary complement to the single supervisory mechanism. A system 
where  supervision  is  European  but  resolution  is  national  creates  frictions.  The  single 
supervisor may assess that a bank needs to be resolved, but the relevant Member State may 
be unable to bear the resolution costs or unwilling to resolve a favoured national firm. Hence, 
the country would likely turn the table on the ECB, and push for generous liquidity support or 
supervisory forbearance.  
From the ECB’s perspective, an effective financial union is a key complement to the single 
monetary  policy.  To  the  extent  that  it  restores  the  flow  of  savings  between  euro  area 
countries,  it  will  support  the  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  allow  us  to 
exit  our  exceptional  measures.  But  more fundamentally,  without  integrated  capital  markets 
and a well-functioning banking sector, there cannot be a single monetary policy – and this 
means we cannot fulfil our mandate. 
Fiscal union 
The  second  pillar,  fiscal  union,  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  fiscal  policies  are  fully 
commensurate  with  the  requirements  of  the  common  currency.  The  crisis  provided  prima 
facie  evidence  of  the  sizeable  negative  spillovers  associated  with  fiscal  crises  within 
monetary  union.  Moreover,  it  showed  the  importance  of  sound  fiscal  policies  for  allowing 
governments  to  perform  their  essential  functions:  countries  with  weak  budgets  lose  their 
ability to perform cyclical stabilisation during a crisis.  
Measures that guarantee solid fiscal policies are therefore a public good – both for individual 
Member  States  and  for  the  whole  euro  area.  For  domestic  citizens,  they  ensure  that  the 
automatic  stabilisers  will  be  able  to  play  out  in  full  during  a  downturn  and  smooth  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
economic  cycle.  For  citizens  elsewhere  in  the  euro  area,  they  provide  protection  against 
contagion emanating from budgetary decisions over which they have no democratic control. 
The recent reforms to strengthen the euro area fiscal framework – the so-called six-pack and 
the fiscal compact – are welcome and go in the right direction. But they remain within the 
logic of the Maastricht Treaty where responsibility for fiscal policies is exclusively in national 
hands.  This  creates  an  inherent  credibility  problem,  as  for  fiscal  frameworks  to  be  fully 
credible, they have to enforceable. This is impossible without a further and deeper sharing of 
budgetary sovereignty.  
This  could  be  achieved  by  giving  European  institutions  greater  competence  to  effectively 
compel  euro  area  Member  States  –  in  a  graduated  manner  if  and  when  the  situation 
deteriorates – to take the necessary fiscal policy decisions.  
This would correspond to a further sharing of national sovereignty. But for both weaker and 
stronger countries, it is in fact an opportunity to regain substantive sovereignty as opposed to 
formal sovereignty. For the weaker countries, measures that put the soundness of their fiscal 
policies beyond doubt will allow them to be fully sovereign, in the sense that they can use 
fiscal  policy  in  its  vital  economic  stabilisation  role  and  take  free  decisions  about  taxes  or 
types of expenditure without fear of excessive discipline from financial markets. 
For the latter, sharing sovereignty at the European level will allow them to effectively protect 
their domestic economies from spillovers from the rest of the euro area. Moreover, they will 
no longer be placed into situations where they are de facto forced into taking decisions to 
avert imminent catastrophe. 
The sharing of sovereignty is also the pre-condition for any risk-sharing mechanisms at the 
euro  area  level.  The  recent  Report  by  the  Four  Presidents  mentioned  the  gradually 
development of a fiscal capacity for the EMU – that is, a common budget for the euro area 
distinct from the EU budget. It identified two possible functions of such fiscal capacity: first, 
facilitating  the  adjustment  to  country-specific  shocks;  and,  second,  providing  financial 
incentives for structural reforms.  
Reflections  on  this  are  at  a  very  early  stage  and  the  pros  and  cons  need  to  be  carefully 
weighed but it is a very important component of a fiscal union. There is a long debate going 
back  to  the  Werner  Report  in  1971  or  to  the  preparation  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  on  the 
degree of fiscal integration that is necessary to sustain a monetary union. In my view the key 
question on taking detailed decisions remains that of efficiency, being necessary to assess 
whether there are economic benefits in excess of costs in moving some expenditure to the 
euro area level.  
Economic union 
The third pillar, economic union, is necessary to ensure the conditions for prosperity within a 
monetary union and thereby prevent countries from becoming a burden on others. Without 
the possibility for exchange rate adjustment, countries have to remain sufficiently flexible to 
adjust through other channels as underlined by the theory of Optimal Currency Areas. This is 
particularly  important  in  the  euro  area  –  as  opposed  to,  say,  the  United  States  –  because 
fiscal  transfers  go  only  through  the  EU  budget  to  compensate  regions  that  lose 
competitiveness and become permanently depressed.  
The  bedrock  of  economic  union  is  completing  the  Single  Market  to  allow  for  higher  factor 
mobility. To a certain extent, the failure of markets to self-equilibrate before the crisis was 
because  markets  were  incomplete.  For  instance,  the  single  market  in  services  remains 
unfinished, despite the fact that the areas covered by the Services Directive account for more 
than  45%  of  EU  GDP.  There  are  also  significant  remaining  barriers  to  labour  mobility,  for 
example linked to the portability of pensions and national insurance contributions. 
However, it clear that competitiveness is a more complex issue that solely factor mobility. It 
depends on national traditions and economic structures. What role can the centre therefore 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
play in ensuring competitiveness? For some fundamental issues linked to adjustment within 
monetary  union  –  like  flexibility  of  wage  formation  –  we  could  envisage  best  practices 
established through guidelines for all countries set at the euro area level. But there are also 
dangers in over-harmonisation. We are seeing currently that system competition can play an 
important role in stimulating structural reform. 
A  more  nuanced  way  forward  may  be  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  encouraging 
country-specific  reforms.  The  Four  President’s  Report  has  suggested  that  Member  States 
could enter into bilateral Reform Contracts with the Commission, whereby they would make 
legally binding commitments to implement structural and institutional reforms. In return, they 
would  receive  funding  to  facilitate  the  transition  process  and  finance  transition  costs  – 
perhaps, for worker reallocation programmes. This could be one function of a fiscal capacity. 
There is still a lot of thinking to be done in this area. And we have to get the balance right. 
The  most  efficient  way  to  ensure  adjustment  is  to  let  market  forces  operate  in  the  many 
protected sectors that still exist in the euro area. But we also know from the first decade of 
EMU  that  markets  do  not  always  self-regulate  and  that  interventions  from  the  centre  to 
ensure competitiveness may be needed. The key challenge is to articulate the appropriate 
role for the European level, the state and the market in the euro area. 
Political union 
The  fourth  pillar,  political  union,  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  other  pillars  have  sufficient 
democratic legitimacy. I will not dwell long on this issue, as it is fundamentally a matter for 
the  Member  States  and  European  citizens.  Suffice  is  to  say  that  the  crisis  has  shown  the 
limits  of  applying  a  national  mind-set  in  a  deeply  integrated  monetary  union.  Citizens  are 
affected  by  what  happens  across  borders  and  their  political  arrangements  need  to  reflect 
this. In this sense, political union is not about moving forward, but about catching up with the 
depth of economic and financial integration that already exists.  
What  is  at  stake  refers basically  to  democratic accountability  and  legitimacy.  An  important 
element  of  legitimacy  has  been  provided  in  the  past,  in  the  European  Union  and  other 
democracies, by what Fritz Scharpf called output legitimacy (or government for the people),11 
that  is,  by  the  effectiveness  of  the  system  in  ensuring  the  continuous  improvement  of  the 
citizens´  quality  of  life.  All  advanced  democratic  countries  and  consequently  the  European 
Union will face challenges in this front stemming from the prolonged period of slow economic 
growth that has now just started. This is the consequence of two types of processes. First, 
the  adjustment  to  the  form  of  balance-sheet  recession  that  the  crisis  represented  and  the 
workings of mechanisms of the associated debt deflation. Second, by the structural problems 
created by ageing populations, globalisation, energy and environmental risks and decreasing 
returns  of  technological  progress  recently  underlined  by  Robert  Gordon.12  To  strengthen 
output  legitimacy,  the  Euro  Area  has  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  its  decision-making 
institutions  to  overcome  the  present  situation  of  crisis.  The  decisions  and  reforms  I  have 
highlighted  in  this  talk  have  precisely  that  objective.  The  transfer  of  some  functions  to  the 
European level is necessary as I argued here. We should not hide, however, the difficulty in 
explaining these reforms to the European public opinion to get their support in the present 
environment.  
                                                
11   The distinction between output legitimacy (government for the people ) and input legitimacy (government by 
the people) was introduced in 1970 by Fritz Scharpf from the Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies. 
For its use in the discussion of European affairs, see Scharpf, F. (1999) “Governing in Europe: effective and 
democratic?” Oxford University Press. 
12   Gordon,  Robert  (2012).  “Is  US  economic  growth  over?  Faltering  innovation  confronts  the  six  headwinds”, 
CEPR Policy Insight No 63. See also Cowen, Tyler (2011) The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the 
Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better” Dutton Books. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
This means that it gains accrued importance the attention that will have to be given to the 
other form of political legitimacy referred by Scharpf the input legitimacy (government by the 
people) – that is, increasing citizens’ participation in European decisions. In some ways this 
may  appear  as  contradictory  with  the  search  for  effectiveness  linked  with  the  first  form  of 
legitimacy  that  requires  now  stronger  central  deciding  bodies.  To  understand  the  great 
difficulty in addressing this issue, we have only to think about the analogy we could establish 
with the political trilemma of the world economy recently enunciated by Dani Rodrik:13 “we 
cannot  simultaneously  pursue  democracy,  national  determination  and  economic 
globalization”  I  will  not  enter  into  such  complications.  I  will  recall,  however,  that  in  this 
context,  we  should  never  forget  that  Europe  is  not  a  Nation  or  a  State.  Political  life  and 
legitimacy continues to occur mostly at the level of nation-states. This implies that to foster 
legitimacy  we  have  to  act  on  the  two  levels  the  European  and  the  national  by  giving  for 
instance,  the  European  Parliament  a  stronger  euro  area  dimension  and  engaging  national 
parliaments  more  in  euro  area  discussions.  I  wanted  to  highlight  the  importance  of  these 
issues but as I said I will not dwell upon them further.  
Conclusion 
Let me then conclude. 
The euro area was designed in the 1990s and we should not be too critical of the fact that its 
architecture was influenced by the prevailing economic theory. However, we now have more 
than  a  decade  of  practical  experience  of  sharing  a  single  currency  in  Europe.  It  is 
unacceptable if we do not learn the lessons of that experience. 
The most important lesson is that, to maximise its benefits, the single currency needs strong 
common institutions. Strong institutions to supervise and stabilise the single financial market. 
Strong  institutions  to  guide  fiscal  policies  and  preserve  budgetary  sovereignty.  Strong 
institutions  to  guarantee  competitiveness  and  encourage  sustainable  growth.  And  strong 
institutions to engage citizens more closely in the European project. 
In  this  effort  the  European  and  national  dimensions  of  legitimacy  must  be  balanced. 
Nevertheless, we must also recall that Nations are a construct of man, not a natural reality, 
meaning that our consciousness and our knowledge are socially constituted. A form of civic 
community among strangers was somehow created to shape several European nation-states 
only as late as the XIX century. That explains why we belong to two societies, our own and 
the European one as the essential cultural background for our universal- aspiring values. In 
this sense, Europe is a memory, a key to understanding our own past. However, the EU, and 
even more so the EA, are political projects and what we want now is to pursue the project of 
completing  and  deepening  the  integration  of  European  nations  in  a  unique  community  of 
destiny that is neither a nation nor a State. It is a powerful vision of preserving and defending 
national identities and interests in a globalized and very challenging world. If we would fail, 
as  Helmut  Schmidt  said:”  For  us,  European  citizens,  that  decadence  would  be  a  tragedy, 
meaning the loss of our self-determination”.14  
We can only hope that our past and community of culture will help us to be successful in our 
endeavour.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
13   Rodrik, D. (2011) “The Globalization Paradox: Why Global Markets, States, and Democracy Can’t Coexist”, 
Oxford University Press. 
14   Schmidt, H. (2000) “Die Selbstbehauptung Europas” Verlags-Anstalt. French translation : “L’europe s’affirme: 
perspectives pour le XXI éme siècle” B. de Fallois (2001). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
