William C Dudley: Solving the too big to fail problem 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS),  at  the  Clearing  House’s  Second  Annual  Business  Meeting  and  Conference, 
New York City, 15 November 2012. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. I am glad to see the progress 
our city and region have made recovering from Sandy, but obviously significant challenges 
remain. 
I  am  going  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  what  is  popularly  known  as  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
(TBTF)  problem.  In  particular,  should  society  tolerate  a  financial  system  in  which  certain 
financial institutions are deemed to be too big to fail? And, if not, then what should we do 
about it? 
The  answer  to  the  first  question  is  clearly  “no”.  We  cannot  tolerate  a  financial  system  in 
which some firms are too big to fail – at least not ones that operate in any form other than 
that of a very tightly regulated utility. 
The second question is the more interesting one. Is the current approach of the official sector 
to ending TBTF the right one? I’d characterize this approach as reducing the incentives for 
firms to operate with a large systemic footprint, reducing the likelihood of them failing, and 
lowering the cost to society when they do fail. Or would it be better to take the more direct, 
but less nuanced approach advocated by some and simply break up the most systemically 
important  firms  into  smaller  or  simpler  pieces  in  the  hope  that  what  emerges  is  no  longer 
systemic and too big to fail?1 
As I will explain tonight, I believe we should continue to press forward on the first path. But, if 
we  fail  to  reach  our  destination  by  this  route,  then  a  blunter  approach  may  yet  prove 
necessary. As always, my views may not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve 
System. 
What is the too-big-to-fail problem? 
The root cause of “too big to fail” is the fact that in our financial system as it exists today, the 
failure  of  large  complex  financial  firms  generate  large,  undesirable  externalities.  These 
include disruption of the stability of the financial system and its ability to provide credit and 
other  essential  financial  services  to  households  and  businesses.  When  this  happens,  not 
only is the financial sector disrupted, but its troubles cascade over into the real economy. 
There are negative externalities associated with the failure of any financial firm, but these are 
disproportionately high in the case of large, complex and interconnected firms. Although the 
moniker is “too big to fail”, the magnitude of these externalities does not depend simply on 
size. The size of the externalities also depends on the particular mix of business activities 
and the degree of interconnectedness with the rest of the financial industry. One important 
element is the importance of the services the firm provides to the broader financial system 
and  the  economy  and  the  ease  with  which  customers  can  move  their  business  to  other 
providers. Another is the extent to which the firm’s structure and activities create the potential 
for  contagion  –  that  is,  direct  losses  for  counterparties,  fire  sales  of  assets  held  by  other 
                                                 
1  This would presumably require legislation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
leveraged  financial  institutions,  or  loss  of  confidence  that  might  precipitate  runs  on  other 
firms with similar business models. 
The presence of large negative externalities creates a dilemma for policymakers when such 
firms are in danger of failing, particularly if the wider financial system is also under stress at 
the same moment. At that point in time, the expected costs to society of failure are very large 
compared to the short-run costs from providing the extraordinary liquidity support, capital or 
other emergency assistance necessary to prevent catastrophic failure. 
The market’s belief that a TBTF firm is more likely to be rescued in the event of distress than 
other  firms  weakens  the  degree  of  market  discipline  exerted  by  capital  providers  and 
counterparties. This reduces the firm’s cost of funds and incents the firm to take more risk 
than would be the case if there were no prospect of rescue and funding costs were higher. 
The fact that firms deemed by the market to be TBTF enjoy an artificial subsidy in the form of 
lower funding costs distorts competition to the detriment of smaller, less complex firms. This 
advantage,  in  turn,  creates  an  unfortunate  incentive  for  firms  to  get  even  larger  and  more 
complex.  The  funding  benefit  of  being  seen  to  be  TBTF  causes  the  financial  system  to 
become  artificially  skewed  toward  larger  and  more  complex  firms  –  in  ways  that  are 
unrelated to true economies of scale and scope. 
Now to be clear, I don’t believe that firms necessarily deliberately set out to become TBTF. 
Nor  do  I  think  that  TBTF  was  the  main  cause  of  the  breakdown  in  market  discipline  that 
preceded  the  financial  crisis.  Many  factors  were  at  work,  including  the  failure  to  grasp  the 
riskiness of new types of credit products and business models, and principal-agent problems 
such as the “trader’s put”. But I do think TBTF contributed to the underpricing of risk in the 
system and did create a bad set of incentives, and if not addressed comprehensively, would 
likely be an even larger problem in the future. 
So how did the problem become so serious? 
The  TBTF  problem  is  not  new.  For  example,  the  FDIC  (Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation) and other federal regulatory agencies intervened to prevent the abrupt failure of 
Continental  Illinois,  then  the  seventh  largest  bank  in  the  United  States,  in  the  1980s.  Had 
Continental  Illinois  been  allowed  to  fail  without  any  intervention,  the  comptroller  of  the 
currency  later  testified,  “we  could  very  well  have  seen  a  national,  if  not  an  international, 
financial crisis the dimensions of which were difficult to imagine”.2 
The comptroller went on to declare that the largest 11 national, commercial banks were too 
big to fail. 
But the problem has become more significant since that time for several reasons. First, the 
biggest financial institutions have become much larger, both in absolute terms and relative to 
the  overall  size  of  the  banking  system.  This  reflects  many  factors  including  the  end  of 
prohibitions on interstate banking, the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act restrictions separating 
investment  from  commercial  banking,  the  rapid  growth  of  the  capital  markets,  and  the 
globalization of the economy – all of which created intense competitive pressures to expand 
in order to gain economies of scale and scope. 
In  commercial  banking,  consolidation  occurred  at  a  rapid  pace.  For  example,  Bank  of 
America was the outgrowth of over 160 different mergers, which pushed up the size of the 
original  acquirer  from  $23  billion  of  assets  in  1980  to  $2.2  trillion  today.  In  the  securities 
                                                 
2  Conover,  C.T.  1984.  “Testimony:  Inquiry  Into  the  Continental  Illinois  Corp.  and  Continental  Illinois  National 
Bank”. Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation, and Insurance of 
the  Committee  on  Banking,  Finance  and  Urban  Affairs,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  98th  Cong., 
2nd Session, September 18, 19 and October 4: 172–391. P. 288. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
industry,  some  partnerships  became  public  companies,  in  part,  so  that  they  could  more 
easily obtain the capital needed to expand rapidly. For example, when Goldman Sachs went 
public in 1999, it had about 15,000 employees and $250 billion of assets. Just eight years 
later, the firm had expanded to 35,000 employees and $1.1 trillion of assets. 
In  the  mid-1990s,  the  top  five  banks  in  the  United  States  had  total  assets  of  $1 trillion  or 
about 14 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). The top securities firms had total assets 
of $718 billion, or about 9 percent of GDP. By the end of 2007, the top five banks had assets 
of  $6.8 trillion  or  49 percent  of  GDP.  Similarly,  the  top  securities  firms  accounted  for 
$3.8 trillion, or about 27 percent of GDP. In addition, the firms’ off-balance-sheet exposures 
rose sharply. 
Second,  the  complexity  and  interconnectedness  of  the  largest  financial  firms  increased 
markedly.  Factors  behind  this  include  the  adoption  of  a  universal  banking  model  by  some 
commercial bank holding companies and the rapid growth of trading businesses, especially 
the over the counter (OTC) derivatives market. In the early 1980s, there were no true U.S. 
“universal  banks”  that  combined  traditional  commercial  banking  with  capital  markets  and 
underwriting activities. By 2007, there were several operating in the United States, including 
Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, UBS, Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank. Also, the OTC derivatives 
business  in  foreign  exchange,  interest  rate  swaps  and  credit  default  swaps  had  exploded 
from its start in the early 1980s. The total notional value of the OTC derivatives outstanding 
for the five largest banks and securities firms currently totals about $200 trillion. 
During this period, there was inadequate attention to the risks that were building up in the 
system. The regulatory and supervisory framework did not keep up with the changes in size, 
complexity,  interconnectedness  and  globalization  that  created  growing  systemic  risk 
externalities and widened the wedge between private and social costs in the event of failure. 
Let me mention just a few of the issues: 
• 
Capital regulation was lax both in terms of the amount of capital required and the 
quality of that capital. As a result, many banks did not have the capacity to absorb 
large shocks and retain access to wholesale funding. 
The  oversight  of  the  largest  securities  firms  was  particularly  deficient  in  terms  of 
ensuring that these firms had sufficient private resources to deal with shocks. The 
industry was also particularly exposed because in the United States, there was (and 
remains)  no  lender  of  last  resort  backstop  for  the  securities  industry  except  in 
extremis.3 
Although  global  integration  brought  with  it  a  number  of  benefits,  regulatory 
coordination did not keep pace with the globalization of financial firms and markets. 
This  allowed  the  potential  magnitude  of  the  negative  externalities  associated  with 
the failure of globally active firms to expand considerably. 
Policymakers allowed market structures, particularly in wholesale funding markets, 
to evolve in directions that were efficient from a private perspective in normal times, 
but amplified run dynamics and therefore externalities in times of stress. Examples 
include the growth in triparty repo activities and the reliance of many large financial 
institutions  on  funding  from  money  market  mutual  funds,  as  well  as  many  other 
elements of the shadow banking system. 
                                                    
3  Under  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  authorized  to  lend  to  individuals, 
corporations and partnerships. But this may occur only if a super majority of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal  Reserve  System  has  determined  that  circumstances  are  “unusual  and  exigent”.  Subsequently,  the 
Dodd-Frank Act further constrained this authority by prohibiting its use to rescue an individual company from 
bankruptcy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The TBTF problem was further aggravated by the financial crisis and the policy response. 
Faced with systemwide stress, the Federal Reserve, with the support of the U.S. Treasury, 
intervened to prevent the disorderly failure of Bear Stearns, a firm that would not have been 
high on the list of TBTF firms a few years earlier. 
Meanwhile,  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  demonstrated  that  the  cost  to  society  of  the 
uncontrolled failure of a TBTF firm in a period of generalized stress was considerably greater 
than anticipated. Following the bankruptcy of Lehman, contagion spread by many channels, 
including prime brokerage, OTC derivatives positions, money market mutual funds, tri-party 
repo  and  wholesale  funding  markets.  The  loss  in  confidence  disrupted  the  flow  of  credit 
throughout the global financial system, generating a global economic downturn and the worst 
contraction in the United States since the Great Depression. 
Recognition of the costs generated by the Lehman failure led to extraordinary interventions 
to prevent further catastrophic failures. These included the rescue of AIG, the FDIC’s TLGP 
program, the ring-fence of Citigroup’s poorer quality assets, and the TARP injection of capital 
into  the  largest  U.S.  financial  institutions.  Because  this  solidified  in  investors’  minds  that 
TBTF  firms  –  after  the  Lehman  debacle  –  would  be  protected,  this  worsened  the  TBTF 
problem. 
The  problem  was  exacerbated  during  the  crisis  by  the  acquisition  of  weakened  firms  by 
stronger firms, a development that was actively promoted by policymakers in a bid to avoid 
or  temper  the  consequences  of  their  failure.  J.P.  Morgan  absorbed  Bear  Stearns  and 
Washington Mutual and its assets grew from $1.5 trillion in 2007 to $2.3 trillion today; Wells 
Fargo purchased Wachovia and its assets increased from $575 billion in 2007 to $1.3 trillion 
today; and Bank of America purchased Countrywide and Merrill Lynch, increasing its assets 
from $1.7 trillion in 2007 to $2.2 trillion today. This, of course, made the surviving firms even 
bigger and more complex. 
When  the  smoke  had  cleared,  the  situation  was  clearly  untenable.  The  experience  of  the 
crisis increased the advantage from being perceived as TBTF, and, thus, strengthened the 
incentives to become bigger, more complex, and interconnected. 
The Dodd Frank Act (DFA) set out to end TBTF. One means was by eliminating the Federal 
Reserve’s discretion to provide emergency financial support through a program open only to 
a  single  financial  institution,  and,  in  general,  raising  the  bar  for  broader-based  emergency 
interventions under section 13.3 of the Federal Reserve Act. 
But,  as  the DFA  recognized, simply  tying  the  Fed’s  hands on  intervention  is  insufficient.  It 
does not reduce the cost to society from the failure of a large and complex firm. In order for 
the non-intervention strategy to be both fully credible and consistent with the public interest, 
we need to tackle the underlying externalities and incentive problems that give rise to TBTF 
in the first place. 
Tackling too big to fail 
As  I  see  it,  solving  the  TBTF  problem  requires  working  on  a  number  of  different  margins. 
These  include  measures  that  are  firm-specific  and  those  that  address  the  structure  of  the 
financial system more broadly. 
One set of measures works to reduce the incentives for excessive risk-taking and to lower 
the probability that large financial firms fail or come close to failure. Another set lessens the 
disruption  to  the  financial  system  and  hence  the  cost  their  failure  imposes  on  the  broader 
economy  and  society  as  a  whole.  Along  with  measures  that  penalize  characteristics 
associated  with  the  negative  externalities  from  failure,  these  changes  work  against  the 
incentive to be too big to fail. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Policy measures that alter incentives and reduce the probability of distress 
A  number  of  steps  have  already  been  taken  that  reduce  the  probability  of  failure.  For 
example,  there  has  already  been  considerable  progress  in  forcing  firms  to  bolster  their 
capital  and  liquidity  resources.  On  the  capital  side,  consistent  with  the  Dodd-Frank  Act, 
Basel III  significantly  raises  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  required  of  internationally 
active  bank  holding  companies.  This  ensures  that  the  firm’s  shareholders  will  bear  all  the 
firm’s  losses  across  a much  wider  range  of  scenarios  than  before.  This  should  strengthen 
market discipline. Meanwhile, to the extent that some of the specific activities that generate 
significant externalities are now subject to higher capital charges, this should cause banks to 
alter their business activities in ways that reduce both the likelihood and social cost of their 
failure. 
Moreover,  the  new  Basel  regime  explicitly  adjusts  capital  requirements  upward  based  on 
size,  complexity,  interconnectedness,  global  exposure  and  substitutability  –  attributes  that 
are proxies for the negative externalities generated by failure. If a bank is deemed a global 
systemic financial institution or G-SIFI, then it will have to hold a greater amount of capital 
relative to its risk-weighted assets compared to a less systemic institution.4 
The notion behind the SIFI surcharge is a simple one. The cost to society from the failure of 
a  large,  complex  firm  is  proportionally  considerably  higher  than  the  cost  to  society  of  the 
failure of a non-systemic firm. As a result the capital buffer for the more systemic firm should 
be higher so that its expected probability of failure will be lower than for the less systemic 
firm. 
The  SIFI  surcharge  acts  as  a  penalty  for  size  and  complexity,  leaning  against  the  funding 
cost  advantage  a  firm  may  have  because  it  is  perceived  to  be  TBTF.  This  helps  level  the 
playing field for smaller firms and reduces the incentive to seek to become TBTF in the first 
place. 
Domestically, we have adopted a more forward-looking approach to capital through the use 
of stress tests, in particular the annual Comprehensive Capital Assessment Review (CCAR) 
program. By promoting transparency, CCAR also strengthens market discipline. 
On the liquidity front, the largest, most systemically important bank holding companies will be 
required to hold a 30-day liquidity buffer – the so-called liquidity coverage ratio or LCR. The 
purpose of the LCR is to ensure that such a bank will have sufficient liquid resources so if it 
were  to  encounter  business  difficulties  and  temporarily  lose  access  to  market  funding,  it 
would still have some time to address its underlying problems. With a liquidity buffer, banks 
will  not  immediately  be  forced  to  sell  illiquid  assets  during  times  of  stress.  This  should 
enhance their stability, and provide some protection against the fire sale externalities we saw 
during  the crisis:  forced  asset  sales,  falling  asset  prices,  leading  to  rising  capital  losses at 
other firms that led, in turn, to further funding difficulties, asset sales and so on. 
On  the  supervisory  side,  firms  are  now  increasingly  being  evaluated  on  a  cross-industry 
basis in order to identify best practices and to identify laggards that need to upgrade areas 
such as MIS, governance, model validation, and risk management practices. 
Activity  restrictions  are  another  potential  means  to  reduce  the  risk  of  failure.  The  biggest 
initiative in this area is the Volcker Rule. By limiting proprietary trading activities, the Volcker 
Rules seeks to reduce trading risk and the likelihood of failure. 
                                                 
4  Earlier this month, the Financial Stability Board published a list of 28 global systemically important banks or 
G-SIBs that will be subject to capital surcharges. The firms were arrayed in four buckets, with an increasing 
capital  surcharge  as  a  percent  of  risk-weighted  assets  imposed  as  one  ascended  upward  to  the  higher 
buckets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In addition, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is in the process of identifying 
those non-bank financial firms that are systemically important. These firms will be subject to 
tougher prudential standards and supervisory oversight by the Federal Reserve. 
Some  argue  that  this  designation  process  merely  creates  more  TBTF  firms.  I  see  it 
differently. The system risk externalities do not depend on whether we label them systemic or 
not. If these risks are present, then we should face up to the issue with tougher standards 
and enhanced supervisory oversight rather than leave the issue unaddressed. This has to be 
a superior approach relative to pretending these firms could not be TBTF and the problem 
doesn’t exist. 
Policy measures to reduce the adverse systemic consequences from failure 
Because no plausible level of capital and liquidity standards will be sufficient to reduce the 
probability  of  failure  to  zero,  it  also  makes  sense  to  work  on  the  other  major  margin  –  to 
reduce the cost of the failure of a large, complex financial firm. We can do this by making 
changes so that such failures are less likely to impair the functioning of the broader financial 
system. In this area, although many initiatives are in train, I would conclude that we are still 
very far from where we need to be. 
One simple but meaningful step that already has been enacted is to put a brake on the ability 
of the largest and most complex firms to become even larger and more complex. To this end, 
the Dodd-Frank Act adds “the risk to stability of the U.S. banking or financial system” as an 
additional factor to be considered in evaluating a proposed merger or acquisition under the 
Bank Merger Act and the Bank Holding Company Act. As Governor Daniel Tarullo discussed 
in a recent speech, there is not a hard and fast rule to be applied here. But his view, which I 
share, is that there would be a “a strong, though not irrebuttable, presumption of denial [of a 
merger or acquisition] by any firm that falls in the higher end of the list of global systemically 
important banks…”5,6 
Another step for dealing with the firms that might be viewed by some as already TBTF is to 
understand better the interconnections and pathways through which the distress or failure of 
one  firm  impairs  the  larger  system  and  causes  harm  to  society.  We  have  made  progress 
through the supervisory process in mapping out critical activities performed by firms. Also, 
we have identified a number of areas, such as collateral management, where better practices 
could both improve the safety and soundness of the individual firm and reduce the negative 
externalities generated by a firm’s failure. 
Work  is  also  underway  to  evaluate  what  changes  would  be  required  to  make  the  future 
bankruptcy of large complex firms less disruptive, while also developing an alternative means 
for the orderly resolution of such firms outside the normal bankruptcy process. 
The costs to society of large complex financial firms failing can be reduced at least to some 
degree  by  having  firms,  working  in  conjunction  with  their  regulators,  “pre-plan”  their  own 
failure through the so-called “living will” process. The largest and most systemically important 
                                                 
5  See Governor Daniel K. Tarullo, “Financial Stability Regulation”, October 10, 2012. Mr Tarullo added that “I 
would  not  apply  the  presumption  in  the  case  of  certain  de  minimis  acquisitions  or  in  cases  where  asset 
dispositions were judged to offset any increase in systemic risk from the proposed new acquisiton”. 
6  Earlier  this  year,  the  Board  of  Governors  issued  an  order  approving  Capital  One  Financial  Corporation’s 
acquisition  of  a  federal  savings  bank,  ING  Bank.  In  that  order,  the  Board  set  forth  two  principles  that  are 
relevant to this particular issue. First, the Board stated that it would generally find a significant adverse effect if 
the  failure  of  the  firm  resulting  from  a  merger  or  acquisition  “would  likely  impair  financial  intermediation  or 
financial  market  functioning  so  as  to  inflict  material  damage  on  the  broader  economy”.  Second,  the  Board 
observed that there are some small acquisitions or mergers that would not raise a financial stability concern, 
such as “a proposal that involves an acquisition of less than $2 billion in assets, [or] results in a firm with less 
than $25 billion in total assets……” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks  submitted  their  “living  wills”  to  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  FDIC  this  summer.  We 
have  reviewed  the  first  iterations  of  their  plans  and  are  currently  drafting  feedback  for  the 
firms  to  incorporate  in  their  next  submissions.  Through  such  “living  wills”,  regulators  are 
gaining  a  better  understanding  of  the  impediments  to  an  orderly  bankruptcy.  This  is  the 
necessary  first  phase  in  the  process  of  determining  how  to  ameliorate  these  impediments 
over time and then doing so. 
In  my  view,  this  initial  exercise  has  confirmed  that  we  are  a  long  way  from  the  desired 
situation  in  which  large  complex  firms  could  be  allowed  to  go  bankrupt  without  major 
disruptions to the financial system and large costs to society. Significant changes in structure 
and organization will ultimately be required for this to be achieved. However, the “living will” 
exercise is an iterative process, and we have only taken the first step in a long journey. 
The second way to potentially minimize the negative externalities from a firm’s failure would 
be  to  avoid  a  bankruptcy  proceeding  altogether  and  instead  resolve  the  firm  under  the 
Dodd-Frank Act’s Title II orderly liquidation authority.7,8 
The “single point of entry” model has much promise, but much remains to be done before it 
could be implemented with confidence for a globally active firm. Title II authority is U.S. law. 
Subsidiaries  and  affiliates  chartered  in  other  countries  could  be  wound  down  under  the 
bankruptcy laws of those countries, if authorities there did not have full confidence that local 
interests would be protected. Certain Title II measures including the one-day stay provision 
with respect to OTC derivatives and other qualified financial contracts may not apply through 
the force of law outside the United States, making orderly resolution difficult. 
The other essential dimension of solving TBTF is to make the financial system more robust – 
addressing structural vulnerabilities that tend to amplify shocks rather than absorb them. If 
the financial system can be made more resilient, it will be better positioned to withstand the 
failure of a large and complex firm and continue to provide essential financial services to the 
real economy. 
I  would  highlight  three  areas  of  work  that  are  critical  to  solving  the  TBTF  problem.  First, 
regulators and supervisors are pushing for changes in wholesale funding markets, a source 
of particular vulnerability during the crisis. This includes reforms to tri-party repo, which are 
underway,  and  necessary  reforms  to  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry,  which  are 
being  evaluated  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  and  the  Financial 
Stability Oversight Council. 
Second,  the  financial  market  infrastructures  are  being  strengthened  to  make  them  more 
robust to the failure of individual firms. The Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems 
and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have published a set 
of  standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures  called  “Principles  for  Financial  Market 
Infrastructures” that will serve as minimum standards globally. 
                                                 
7  The FDIC’s “single point of entry” framework for implementing this authority envisages establishing a bridge 
company  into  which  all  the  operating  subsidiaries  of  the  parent  company  would  be  transferred.  The  bridge 
company would be recapitalized by converting all or some of the parent company’s subordinated and senior 
unsecured debt into fresh equity in the bridge company. The parent company would be allowed to fail. The 
transfer of the operating subsidiaries to the bridge company  would allow critical operations to continue and 
provide time for the FDIC to move the systemically important operations back into private hands. 
8  The DFA orderly liquidation authority is viewed as to be used only as a last resort under a very well-defined 
set  of  circumstances.  To  resolve  a  firm  under  the  FDIC’s  orderly  liquidation  authority,  a  number  of 
determinations  must  be  satisfied.  First,  the  troubled  firm  must  be  designated  a  covered  financial  company 
(CFC) and that it is in default or danger of default and a resolution under bankruptcy would result in adverse 
consequences. The determination to use OLA authority requires the assent of the Treasury Secretary after 
consultation with the President 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Finally,  the  OTC  derivatives  market  is  being  reformed  with  the  aim  of  reducing  bilateral 
exposures  between  firms  and,  thus,  the  systemic  impact  from  any  one  firm  failing.  All 
standardized  OTC  derivatives  in  the  interest  rate,  credit  default,  and  equities  markets  will 
soon  have  to  be  centrally  cleared  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs).  The  clearing  of 
standardized  derivatives  trades  through  CCPs  should  reduce  risk  in  the  overall  financial 
system  by  facilitating  the  netting  down  of  OTC  derivative  exposures.  Such  trades will  also 
have  to  be  reported  to  trade  repositories  and  information  about  the  trades  will  be  made 
available  on  a  post-trade  basis.  This  should  make  the  OTC  derivatives  market  more 
transparent and, thus, reduce the risk of contagion. 
The way forward 
We have made some progress on the TBTF problem, particularly in reducing the likelihood 
that a large complex firm will reach the point of distress at which society faces serious costs. 
But we have a considerable ways to go to finish the job and reduce to tolerable levels the 
social costs associated with such failures. 
Further  international  coordination  is  almost  certainly  going  to  be  necessary  to  ensure  that 
bankruptcy regimes interact in ways that minimize negative externalities. At home we also 
need  to  ensure  that  different  authorities  and  resolution  regimes  operate  in  a  mutually 
consistent  manner.  In  particular,  we  may  need  to  revisit  the  SIPC  regime  that  governs 
securities  firms  in  bankruptcy.  At  present,  the  bankruptcy  of  a  securities  firm  is  very 
disruptive  because  the  claims  of  all  counterparties  are  typically  frozen  for  a  considerable 
period and the value of these claims is not easy to ascertain or monetize quickly. 
As I have argued above, we shouldn’t focus on solving TBTF exclusively at the level of the 
individual  firm.  We  need  significant  changes  in  market  structures  and  practices  as  well  in 
order to have a financial system in which the key players can fail without big social costs. 
We  also  must  continue  to  ask  ourselves  the  question  of  whether  the  steps  in  train  go  far 
enough.  For  example,  one  could  make  a  good  case  that  the  capital  surcharge  for 
systemically  important  firms  should  be  higher  than  that  contemplated  by  the  Basel 
Committee.  Of  course,  such  a  judgment  depends  on  how  much  other  policies  succeed  in 
reducing the negative externalities their failure would generate. 
Critics of our approach believe it would be better to just break up firms deemed TBTF now – 
perhaps  through  legislation  requiring  the  separation  of  retail  banking  and  capital  markets 
activities or by imposing size restrictions that require firms to shrink dramatically from their 
current scale. My own view is that while this could yet prove necessary, it is premature to 
give  up  on  the  current  approach:  changing  the  incentives  facing  large  and  complex  firms, 
forcing them to become more resilient, and making the financial system more robust to their 
failure. 
In my opinion, there are shortcomings to reimposing Glass-Steagall-type activity restrictions 
or strict size limits. With respect to Glass-Steagall, it is not obvious to me that the pairing of 
securities and banking businesses was an important causal element behind the crisis. In fact, 
independent investment banks were much more vulnerable during 2008 than the universal 
banking firms which conducted both banking and securities activities. More important is to 
address the well-known sources of instability in wholesale funding markets and give careful 
consideration  to  whether  there  should  be  a  more  robust  lender  of  last  resort  regime  for 
securities activities. 
With respect to size limitations, it is important to recognize that a new and much reduced size 
threshold could sacrifice socially useful economies of scale and scope benefits. And it could 
do this without actually solving the problem of system risk externalities that aren’t related to 
balance sheet size. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Evaluating the socially optimal size, scope and organizational structure of financial firms is a 
complicated  business,  and  so  is  establishing  a  viable  transition  path  to  a  system  of  much 
smaller firms. It would be helpful in this regard if advocates of break-up solutions would put a 
bit more flesh on the bones and develop detailed proposals that address essential questions 
of how such downsizing or functional separation would be accomplished, and what benefits 
and costs could be expected. 
Such an analysis should answer several questions: How would you force divestiture (in good 
times and bad)? Should firms be split up by activity or reduced pro-rata in size? How much 
would they have to be shrunk in order for the externalities of failure to no longer create TBTF 
problems?  How  would  global  trading  and  investment  banking  services  and  network-type 
activities  be  supported?  Should  some  activities  be  retained  in  natural  monopoly  form,  but 
subject to utility type regulation? How costly would it be to replicate support services or to 
manage liquidity and capital locally? Are there ways of designing size limits that cannot be 
arbitraged by banks via off-balance-sheet structures and other forms of financial innovation? 
So  far,  advocacy  for  the  break-up  path  has  been  strong,  but  without  the  detail  to  assess 
whether  this  is  indeed  superior  to  the  course  we  are  currently  following.  But,  I’m  open-
minded. 
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  any  credible  approach  to  addressing  the  TBTF  problem, 
including the one we are pursuing today, necessarily implies changes to the structure and 
business mix of financial firms and financial markets. Moreover, it is important to stress that 
not all of these adjustments will be in the private interests of these firms, and some will result 
in  changes  to  the  price  and  volume  of  certain  financial  services.  These  are  intended 
consequences, not unintended consequences. 
Too big to fail is an unacceptable regime. The good news is there are many efforts underway 
to address this problem. The bad news is that some of these efforts are just in their nascent 
stages. It is important that as the crisis recedes in memory, that these efforts not flag – this is 
a  project  that  needs  to  be  seen  to  a  successful  conclusion  and  then  sustained  on  a 
permanent basis. 
Thank you for your attention, I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
