Erkki Liikanen: The case for structural reforms of banking after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level Expert Group on the structure of the EU banking sector, at the European Commission, 
Brussels, 2 October 2012. 
 Changes in banking in the run-up to the crisis 
In the years preceding the financial crisis that started in 2007, global financial institutions had 
grown ever bigger in size and scope and their organisational complexity had increased. Their 
leverage had strongly risen and their average debt maturity had shortened. 
Behind  these  trends  were  forces  that  intensified  competition  in  banking,  driven  by 
technological development. An entire shadow banking sector had developed, comprising a 
chain  of  non-bank  institutions  which  were  able  to  provide  similar  financial  intermediary 
services as traditional banks. 
In this environment, regulatory reforms were partly a response to the changes and allowed 
banks  to  cope  with  the  increasing  pressure  from  non-bank  competitors.  Banks  sought  for 
economies of scale and scope and strived to take advantage of diversification benefits from 
multiple sources of income. 
Commercial  banking  had  increasingly  moved  away  from  customer  relationship-based 
banking where loans are granted and then held until maturity to the “originate and distribute” 
model where granted loans are pooled, then securitized and sold to investors. This shift in 
the business model increased traditional banks’ connections to the shadow banking sector.  
The  expansion  of  banks’  balance  sheets  partly  reflected  the  growing  global  imbalances, 
supported by the accommodative monetary policy stance in the early 2000s. 
Regulation,  supervision  and  market  discipline  failed  to  counter  the  developments  in  the 
financial sector. The Basel capital requirements on banks proved ineffective in restraining the 
strong  growth  in  banks’  leverage  and  balance  sheet  size.  For  example,  the  Basel  rules 
effectively allowed banks to lower their capital requirements by means of securitizing loans. 
This  is  an  important  reason  for  how  and  why  banks  became  strongly  connected  with  the 
shadow banking sector. The increasing complexity of structures and products, as well as the 
financial  sector’s 
to  reduced 
transparency of bank balance sheets.  
This  should  logically  have  rung  alarm  bells  among  investors,  especially  among  banks’ 
uninsured  debt  holders,  but  the  opposite  seems  to  have  happened:  the  markets  rewarded 
bank  size  by  charging  lower  debt  margins from  the  biggest  institutions.  This  suggests that 
there  was  a  perception  among  market  participants  that  the  biggest  financial  institutions 
enjoyed  an  implicit  public  guarantee;  in  other  words,  they  had  become  too  big  or  too 
important to fail. 
interconnectedness  and  growing  size, 
increasing 
led 
Public reaction to the crisis and the need to rebuild trust 
The huge cost of the financial crisis, both in terms of direct public support to banks and lost 
economic  output  has  sadly  fallen  to  tax  payers,  causing  an  understandable  and  justified 
public outcry. 
Trust  needs  to  be  rebuilt  between  banks  and  the  general  public,  and  the  role  of 
internationally co-ordinated regulatory reforms is central in this process. Also in banking not 
only gains but also losses must fall on the risk-takers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Regulatory response to the crisis 
The problems in banking, as revealed by the crisis, can be summarized as excessive risk-
taking,  leverage,  complexity,  inadequate  capital,  extensive  interconnectedness,  and  very 
limited possibilities to resolve failed banks.  
In response to these problems, regulatory reforms have been focused on two crucial areas: 
capital adequacy and liquidity requirements, as in Basel III, and recovery and resolution, as 
in the Commission’s proposal. 
These reforms can go a long way toward increasing loss absorbency, reducing incentives to 
take  excessive  risks  and  increase  leverage,  and  reducing the  social  costs  of  bank failures 
and the need for implicit public guarantees. 
The High-level Expert Group was requested to consider whether there is a need for structural 
reforms of the EU banking sector or not and to make any relevant proposals as appropriate, 
with the objective of establishing a stable and efficient banking system serving the needs of 
citizens, the economy and the internal market.  
The proposals of the High-level Expert Group 
The  Group  recommends  a  set  of  five  measures  that  augment  and  complement  the  set  of 
regulatory  reforms  already  enacted  or  proposed  by  the  EU,  the  Basel  Committee  and 
national governments.  
1. Proprietary trading and other high risk trading activities should be assigned to a separate 
legal entity if the activities to be separated amount to a significant share of a bank’s business 
and  are  above  a  certain  threshold.  This  would  ensure  that  trading  activities  beyond  the 
threshold are carried out on a stand-alone basis and separately from the deposit bank. As a 
consequence, deposits, and the explicit and implicit guarantee they carry, would no longer 
directly support risky trading activities. The long-standing universal banking model in Europe 
would, however, remain untouched, since the separated activities can be carried out in the 
same banking group. Hence, banks’ ability to provide a wide range of financial services to 
their customers would be maintained. 
Within the Group, some members expressed a preference for a combination of measures: 
imposing a non-risk-weighted capital buffer for trading activities and leaving the separation of 
activities conditional on supervisory approval of a recovery and resolution plan, rather than a 
mandatory separation of banking activities. Both basic alternatives and their motivation are 
presented in the report.  
2.  Second,  effective  and  realistic  recovery  and  resolution  plans  must  be  drawn  up  and 
maintained by the banks, as proposed in the Commission’s Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive.  The  resolution  authority  should  request  a  wider  separation  than  the  considered 
mandatory  separation  above  if  this  is  deemed  necessary  to  ensure  resolvability  and 
operational continuity of critical functions. 
3. The use of designated bail-in instruments is strongly supported by the Group. The position 
of  bail-in  instruments  within  the  hierarchy  of  debt  commitments  in  a  bank’s  balance  sheet 
must  be  clear  so  that  investors  know  the  eventual  treatment  in  case  of  resolution.  Banks 
should  build  up  a  sufficiently  large  layer  of  “bail-inable”  debt.  Such  debt  (or  an  equivalent 
amount of equity) would increase the overall loss-absorptive capacity, decrease risk-taking 
incentives, and improve transparency and the pricing of risk. 
4. The Group proposes to apply more robust risk weights in the determination of minimum 
capital standards and more consistent treatment of risk in internal models. Once the Basel 
Committee  has  concluded  its  review  of  the  trading  book,  the  Commission  should  assess 
whether the results would be sufficient to cover the risks of both deposit banks and trading 
entities in Europe. Also, the treatment of real estate lending within the capital requirements 
framework  should  be  reconsidered,  as  well  as  maximum  loan-to-value  (and/or  loan-to-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
income)  ratios  included  in  the  instruments  available  for  micro-  and  macro-prudential 
supervision.  
5. Finally, the Group considers that it is necessary to augment existing corporate governance 
reforms by specific measures to 1) strengthen boards and management; 2) promote the risk 
management function; 3) rein in compensation for bank management and staff; 4) improve 
risk disclosure, and 5) strengthen sanctioning powers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
