Thomas Jordan: Review of the Swiss economy and global economic 
outlook 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
13 December 2012. 
 The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is leaving the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro 
unchanged.  The  Swiss  franc  is  still  high.  An  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  would 
compromise  price  stability  and  would  have  serious  consequences  for  the  Swiss  economy. 
Consequently, the SNB will continue to enforce the minimum exchange rate with the utmost 
determination. It is prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. 
In  addition,  the  SNB  is  leaving  the target range for the three-month  Libor  at  0.0–0.25%. If 
necessary, it stands ready to take further measures at any time. 
Essentially,  the  SNB’s  conditional  inflation  forecast  is  unchanged  from  its  September 
forecast. In the short term, price movements will again be subdued by a somewhat weaker 
economy in the euro area. In addition, the impact which past appreciation of the Swiss franc 
is  having  on  the  price  level  is  rather  stronger  than  had  originally  been  expected.  From 
mid-2013 onwards, the path of the new conditional inflation forecast is almost identical to that 
of September. The forecast is based on an unchanged three-month Libor of 0.0% over the 
next three years. Given this assumption, the Swiss franc weakens over the forecast period. 
Nevertheless,  forecast  inflation  remains  low  for  the  next  few  years.  For  2012,  the  inflation 
rate will amount to –0.7%. For 2013, we expect inflation of –0.1% and for 2014, 0.4%. In the 
foreseeable future, therefore, there is no risk of inflation in Switzerland. 
The  third  quarter  of  2012  saw  weak  growth  and  a  decline  in  trading  activity  worldwide. 
Although growth in the US economy and some of the emerging economies picked up, a mild 
recession persisted in the euro area. In Switzerland, real GDP in the third quarter increased 
again following a temporary downturn. For the fourth quarter, however, we expect significant 
weakening  in  growth.  Consequently,  economic  growth  in  Switzerland  for  the  year  2012  is 
likely to remain unchanged at around 1.0%. For 2013, we expect growth of 1.0–1.5%. 
The  downside  risks  for  the  Swiss  economy  remain  considerable.  Although  the  measures 
announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) have significantly reduced the probability of 
extreme  developments  in  the  monetary  union,  there  is  still  substantial  uncertainty  in 
connection  with  the  management  of the  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area. It also  remains to  be 
seen how far the upcoming budget consolidation in the US will hamper growth. This question 
is  weighing  on  the  sentiment  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  Moreover, 
momentum in the Swiss residential mortgage and real estate markets remains strong, and 
has led to a further increase in risks for financial stability. 
Global economic outlook 
I would now like to outline the outlook for the global economy and Switzerland in more detail. 
Then I will look at monetary and financial conditions and the SNB’s monetary policy. 
In  the  third  quarter  of  2012,  global  economic  growth  remained  weak,  while  the  volume  of 
international foreign trade actually declined. A mild recession persisted in the euro area, and 
Japan recorded strongly negative growth figures. In the US, growth was supported by private 
consumption as well as the improvement in residential construction investment. The situation 
varied in the emerging economies. In some countries, there was scarcely any improvement 
in economic momentum, while in others – such as China – a supportive economic policy led 
to some consolidation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We still expect that the global economy as a whole will gradually recover. However, we have 
adjusted our forecast for 2013 slightly down from the last monetary policy assessment. This 
revision mainly affects the short-term outlook for the euro area. We expect that the euro area 
will  only  emerge  from  the  recession  during  the  course  of  2013.  In  the  US,  the  moderate 
recovery is likely to continue, partly as a result of the favourable developments in residential 
construction. In the emerging economies, growth should continue to gain momentum. 
The downside risks for the global economy remain high. The crisis in the euro area continues 
to  weigh  on  the  economic  outlook.  In  September,  the  ECB  initiated  a  new  securities 
purchasing  programme,  Outright  Monetary  Transactions.  Although  this  announcement 
substantially reduced the probability of extreme events and led to an easing in the financial 
and credit markets, the economic situation in the monetary union remains vulnerable and the 
level  of  uncertainty  is  still  considerable.  A  further  source  of  uncertainty  are  the  upcoming 
fiscal decisions in the US. 
Swiss economic outlook 
In Switzerland, real GDP in the third quarter increased again following a downturn, due to a 
temporary recovery in exports. For the fourth quarter, however, we again expect significant 
weakening  in  growth.  Consequently,  economic  growth  for  this  year  is  likely  to  come  to 
around 1.0%, as forecast to date. 
For 2013, we expect growth of 1.0–1.5%. While the gradual revival in the global economy is 
having a supportive effect, the strength of the Swiss franc will hold back export momentum 
and corporate investment expenditure. Domestic demand is also likely to be restrained over 
the  next  few  quarters.  In  view  of  the  modest  pace  of  growth,  production  capacity  in 
Switzerland will probably remain underutilised in 2013. The rate of unemployment is likely to 
rise further. 
Given the fragility of global conditions, the downside risks also remain high for Switzerland. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
I  will  now  turn  to  monetary  and  financial  conditions,  which  are  almost  unchanged  as 
compared to the situation in summer 2012. Interest rates in the Swiss franc money market 
continue  to  fluctuate  around  zero.  Since  mid-June,  the  three-month  Libor  has  fallen  from 
some 9 basis points to only 1 basis point. Interest rates in the repo market are predominantly 
negative. In addition, the yield on ten-year Confederation bonds attained a new historical low. 
This shows that the demand for safe investments remains high. 
Over  the  past  few  months,  as  before,  movements  in  the  Swiss  franc  mainly  reflected  the 
changing  risk  assessment  of  market  participants.  Following  the  ECB’s  announcement  in 
early September that it would purchase unlimited quantities of bonds of crisis-hit euro area 
countries under certain conditions, the upward pressure on the Swiss franc lessened. 
The  M1,  M2  and  M3  monetary  aggregates,  which  measure  the  amount  of  money  held  by 
households and companies, have increased substantially over the past few months. For this 
reason,  some fear  that we  are  heading  for  high  rates  of  inflation.  However,  this  is  not  the 
case. The inflation forecast for Switzerland continues to be low. At present, the inflation rate 
is still in negative territory. Inflationary pressure remains minimal because of the strong Swiss 
franc and the relatively unfavourable global growth outlook. Moreover, the underutilisation of 
production capacities in Switzerland is restraining the inflation outlook. Surveys on inflation 
expectations  show  that  households  and  companies  continue  to  assume  that  prices  will 
remain stable, also in the medium term. 
Given  the  current  low  interest  environment  worldwide,  enforcement  of  the  minimum 
exchange  rate  is  necessary  to  ensure  suitable  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  Global 
uncertainty will persist for the foreseeable future and drive demand for secure investments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  a  result the  exchange  rate  situation  will  remain fragile,  despite  the  calmer  environment 
that has come about as a result of the measures taken by the ECB. 
However,  the  very  low  interest  rates  around  the  world  are  also  associated  with  risks.  The 
longer a low interest rate phase persists, the greater the potential danger of speculative price 
developments  and  misallocations.  Investors  searching  for  yields  could  place  increasing 
amounts in real estate, and this can lead, in particular, to a rise in real estate prices and thus, 
to a distorted pattern of incentives. 
Momentum  in  the  domestic  residential  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  remains 
exceptionally strong. Mortgage lending continues to grow briskly compared to the economy 
as  a  whole.  In  addition,  real  estate  prices,  already  at  a  high  level,  continued  to  rise.  As  a 
result, risks for financial stability increased further. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will 
give you an assessment of the situation in the financial sector from the point of view of the 
SNB. 
Monetary and investment policy 
The  minimum  exchange  rate  provides  us  with  new  challenges  for  our monetary  policy  but 
also for our investment policy. I would therefore like to close with a few words on our foreign 
currency investments. As you know, in the months May to August, in particular, we had to 
purchase large quantities of foreign currency in order to enforce the minimum exchange rate. 
Consequently, the SNB’s foreign currency investments have significantly increased. Also, we 
cannot exclude the possibility that we will have to intervene substantially again. 
From the beginning we made it clear that enforcement of the minimum exchange rate was 
associated  with  risks.  We  are  endeavouring  to  reduce  the  balance  sheet  risks  through 
suitable diversification of our foreign currency investment. However, the exchange rate risk 
on the foreign exchange reserves is based on monetary policy considerations and the SNB is 
therefore obliged to bear it. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will talk about the management of 
the foreign exchange reserves in his remarks. 
Through  its  monetary  policy,  the  SNB  serves  as  a  buffer  for  the  Swiss  economy  and 
cushions the effect of severe shocks. Because it has a long-term focus, it is in a position to 
carry substantial risks. This means we can react flexibly in exceptional situations in order to 
fulfil  our  mandate,  which  is  to  ensure  price  stability  while  taking  due  account  of  economic 
developments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
