Benoît Cœuré: The euro as a trusted means of payment 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  joint  European  Central  Bank-Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of  Hungary) 
conference on “Cost and efficiency of retail payments: Evidence, policy actions and role of 
central banks”, Budapest, 15 November 2012. 
 I wish to thank Thomas Lammer, Heiko Schmiedel and Wiebe Ruttenberg for their contributions to this speech. I 
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here in Budapest and to open this joint conference entitled “Cost 
and  efficiency  of  retail  payments”  organised  by  the  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (MNB)  and  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  Let  me  start  by  thanking  Governor  Simor  and  our 
co-organisers  from  the  MNB  for  the  excellent  cooperation  during  the  preparation  of  this 
conference and for their warm welcome in Budapest. 
The  causes  and  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  as  well  as  the  way  ahead  remain  important 
issues for the ECB. Today, however, I would like to focus on some underlying fundamental 
elements  of  trust  in  the  currency,  namely  payment  services  systems,  and  especially  retail 
payments. This is not unrelated to the crisis, quite the contrary. 
Since the introduction of the euro, the ECB has been responsible for maintaining the trust of 
330 million Europeans in their currency. What is “trust in a currency”? Currencies have to be 
trusted to perform their three classical functions, first defined by Aristotle:1 namely, to be a 
store of value, a unit of account (or standard of value), and a medium of exchange (we would 
say today: means of payment). Let me address them in turn. 
• 
(unjustified) 
Trust in the euro as a store of value rests on the ECB fulfilling its primary mandate of 
medium-term price stability. It has done so in the past and will continue to do so. 
Euro area inflation has on average been very close to 2% since 1999; medium-term 
inflation expectations are very firmly anchored; and the ECB can be trusted to act 
decisively whenever risks to price stability materialise.  
Let me be frank: in some places, trust in the euro as a standard of value has been 
undermined  by 
fears  of  a  euro  break-up,  also  known  as 
“redenomination  risk”.  This  risk  has  been  compounded  by  interbank  market 
fragmentation  along  national  borders,  and  by  the  fear  that,  say,  one  euro  of 
commercial  money  might  not  be  worth  the  same  everywhere  in  the  euro  area. 
Responses  are  now  in  place  or  taking  shape:  the  ECB’s  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions will ease concerns of a euro area break-up, provided countries make 
the  necessary  adjustments;  and  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  should  be 
promptly implemented to restore the singleness of euro area banks’ liabilities, then 
complemented by a unified mechanism to wind down failed banks. 
Trust  in  the  euro  as  a  means  of  payment  rests  on  well-designed  and  resilient 
infrastructures, both at the wholesale and retail levels. I would like here to convey 
two  messages.  First,  properly  functioning  large-value  and  retail  payment  systems 
are  essential,  and  therefore  public  authorities  and  central  banks  have  both  an 
interest  and  an  obligation  to  ensure  their  resilience.  Second, given  the  social  and 
private  costs  of  retail  payments,  authorities  should  not  only  focus  on  the  smooth 
functioning  of  payment  systems  but  also  keep  a  close  eye  on  their  efficiency.  An 
                                                  
1  Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics, Book V, and Politics, Book I. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
increased level of harmonisation and integration in the retail payments market could 
be a catalyst for greater efficiency. 
Let me now elaborate. 
The importance of well-functioning large-value payment systems for Economic and 
Monetary Union 
The development of an integrated infrastructure for large-value payments was necessary in 
order  to  create  a  single  money  market  and  to  allow  for  the  transmission  of  a  common 
monetary policy in the euro area. This macroeconomic relevance explains why central banks 
are  typically  much  more  involved  in  large-value  payment  systems  (LVPS)  than  in  retail 
payment systems.  
The prominent role of central banks gives them a strong influence in the design and smooth 
functioning  of  LVPS.  If  central  banks  act  as  operators,  they  are  even  directly  responsible. 
Poorly  designed  and  operated  financial  market  infrastructures  can  indeed  exacerbate 
systemic  crises  by  passing  financial  shocks  from  one  participant  and/or  infrastructure  to 
another. The effects of such a disruption could extend  well beyond the  infrastructures and 
their  participants,  threatening  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  market  and  the  broader 
economy.  Since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  financial  market  infrastructures  in  Europe 
have  worked  well  and  have  not  in  themselves  added  to  financial  instability.  In  short, 
throughout the crisis, the ECB has complied with its Treaty mandate to “promote the smooth 
operation of payment systems”.2  
This is especially true for LVPS, which have had to cope with major challenges. TARGET2 
and Euro1 as euro-denominated LVPS faced a sharp decrease in their activities from 2008 
onwards as a direct consequence of the financial crisis. Since 2010 they have been growing 
again but at slower pace. The same phenomenon has been observed elsewhere – consider 
the  Fedwire  Funds  (the  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  system  operated  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System). In addition, the systems have had to cope with higher traffic volatility and 
even  the  default  of  some  of  their  participants.  The  launch  of  TARGET2  was  completed  in 
May 2008, just before the Lehman episode. Since then it has proved to be extremely robust 
and has greatly helped banks to properly manage their euro liquidity in these difficult times. It 
continues to lead by example, with an availability of 100% in 2012. Almost 1,000 banks in 
Europe use TARGET2 to initiate payments on their own behalf or on their customers’ behalf. 
Taking into account branches and subsidiaries, almost 60,000 banks worldwide (and thus all 
of the customers of these banks) can be reached via TARGET2. The system is settling on 
average  around  €2.4  trillion  every  day,  with  peak  days  over  €3.5  trillion,  which  represents 
more than a third of the whole euro-area GDP settled in just one day. 
But what are the reasons for this strong performance in such difficult times? The answer is 
that the necessary infrastructural decisions have been taken and implemented with the euro 
introduction and they have been steadily developed since then.  
The  Eurosystem  is  also  actively  pursuing  more  efficient  and  safer  arrangements  for  the 
management of liquidity, collateral and securities. For example, the implementation of cross-
border tri-party collateral management services within the Eurosystem’s collateral framework. 
Today, these services are only available to a limited number of Eurosystem counterparties in 
a  small  number  of  countries  (France,  Germany,  Luxembourg  and,  very  recently,  Italy).  In 
2014 however, the Eurosystem will go live with the support of cross-border use of tri-party 
collateral  management  services  via  the  Correspondent  Central  Banking  Model  (CCBM), 
thereby  making  them  equally  available  to  all  euro  area  counterparties.  While  tri-party 
services do not increase the availability of collateral as such, they allow for a considerably 
                                                
2  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Article 127.2. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
more  efficient  delivery  of  collateral  to  the  Eurosystem,  in  turn  allowing  counterparties  to 
optimise the use of their collateral assets with central banks and in the market. To enhance 
this  process  even  further,  the  Eurosystem  is  also  cooperating  with  the  market  to  achieve 
interoperability between the different tri-party offerings. 
Another  very  important  initiative  in  this  respect  is  TARGET2-Securities  or  T2S,  which  is  a 
single  platform  for  the  settlement  in  central  bank  money  of  potentially  all  securities 
transactions in Europe. The idea of consolidating numerous systems into a single platform 
managed  by  the  Eurosystem  was  triggered  –  on  the  cash  side  –  by  TARGET2,  which 
brought about an upheaval in terms of banks’ ability to manage their liquidity in central bank 
money throughout the euro area. Furthermore, TARGET2 made it even more apparent that a 
fragmented securities settlement landscape, such as the one we have in Europe, can give 
rise  to  serious  inefficiencies  and  risks.  As  of  2015,  T2S  will  complement  the  integration 
already in place at the payment system level, and contribute to creating a true single market 
for post-trade services. It will increase competition in the provision of those services and thus 
reduce  fees  for  end  users  and  investors.  T2S  will  foster  financial  stability  by  allowing 
seamless  cross-border  as  well  as  domestic  securities  settlement  in  central  bank  money 
across  all  participating  markets.  It  will  reduce  the  complexity  and  fragmentation  that 
characterise the current infrastructure. Moreover, T2S will support the Eurosystem collateral 
management  framework  by  simplifying  the  cross-border  exchange  of  securities  eligible  as 
Eurosystem  collateral,  meeting  the  increasing  need  for  high-quality  collateral  that  we  are 
witnessing in the market today. T2S is the proof that, in spite of the current crisis, there is still 
an  integration  momentum.  We  are  striving  to  build  a  stronger  euro  area  and  in  particular 
stronger euro area markets.  
One final point on the subject of LVPS: given the importance of sound payment systems and 
market  infrastructures  for  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability, robust oversight arrangements with adequate central bank involvement are critical. 
We  have  recently  seen  decisive  progress  in  this  area.  The  April  2012  CPSS-IOSCO 
principles, agreed by central banks and securities regulators worldwide, have strengthened 
respective  international  requirements.  Similarly,  at  EU  level,  the  new  European  Market 
Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) provides for the close involvement of central banks of issue, 
such  as  the  ECB,  and  central  bank  overseers  in  the  ongoing  oversight  of  central 
counterparties (CCPs). Enhanced cooperation arrangements are also being developed in the 
context of the Central Securities Depository Regulation (CSDR). 
Responsibility to ensure an integrated retail payments market 
Let me now turn to retail payments. 
Like the large-value payment systems, retail payment infrastructures have also worked well 
during the crisis. Admittedly, they have no direct major impact on the overall stability of the 
financial system. But they are essential for the proper functioning of a market economy and 
people’s trust in the currency as a means of exchange. Europeans’ trust in the euro can be 
inferred  from  their  support  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  with  the  euro  as  the  single 
currency: in the euro area, almost two-thirds of citizens support the single currency (63%).3 
Therefore, besides their function as an overseer for retail payments, central banks also need 
to build trust, facilitate integration and improve efficiency in this field too.  
The most prominent integration example in Europe is the establishment of the “Single Euro 
Payments  Area”  –  in  short,  SEPA.4  This  project  aims  to  harmonise  and  integrate  former 
                                                
3  European  Commission  (2012):  Standard  Eurobarometer  77,  Spring  2012.  Public  Opinion  in  the  European 
Union – First Results. http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb/eb77/eb77_first_en.pdf 
4  For more information on SEPA see: www.sepa.eu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
purely domestic retail payment markets. It is should lead to lower fees, speed up payment 
execution  and  foster  competition  across  Europe.  SEPA  is  one  of  the  most  far-reaching 
transformations  in  the  field  of  European  financial  integration.  Having  started  as  a 
self-regulatory initiative by the payments industry, the final push had to be provided by the 
legislator. In this way, concrete end dates for full migration towards SEPA credit transfer and 
SEPA  direct  debit  were  defined  and  put  forward.  Currently,  the  euro  area  indicators  for 
migration  to  SEPA  credit  transfers  show  that  about  one  out  of  three  transfers  in  euro  are 
already  processed  in  the  new  SEPA  format.  However,  there  are  still  big  country-specific 
differences. In respect of the figures for migration to SEPA direct debits, progress is far less 
promising: less than two out of 100 direct debits are currently processed in the new SEPA 
formats.  Today  SEPA  is  a  reality  and  as  I  speak,  it  is  harmonising  the  way  thousands  of 
banks, hundreds of thousands of companies and tens of millions of people are processing 
and making their day-to-day payments. 
Soon,  in  February  2014,  all  corresponding  national  legacy  instruments  for  euro  retail 
payments  will  be  fully  replaced  by  the  two  SEPA  instruments  in  the  countries  of  the  euro 
area.  By  that  time,  the  key  foundations  of  SEPA  will  have  been  laid.  With  the  successful 
completion of SEPA, we not only have the euro as our single currency, but we will also have 
one  domestic  market  for  cashless  payments  –  extending  well  beyond  the  euro  area. 
Throughout  32  SEPA  countries,5  payments  in  euro  will  be  as  fast,  safe  and  efficient  as 
national payments are today. 
In addition to SEPA credit transfers and direct debits, payment cards and other innovative, 
mobile  and  online  payment  instruments  are  becoming  increasingly  important.  Therefore, 
further efforts, going beyond SEPA, are needed. These will require political support to create 
a fully integrated and competitive European market for retail payments. However, we must 
be careful to avoid creating a “fortress Europe” by disregarding international developments. 
Precisely for this reason, SEPA has been built according to international technical standards6 
which  can  be  used  globally  –  not  only  within  Europe  and  not  only  for  retail  payment 
infrastructures but also for large-value payment systems and security settlement systems. It 
is encouraging to see that countries in the Asia-Pacific region, Africa and the Americas are 
paying close attention to SEPA, maybe  with a  view to adopting it in their national context. 
Such harmonisation and integration initiatives beyond Europe are certainly welcome. 
Let me now address the issue of SEPA governance. The SEPA Council, established in 2010 
and currently under review by the European Commission and the ECB, brings together high-
level  representatives  from  the  demand  side  (corporates,  SMEs,  retailers,  consumers)  and 
from the supply side (banks, payment service providers) and facilitates a dialogue on retail 
payments at European level. 
To achieve a fully integrated European payments market, there are two distinct concepts that 
would need to be reflected upon when re-defining the mandate of the SEPA Council. One 
option would be that the SEPA Council becomes an advisory body for public authorities in 
the exercise of regulation. Another option, which is the preferred alternative in my view, is to 
accept a body that is empowered with a self-regulatory focus. 
These two concepts are not mutually exclusive; one may fit best in respect of some issues, 
while the other may do so on other issues. Any self-regulatory nature of the SEPA Council 
shall  be  complemented  by  regulation  and/or  competition  to  find  out  the  most  efficient 
solutions to integrate the market. In any case, the notion of self-regulation versus regulation 
shall be seen as a dynamic phenomenon which may change over time. I admit that finding 
the right combination of self-regulation and regulation always represents a challenge, but the 
                                                
5 
6  SEPA makes use of ISO standards, such as IBAN and ISO20022. ISO20022 is the standard used for T2S and 
In addition to the EU27, SEPA comprises Iceland, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway, and Switzerland. 
plays an important role for the future developments in TARGET2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
benefits of market-driven solutions for retail payments in Europe are apparent. In addition, it 
is important that self-regulation is guided by the search for Europe-wide  solutions, thereby 
preventing any recourse to national and fragmented market structures. 
Fragmentation of retail payment markets can lead to inefficient market structures and higher 
costs  to  participants  and  society  as  a  whole.  Measuring  the  true  underlying  costs  of  retail 
payments is not trivial. Some pioneering national central banks have already looked into this 
issue at domestic level. European cross-country comparisons are so far uncharted territory. It 
is only recently that the ECB has shown in a study7,8 that the social costs of retail payment 
instruments, including cash and non-cash payments, are substantial. They amount to almost 
1% of GDP in Europe. The study also makes clear that considerable differences exist within 
Europe. In facilitating the  debate  among  participants  in the  payment  chain,  the  ECB  study 
seeks to provide an important tool for further benchmarking and efficiency analysis.  
Another  important  dimension  is  trust  in  the  safety  of  retail  payment  instruments.  In  this 
sense, the protection of individuals’ payments data becomes more and more sensitive and 
important. Data breaches can have effects as devastating as environmental disasters9 and 
undermine  overall  confidence  and  faith  in  a  currency  and  retail  payment  instruments. 
Therefore, payments data have to be handled with utmost care. It should be protected from 
misuse,  while  at  the  same  time  recognising  the  need  for  open  and  fair  competition  in  the 
payments field.  
Let me also point out the issue of financial inclusion. It is interesting to note that in the EU not 
everybody  has  a  bank  account.  For  example,  one-quarter  of  Italians  and  one-third  of 
Hungarians  do  not  have  a  bank  account.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  in 
Romania  and  Bulgaria  almost  three-quarters  of  inhabitants  are  unbanked.10  Against  this 
background,  while  striving  for  greater  efficiency  in  retail  payments,  financial  inclusion  is 
another  important  pillar.  In  my  view,  it  is  essential  to  make  sure  that  every  European 
consumer can open and use a basic payment account with a set of basic payment services. 
Only then will people will be able to fully benefit from SEPA. As such, I fully agree with the 
European Commission, which has stated this objective in a recent EU Recommendation.11  
Talking of retail payments let me say a final word on banknotes. Even if there are different 
views in society about the efficiency of cash as a means of payment, both its friends and foes 
agree that it will be used as a means of payment in the foreseeable future. And as it is the 
task  of  the  Eurosystem  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  stay  ahead  of 
counterfeiters,  the  ECB  has  recently  announced  the  introduction  of  a  new  series  of  euro 
banknotes, called the Europa series. They will be introduced in ascending order over several 
years,  starting  with  the  €5  banknote  in  May  2013.  The  new  €5  banknote  will  include 
enhanced security features and has been made more durable. It will be unveiled in full on 
10 January 2013. 
                                                
7  The following 13 central banks have been actively participating in the study: Danmarks Nationalbank, Eesti 
Pank,  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  Bank  of  Greece,  Banco  de  España,  Banca  d’Italia,  Latvijas  Banka,  Magyar 
Nemzeti Bank, De Nederlandsche Bank, Banco de Portugal, Banca Naţională a României, Suomen Pankki 
and Sveriges Riksbank. 
[9]Schmiedel,  H.;  Kostova,  G.:  Ruttenberg,  W.  (2012):  The  Social  and  Private  Costs  of  Retail  Payment 
Instruments.  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series  No  137,  Sept.  2012.  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpops/ 
ecbocp137.pdf 
[10]Hughes,  S.J.  (2010):  Payments  Data  Security  Breaches  and  Oil  Spills:  What  Lessons  Can  Payments 
Security Learn from the Laws Governing Remediation of the Exxon Valdez, Deepwater Horizon, and Other Oil 
Spills? Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Jan. 2010. http://www.repository.law.indiana.edu/facpub/499/ 
8 
9 
10  European Commission (2012): Special Eurobarometer 373, Retail Financial Services, 2012. 
11  Recommendation  2011/442/EU  on  access  to  a  basic  payment  account:  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ 
LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32011H0442:EN:NOT 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Let me conclude by emphasising that large-value and retail payment systems play a vital role 
in the overall economy. We can be proud of the fact that payment systems have proven to be 
the  rock  in  the  troubled  waters  of  the  crisis.  I  do  not  want  to  imagine  what  would  have 
happened if payment systems had got in trouble as well. Therefore, it is our duty to ensure 
the  continued  operational  performance  of  payment  systems,  to  strive  for  efficient  cost 
structures while keeping a high level of security in retail payments.  
This  conference  will  for  sure  bring  further  insights,  allowing  us  to  take  the  right  policy 
decisions.  I  look  forward  to  a  stimulating  discussion,  wish  all  of  us  a  very  successful 
conference and I thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
