Matthew Elderfield: Effective enforcement – encouraging compliance and 
good practice 
Opening remarks by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, 
to the Central Bank Enforcement Conference, Dublin, 11 December 2012. 
 I would like to welcome you to the first conference on enforcement that we are hosting at the 
Central Bank of Ireland. We are very glad to be hosting this event and that you are able to 
join us here today. 
Enforcement  is  an  important  element  of  our  regulatory  strategy  at  the  Central  Bank.  Our 
approach  of  assertive,  risk-based  supervision  is  underpinned  by  having  a  credible 
enforcement deterrent in place. Effective enforcement certainly has a corrective element that 
is designed to ensure accountability for non-compliance with regulatory requirements, both 
by firms and – as I would like to talk about briefly in a moment – ideally also for individuals. 
But  effective  enforcement  is  much  more  powerful  than  simply  being  about  bringing  a 
particular firm or its management to account.  
The  broader  benefit,  which  supports  supervision,  is  the  deterrent  effect  of  enforcement.  If 
firms think there is a credible risk that their own non-compliance with regulatory standards 
would lead to sanctions from the Central Bank, then that provides a very powerful motivation 
to boards of directors and senior management teams to ensure a high standard of conduct. 
The  fact  that  the  Central  Bank  has  sanctioned  firms  and  has  published  details  of  these 
sanctions has made some in the industry uncomfortable and leads to pleas to ease up on the 
use  of  the  enforcement  tool.  We  do  not  apologise  for  taking  enforcement  actions  or 
publicising them. There is no deterrence value  unless firms, investors, consumers and the 
public are aware that we will respond with enforcement action where behaviour and practices 
fall  short.  I  am  firm  in  my  belief  that  this  is  a  necessary  and  best  practice  element  in  the 
regulatory toolkit of the Central Bank. And, unless these sanctions are published with enough 
detail about what occurred and the sanctions imposed the deterrent effect will be diluted. 
We  have  purposefully  made  an  effort  to  be  more  explicit  and  detailed  in  the  publicity 
statements  involving  enforcement  sanctions.  The  purpose  of  this  is  to  provide  greater 
transparency to industry, the markets and the public about the nature of breaches that have 
been committed. The publication of the enforcement action has a reputational impact on the 
firm and management concerned. A consequence of this approach is that the impact of our 
enforcement  efforts  is  greater  because,  frankly,  the  message  is  clearly  communicated  to 
industry  and  the  public  that  breaches  will  not  be  tolerated.  Consequently  all  firms  are 
powerfully  incentivised  to  avoid  enforcement  action  by  being  more  diligent  in  respect  of 
regulatory compliance.  
This  raises  standards  generally  in  the  financial  services  sector.  It  shows  that  there  are 
consequences for non-compliance. And it is an efficient use of resources. Rather than trying 
to  individually  mark  all  the  firms  that  we  supervise,  the  risk  of  enforcement  action  has  a 
multiplier  effect  across  the  regulatory  population  in  terms  of  encouraging  compliance  and 
good practice. It is, for example, particularly useful for the large population of smaller, low 
impact, firms where we cannot have a routine supervisory interaction. 
The  benefits  of  enforcement  are  therefore  very  clear  in  terms  of  raising  standards.  These 
benefits are not only recognised in Ireland but, of course, across many other jurisdictions in 
Europe  and  more  generally  internationally  elsewhere.  Enforcement  actions  are  taken  by 
supervisors in Ireland, in the UK and the US, and also across the European Union including 
France, Germany, Sweden, Malta and Luxembourg for example. So, I think concerns over 
the competitiveness impact of taking enforcement actions, which is a point sometimes put to 
me, is somewhat overstated.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And to be clear, I don’t think it makes sense to somehow ring fence international firms from 
the scope of potential enforcement action. We see weaknesses in governance, systems and 
controls  and  other  breaches  amongst  international firms, just  as  we  do for  domestic  ones. 
Protecting  Ireland’s  reputation  as  an  international  financial  centre  is  important  and  means 
that both firms and the Central Bank need to be vigilant about standards in this sector. 
What about the argument that it’s not fair to take enforcement action for mistakes? Or that 
when  a  management  team  self-reports  a  breach  they  should  get  an  exemption  from 
enforcement? These are, frankly, well-trodden and somewhat hackneyed arguments. These 
are certainly relevant factors to consider during the enforcement process, and typically would 
be  given  consideration  when  assessing  the  correct  sanctions.  But  the  clear  international 
practice is that enforcement still takes place in such circumstances. It is important that the 
deterrent effect still applies to inadvertent breaches and to self-reported ones as well. To do 
otherwise, would be to effectively turn a blind eye to the requirements which we are required 
to uphold and would encourage a culture of slackness that would sow the seeds of significant 
detriment to consumers and damage the financial stability. 
So, let me be clear, enforcement in the financial sector in Ireland is here to stay. We aim to 
be transparent about our particular enforcement priorities in any given year and publicly state 
what  these  are.  We  are  clear  that  certain  types  of  breaches  will  be  more  likely  to  attract 
enforcement  action  than  others.  Additionally,  we  allocate  resources  to  take  cases  on  a 
reactive basis so that we can respond appropriately to serious breaches. Enforcement is not 
automatic for all breaches and involves collaborative effort between the supervisory teams 
and the enforcement directorate. We exercise judgement and discretion in using the tool.  
I’m  very  pleased  by  the  progress  we  have  made  over  the  past  three  years  with  our 
enforcement  strategy.  We  have  established  a  good  track  record  of  taking  cases  against 
financial services firms for a wide range of breaches. In the last three years, the Central Bank 
has concluded 30 administrative sanctions cases and imposed approximately €13.3 million in 
fines.  We  can  see  the  benefit  of  this  in  terms  of  behaviour  in  the  industry.  For  example, 
financial  firms’  efforts  to  provide  restitution  in  overcharging  cases  tended  to  drag  on 
interminably prior to setting a strict deadline backed up by the threat of enforcement action – 
and  by  taking  a  couple  of  cases.  We  have  targeted  transaction  reporting  as  an  area  of 
concern and see firms tightening up the procedures as a result. We have sent a strong signal 
to firms  both  domestic  and  international that their  systems  and  controls need  to  be  strong 
and  robust. We  have  also,  as  part  of  our  mandate  to  protect  consumers, focused  on  how 
firms  handle  complaints  from  their  customers,  emphasising  to  firms  the  importance  of 
consumer protection and professional interaction. 
I  would  like  to  thank the  staff of  the  enforcement  directorate  of the  Central  Bank  and  also 
those  supervisors  will  help  prepare  enforcement  cases  for  the  good  work  in  making  this 
happen. 
But while we have quickly delivered on our enforcement strategy in terms of actions against 
firms,  we  still  have  some  way  to  go  to  conclude  successful  actions  against  individuals 
involved  in  the  management  of financial firms. Generally  speaking, firms  tend  to  settle  but 
individuals tend to fight their corner to the bitter end. So be it. That means that the process is 
protracted,  both  for  financial  regulators  and  other  enforcement  authorities.  So,  there  is  a 
need for considerable patience and determination. 
The  introduction  of  the  fitness  and  probity  regime  was  an  important  step  forward  in 
developing a comprehensive and effective regime. The ability to remove persons occupying 
important functions within regulated firms where they fail to meet the required standards of 
fitness and probity, and indeed prevent those who do not meet such standards from entering 
the  industry,  will  ensure  greater  confidence  and  trust  in  persons  occupying  important 
functions within regulated firms.  
All  that  said,  I  think  it  would  be  useful  to  find  an  appropriate  mechanism  to  provide  a 
measured  analysis  of  and  reflection  on  our  overall  structures  in  Ireland  for  taking  cases 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
against  individuals  for  breaches  of  financial  regulation  or  indeed  for  cases  of  white  collar 
financial  crime.  This  is  a  challenging  area  in  most,  if  not  all,  countries,  but  I  think  many 
people in Ireland have the impression that the national track record here could be stronger. 
The  Central  Bank,  and  its  predecessor  the  Financial  Regulator,  has  only  applied  financial 
sanctions to seven individuals during the past 10 years. We do have some substantial cases 
against individuals in the pipeline, but they are taking a lot of time. Similarly, on the criminal 
front, despite the efforts of the Gardaí, DPP and ODCE, we are still some way from the start 
of criminal proceedings, never mind their successful conclusion, of the cases arising from the 
financial crisis. Looking further back, we can see that it has taken a long time for high profile 
cases and tribunals to reach their conclusions.  
Taken together, this track record arguably undermines public confidence in the “enforcement 
system”  broadly  defined  and  weakens  its  deterrent  impact  to  head  off  the  next  crisis  or 
scandal.  Surely,  then  there  is  a  case  to  step  back  and  ask  some  rather  fundamental 
questions. 
This is not just a question of delivering speedier enforcement action against individuals – but 
without cutting corners – although that is part of it. It is about examining whether the current 
enforcement  system  is  able  to  really  deliver  results  when  it  comes  to  individuals  who  are 
responsible  for  financial  failures  that  impose  costs  on  society,  for  breaches  of  financial 
regulatory standards and for financial white collar crime more generally.  
This is clearly a difficult area where frankly many other countries struggle as well. But let me 
very briefly suggest a few possible areas that could be explored. 
A coordinated strategic approach is necessary for effective enforcement. At a high level, it 
would  first  make  sense  to  examine  the  respective  roles  and  missions  of  the  principal 
enforcement bodies involved with financial white collar crime and, as part of this, to assess 
the capabilities and resources for delivering their objectives. 
It  would  additionally  make  sense  to  assess  whether  there  are  best  practice  enforcement 
techniques that can be adopted from other leading jurisdictions. 
It would also be useful to carefully review whether the existing legal framework for collecting 
evidence  and  pursuing  cases  is  appropriately  calibrated  to  ensure  success.  In  November 
2010 the then Director of Corporate Enforcement made a commendable submission to the 
Department of Justice on their White Collar Crime white paper, highlighting the problems with 
the current system, and suggesting possible reforms. He also raised a concern over the rules 
governing questioning of suspects and, to its credit, the government is acting quickly on this 
matter. It seems to me that these proposals have merit.  
More fundamentally, I would argue that we should use the opportunity to examine some of 
the  underlying  legal  offences  in  the  area  of  financial  white  collar  crime  and  to  consider 
whether they need amendment or bolstering. For example, regarding administrative sanction 
cases  taken  by  the  Central  Bank,  how  strict  a  test  of  responsibility  should  be  applied  to 
directors and senior management – i.e. the individuals themselves – of a firm that has been 
in  breach  of  regulation  and  is  itself  subject  to  sanctions?  Should  we,  like  the  FSA  has 
proposed  and  the  UK  Treasury  committee  is  considering,  introduce  some  degree  of 
presumptive  liability  or  sanctions  for  directors  of  banks  which  failed  and  required  public 
support? Should there be a general offence – either civil or criminal – for reckless trading of a 
financial services company? What other adjustments to the legislative framework might result 
in  more  effective  enforcement  action  against  individuals  in  cases  of  financial  white  collar 
crime?  These  matters  require  close  scrutiny  and  careful  debate,  and  not  all  should 
necessarily make it to the statute book. But it is important that these issues are examined 
systematically in a thoughtful and considered way as part of a broader, strategic initiative to 
strengthen Ireland enforcement capability and effectiveness. 
These  matters  deserve  some  public  debate,  as  well  as  expert  study.  Indeed  such  an 
approach  can  be  seen from  the  Department  of Justice’s  white  paper  on  Crime  –  currently 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
being  prepared  –  which  includes  a  section  on  organised  and  white  collar  crime,  and  has 
been the subject of public consultations and submissions, with many of the matters referred 
to here being raised. This may usefully lead to a package of policy proposals to enhance the 
Irish  enforcement  system.  This  will  not  change  the  rules  of  the  game  or  prospects  of  the 
financial crisis cases that are currently in the pipeline at the Central Bank or shortly before 
the courts (although the lessons from the proceedings should also inform the reform agenda) 
– but it will strengthen the system for the future. 
What is the best way to go about this? The Law Reform Commission? A Government Green 
Paper? A Wise Persons Report? Some mechanism for a measured and careful analysis of 
the issues in the round would seem to make sense, alongside a thoughtful public debate on 
the  issues.  Perhaps  some  of  the  leading  academic  bodies  in  Ireland  might  facilitate  and 
stimulate discussion in this area, for example. 
But we should somehow take the opportunity to ask some searching questions about how we 
can raise our collective game to ensure that we have a truly effective enforcement system 
that delivers deterrence where it really counts: at the door of the individual who breaks the 
rules. Only then will we be able to take comfort that we have created a system that will help 
deter the origins of the next financial crisis. 
Just as the impetus for our internationally lauded criminal assets bureau came from the tragic 
circumstances surrounding Dublin’s gangland problem in the 1990s, so too should the recent 
financial crisis provide a catalyst and opportunity for Ireland to create a truly effective system 
to assist in the fight against white collar crime, bringing with it individual responsibility for the 
actions of persons who hold senior positions in financial institutions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
