Rodrigo Vergara: Macroeconomic and financial stability – challenges for 
monetary policy 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
XVI Annual Conference on “Central banking, analysis and economic policies” of the Central 
Bank of Chile, Santiago de Chile, 15 November 2012. 
 I  thank  Sofia  Bauducco,  Gonzalo  Castex,  Maria  Consuelo  Edwards,  Luis  Oscar  Herrera,  Kevin  Cowan,  and 
Claudio Raddatz for helpful comments. 
Good  morning.  Welcome  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile’s  sixteenth  annual  conference  on 
Central  Banking,  Analysis  and  Economic  Policies.  This  year’s  version 
is  about 
“Macroeconomic and Financial Stability: Challenges for monetary policy.” 
We are expecting two exciting days of learning and discussion on topics at the forefront of 
academic  and  policy  research  on  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  The  interaction 
between  academics  and  policy  makers  fostered  by  this  conference  provides  an  important 
opportunity  to  learn  from  each  other  and  share  views  and  experiences  that  will  help  us 
improve our policy decisions and hopefully go home with new ideas for research. 
Today and tomorrow we will reflect on the role of central banks in preventing and reacting to 
financial exuberance and financial crises. The discussion will focus on two important policy 
questions: first, did the conduct of conventional monetary policy before the crisis contribute to 
shaping it? And second, how should monetary policy react to a crisis? In particular, we will 
discuss  the  efficacy  of  conventional  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  action  in 
ameliorating  the  effects  of  financial  crises. With  these  two  questions  in  mind,  we  will  also 
explore  the  consequences  of  financial  crises  on  unemployment,  household  credit,  and  the 
real  economy,  and  will  try  to  understand  how  markets  operate  in  environments  with 
multidimensional private information. Our last session will be devoted to analyzing the effects 
of unconventional policies in dealing with the impact of the recent financial crisis in Chile. I 
am confident that valuable lessons will come out of these two days of discussion. 
To  begin,  I  would  like  to  share  my  views  and  Chile’s  experience  in  four  issues  that  are 
currently in the policy debate and that will underlie the discussion we will be having over the 
next two days. The first issue relates to the debate on financial stability as a macro  policy 
goal and which institutions should be responsible for it. I will then turn to the availability and 
usefulness of policy instruments to pursue financial stability. I will also refer to two aspects of 
our  experience  in  conducting  monetary  policy  during  financial  crises:  our  experience  with 
unconventional  policies  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  and  our  experience  with 
financial rescues in our own financial disaster in the early 1980s. In the latter case, I will also 
touch briefly on the impact of rescues on the Central Bank´s balance sheet. 
Financial stability as a policy goal. The role of the central bank 
1. 
The recent financial crisis challenged the paradigm that the stability of the financial system 
could be preserved through a combination of micro regulation and macroeconomic stability. 
Before the crisis, many countries focused financial regulation on the risks faced by individual 
financial institutions (as indicated by Basel II), and macroeconomic policy on the preservation 
of price stability. This approach may have worked well during calmed times, but it also may 
have  allowed  hidden  financial  risks  to  build  up  unchecked.  As  a  result,  there  is  growing 
consensus  that  the  pursuance  of  macro  financial  stability  has  to  be  considered  in  its  own 
right, in a way that combines micro regulation with a systemic view of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However, while there is consensus in the approach, there is still debate on what institutions 
should be in charge of ensuring financial stability, and in particular, what should be the role of 
central banks.  
There are advantages in having central banks involved in preserving financial stability, but 
these  advantages  do  not  necessarily  mean  that  they  have  to  be  the  sole  institutions  in 
charge. Central banks have a systemic vision of the economy that allows them to visualize 
links between different players of financial systems and their potential consequences for the 
real  economy.  Also,  as  lenders  of  last  resort,  the  preservation  of  financial  stability  is  of 
natural interest for central banks. Thus, even if not formally in charge, central banks should 
and do care about financial stability.  
But at the same time, there are important risks in having central banks in charge of financial 
stability.  First  is  the  risk  of  diluting  the  mandate  of  the  central  bank  and  damaging  its 
credibility. Central banks have fought hard to establish credibility by focusing on measurable 
goals,  maintaining  clear  communications  with  the  public,  and  being  transparent  and 
accountable  in  achieving these goals. The focus  on  inflation,  a  simple observable  variable 
has helped. Having a central bank with multiple mandates creates risks of policy dilution and 
conflicting goals. In contrast with inflation, or even employment, financial stability is a fuzzy 
concept with many dimensions that are hard to encompass in a single indicator. Attempting 
to  do  so  risks  ending  with  a  narrow  view  of  financial  stability,  but  having  a  broader,  less 
precise definition of financial stability makes it hard to establish credibility and accountability 
for  achieving  it.  On  a  more  pragmatic  front,  there  are  good  reasons  to  have  banking 
supervision  conducted  outside  the  central  bank  (which  I  will  not  address  now),  and  many 
countries  follow  this  institutional  arrangement.  This  should  be  considered  when  thinking 
about  the  involvement  of  the  central  bank  in  financial  stability  because  it  is  desirable  that 
micro  and  macro  aspects  of  financial  regulation  be  well  coordinated  to  avoid  sending 
conflicting messages to regulated entities. 
For these reasons, the institutional setting for monitoring and preserving financial stability will 
likely vary across countries. But the natural interest of central banks in financial stability and 
their  advantages  in  providing  a  systemic  view  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  economy 
suggest  that  they  should  be  involved  at  some  level.  Whatever  the  institutional  setting  for 
pursuing  financial  stability,  it  is  important  that  it  guarantees  that  the  systemic  aspects  of 
financial decisions are properly taken into consideration, that the institutions involved have 
the necessary tools to prevent the formation of excessive risks in the financial system and 
quickly act when they materialize, and that it ensures that these tools are used with a unified 
view  of  the  micro  and  macro  aspects  of  financial  regulation.  Whether  this  is  achieved  by 
having  a  single  entity  in  charge  of  regulation  or  by  having  instances  that  facilitate  the 
coordination between the different entities in charge of it may be of second order importance 
if such coordination works well.  
In Chile, the Central Bank is expected to act as a lender of last resort to commercial banks 
facing liquidity problems. We are also in charge of some aspects of financial regulation such 
as  retail  payments;  bank  liquidity  and  market  risk  regulation,  aggregate  limits  for  pension 
funds,  and  others.1  Furthermore,  preserving  an  appropriate  functioning  of  the  payment 
system  is  a  goal  established  in  our  charter  that  is  clearly  related  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial sector.  
So, we naturally care about financial stability, and accordingly we monitor systemic aspects 
of the functioning of all participants in the financial sector, conduct regular surveys of market 
participants,  run  an  annual  survey  of  the  financial  position  of  households,  and  produce  a 
twice-yearly  financial  stability  report  that  is  widely  read  by  other  regulators  and  market 
participants, among other activities.  
                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Chile, Compendio de Normas Financieras. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
funds  and 
However,  in  Chile  the  supervision  of  different groups  of financial  institutions,  and  the  legal 
power and tools to enforce regulation are spread across several entities. For instance, the 
banking  sector  is  under  the  supervision  of  the  Superintendence  of  Banks  and  Financial 
Institutions  (SBIF),  mutual 
the 
Superintendence  of  Securities  and  Insurance  (SVS),  and  pension  funds,  which  are  large 
players in our financial system, are regulated by the Superintendence of Pensions (SP). In 
this setting, the preservation of financial stability crucially relies on the capacity and ability of 
all  players  involved,  including  us,  to  share  our  views  and  coordinate  our  actions.  This  is 
currently  done  through  routine  interaction  between  us,  and  more  formally  through  periodic 
meetings  in  the  Financial  Stability  Council,  an  entity  created  precisely  to  guarantee  such 
coordination.  
insurance  companies  are  regulated  by 
Financial stability tools 
2. 
Let me now turn to the discussion of what are the most appropriate tools to pursue financial 
stability. Of course, this discussion draws from the previous one on whether the central bank 
should be in charge of it. But let’s forget about that for a second to tackle one of the main 
aspects  of  this  debate,  which  is  whether  a  central  bank  that  cares  about  financial  stability 
should  use  the  policy  rate  as  a  tool.  There  are  different  views  on  this  regard,  both  in 
academic and policy circles that you probably know well. I am among the ones who think that 
the interest rate is often too blunt a tool to deal with financial stability issues, especially when 
they  have  clear  sources  that can  be  addressed more  directly,  since  the policy  rate  affects 
every sector of the economy. 
Furthermore,  under  some  circumstances  the  required  movement  in  the  policy  rate  for 
financial stability purposes may be in conflict with the price stability mandate. Assuming that 
such  tradeoff  is  absent,  that  reasonable  movements  in  the  policy  rate  are  expected  to  be 
useful to deal with financial stability concerns, and that there are no better tools at hand, it 
may be reasonable to rely on it as a tool for financial stability.  
However,  in  many  situations  at  least  one  of  these  conditions  would  not  hold  and  other 
options  would  prove  more  efficient.  For  instance,  more  often  than  not  financial  stability 
concerns are related to specific segments of financial intermediation. Concerns about rapid 
growth in credit to the housing sector can be tamed by changes in loan-to-value or debt-to-
income ratios, for example. Dynamic provisions related to general or specific forms of credit 
may  also  help  banks maintain  a  solid  position  through  the financial  cycle,  and  discretional 
changes  to  reserve  requirements  may  also  help  rein  in  rapid  bank  credit  expansion.  Of 
course,  all  these  measures  are  not  cost  free  and  their  use  must  properly  consider  these 
costs  against  specific  financial  stability  concerns.  For  instance,  increases  in  reserve 
requirements  affect  only  the  banking  sector,  which  may  lead  to  disintermediation  and 
increased cost of credit for those with limited access to other sources. 
In Chile many of these tools are under the control of the Superintendence of Banking and 
Financial  Institutions  (SBIF).  This  makes  the  Financial  Stability  Council  I  just  mentioned  a 
crucial instance for coordinating and implementing financial regulation with a systemic view. 
Monetary policy in an environment of financial crisis 
3. 
When  using  policy  tools  to  prevent  financial  crisis  is  not  enough  and  the  financial  system 
becomes  unstable,  standard  monetary  policy  tools  might  be  impaired. Many  central  banks 
target the overnight interbank rate, so the transmission of monetary policy relies on a working 
financial system and its effectiveness may be significantly weakened in conditions of financial 
distress.  Furthermore,  under  extreme  conditions,  such  as  those  experienced  during  the 
recent financial crisis, standard monetary policy may reach its natural limit that is the zero-
lower  bound.  Under  these  conditions,  unconventional  monetary  policies  may  be  the  only 
ones at hand for a central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  experience  of  the  United  States  and  Europe  with  unconventional  tools  during  recent 
years is well known to all of you, so let me briefly describe our experience with them. It is 
important to mention that the scale of our interventions was substantially smaller, since we 
had to quickly undo many of our policy actions because of the fast recovery of the Chilean 
economy after the recession of 2009. I hope our history will shed some light on those that 
view the undoing of large interventions as a cause for concern.  
Shortly after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Central Bank of Chile began reducing the 
policy rate from an initial level of 7.25 percent until it reached the effective lower bound of 50 
basis points in July 2009. The rate remained at that level for one year until June 2010. During 
that period, the Central Bank also took unconventional measures aimed at providing liquidity 
to  the  financial  markets.  For  instance,  we  offered  financial  institutions  access  to  a  term 
liquidity program (FLAP) at the monetary policy rate of 0.5 percent. During January 2010 we 
reached  a  peak  of  6.5  billion  dollars  on  the  liquidity  program,  equivalent  to  40%  of  the 
banking system’s capital and reserves.2 Our exit strategy from this expansionary policy was 
free from major difficulties. We started unwinding these special facilities in November 2009 
by  gradually  shortening  their  term.  As  we  finished  dismantling  our  special  programs  we 
slowly began increasing the monetary policy rate to a neutral range. The withdrawal of the 
monetary stimulus at an appropriate pace allowed us to maintain inflation expectations at a 
two year horizon close to our target of 3 percent. 
Before moving on to the next topic, let me close this discussion by stressing that, while central 
banks have been and will continue to be creative in using all available tools to achieve their 
mandate,  we  must  recognize  the  limits  of  conventional  monetary  policy  in  circumstances  of 
extreme  financial  distress.  Conventional  monetary  policy  alone  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  put 
back the economy on the right track and its combination with other policies certainly increases 
the chances of success. 
Financial rescues and their Impact on a central bank’s balance sheet 
4. 
Please allow me now to finish with another topic where Chile’s experience can contribute to 
the international debate: the implementation of a financial bailout and the risks it imposes on 
the  operation  of  a  central  bank.  In  normal  times,  central  banks  conduct  their  operations 
maintaining  only  the  safest  assets  on  their  balance  sheets,  typically  government  bonds  or 
other low-risk assets. But in times of distress, acting as lender of last resort, central banks 
may  also  accept  lower  quality,  more  risky  assets,  as  collateral  for  liquidity  provision  or  in 
outright  purchases  aimed  at  rescuing  banks,  with  the  consequent  risk  to  their  balance 
sheets. This has been indeed the case in several countries during the recent financial crisis. 
The  possibility  that  risk-taking  by  central  banks  may  result  in  losses  that  affect  their 
reputation and operations has recently preoccupied policymakers, especially when pondering 
about the possibility of a large rescue operation of troubled European banks by the ECB. The 
concerns are both financial and operational. The financial soundness of a central bank, the 
usual  lender  of  last  resort  in  a  country,  is  an  important  firewall  for  trouble  in  the  financial 
system. While a central bank may count with the help of the sovereign, this channel may be 
a  source  of  concern  when  sovereign  themselves  are  facing  problems,  and  it  also  raises 
some worries about the ability of the central bank to maintain its independence. There are 
also those who argue that, since the liabilities of central banks can be arbitrarily created, the 
financial position of a central bank shouldn’t matter. But this argument forgets that doing so 
may endanger the achievement of the inflation targets that many central banks have taken 
as their operational goals, affecting their reputation and independence. 
                                                
2  Céspedes et al. 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In 1982, as the debt crisis spread through Latin America, the Chilean financial system, which 
had  channeled  substantial  foreign-currency-denominated  syndicated  loans,  became  largely 
insolvent. Under these conditions, the government engineered a massive rescue operation 
through  the  central  bank  where  several  of  the  most  important  banks  became  nationalized 
and  others  disappeared,  after  their  assets  were  absorbed  by  other  institutions.  This 
intervention  prevented  an  even  larger  collapse  of  activity  than  the  one  we  ended  up 
experiencing. The manner in which it was implemented, where shareholder equity was fully 
diluted and institutions assumed a subordinated debt to the central bank that took a long time 
to repay, helped maintain the rescue’s moral hazard concerns at bay. This, together with new 
regulation,  resulted  in  a  healthier  financial  system.  However,  an  important  cost  of  this 
intervention  is  that  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  was  severely  stressed, 
leading  us  to  operate  with  negative  capital  until  today.  This  negative  capital  is  also  a 
consequence of the Central Bank’s balance sheet composition, with international reserves in 
foreign  currency  earning  a  much  lower  return  than  the  interest  we  pay  on  our  domestic 
currency  liabilities.  In  addition,  an  appreciation  of  our  currency  makes  our  capital  more 
negative, as we mark to market our international reserves. 
The lesson from our country’s experience in this regard is that we have been quite able to 
operate  with  negative  capital  for  the  last  several  years,  maintaining  inflation  under  control 
and  preserving  the  working  of  the  financial  system.  Thus,  while  operating  with  negative 
capital is far from ideal, at the levels at  which  we have been operating, it is not cause for 
undue  alarm.  It  is  possible  to  conduct  monetary  policy  under  these  conditions,  especially 
when  accompanied  by  an  environment  of  good  institutions  and  fiscal  strength.  Other  well 
respected central banks have been operating under similar conditions.  
I cannot finish this presentation without thanking Sofia Bauducco, Lawrence Christiano, and 
Claudio  Raddatz  for  putting  together  the  program  of  what  promises  to  be  an  exciting 
conference, and all of you for coming to participate and share in the discussion.  
Thank you. 
References 
Céspedes, L., Javier García-Cicco and Diego Saravia. 2012. “Monetary Policy Responses to 
the Global Financial Crisis: The Chilean Experience”. Mimeo. 
Compendio  de  Normas  Financieras.  Banco  Central  de  Chile.  Available  at 
http://www.bcentral.cl/normativa/normas-financieras/index.htm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
