Masaaki Shirakawa: Path toward overcoming deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 26 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be here today to speak and exchange views with business leaders from the 
Chubu  region.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  deep  gratitude  for  your 
cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s Nagoya branch. 
Today, I will start by touching upon economic developments at home and abroad, and then 
move on to explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. I will then discuss the economy’s 
path toward overcoming deflation. 
Developments in overseas economies and in exchange rates 
I. 
Considering that I have paid this region a visit every year just around this time in November, 
let me begin my talk by reflecting on developments in the economic environment surrounding 
Japan’s economy over the past year, especially in overseas economies and exchange rates. 
To start with, I will outline developments in overseas economies. Around this time last year, 
developments  with  respect  to  the  European  debt  problem  –  the  biggest  risk  factor  for  the 
global  economy  at  that  time  –  had  been  highly  uncertain  and  nervousness  in  financial 
markets had been so strong that even a worst-case scenario – namely, the collapse of the 
euro  zone  –  had  been  envisaged  (Chart  1).  In  comparison  with  last  year,  the  risk  of  the 
European  debt  problem  triggering  an  extreme  event  such  as  a  global  financial  crisis  has 
subsided,  thanks  to  progress  with  reinforcing  the  safety  net  including  such  moves  as  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)’s  decision  to  launch  a  new  government  bond  purchasing 
program and the inauguration of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM).  Nevertheless, an 
adverse feedback loop among the fiscal balance, the financial system, and economic activity 
continues  to  operate  in  Europe,  particularly  peripheral  countries,  and  the  effects  have 
recently started to spill over to core countries as well. Consequently, the European economy 
has entered a moderate recession phase, as evident in the fact that it has posted successive 
negative  growth  since  the  fourth  quarter  of  2011.  Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  economy  –  its 
household sector in particular – has been undergoing recovery at a moderate pace. In terms 
of changes over the past year, it is a positive indication that housing investment appears to 
be bottoming out despite its continued low level (Chart 2). However, the situation regarding 
the “fiscal cliff” – the same issue as was raised a year ago – has not changed. In fact, there 
is increasing concern about this issue as the economy moves closer to the cliff. Relative to 
the  past  year,  the  economy  that  has  encountered  the  most  significant  change  is  China 
(Chart 3). Deceleration of the Chinese economy has been prolonged mainly due to a decline 
in exports bound for Europe and inventory adjustment in materials industries, as evident in 
the fact that its real GDP growth rate on a year-on-year basis has continued to decline for 
seven consecutive quarters since the first quarter of 2011, though it remains at a high level. 
Apart  from  these  short-term  developments,  whether  the  Chinese  economy  can  make  a 
smooth transition from high growth to moderate and stable growth appears to be growing into 
a matter of great interest in terms of policy conduct. 
I  will  now  turn  to  developments  in  exchange  rates  (Chart  4).  Focusing  solely  on  this  past 
year, the yen has depreciated against the U.S. dollar by 4 percent and the Korean won by 
8 percent  while  appreciating  against  the  euro  by  2  percent.  A  weighted  average  of  these 
developments based on the value of trade – in other words, the nominal effective exchange 
rate – results in a 4 percent depreciation of the yen. Of course, putting aside developments 
that  have  occurred  in  the  past  year,  I  am  well  aware  that  corporate  managers  here  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
increasingly  expanding 
Nagoya, where export-driven manufacturing plays a significant role, have been feeling that 
they continue to face a severe situation as the value of the yen has remained at a high level 
following its rapid appreciation since the Lehman shock. On this point, the share of overseas 
business fixed investment has been rising further in recent years and Japanese firms have 
been 
their  overseas  business  activities  (Charts  5  and  6). 
Fundamentally,  this  reflects  firms’  efforts  to  capture  demand  in  overseas  economies  with 
relatively high economic growth; however, it also appears to reflect that the persistent trend 
of  the  yen’s  appreciation  is  accelerating  such  business  activities.  From  an  even  longer 
perspective,  developments  in  the  yen’s  exchange  rate  have  shown  large  swings.  Looking 
back,  the  yen  depreciated  considerably  toward  the  mid-2000s,  mainly  against  the  euro, 
against the background of yen carry trades (Chart 4). Following the Lehman shock, however, 
it  started  to  appreciate  rapidly.  Forces  behind  such  appreciation  include  a  reversal  of  yen 
carry  trades  as  interest  rate  differentials  between  the  United  States  and  Japan  and  those 
between Europe and Japan narrowed, and the fact that the yen had come to be perceived as 
a safe currency as the European debt problem became aggravated. Such large swings in the 
exchange rate have significant effects on corporate performance, and I do acknowledge that 
achieving a stable exchange rate is highly desirable in authorities’ policy conduct. 
The  Bank  is  concerned  that  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  could  have  adverse  effects  on 
Japan’s economy – mainly through a decrease in exports and corporate profits as well as 
deterioration in business sentiment – in the current phase, in which there is high uncertainty 
regarding the outlook for overseas economies. The yen’s appreciation should also be viewed 
as  a  risk  in  terms  of  whether  it  would  accelerate  firms’  shift  of  production  overseas  or 
whether  it  would  lead  to  a  decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations.  As  I  will 
explain  shortly,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  aggressive  monetary  easing  while  assessing 
developments in economic activity and prices, while also keeping in mind the risks I have just 
mentioned.  Meanwhile,  the  government  has  carried  out  foreign  exchange  intervention  as 
necessary in line with the understanding – shared again at the last G-20 meeting – that reads 
“disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  have  adverse  implications  for  economic  and 
financial stability.” 
Recent developments in and the outlook for Japan’s economy 
II. 
I will now explain recent developments in and the outlook for Japan’s economy, taking into 
account  the  developments  in  overseas  economies  and  exchange  rates  that  I  have  just 
explained. 
In  the  first  half  of  2012,  Japan’s  economy  registered  the  highest  growth  rate  among  the 
advanced  economies.  The  situation  changed  rapidly  since  the  summer,  however,  and  the 
economy is currently weakening somewhat. Its transition to this somewhat weakening phase 
is  mostly  attributable  to  the  prolonged  deceleration  in  overseas  economies.  Exports 
decreased in July–September and then in October, and industrial production has fallen for 
two consecutive quarters (Chart 7). Developments in October–December warrant vigilance, 
as effects of the Japan-China relations are projected to be reflected in exports as well. While 
domestic demand has been relatively firm until recently, mainly against the background of an 
increase  in  reconstruction-related  demand,  the  effects  of  the  prolonged  deceleration  in 
overseas  economies  have  gradually  begun  to  spill  over  to  domestic  demand  too.  Private 
consumption  has  lost  some  momentum,  partly  due  to  the  decline  following  the  ending  of 
subsidies for the purchase of environmentally friendly cars. While business fixed investment 
has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing trend,  it  has  shown  some  weakness  in  manufacturing 
mainly due to the deceleration in overseas economies. 
Based  on  these  developments  in  overseas  demand,  the  economy  is  expected  to  remain 
relatively weak for the time being. Thereafter, however, it will return to a moderate recovery 
path as overseas economies gradually emerge from the deceleration phase. Meanwhile, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is 
expected to remain at around 0 percent for the time being and start rising gradually thereafter 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as  the  supply  and  demand  balance  improves  in  accordance  with  a  pick-up  in  economic 
activity.  In  fiscal  2014,  it  appears  likely  that  the  CPI  will  move  steadily  closer  toward  the 
Bank’s “price stability goal in the medium to long term” of 1 percent for the time being. 
Whether developments in Japan’s economy will follow the projected path, however, hinges 
on  those  developments  in  overseas  economies.  At  international  conferences  that  I  have 
attended recently, the delegates from the United States, Europe, and China have similarly 
pointed to developments in overseas economies as a factor exerting a considerable impact 
on their own economies. If these economies are considered in terms of the global economy 
as  a  whole,  however,  this  overseas  factor  does  not  exist.  Put  differently,  it  is  important  to 
grasp  the  global  economy  as  a  whole  in  an  era  that  is  witnessing  significant  progress  in 
economic  globalization.  In  this  regard,  we  surely  cannot  forget  that  global  economic 
expansion  in  the  mid-2000s  –  particularly  from  2004  toward  2007  –  was  characterized  by 
extraordinarily favorable economic conditions supported by an unprecedented credit bubble 
(Chart 8). As a consequence of the bursting of this bubble, even six years since the bursting 
of the U.S. housing bubble and four years since the Lehman shock, and despite aggressive 
monetary easing in advanced economies, the pace of global economic recovery is extremely 
moderate (Chart 9). This suggests that it will be difficult for the global economy to return to a 
high  growth  path  until  adjustments  of  excess  debt  after  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  are 
completed. 
Recent conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.1  Based  on  the  aforementioned 
assessment of economic activity and prices, the Bank of Japan undertook further aggressive 
monetary easing for two months in a row, in September and October 2012. 
The  Bank’s  decision  can  be  summarized  within  the  following  two  components.  First,  it 
decided  to  increase  the  size  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter,  the  Program; 
Chart 10). The Program’s size was increased by about 21 trillion yen when adding together 
the  decisions  made  in  September  and  October.  Looking  back  to  autumn  2010,  when  the 
Program was introduced, it started off at a size of about 35 trillion yen; within two years, its 
size increased by about 56 trillion yen to about 91 trillion yen and its timing of completion was 
also  extended  from  end-2011  to  end-2013.  The  Bank  has  clearly  stated  that  it  aims  to 
achieve the goal of 1 percent for the time being in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase 
in  the  CPI  through  the  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary  easing,  conducting  its  virtually  zero 
interest rate policy and implementing the Program mainly through the purchase of financial 
assets, as was announced back in February 2012. The Bank is determined to continue with 
this  powerful  easing  until  it  judges  the  1  percent  goal  to  be  in  sight,  while  it  will  ascertain 
whether there is any significant risk to the sustainability of economic growth, including from 
the accumulation of financial imbalances. 
The second aspect of the Bank’s decision is the establishment of a new lending facility called 
the “Stimulating Bank Lending Facility” (Chart 11). Under this facility, the Bank will provide 
funds to financial institutions, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase 
in their lending. The total amount of funds provided by the Bank will be “unlimited” – that is, 
there shall be no upper limit. If we take account of the fact that firms’ overseas activities and 
financial institutions’ support of such activities through lending have important implications for 
the development of Japan’s economy in the midst of economic globalization, then financial 
institutions’  lending  can  be  the  form  of  either  yen-denominated  or  foreign  currency-
denominated. The interest rate charged by the Bank will be equivalent to its target for the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  at  the  time  of  loan  disbursement,  and  is  currently 
                                                
1  For details on various issues concerning the Bank’s monetary policy conduct, please see Masaaki Shirakawa, 
“Toward Sustainable Growth with Price Stability” (Speech at the Kisaragi-kai Meeting in Tokyo), November 12, 
2012. http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ko121112a1.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
0.1 percent per annum. Furthermore, loans can be rolled over up to four years at the request 
of financial institutions. In sum, these institutions can have access to long-term stable funding 
at a low cost through the Bank. According to data for the 12 months up through August 2012, 
the  amount  of  lending  increased  by  a  total  of  approximately  15  trillion  yen  for  financial 
institutions that saw a rise in their lending. Going forward, if financial institutions manage to 
increase their lending more aggressively, the amount of funds that the Bank can provide will 
rise  accordingly.  At  present,  the  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  making  the  necessary 
arrangements, and we plan to release the details of this facility before the end of the year 
and start its operation as soon as possible. 
The  Bank’s  aggressive  monetary  easing,  which  consists  of  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy  and  its  purchases  of  financial  assets  through  the  Program,  coupled  with  measures 
including the government’s intervention in the foreign exchange market, has fended off the 
yen’s appreciation to some extent. Nonetheless, we have heard the opinion that the Bank’s 
monetary  easing  is  not  enough  because  Japan’s  economy  has  yet  to  overcome  deflation. 
This opinion often refers to the amount of “money” supplied by a central bank. Looking at the 
monetary  base  –  which  is  the  amount  of  “money”  supplied  by  a  central  bank,  percentage 
point changes in its ratio relative to GDP since the Lehman shock have been more or less 
the same as in Europe and the United States, where the monetary base is thought to have 
been  increased  aggressively  during  this  period  (Chart  12).  Furthermore,  as  Japan 
experienced its financial crisis much earlier than other economies, the ratio of the monetary 
base  relative  to  GDP  also  started  rising  in  earlier  years  and  has  now  reached  the  highest 
level among the advanced economies.2 
Now the question is, how can we further strengthen the effect of monetary easing? In order 
to answer this question, I would like to discuss the monetary transmission mechanism. This 
can be divided into two stages. The first stage is the transmission of monetary easing effects 
from  the  realm  of  monetary  policy  to  the  financial  environment,  where  firms  can  raise 
sufficient  funds  at  low  costs  on  the  back  of  monetary  easing.  The  second  stage  is  the 
transmission of effects from the financial conditions to economic activity and prices; in other 
words,  the  extent  to  which  firms  and  households  actually  take  advantage  of  the 
accommodative financial conditions to increase their investment and spending (Chart 13). 
As  for  the  first  stage  of  the  transmission,  the  effect  of  aggressive  monetary  easing  has 
thoroughly  permeated  the  financial  environment,  and  extremely  accommodative  financial 
conditions have been achieved both in terms of interest rates and access to financing. If the 
effect of aggressive easing permeates the second stage of the transmission, it surely can be 
seen in economic activity and prices. 
The Bank considers that the key to the overcoming of deflation lies in the extent to which a 
wide range of economic entities – such as firms and households – actually make full use of 
current accommodative financial conditions. With this in mind, I would next like to discuss the 
necessity to invigorate growth potential, or to raise the potential growth rate of the economy. 
Path toward overcoming deflation 
IV. 
Fluctuations in economic activity can be broken down into two components: one is the trend 
growth and the other is cyclical growth – that is, the fluctuation of economic activity around 
the trend growth path. The first half of my talk today mainly dealt with the issue of economic 
cycles,  and  monetary  policy  is  aimed  at  ensuring  price  stability  while  leveling  out  such 
fluctuations. 
                                                
2  Under the current zero interest rate environment, the cost of holding money is zero, so money is unlikely to 
circulate in the economy no matter how much a central bank injects. What is important at this juncture is to 
raise the velocity of money through the strengthening of growth potential. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
From this viewpoint, the output gap – which became as large as –8 percent after the Lehman 
shock – has shrunk to around –2 percent recently (Chart 14). Reflecting such developments 
in  the  economy,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food) 
became  as  low  as  –2.4  percent  in  summer  2009,  but  overall  it  has  been  on  an  improving 
trend  since  then,  as  exemplified  by  the  recent  figure  of  around  0  percent.  In  contrast,  the 
trend growth rate has been declining gradually. 
When corporate managers – those of SMEs in particular – say that they cannot feel there 
has  been  any  economic  recovery,  what  they  are  expressing  is  exactly  in  line  with  the 
situation  that  I  just  described;  namely,  that  the  trend  growth  rate  has  been  declining 
gradually.  The average growth rate for the next decade or two is defined by the potential 
growth rate, which can be broken down into the rate of growth in the number of workers and 
that  in  the  real  GDP  per  worker  –  in  other  words,  the  labor  productivity  growth  rate.  The 
number of workers declined at a rate of –0.2 percent in the 2000s, and it is estimated that 
there  will  be  an  acceleration  in  the  pace  of  decline  to  –0.6  percent  in  the  2010s  and  
–0.8 percent  in  the  2020s,  given  the  present  labor  participation  rates  by  gender  and 
generation (Chart 15). The labor productivity growth rate for the years 2000 through 2008 – a 
period characterized by relatively favorable economic conditions – was 1.5 percent. Taking 
these numbers together, the potential growth rate for the next two decades will be less than 
1 percent. 
This  leads  us  to  conclude  that,  in  order  to  lift  the  potential  growth  rate  to  2  percent,  for 
example, it is imperative to make serious efforts both to increase the number of workers and 
to raise the labor productivity growth rate. As for the number of workers, increasing the labor 
participation rates of the elderly and women is a key factor. In terms of labor productivity, the 
average labor productivity growth rate in G-7 countries over the last 20 years is 1.3 percent 
(Chart  16).  Admittedly,  it  is  difficult  to  expect  that  advanced  economies  including  Japan  – 
having already completed their “catching up” process – will maintain high labor productivity 
growth  rates,  but  one  has  to  make  tenacious  efforts  to  raise  the  growth  rate. We  need  to 
acknowledge the need to make efforts on these two fronts; that is, efforts to strengthen the 
growth potential. In an economy where a rise in income is hardly expected to occur in the 
near  future,  expenditure  keeps  declining  and  thus  prices  are  unlikely  to  rise.  It  is  in  this 
context  that  the  Bank  notes  the  importance  of  efforts  to  strengthen  the  economy’s  growth 
potential  and  support  from  the  financial  side  in  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome 
deflation as early as possible and return to the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
I have already explained the Bank’s own efforts to overcome deflation. For the last part of my 
remarks,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  respective  roles  of  business  firms,  private  financial 
institutions,  and  the  government  with  regard  to  achieving  the  same  goal  of  overcoming 
deflation. 
First, business firms obviously are the main actors in the strengthening of growth potential. 
Among others, firms here in Nagoya have overcome a number of difficulties in the past and 
have actually cultivated the frontier for growth. I am fully confident that you have the strength 
to generate highly value-added goods and services in spite of severe circumstances. 
Second, as for private financial institutions, their major lasting role is to support firms’ efforts 
toward  strengthening  growth  potential  from  the  financial  side.  On  this  point,  it  is  important 
that financial institutions, while assessing the growth potential of businesses and cultivating 
credit demand for promising projects, provide funds smoothly to firms and projects with high 
growth  potential,  despite  the  high  risks,  through  devising  lending  measures.  In  addition, 
financial  institutions  have  the  advantage,  compared  with  other  sectors,  of  maintaining 
corporate information and the customer network. Making use of such an advantage, they are 
expected to help customers solve challenges by providing services that meet the needs of 
those  customers,  such as  developing  a  sales  network  at  home  and  abroad,  helping  those 
customers start overseas businesses, and supporting M&A and business succession. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Last,  but  not  least,  it  is  really  important  for  the  government  –  through  measures  including 
decisive  deregulation  –  to  raise  the  attractiveness  of  domestic  investment  and  lay  the 
foundations  that  encourage  firms  to  embark  on  challenges.  It  is  also  important  for  the 
government to continue making efforts to ensure fiscal consolidation. In order to aggressively 
cultivate new potential demand at home, firms have to produce new goods and services that 
meet highly diversified customers’ needs, partly due to the aging society; at the same time, 
the government must lay the foundations that allow households to use money without feeling 
unease about the future. In order to do so, the social security system and pension system 
need to be sustained. In recent years, Japanese financial institutions have been aggressively 
increasing  the  amount  of  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  holdings  in  light  of  declining 
credit demand in the private sector (Chart 17). Accordingly, interest rate risk stemming from 
fluctuations  in  market  rates  is  heightening  (Chart  18).  Therefore,  it  is  also  extremely 
important from the viewpoint of financial institutions – which support the growth of business 
firms  through  lending  activities  –  that  the  government  makes  every  effort  to  ensure  fiscal 
consolidation. 
Concluding remarks 
Japan’s economy now faces a big challenge, but we should not be trapped by pessimism. 
Unlike Europe and the United States, Japan is one of a handful of countries for which real 
consumption per capita has exceeded the levels prior to the Lehman shock (Chart 19). As I 
have noted today, in order to overcome deflation, firms, financial institutions, the government, 
and the central bank must play their respective roles, through which this challenge can surely 
be met. 
Let  me  close  by  saying  that  the  Bank  is  determined  to  continue  making  its  utmost  efforts 
toward  overcoming  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  returning  Japan’s  economy  to  the 
sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Thank you. 
 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
