Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Funding for financing economic growth – a 
Schumpeterian perspective 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the GIC 
(Global Interdependence Center) Conference on “The Global Financial Crisis – lessons from 
Japan”, Tokyo, 3 December 2012. 
 Introduction: beyond standard macroeconomics 
I.  
Having  experienced  prolonged  stagnation  after  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008, 
economists,  market  participants,  and  policymakers  alike  have  arrived  at  the  painful 
recognition that per capita real output has a long path toward recovering its pre-crisis level. 
To  tackle  this  stagnation,  the  standard  macroeconomic  prescription  is  simple  and 
straightforward:  the  policymaker  should  conduct  an  expansionary  policy  to  fill  the  gap 
between actual and potential GDP, treating potential GDP as exogenously given. Although it 
is difficult to tell in real time whether the observed weakness in economic recovery is cyclical 
or  structural,  it  seems  obvious  that  the  current  GDP  gap  is  large  no  matter  how  one 
measures  the  potential.  Under  this  prescription,  and  facing  the  zero  bound  on  nominal 
interest rates, central banks in advanced countries are currently employing unconventional 
measures, such as large-scale asset purchase programs.  
However, I believe we need to go beyond such a standard way of policy thinking in order to 
bring about effective policy in this slow growth environment. We should consider policies that 
influence  the  growth  potential  itself.  In  particular,  I  suggest  that  central  banks  should  find 
tools to support the efforts to strengthen the foundation for economic growth. This may look 
even  more  unconventional  than  already  unconventional  asset  purchase  programs.  But  it 
should be noted that price stability, the goal of central banking, becomes difficult to achieve 
once growth expectations diminish and the economy becomes prone to hit the zero bound.1 
Thus, it is absolutely necessary to raise growth expectations in order to alleviate the difficulty 
in maintaining price stability. And I presume that monetary policy can influence the growth 
potential over a long term, although such effects are uncertain and indirect. 
Indeed,  there  have  been  several  signs  of  these  diminished  growth  expectations  in  many 
countries.  The  aftereffect  of  a  financial  crisis  has  been  discussed  extensively.2  Population 
ageing is another factor that is already impacting advanced economies and coming soon to 
several emerging economies.3 A not-so-growth-friendly change in the current technological 
                                                
1   Persistent deflation found in Japan in the past decade was at least partly caused by recurrent negative shocks 
that  caused  continuously  diminishing  growth  expectations.  When  a  negative  shock  happens  to  diminish 
growth  prospects,  management  refrains  from  engaging  in  capital  investment  and  giving  pay  raises,  and 
households cut consumption expenditures to increase savings for the future. If a fall in growth expectations 
were  a  one-off  event,  price  levels  would  stabilize  soon  after  necessary  adjustments  were  made.  However, 
when  such  a  decline  happens  several  times,  a  chronic  demand  shortfall  would  keep  placing  downward 
pressure on price levels and deflation would persist. 
  Persistent  deflation  may  also  have  been  caused  by  the  following  mechanism  that  operates  through  the 
price-and wage-setting behavior of firms. Japanese export firms dealt with the severe competition coming from 
low-cost emerging countries by cutting costs – that is, cutting wages and delivery prices. This had a spillover 
effect on the non-manufacturing and public sectors in Japan, resulting in a fall in the general price level. This 
led to an appreciation of the Japanese yen through the purchasing power parity (PPP) mechanism. As this 
currency appreciation partly offsets the effects of initial cost cuts by export firms, the whole cycle starts once 
again, beginning with cost cuts by firms. Deflation persists in that process. 
2   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2012) and IMF (2009). 
3   The  impact  of  population  ageing  is  multifaceted.  Obviously,  it  creates  the  financial  burden  of  supporting  a 
larger  older  population  with  a  smaller  younger  generation,  leading  to  fiscal  problems.  The  dominance  of 
elderly  consumers  changes  the  demand  structure  and  thus  necessitates  structural  changes  in  corporate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
advancements  is  another  element  that  deserves  more  extensive  discussion,  especially  in 
terms of its impact on employment.4  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  explain  my  own  view  about  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  a  slow 
growth environment, which is distinctively Schumpeterian, and describe the policies adopted 
by the Bank of Japan from this viewpoint. But first, let me briefly review the development of 
the real growth rate in Japan and other advanced countries. 
information  and  communication 
Evolution of post-crisis economic growth: Japan as a spearhead of change  
II. 
Japan has an extraordinary history of real GDP growth over the past six decades, from the 
annual average of a roaring 9.7% in the 1960s to a meager 0.6% in the 2000s, as depicted in 
Chart 1. Chart 2 decomposes real GDP growth into the growth in labor productivity and that 
of  labor  inputs.  Note  that  the  peak  of  the  Japanese  property  bubble  is  around  1990. 
Comparing pre-bubble growth (1980s) and post-bubble growth (1990s), we find that most of 
the change in growth is from the substantial slowdown in labor productivity growth.  
There  are  several factors  explaining  this  slowdown  in  labor  productivity  growth,  which  can 
further be decomposed into the growth of total factor productivity (TFP) and the contribution 
of  the  change  in  capital-labor  ratio.  Firstly,  TFP  growth  slowed  because  technological 
catch-up  opportunities  were  exhausted,  the  illusory  TFP  growth  of  the  bubble  period 
evaporated,5  and 
the 
productivity of Japanese firms, unlike the case for firms in the United States.6 Secondly, and 
more  importantly,  the  increase  of  the  capital-to-labor  ratio  was  reduced  sharply  because 
firms  hesitated  to  invest  in  new  projects  or  even  to  replace  old  equipment:  the  firms’  top 
priority then was to “deleverage” – namely, to reduce the excessive stock of capital and debt 
that had been built up during the bubble period. 
Japan  has  faced  a  consecutive  set  of  difficult  problems  during  the  last  quarter  century, 
starting with a property bubble of an unprecedented magnitude and its bursting, followed by 
financial crises in Asia and at home in the situation of a fast-paced population ageing and 
now  declining  population.  However,  the  development  of  the  global  economy  since  the 
mid-2000s suggests that other advanced countries also face similar problems, making Japan 
look like a spearhead of change. Indeed, Chart 3 depicts the rolling ten-year average of per 
capita real GDP growth rate among advanced economies between 1971 and 2010, which in 
theory is closely related to the natural rate of interest. Since the financial crisis, this has fallen 
in the United States and Europe to a level similar to that in Japan. Thus, the issue of raising 
growth potential is likely to become a common policy challenge for advanced countries.  
technology  failed 
improve 
to 
                                                                                                                                                   
strategies.  Moreover,  coupled  with  the  progress  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT),  an 
ageing workforce may result in lower productivity. In Japan, the ageing workforce during the 1990s contributed 
to the deceleration in labor productivity growth, since ICT made obsolete the existing firm-specific know-how 
and human capital. See Minetaki and Nishimura (2010). 
4   Gordon  (2012)  lucidly  explains  a  changing,  non-linear  nature  of  technological  progress  and  suggests  that 
improvement may be reduced substantially in the near future. This is especially relevant with respect to profit 
prospects and employment generation. First, ICT widely reduces profits because more and more products are 
becoming digitized and these digitized products’ prices are subject to constant downward pressure due to the 
fact  that  their  reproduction  costs  are  almost  zero.  Second,  ICT  replaces  middle  management  both  at  the 
workshop  and  in  the  office,  and  thus  reduces  the  number  of  relatively  well-paid  and  career-oriented 
medium-skill jobs (Nishimura 2012). 
5   The best example may be the construction industry, where huge TFP gains are found in the bubble period, 
although construction is an industry of low TFP growth in many countries and many periods. In the bubble 
period, irrational exuberance or conspicuous purchasing behavior was often observed, in which the higher the 
price of the building, the quicker it was sold. See Minetaki and Nishimura (2010). 
6   See footnote 4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A Schumpeterian perspective: banks’ role in innovation dynamics 
III.  
What should be done to lift the growth potential and thus growth expectations, especially in a 
time  of  population  ageing?  The  key  is  to  raise  labor  productivity  –  that  is,  to  increase  the 
value-added  generated  by  labor  inputs.  There  are  two  ways  to  do  this:  cutting  costs  and 
creating new demand. Cost cuts are best fit to a growing population that is demanding more 
high-quality  products  at  lower  prices.7  However,  when  demand  does  not  grow  as  the 
population matures, creating demand is much more important than cutting costs. It is all the 
more important to figure out the potential needs of the society and to provide those goods 
and services for which people are willing to pay.  
When firms attempt to engage in demand-creating innovation, financial intermediaries should 
play  the  crucial  role  of  supporting  them  financially.  In  the  absence  of  active  financial 
intermediations,  high-risk  but  high-return  projects  may  end  up  not  being  undertaken,  the 
technology  spillover  may  be  severely  limited,  and  the  economy  may  fall  into  stagnation. 
Indeed, it is Schumpeter who emphasizes the role of the “banker,” in addition to the role of 
the “entrepreneur” that carries out demand-creating innovation.8  
Crucial role of the banker in the Schumpeterian creative destruction 
Creative destruction, as Schumpeter defines it, starts from a phase of shaking up the existing 
market structure. At this phase, the “entrepreneur” brings in a new combination of technology 
and knowledge while the “banker” provides to the entrepreneur investment funds, which are 
raised through the process of credit creation. Of course, the “banker” here is not limited to 
the bank as it literally means, and it also includes venture capitalists. 
The  banker  plays  two  roles  in  this  process.  First,  the  banker  screens  prospective 
entrepreneurs  and  selects  the  most  promising  ones.  This  is  often  called  the  “expert  eye” 
function of bankers. Second, and more important in practice, the banker often provides firms 
with information related to business matching and new markets, which helps to improve the 
recipient  firms’  performance  even  after  the  initiation  of  funding.9  A  banker  who  selects 
successful entrepreneurs and provides appropriate advice to them at a lower cost than other 
bankers  can  earn  steady  profits  from  an  ongoing  relationship  with  them.10  Such  long-term 
profit-maximizing behavior of the banker improves the efficiency of risk allocation evaluated 
                                                
7   The main strength of Japanese companies until the 1980s was their ability to manufacture and sell a large 
volume  of  high-quality  products.  That  was  made  possible  by  product  quality  improvement  as  well  as 
cost-cutting efforts that enhanced the operational quality and efficiency. A famous example is the “just-in-time” 
system for production and inventory management. There was a limit to maintaining this kind of “cost-cutting 
innovation,” however: the room for further improvement gradually diminished. Furthermore, the rapid catch-up 
by  emerging  countries  in  Asia  made  it  difficult  for  Japanese  manufacturers  to  continue  increasing  profits 
through  cost-cutting  efforts  since  the  1990s:  standardization  based  on  information  technology  as  well  as 
globalization have enabled Asian emerging countries to combine technology and capital in advanced countries 
with the abundant labor available in their own countries to pursue international specialization that helps them 
to achieve an optimal production structure. To put it differently, the old business model that had supported the 
high  growth  of  Japanese  firms  gradually  became  out  of  touch  with  the  renewed  economic  environment 
characterized by advances in information technology and globalization. See Nishimura (2012). 
8   See Schumpeter (1926). 
9   Although  the  second  role  is  not  explicitly  examined  by  Schumpeter  in  his  treatise,  it  becomes  increasingly 
important  in  innovation  as  the  economy  enters  the  age  of  ICT.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  venture 
capital firms contributed to the product development of biotech firms, through both fund provision and other 
kinds  of  assistance  (Michalopoulos  et  al.  2009).  The  latter  includes  the  provision  of  information  related  to 
management and help in business contracts. 
10   In fact, small and medium-sized enterprises often complain that, although this information-providing function is 
most demanded, Japanese banks unfortunately have failed to provide it adequately in post-crisis Japan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
at the macro level and leads to an endogenous increase in the economic growth rate through 
an expansion in the production possibility frontier.11  
Necessity of Schumpeterian banks, particularly in a recession 
Innovation  entails  long-term  investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D),  teaching 
workers new technologies, and the search for new markets. In what phase of the business 
cycle is such long-term investment stimulated? In theory, long-term investment such as R&D 
should gain momentum in a recession, when short-term investment to meet current demand 
decreases.12  In  reality,  however,  the  opposite  is  true:  innovation  drops  sharply  in  a 
recession.13 The reason the theory fails provides an important clue for policy. 
The opportunity cost of long-term investment, which is the foregone profits of not undertaking 
a short-term investment that meets the current demand, decreases in a recession when the 
current  demand  is  weak.  Consequently,  the  theory  predicts  that  the  entrepreneur  will  find 
innovation  to  be  more  profitable  in  a  recession.14  On  the  contrary,  many  empirical  studies 
point out that long-term investment such as R&D may in fact be pro-cyclical, and drop in a 
recession. The most plausible explanation is that the theory implicitly assumes that firms are 
not  subject  to  credit  constraints,  but  this  is  not  the  case  in  practice.  To use  Schumpeter’s 
terminology,  the  theory  assumes  that  the  “banker”  is  always  willing  to  provide  financial 
support to the innovative “entrepreneur.” In reality, however, the “banker” is not willing to do 
so in a recession because credit constraints usually tighten due to firms’ worsening balance 
sheet conditions and renewed concern about an uncertain return on R&D. The consequence 
is that the tone of firms’ innovation activity as a whole becomes low, and the risk of impeding 
long-term growth potential becomes elevated. 
Thus, from the Schumpeterian perspective, the monetary authority should make every effort 
to  maintain  stability  in  the  financial  environment,  particularly  in  a  recession,  so  that  firms’ 
innovative activity is not held back. Admittedly, this is a very subtle balancing act, since we 
should  avoid  bank  loans  from  going  bad  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  efficiency  in  the 
allocation of funds. 
Necessity to consider externality in innovation 
Lastly,  from  the  Schumpeterian  perspective,  the  policymaker  or  the  monetary  authority 
should  properly  take  into  account  “externality”  in  innovation  when  it  seeks  to  support  the 
innovative activity of entrepreneurs. To take as an example, R&D investment leading to the 
development  of  frontier  technology  has  a  clear  positive  externality:  such  investment  has  a 
social  benefit,  in  that  it  encourages  competition  toward  technology  revolution,  which 
eventually gives rise to a knowledge spillover. For each individual firm, however, the private 
return  on  such  investment  is  not  sufficiently  high  unless  the society-wide  spillover  benefits 
are internalized.15 In fact, we often hear that firms actually give up many projects with high 
                                                
11   Michalopoulos  et  al.  (2009)  present  an  endogenous  growth  model  that  features  the  entrepreneur  and  the 
banker, and provide a theoretical perspective to Schumpeter’s idea. However, the model focuses only on the 
“expert eye” function of the banker. 
12   See Aghion et al. (2005, 2010). 
13   See, for example, Aghion et al. (2008) and Mannasoo and Merikull (2011). 
14   This is the heart of the so-called “cleansing effect” of a recession: a recession stimulates innovation activity 
and  rectifies  inefficiencies  in  the  economy.  The  word  “cleansing  effect”  sometimes  refers  exclusively  to 
efficiency  gains  from  the  exit  of  inefficient  firms,  but  the  innovation-induced  mechanism  should  properly  be 
taken into account. 
15   Social  return  has  the  elements  of  both  dynamic  scale  effect  and  learning  effect.  Specifically,  although  the 
initial investment is costly, the cost decreases as the scale of production increases: even if the private return is 
low initially, the social return that takes into account the subsequent benefits may be high. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
social  return  because  of  their  low  private  return.16  To  summarize,  in  the  presence  of 
externalities, long-term investment such as R&D is not carried out sufficiently from a social 
point of view, since each individual firm may not have enough incentive to do so. 
Here, a Schumpeterian perspective of innovation becomes important. A standard policy tool 
to rectify this problem is the government subsidy or so-called Pigovian tax. However, such a 
direct intervention of public authority may severely undermine market efficiency because the 
authority does not have sufficient information and the monitoring ability to implement it. Then, 
it may be desirable to move indirectly toward using financial institutions’ Schumpeterian role, 
stimulating firms’ incentive for innovation while preserving efficiency at the same time. The 
policymaker provides funding for the bankers’ support to promising innovations, counting on 
the bankers’ ability to produce information; namely, the “expert eye” function and “opportunity 
provision” function. In other words, we need a social system to promote innovation, providing 
backing to private returns and shifting allocation of funds and resources toward investment 
projects  with  high  social  return.  Having  this  kind  of  social  system  is  particularly  important 
when  low  private  return  prohibits  firms  from  making  an  effort  toward  innovation  that 
generates social benefits in terms of growth expectations and employment opportunities. 
IV.   Central banking in the post-crisis world: funding for financing economic growth 
Let  me  now  explain  the  policy  initiatives  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  which  specifically  aim  at 
raising the growth potential and thus growth expectations of firms and households. In June 
2010,  the  Bank  introduced  the  “fund  provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth,” which I call the GFSF (Growth Foundation Strengthening 
Facility).17 In October 2012, the Bank announced the introduction of the “fund provisioning 
measure to stimulate bank lending,” which at this moment is being carefully prepared. In a 
nutshell, we can combine both measures into “funding for financing economic growth.”  
These  measures  aim  to  contribute  to  lift  the  potential  growth  rate  through  financial 
intermediation.  Specifically,  they  supply  long-term funds  at  a  very  low  interest  rate  against 
eligible collateral to financial institutions in order to encourage their lending and investment to 
businesses. 
Chart 4 depicts steadily increasing GFSF loans provided to financial institutions by the Bank 
of Japan, which consist of the main-rule loans starting in September 2010 as well as three 
special-rule  ones  introduced  afterward.  Chart  5  shows  the  amount  of  financial  institutions’ 
loans to firms that the GFSF generated, categorized by growth-related business lines. Here, 
the  “environment  and  energy  business”  accounts  for  the  largest  share,  followed  by  the 
“medical,  nursing  cares,  and  other  health-related  business”  and  the  “development  and 
upgrading of social infrastructure.” Indeed, the GFSF has induced sizable efforts by financial 
institutions to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth.  
Let me point out three theoretical rationales of these fund-provisioning measures or facilities 
from the Schumpeterian perspective that I have explained. First, they make the most of the 
Schumpeterian  bankers’  informational  capacity  in  screening  innovative  entrepreneurs  and 
providing information valuable that will allow them to grow. The “expert eye” of the bankers 
plays  a  vital  role  in  screening  projects,  and  their  good-advisor  function  substantially 
                                                
16   As  one  example,  consider  an  anonymous  manufacturer’s  plan  to  develop  a  mine  detection  robot.  In  this 
company, there were several research projects that had the objective of stimulating the R&D activity of the 
company. One of the projects was the R&D of a mine detection robot, which utilized the sensor technology 
owned  by  the  company.  The  company  eventually  gave  up  on  the  project  because,  as  a  private  company 
seeking profits, it was difficult to continue with a project that seemed to yield little return. The problem was that 
there was a lack of demand to properly reflect the social importance of the robot. See Nishimura (2004). 
17   See  Nishimura  (2010)  for  details.  It  also  describes  possible  measures  to  strengthen  the  foundation  for 
economic growth through financial intermediation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
increases the value of innovation.18 Second, the policy measures try to counter the negative 
effect  of  a  recession  by  providing  financial  support  to  the  “banker”  at  a  time  of  many 
headwinds to the economy. Third, the policy measures aim to act as a catalyst for financial 
institutions’  lending  and  investment  to  businesses  with  high  social  return.  By  offering 
long-term  funds  at  a  very  low  interest  rate,  they  supplement  the  low  private  return  that 
mirrors the presence of externality in innovation. 
The policy philosophy here is different from that of the Keynesian approach. These measures 
aim  to  improve  financial  intermediation’s  long-term  efficiency  in  resource  allocations,  while 
the Keynesian approach endorses public spending to fill the short-run shortage in aggregate 
demand.  It  also  differs  from  neoliberalism,  which  rests  on  the  superiority  of  free  and 
competitive  markets  and  thus  makes  every  effort  to  avoid  public  interventions.19  It  is 
distinctively Schumpeterian, in that it has the aim of raising the growth potential or liveliness 
of the economy. For this very reason, one could say that it is unconventional in the domain of 
monetary policy design. I certainly do not dispute such claim. However, we should recognize 
that a secular decline in the real growth rate and sluggish growth expectations have plagued 
Japan in past decades. Thus, the Bank’s indirect intervention through the financial system – 
that  is,  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  fund-provisioning  measures  –  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the 
principle  of  monetary  policy  stipulated  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act;  namely,  “currency  and 
monetary control by the Bank of Japan shall be aimed at achieving price stability, thereby 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy.” 
Concluding remarks: a way forward 
V.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  Sluggish  productivity  growth  reduces  potential  growth.  It  not  only 
scales down the supply side but also places a negative impact on the demand side. This is 
because  household  consumption  and  corporate  investment  are  held  back  once  the 
households’  income  prospects  and  the  firms’  earnings  forecasts  are  weakened.  Both  the 
supply  and  demand  sides  lose  momentum  due  to  productivity  declines,  resulting  in  a 
persistent fall in the natural rate of interest. 
Deleveraging in the aftermath of the bubble bursting and the financial crisis reinforces the fall 
of the natural rate of interest, since the private sector reduces expenditures rapidly and by a 
large  amount.20  As  the  policy  rate  reaches  the  zero  lower  bound  and  room  for  further 
unconventional  –  as  well  as  conventional  –  monetary  easing  diminishes,  it  becomes  even 
more difficult for central banks to stabilize the economy and price levels. In such a situation, 
the central bank needs to shape policy frameworks so as to contribute to growth potential 
and thus growth expectations, and hence raise the natural rate of interest.  
The  situation  I  have  described  is  no  longer  unique  to  Japan  and  rather  common  in  other 
advanced economies, and even for some emerging economies facing population ageing in 
the  near  future.  I  believe  that  the  seemingly  unconventional  activist  policy  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan in funding for financing economic growth may be relevant for these economies as well 
in  the  coming  years.  My  interpretation  of  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  in  the  United 
                                                
18   Although it is not widely recognized, this good-advisor function is important in helping the entrepreneur grow. 
Unfortunately, Japanese financial institutions failed to act as good advisors in improving the performance of 
borrower firms (Fukao et al. 2005). 
19   See Aghion (2012) for this classification. Aghion et al. (2012) claim with both theory and empirical evidence 
that monetary policy influences aggregate productivity through its impact on R&D investment by firms. 
20   Guerrieri  and  Lorenzoni  (2011)  point  out  that  an  unanticipated  tightening  of  borrowing  constraints  during  a 
financial crisis leads to a fall in the natural rate of interest. First, borrowers facing financial constraints have to 
deleverage.  Second,  even  lenders  not  facing  financial  constraints  have  to  increase  precautionary  savings 
once  they  become  aware  of  the  risk  that  their  constraints  may  bind  in  the  future.  Similarly,  Eggertson  and 
Krugman  (2012)  claim  that  the  natural  rate  of  interest  declines  and  deflationary  pressure  becomes  large 
during the deleveraging process, induced by a tightening in the financial constraints. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Kingdom is that it has similar Schumpeterian effects, although this scheme’s origin may be 
different from those of the fund provisioning measures of the Bank of Japan. 
References 
Aghion, P. (2012), “From Growth Theory to Growth Policy Design,” LSE, Economic & Social 
Research Council (E.S.R.C.). 
Aghion,  P.,  G.-M.  Angeletos,  A.  Banerjee,  and  K.  Manova  (2005),  “Volatility  and  Growth: 
Credit  Constraints  and  Productivity-Enhancing  Investment,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series 
No.11349. 
Aghion,  P.,  G.-M.  Angeletos,  A.  Banerjee,  and  K.  Manova  (2010),  “Volatility  and  Growth: 
Credit  Constraints  and  the  Composition  of  Investment,”  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics, 
Vol.57, pp.246–265. 
Aghion, P., P. Ashkenazy, N. Berman, G. Cette and L. Eymard (2008), “Credit Constraints 
and  the  Cyclicality  of  R&D  Investment:  Evidence  from  France,”  Banque  de  France,  Notes 
d’états et de Recherche-R#198. 
Aghion,  P.,  E.  Farhi,  and  E.  Kharroubi  (2012),  “Monetary  Policy,  Liquidity,  and  Growth,” 
NBER Working Paper Series No.18072. 
Eggertson,  G.  and  P.  Krugman  (2012),  “Debt,  Deleveraging  and  the  Liquidity  Trap:  A 
Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Working Paper. 
Fukao,  K.,  K.  G.  Nishimura,  Q.-Y.  Sui,  and  M.  Tomiyama  (2005),  “Japanese  Banks’ 
Monitoring  Activities  and  the  Performance  of  Borrower  Firms:  1981-1996,”  International 
Economics and Economic Policy, Vol.2, No.4, pp.337-362. 
IMF  (2009),  “What’s  the  Damage?  Medium-Term  Output  Dynamics  after  Financial  Crises,” 
World Economic Outlook, Chapter 4, October 2009. 
Gordon, R. J. (2012), “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six 
Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper Series No.18315. 
Guerrieri,  V.  and  G.  Lorenzoni  (2011),  “Credit  Crises,  Precautionary  Savings  and  the 
Liquidity Trap,” MIT, mimeo. 
Mannasoo,  K.  and  J.  Merikull  (2011),  “R&D  in  Boom  and  Bust:  Evidence  from  the  World 
Bank Financial Crisis Survey,” Working Papers of Eesti Pank No.7/2011. 
Michalopoulos, S., L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2009), “Financial Innovation and Endogenous 
Growth,” NBER Working Paper Series No.15356. 
Minetaki,  K.  and  K.  G.  Nishimura  (2010),  Information  Technology  Innovation  and  the 
Japanese Economy, Stanford University Press. 
Nishimura, K.G. (2004), The Japanese Economy: Inconspicuous Structural Transformation, 
Nihon Keizai Shinbun Sha. 
Nishimura,  K.  G.  (2010),  “Toward  Strengthening  the  Foundation  for  Economic  Growth: 
Efforts  of  Financial  Institutions  and  the  Bank  of  Japan,”  Speech  at  Symposium  2010  on 
“Cooperation among Finance, Industry, Academia, and Government” Organized by the Kanto 
Bureau  of  Economic,  Trade  and 
Industry,  December  2,  2010,  available  at: 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2010/ko1012c.htm/  
Nishimura, K. G. (2012), “Demographic Transition, Impact of ICT, and Globalization: A Long 
View of the Post-Crisis World,” Speech at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, August 
27, 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/ 
data/ko120828a1.pdf 
Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2012),  “This  Time  is  Different,  Again?  The  US  Five  Years 
After the Onset of Subprime,” VOX. 
available 
2012, 
at: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Schumpeter, J. A. (1926), Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung: Eine Untersuchung über 
Unternehmergewinn, Kapital, Kredit, Zins und den Konjunkturzyklus, 2nd revised ed. Leipzig: 
Duncker & Humblot. (The Theory of Economic Development, Translated by Redvers Opie, 
Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, New Jersey, 1983.) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
