DeLisle Worrell: Lessons for small business from the financial crisis 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
19th Annual Meeting of the Small Business Association, Bridgetown, 20 November 2012. 
 The richest source of expertise about small business in Barbados lies with the experience of 
small  businesses  themselves.  Many  in  this  audience  have  far  richer  insights  about  what 
makes for success in small business than I do, from their many years of entrepreneurship, in 
good times and bad. My comments are mainly on the basis of observation and discussion, of 
the operations of the many small businesses whose products and services I have used over 
the years, and those with which my family and friends have been associated in one capacity 
or another. 
Before sharing my brief thoughts about the challenges facing small business I will give you a 
brief rundown on the economy: 
The  challenge for  small business  is  similar  to  the  challenge for  all  of  us:  how  to  raise  our 
productivity and quality to such a high level that our customers are happy to pay premium 
prices for  our goods  and  services.  Each  individual  and  each  business  must find their  own 
answer to that question. What is it that makes what you are selling special, that keeps the 
customers  coming  even  when  competitors  spring  up  and  undercut  your  prices?  Is  it  the 
ambience that you offer? Is it your comprehensive and in-depth knowledge of your craft, your 
awareness of relevant new trends from across the globe? Is it the personalised attention you 
offer to each and every customer?  
The savvy  business  person  recognises  that they  are  hostage  to  their  customers. If  people 
don’t  buy,  the  business  will  not  survive,  no  matter  the  price  or  quality  of  the  product. 
Therefore, the way to secure your company’s future is to build your customer base. That is 
what competition is really about. How do you attract a sufficient volume of business, and how 
do you make your customers loyal to you? The answer to that question will encompass many 
different facets and characteristics of your market and operations, but there are a few points 
of general applicability. 
The first  is  that  you  must  treat  every  customer  well,  with  a  genuine  concern  that  they  are 
happy with the product or service that you provide. You have to build a relationship with your 
clients. I believe that a lack of concern about business relationships is among the ailments 
that are contributing to the decline of the American style of capitalism. If I am a mortgage 
lender and I hope to stay in business for the long term, my concern will be that my customers 
get the best home they can truly afford. I will not encourage them to take a mortgage that 
requires a payment that their incomes cannot support, even if I can benefit from it in the short 
term, because I want to preserve my relationship with my client. They will be receptive when 
I  market  other  services  to  them,  and  they  will  spread  the  word  about  my  services. 
Relationships build customer loyalty, and loyal customers stick with you in hard times. 
When  going  into  business  for  yourself,  it  seems  best  to  start  with  a  sizeable  equity 
commitment, and try to keep it intact, as your buffer against lean times. It is not a good idea 
to start a business with borrowed money, because you invariably start with no customers and 
therefore no revenue. You will need to fund yourself, start-up costs and much of the initial 
running costs, all out of your own resources, until you have built revenues to the breakeven 
level.  What  is  more,  things  do  go  wrong,  and  you  may  find  yourself  losing  some  of  the 
start-up capital as a result. If, in addition to all of this, your new venture has to meet bank 
service  charges  on  a  loan  from  the  first  month  of  operation,  the  chances  of  a  successful 
launch are much reduced. Indeed, your best bet is to launch your business while you are still 
in salaried employment, if possible, so that there is already a revenue stream to cover early 
expenses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I admit that this advice is not helpful to most of this audience, who are already in business, 
and suffering through some very trying times. I do think that those who may have lost their 
jobs and are seeking ways to employ their skills and experience in remunerative ways might 
bear these realities in mind. Your best bet is to package your experience and expertise into a 
product or service which stands out in the crowd that you can sell from home, and to depend 
on marketing by word of mouth. 
For all of you who are struggling through the hard times the message is to make a realistic 
adjustment plan, based on pessimistic assumptions about the future, but with an eye to your 
long term survival. Exactly what that involves will have to be worked out on a case by case 
basis,  because  there  will  be  trade-offs,  and  the  options  available  depend  on  your  starting 
point. For example, for almost all of us, adjustment means having to shrink our operations. 
However, if we simply lay off workers to balance the books we may prejudice the survival of 
the firm, because of the adverse impact on the morale of the firm and the quality of output, 
and the consequent loss of hitherto loyal customers who are put off by your falling standards. 
There are many other variables to be taken into account, such as the timing of adjustment, 
the treatment of maintenance and renovation, the extent of the owners’ resources, whether 
there are marketable assets that might be sold, etc. 
As  everyone  knows,  small  business  makes  a  disproportionally  large  contribution  to 
employment,  compared  to  large  businesses,  in  all  economies,  including  our  own.  This  is 
especially so in these times of stagnation, when so much of the labour force is forced back 
on their own resources. However, small business faces an extra challenge in a country like 
Barbados, because we need foreign exchange in order to grow, and small businesses need 
to depend largely on others to do the overseas marketing that brings in the foreign exchange 
from which they ultimately benefit.  
Ultimately the message for small business is the same as for all Barbadians: we need to sell 
quality,  value  and  unique  experiences,  and  to  secure  a  loyal  clientele,  however  small  to 
begin with, by a consistently high standard of service. To survive and prosper we need to 
have  a  long  term  plan  to  preserve  or  restore  the  viability  of  our  business.  It  needs  to  be 
realistic,  because  it  must  sell  itself  to  the  financial  institutions,  equity  holders  and  others, 
whose assistance and accommodation you may need in order to complete the adjustment. 
Finally,  successful  adjustment  may  take  a  longer  time  than  we  would  like.  However,  we 
should be wary of action that, while necessary, may be too precipitate. In medical practice it 
is  sometimes  necessary  to  stabilise  the  patient’s  condition  before  embarking  on  radical 
surgery, and a similar strategy may be warranted for some firms. 
In the end, small businesses face the same challenge that Barbados faces as a nation: to 
marshall  our  skills,  experience  and  ingenuity  to  develop  products  and  services  that  are 
unique and compelling, and to build a loyal clientele for the long term. The way forward is for 
each one of us to do what we do best, to the best of our ability. Above all, we must have 
confidence in ourselves as we face the uncertain future. We will need to be patient, but we 
should pursue our goals with firm determination, as individuals and as businesses, large and 
small.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
