Glenn Stevens: Challenges for central banking 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Bank of 
Thailand’s 70th Anniversary and 3rd Policy Forum, Bangkok, 12 December 2012. 
 Monday  marked  the  70th  anniversary  of  the  commencement  of  operations  of  the  Bank  of 
Thailand, on 10 December 1942. Conceived under war-time occupation, the Bank has grown 
to be a key institution in Thailand. It is a pleasure and an honour to come to Bangkok to take 
part  in  one  of  a  series  of  events  to  mark  the  anniversary,  and  I  want  to  thank  Governor 
Prasarn for the invitation.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  has  long  enjoyed  a  strong  relationship  with  the  Bank  of 
Thailand. In 1997, the RBA was among those central banks to enter a swap agreement with 
the  Bank  of  Thailand  shortly  after  the  crisis  broke.  This  was  the  first  part  of  Australian 
assistance to the regional partners who were under pressure, which later extended to Korea 
and  Indonesia.  In  fact,  Australia  and  Japan  were  the  only  countries  that  offered  direct 
financial support to all three countries.  
It was a predecessor of mine, Bernie Fraser, who made the suggestion 17 years ago that 
cooperation  in  the  Asian  region  might  be  improved  by  the  establishment  of  a  dedicated 
institution,  along  the  lines  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  Basel –  the  “Asian 
BIS”.1 Such a body has not come to pass – at least not yet! – but it is fair to say that this 
suggestion and others like it helped to spur the Basel BIS to reach out to Asia.2  
The central banks of the region, taking the initiative through the Executives Meeting of East 
Asian and Pacific central banks – EMEAP (not the most attractive acronym) – have improved 
cooperation substantially over the years. Thanks to long-term efforts at building relationships, 
and  the  vision  of  key  governors  and  deputy  governors,  including  at  the  Bank  of  Thailand, 
EMEAP has developed into a mature forum for sharing information, and continues to develop 
its ability to find common positions on global issues and to promote crisis readiness.  
Yet as the central banks have grown closer and become more effective in their cooperation, 
the challenges we face have only  increased. Today I  want to speak about three of them.3 
First,  I  will  talk  about  the  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  the  need  to  allow  that  to 
consider  financial  stability.  Secondly,  I  will  make  some  observations  about  the  more 
prominent role for central banks' own balance sheets that we are seeing in some countries. 
Then, thirdly, I will offer some observations about international spillovers. In so doing, I am 
not  seeking  to  deliver  any  particular  messages  about  the  near-term  course  of  monetary 
policy in either Australia or Thailand.  
                                                
1   Fraser  B  (1995),  ‘Central  Bank  Cooperation  in  the  Asian  Region’,  Address  to  the  24th  Conference  of 
Economists, Adelaide, 25 September. 
2   There was a round of new shareholdings taken up by Asian central banks in the late 1990s, including Thailand 
in 2000. The BIS established an Asian office in Hong Kong in 1998, and the Asian Consultative Council in 
2001. Admittedly, the major shareholdings of the BIS remain overwhelmingly North Atlantic in their focus. But 
the  BIS  has  made  a  good  deal  of  progress  –  more  than  many  institutions  perhaps  –  in  addressing  the 
imbalances in global financial governance, even if there is further to go. 
3   The Bank of Thailand quite recently held a conference on exactly this topic, with a number of distinguished 
speakers. My remarks draw on some of their insights. See Challenges to Central Banks in the Era of the New 
Globalisation,  Bank  of  Thailand  International  Symposium  2010,  available  at  <http://www.bot.or.th/Thai/ 
EconomicConditions/Semina/Pages/Inter_Symposium.aspx> 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
It is more than two decades since the framework of Inflation Targeting (IT) was pioneered in 
New  Zealand  and  Canada.  The  United  Kingdom  was  an  enthusiastic  early  adopter  from 
1992. Australia adopted IT in 1993.  
Among  the  early  adopters,  the  move  to  IT  was  driven  by  a  mixture  of  principle  and 
pragmatism. The key principle was that monetary policy was, in the end, about anchoring the 
value of money – that is, about price stability. The pragmatism arose because one or more 
previous  approaches  designed  to  achieve  that  –  monetary  targeting,  exchange-rate 
targeting,  unconstrained  discretion  –  had  proved  at  best  ineffective,  and  at  worst 
destabilising, for the countries concerned. Hence many of the adopters shared  a desire to 
strengthen the credibility of their policy frameworks. As the initial adopters came to have a 
measure of success in combining reasonable growth with low inflation, other countries were 
attracted to the model.  
According to the IMF, more than 30 countries now profess to follow some form of IT.4 The 
euro area could also be counted among this group though it also professes adherence to the 
“second pillar” of “monetary analysis”. Even the United States can, I think, be counted as a 
(fairly  recent)  IT  adopter,  since  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  is  these  days  quite 
explicit about its desired inflation performance.5  
The Bank of Thailand was one of a number of emerging economies that adopted IT around 
the turn of the century. Twelve years on, Thailand can boast an impressive record of price 
stability under this framework. A high level of transparency has ensured that financial market 
participants understand the framework, and view it as credible. Moreover, price stability has 
not come at the cost of subdued economic growth, with output expanding at a brisk pace in 
the 2000s.  
While inflation targeting is not for everyone, the Thai experience illustrates that, when done 
well, it can enhance economic outcomes. I can endorse the favourable verdict offered on the 
Thai experience delivered by Grenville and Ito (2010).6 
So I think that the adoption of IT, including in Thailand, can be seen as a success in terms of 
the straightforward objectives set for it. To make such a claim is not, however, to claim that 
controlling inflation is, alone, sufficient to underwrite stability in a broader sense. If there were 
any thought that controlling inflation over a two or three year horizon was “enough”, we have 
been well and truly disabused of that by experience over the past half decade. Price stability 
doesn't guarantee financial stability.  
Indeed  it  could  be  argued  that  the  “great  moderation”  –  an  undoubted  success  on  the 
inflation/output metric – fostered, or at least allowed, a leverage build-up that was ultimately 
inimical  to  financial  stability  and  hence  macroeconomic  stability.  The  success  in  lessening 
volatility in economic activity, inflation and interest rates over quite a lengthy period made it 
feasible for firms and individuals to think that a degree of increased leverage was safe.7 But 
                                                
4  
IMF  (2012),  Annual  Report,  Appendix 
ft/ar/2012/eng/pdf/a2.pdf>. 
II,  pp  14–16,  available  at  <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ 
5   The Fed points out, quite properly, that it has a dual mandate – “full employment” being the other component. I 
don’t think this precludes being an exponent of IT: the Reserve Bank of Australia has always insisted that it is 
quite compatible to combine an objective for medium-term inflation performance with the notion that we give 
due weight to the path of economic activity. 
6   Grenville S and T Ito (2010), “An Independent Evaluation of the Bank of Thailand’s Monetary Policy under the 
Inflation  Targeting  Framework,  2000–2010”,  available  at  <http://www.bot.or.th/Thai/MonetaryPolicy/ 
Documents/GrenvilleItoV10(Oct22).pdf> 
7   Stevens  G  (2006),  “Risk  and  the  Macroeconomy”,  Address  to  the  2006  Securities  &  Derivatives  Industry 
Association Conference, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 8–17. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
higher  leverage  exposed  people  to  more  distress  if  and  when  a  large  negative  shock 
eventually came along. This explanation still leaves, of course, a big role in causing the crisis 
–  the  major  role  in  fact  –  for  poor  lending  standards,  even  fraud  in  some  cases,  fed  by 
distorted  incentives  and  compounded  by  supervisory  weaknesses  and  inability  to  see 
through the complexity of various financial instruments.  
That price stability was, in itself, not enough to guarantee overall stability, should hardly be 
surprising, actually. It has been understood for some time that it is very difficult to model the 
financial sector, and that in many of the standard macroeconomic models in use, including in 
many  central  banks,  this  area  was  under-developed.  Mainstream  macroeconomics  was 
perhaps a bit slow to see the financial sector as it should be seen: that is, as having its own 
dynamic  of  innovation  and  risk  taking;  as  being  not  only  an  amplification  mechanism  for 
shocks  but  a  possible  source  of  shocks  in  its  own  right,  rather  than  just  as  passively 
accommodating the other sectors in the economy.8  
Notwithstanding the evident analytical difficulties, the critique being offered in some quarters 
is that central banks paid too little attention in the 2000s to the build-up of credit and leverage 
and to the role that easy monetary policy played in that. It is hard to disagree, though I would 
observe that this is somewhat ironical, given that IT was a model to which central banks were 
attracted  after  the  shortcomings  of  targets for money  and  credit  quantities  in  the  1980s. It 
could  be  noted  as  well  that  the  ECB  always  had  the  2nd  pillar,  but  the  euro  area  still 
experienced the crisis – in part because of credit granted in or to peripheral countries, and in 
part because of exposures by banks in the core countries to excessive leverage in the US.  
The upshot is that the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability  is being 
re-evaluated. As this occurs, we seem to be moving on from the earlier, unhelpful, framing of 
this  issue  in  terms  of  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  monetary  policy  should  “prick 
bubbles” and whether bubbles can even be identified. The issue is not whether something is, 
or is not, a bubble; that is always a subjective assessment anyway in real time. The issue is 
the potential for damaging financial instability when an economic expansion is accompanied 
by a cocktail of rising asset values, rising leverage and declining lending standards. One can 
remain  agnostic  on  the  bubble/non-bubble  question  but  still  have  concerns  about  the 
potential  for  a  reversal  to  cause  problems.  Perhaps  more  fundamentally,  although  the 
connections  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  excesses  can  be  complex,  in  the  end 
central  banks  set  the  price  of  short-term  borrowing.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this  affects 
risk-taking behaviour. Indeed that is one of the intended effects of low interest rates globally 
at present (which is not to say that this is wrong in an environment of extreme risk aversion).  
It  follows  that  broader  financial  stability  considerations  have  to  be  given  due  weight  in 
monetary policy decisions. This is becoming fairly widely accepted. The challenge for central 
banks,  though,  is  to  incorporate  into  our  frameworks  all  we  have  learned  from  the  recent 
experience  about financial  stability,  but  without throwing  away  all  that  is  good  about those 
frameworks. We learned a lot about the importance of price stability, and how to achieve it, 
through the 1970s, 80s and 90s. We learned too about the importance of institutional design. 
We shouldn't discard those lessons in our desire to do more to assure financial stability. We 
shouldn't make the error of ignoring older lessons in the desire to heed new ones.  
                                                
8   Some central banks have given a lot of thought to the question of how to manage financial stability concerns 
within a standard IT-type framework, though definitive answers have been hard to come by. See for example 
Bean C (2003), “Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation Targets Enough?”, in A 
Richards and T Robinson (eds), Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve 
Bank  of  Australia,  Sydney,  pp  48–76;  Svensson  L  (2012),  “Differing  Views  on  Monetary  Policy”,  Speech 
delivered  at 
the  SNS/SIFR  Finanspanel,  Stockholm,  8  June,  available  at  <http://www.bis.org/ 
review/r120612c.pdf>. A significant problem is that financial cycles may have a much lower frequency than 
normal  business  cycles  so  incorporating  them  into  a  usual  two  or  three  year  horizon  for  policymaking  is 
difficult. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Rather,  we  have  to  keep  both  sets  of  objectives  in  mind.  We  will  have  to  accept  the 
occasional need to make a judgement about short-term trade-offs, but that is the nature of 
policymaking. And in any event, over the long run price stability and financial stability surely 
cannot be in conflict. To the extent that they have not managed to coexist properly within the 
frameworks in use, that has been, in my judgement, in no small measure because the policy 
time horizon was too short, and perhaps also because people became too ambitious about 
fine-tuning.  
We  also  must,  of  course,  heed  the  lesson  that,  whatever  the  framework,  the  practice  of 
financial supervision matters a great deal. Speaking of supervisory tools, these days it is, of 
course,  considered  correct  to  mention  that  there  are  other  means  of  “leaning  against  the 
wind”  of  financial  cycles,  in  the  form  of  the  grandly-labelled  “macroprudential  tools”.  Such 
measures  used  to  be  more  plainly  labelled  “regulation”.  They  may  be  useful  in  some 
instances when applied in a complementary way to monetary policy, where the interest rate 
that seems appropriate for overall macroeconomic circumstances is nonetheless associated 
with  excessive  borrowing  in  some  sector  or  other.  In  such  a  case  it  may  be  sensible  to 
implement  a  sector-specific  measure  –  using  a  loan  to  value  ratio  constraint  or  a  capital 
requirement. (This is entirely separate to the case for higher capital in lending institutions in 
general).  
We need, however, to approach such measures with our eyes open. Macroprudential tools 
will have their place. But if the problem is fundamentally one of interest rates being too low 
for  a  protracted  period,  history  suggests  that  the  efforts  of  regulators  to  constrain 
balance-sheet  growth  will  ultimately  not  work.  If  the  incentive  to  borrow  is  powerful  and 
persistent enough, people will find a way to do it, even if that means the associated activity 
migrating  beyond  the  regulatory  perimeter.  So  in  the  new-found,  or  perhaps  re-learned, 
enthusiasm for such tools, let us be realists.  
The limits of central banking 
That policy measures of any kind have their limitations is a theme with broader applications, 
especially  for  central  banks.  The  central  banks  of  major  countries  were  certainly  quite 
innovative in their responses to the unfolding crisis.9 Numerous programs to provide funding 
to  private  institutions,  against  vastly  wider  classes  of  collateral,  were  a  key  feature  of  the 
central  bank  response  to  the  situation.  In  essence,  when  the  private  financial  sector  was 
suddenly  under  pressure  to  shrink  its  balance  sheet,  the  central  banks  found  themselves 
obliged to facilitate or slow the balance-sheet adjustment by changing the size of their own 
balance  sheets.  This  is  the  appropriate  response,  as  dictated  by  long  traditions  of  central 
banking stretching back to Bagehot.  
Conceptually, at least initially, these balance-sheet operations could be seen as distinct from 
the overall monetary policy stance of the central bank. But as the crisis has gone on such 
distinctions  have  inevitably  become  much  less  clear  as  “conventional”  monetary  policy 
reached its limits.  
It  was  fortuitous for  some,  perhaps, that the  zero-lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  – 
modern parlance for what we learned about as the “liquidity trap” – had gone from being a 
text  book  curiosum  to  a  real  world  problem  in  Japan  in  the  1990s.  Japan  subsequently 
pioneered the use of “quantitative easing” in the modern era. This provided some experiential 
base for other central banks when the recession that unfolded from late 2008 was so deep 
that there was insufficient scope to cut interest rates in response. So in addition to programs 
to  provide  funding  to  intermediaries  in  order  to  prevent  a  collapse  of  the  financial  system 
                                                
9  
I note parenthetically that several important cross-border initiatives to manage liquidity pressures were put in 
place very quickly by key central banks. This kind of cooperation at a technical level is something at which the 
central banks are actually quite good. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
when  market  funding  dried  up,  there  have  been  programs  of  “unconventional  monetary 
policy” in several major countries over recent years. These have been varyingly thought of as 
operating by one or more of:  
• 
reducing longer-term interest rates on sovereign or quasi-sovereign debt by “taking 
duration out of the market” once the overnight rate was effectively zero  
reducing  credit  spreads  applying  to  private  sector  securities  (“credit  easing”, 
operating via the “risk taking” channel)  
adding  to  the  stock  of  monetary  assets  held  by  the  private  sector  (the  “money” 
channel, appealing to quantity theory notions of the transmission of monetary policy)  
in the euro area in particular, commitments to lower the spreads applying to certain 
sovereign borrowers in the currency union (described as reducing “re-denomination 
risk”).  
   As  a  result  of  such  policy  innovation,  the  balance  sheets  of  central  banks  in  the  major 
countries have expanded very significantly, in some cases approaching or even surpassing 
their war-time peaks (Graph 1). Further expansion may yet occur.  
Graph 1  
  It  is  no  criticism  of  these  actions  –  taken  as  they  have  been  under  the  most  pressing  of 
circumstances  –  to  observe  that  they  raise  some  very  important  and  difficult  questions for 
central  banks.  There  is  discomfort  in  some  quarters  that  central  banks  appear  to  be 
exercising an unprecedented degree of discretion, introducing new policies yielding uncertain 
benefits, and possible costs.  
One obvious consideration is that central banks, in managing their own balance sheets, need 
to  assess  and  manage  risk  across  a  wider  and  much  larger  pool  of  assets. Gone  are  the 
comfortable days of holding a modest portfolio of bonds issued by the home government that 
were seen as of undoubted credit quality. Central bank portfolios today have more risk. To 
date in the major countries, this has worked well in the sense that long-term yields on the 
core portfolios have come down to the lowest levels in half a century or more. Large profits 
have been remitted to governments. But at some point, those yields will surely have to rise.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Of  course  large  central  bank  balance  sheets  carrying  sizeable  risk  is  hardly  news  around 
Asia.  Once  again,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  made  an  excellent  contribution  to  the 
international discussion here, having recently held a joint conference with the BIS on central 
bank  balance  sheets  and  the  challenges  ahead.10  The  difference  is  that  in  Asia  the  risks 
arise from holdings of foreign-currency assets which have been accumulated as a result of 
exchange-rate  management.  There  is  obviously  valuation  risk  on  such  holdings.  There  is 
also  often  a  negative  carry  on  such  assets  since  yields  on  the  Asian  domestic  obligations 
which effectively fund foreign holdings are typically higher than those in the major countries. 
In  effect  the  citizens  of  Asia  continue  to  provide,  through  their  official  reserves,  very  large 
loans  to  major  country  governments  at  yields  below  those  which  could  be  earned  by 
deploying that capital at home in the region.  
For  the  major  countries  a  further  dimension  to  what  is  happening  is  the  blurring  of  the 
distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  Granted,  central  banks  are  not  directly 
purchasing government debt at issue. But the size of secondary market purchases, and the 
share of the debt stock held by some central banks, are sufficiently large that it can only be 
concluded  that  central  bank  purchases  are  materially  alleviating  the  market  constraint  on 
government borrowing. At the very least this is lowering debt service costs, and it may also 
condition how quickly fiscal deficits need to be reduced. There is nothing necessarily wrong 
with  that  in  circumstances  of  deficient  private  demand  with  low  inflation  or  the  threat  of 
deflation. In fact it could be argued that fiscal and monetary policies might actually be jointly 
more effective in raising both short and long-term growth in those countries if central bank 
funding could be made to lead directly to actual public final spending – say directed towards 
infrastructure with a positive and long-lasting social return – as opposed to relying on indirect 
effects on private spending.  
The  problem  will  be  the  exit  from  these  policies,  and  the  restoration  of  the  distinction 
between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  with  the  appropriate  disciplines.  The  problem  isn't  a 
technical  one:  the  central  banks  will  be  able  to  design  appropriate technical  modalities  for 
reversing quantitative easing when needed. The real issue is more likely to be that ending a 
lengthy  period  of guaranteed  cheap funding for  governments may  prove  politically  difficult. 
There is history to suggest so. It is no surprise that some worry that we are heading some 
way back towards the world of the 1920s to 1960s where central banks were “captured” by 
the Government of the day.11, 12  
Most fundamentally, the question is whether people are fully understanding of the limits to 
central banks' abilities. It is, to repeat, not to be critical of actions to date to wonder whether 
private  market  participants,  and  perhaps  more  importantly  governments,  recognise  what 
central banks cannot do. Central banks can provide liquidity to shore up financial stability and 
they  can  buy  time  for  borrowers  to  adjust.  But  they  cannot,  in  the  end,  put  government 
finances on a sustainable course and they cannot create the real resources that need to be 
found  from  somewhere  to  strengthen  bank  capital.  They  cannot  costlessly  correct  earlier 
misallocation of real capital investment. They cannot shield people from the implications of 
having mis-assessed their own life-time budget constraints and as a result having consumed 
                                                
10   See  BIS  (2012),  “Are  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheets  Too  Large?”,  Proceedings  from  the  2011  Bank  of 
Thailand-BIS  Research  Conference:  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheets  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific:  The  Policy 
Challenges  Ahead,  Chiang  Mai,  12–13  December  2011,  available  at  <http://www.bis.org/publ/ 
bppdf/bispap66.pdf>. 
11   Goodhart  C  (2010),  “The  Changing  Role  of  Central  Banks”,  BIS  Working  Paper  No  326,  available  at 
<http://www.bis.org/publ/work326.pdf>. 
12   A further question is whether significant parts of private markets for which central banks are de facto a more or 
less complete substitute today will actually resume when central banks seek to step back, or whether those 
market capacities will have atrophied. This is something the Bank of Japan has long worried about – since it 
has been involved in QE for more than a decade. It will also be relevant in European inter-bank markets and 
probably elsewhere. Of course some may not mourn the loss of such markets, but that would be short-sighted. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
too much. They cannot combat the effects of population aging or drive the innovation that 
raises productivity and creates new markets. Nor can they, or should they, put themselves in 
the position of deciding what real resource transfers should take place between countries in 
a currency union.  
One fears, in short, that while the central banks have been centre stage – rightly in many 
ways – in the early responses to the crisis, and in buying time for other adjustments by taking 
bold  initiatives  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  the  limits  of  what  they  can  do  may  become 
more  apparent  in  the  years  ahead.  A  key  task  for  central  banks  is  to  try  to  communicate 
these limits, all the while doing what they can to sustain confidence that solutions can in fact 
be found and pointing out from where they might come.  
Challenges with spillovers 
Talking  about  the  challenges  associated  with  large  balance-sheet  activities  leads  naturally 
into a discussion about international spillovers.  
In one sense, this is not a new issue. It has been a cause of anxiety and disagreement since 
the latter days of the Bretton Woods agreement at least. The remark attributed to the then 
Secretary  of  the  US  Treasury  in  regard  to  European  concerns  about  the  weakness  of  the 
US dollar in the 1970s of “it's our currency, but your problem” was perhaps emblematic of the 
spillovers of that time. There have been other episodes since.13 In a much earlier time there 
was, of course, the “beggar thy neighbour” period of the 1930s – something which carries 
cogent lessons for current circumstances.  
In recent years, as interest rates across a number of major jurisdictions have fallen towards 
zero and as central bank balance-sheet measures have increased, these developments have 
been seen as contributing to cross-border flows of capital in search of higher returns. The 
extent  of  such  spillovers  is  still  in  dispute.  And,  to  the  extent  that  they  are  material,  some 
argue that a world in which extraordinary measures have been taken to prevent crises may 
still be a better place for all than the counterfactual.14  
The degree of disquiet in the global policymaking community does seem, however, to have 
grown of late.15 Perhaps one reason is the following. In past episodes expansionary policies 
in major countries, while having spillovers through capital flows, did demonstrably stimulate 
demand  in  the  major  countries.  It  is  open  to  policymakers  in  those  countries  to  claim  that 
unconventional policies are having an expansionary effect in their own economies compared 
with  what  would  otherwise  have  occurred.  But  the  slowness  of  the  recovery  in  the  US, 
Europe and Japan, I suspect, leaves others wondering whether major countries are relying 
more  on  exporting their weaknesses  than  has  been  the  case  in  most  previous  recoveries. 
One response to that can be efforts in emerging economies to make their financial systems 
more resilient  to  volatile  capital flows,  such  as  by  developing  local  currency  bond  markets 
                                                
13   The very high US interest rates of the late 1970s and early 1980s had major spillover effects, not least in the 
western hemisphere. The US bond market sell-off of 1993 and 1994 affected many other countries and was a 
major point of debate in international meetings of the time. The re-unification of Germany had spillover effects 
within Europe. 
14   Bernanke B (2012), “U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications”, Address to Challenges of the Global 
Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization, a High-Level Seminar Sponsored by 
Bank of Japan-International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, 14 October, available at <http://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
newsevents/speech/bernanke20121014a.htm>. 
15   See Caruana J (2012), “International Monetary Policy Interactions: Challenges and Prospects”, Address to the 
CEMLA-SEACEN Conference on “The Role of Central Banks in Macroeconomic and Financial Stability: the 
Challenges  in  an  Uncertain  and  Volatile  World”,  Punta  del  Este,  Uruguay,  16  November,  available  at 
<http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp121116.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
and currency hedging markets.16 This type of work is underway in various fora, such as the 
G-20 and EMEAP. But that takes time. Meanwhile people in the emerging economies, and 
for that matter several advanced economies, feel uncomfortable about the spillovers.  
At the same time, it has to be said that spillovers go in more than one direction. While it was 
common for Asian (and European) policymakers to point the finger at the US for many years 
over  the  US  current  account  deficit,  with  claims  that  the  US  was  absorbing  too  great  a 
proportion  of  the  world's  saving,  the  fact  was  that  those  regions  were  supplying  excess 
savings into the global capital market because they did not want to use them at home. That 
surely  had  an  impact  on  the  marginal  cost  of  capital,  to  which  borrowers  and  financial 
institutions in parts of the advanced world responded. We may want to say, in hindsight, that 
policymakers  in  the  US and  elsewhere  should  have  worried  more  about  the financial  risks 
that were building up by the mix of policies that they ran. But we would also have to concede 
that the US policymakers sought to maintain full employment in a world that was conditioned 
by policies pursued in parts of the emerging world and especially Asia.  
Not  only  do  spillovers  go  in  more  than  one  direction,  but  those  which  might  arise  from 
policies  in  this  region  are  much  more  important  now  than  once  was  the  case.  The  rapid 
growth  in  Asia's  economic  weight  means  that  policy  incompatibilities  which  partly  arise  on 
this  side  of  the  Pacific  have  greater  global  significance.  The  traditional  Asian  strategy  of 
export-driven growth assisted by a low exchange rate worked well when Asia was small. Asia 
isn't small anymore and so the rest of the world will not be able to absorb the growth in Asian 
production in the same way as it once did. More of that production will have to be used at 
home. This is understood by Asian policymakers and progress has been made in reorienting 
the strategy. I suspect more will be needed.  
For  central  banks  in  particular,  there  has  been  talk  about  spillovers  from  monetary  policy 
settings  being  “internalised”  into  individual  central  banks'  framework  for  decision  making. 
Exactly  how  that  might  be  done  is  not  entirely  clear,  and  discussion  is  in  its  infancy;  a 
consensus is yet to emerge. The IMF does useful work on spillovers and the IMF offers, at 
least in principle, a forum where incompatibilities can be at least recognised and discussed. 
One  more  far  reaching  proposal  is  for  there  to  be  an  “international  monetary  policy 
committee”.17 That seems a long way off at present.  
For spillovers to be effectively internalised, mandates for central banks would need to allow 
for  that.  At  the  present  time  most  central  banks  are  created  by  national  legislatures,  with 
mandates prescribed in national terms. (The ECB of course is the exception, with a mandate 
given via an international treaty). It would be a very big step to change that and it certainly 
won't occur easily or soon, though national sovereignty over monetary policy within the euro 
area was given up as part of the single currency – so big changes can occur if the benefits 
are deemed to be sufficient.  
Whether or not such a step eventually occurs, it is clear that spillovers are with us now. All 
countries share a collective interest in preserving key elements of the international system, 
even as individual central banks do what it takes to fulfil their current mandates. It is vital, 
then, that central banks continue to talk frankly with each other about how we perceive the 
interconnections of global finance to be operating. We may be limited at times by the national 
natures  of  our  respective  mandates,  but  those  limitations  need  not  preclude  cooperative 
action  altogether,  as  has  been  demonstrated  at  various  key  moments  over  the  past  five 
years.  In  this  region,  the  EMEAP  forum  offers  great  potential  to  further  our  mutual 
                                                
16   Nishimura  K  (2012),  “Future  of  Central  Bank  Cooperation  in  Asia,  Latin  America,  and  Caribbean  States”, 
Remarks  at  the  BOJ-CEMLA  Seminar  on  Regional  Financial  Cooperation,  Tokyo,  11  October,  available  at 
<http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ko121011a1.pdf>. 
17   Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  (2011), “Rethinking  Central  Banking”,  September, 
available at <http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2011/09/ciepr-central-banking> 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
understanding and ability to come to joint positions on at least some issues. Internationally, 
the BIS of course is also a key forum for “truth telling” in a collegiate and confidential setting 
and one in which the central banks of this region are playing an increasingly prominent role. 
There will need to be much more of this in the future.  
Conclusion 
The Bank of Thailand and the Reserve Bank of Australia have, in our respective histories, 
faced  challenges,  some  of  them  severe  ones.  We  have  learned  much  from  those 
experiences. In recent years, we have had our own distinct challenges. Fortunately, we have 
not  been  directly  at  the  centre  of  the  almost  unprecedented  challenges  faced  by  our 
colleagues in major countries, though we have all been affected in various ways.  
The future  in  Asia  is full  of  potential,  but  to  realise  that  we  have  to  continue  our  efforts  to 
strengthen our own policy frameworks, learn the appropriate lessons from the problems of 
others, and continue our efforts to cooperate on key issues of mutual interest. As the Bank of 
Thailand moves into its eighth decade, I am sure you will rise to the challenge.  
Thank you again for the invitation to be here, and Happy Birthday!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
