Barry Whiteside: Bank South Pacific Group expansion in Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  on  the 
occasion of the rebranding of Dominion House to BSP Life Centre, the opening of the BSP 
Life’s  Customer  Service  Centre,  and  the  opening  of  the  BSP’s  Thomson  Street  Branch, 
Suva, 4 October 2012. 
 His Excellency, The President, Rau Epeli Nailatikau 
The First Lady, Adi Koila Nailatikau 
Mr Kevin McCarthy, BSP Fiji Country Manager 
Mr Malakai Naiyaga, Managing Director, BSP Life Limited 
Board Members of BSP Life Limited and Bank South Pacific  
Management and Staff  
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory Comments 
Bula vinaka and a very good evening to you all. 
I wish to thank Kevin and Malakai for their kind invitation to yet another significant event in 
the relatively short history of BSP’s operations in Fiji. It is indeed a privilege to be here to 
support your development initiatives and I welcome your ongoing rebranding & refurbishment 
programme in Fiji. 
It definitely is another sign of the BSP Group wishing to further stamp its mark as a major 
player  in  the  market  and  is  a  real  vote  of  confidence  for  Fiji’s  economy  and  our  domestic 
financial system. 
The re-branding of this Dominion House complex to BSP Life Centre; 
The opening of BSP Life’s Customer Service Centre; and 
The renaming of the refurbished bank operations to BSP Thomson Street branch. 
The BSP Fiji Group 
We are actually here today to celebrate three different milestones: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The BSP Fiji arm of the Group has an impressive pedigree.  
It  is  a  union  of  two  prominent  Fijian  financial  institutions,  Colonial  Fiji  Life  Limited  and 
Colonial National Bank, which were acquired by BSP in December 2009. 
Colonial Fiji Life Limited, which used to be known as Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society 
(or  more  simply  as  just  CMLA  to  us  older  folk),  was  founded  in  Melbourne  in  1873,  and 
almost simultaneously opened offices in several other centers in Australia. A branch office 
was  opened  in  Fiji  in  1876  and  I  understand  that  this  was  the  first  overseas  branch  of 
Colonial Mutual, before the company opened up in New Zealand and South Africa in 1883, 
and expanded into Great Britain and Ireland in 1886. 
The company officially demutualised in 1996 after acquiring Blue Shield (Pacific) Limited in 
1991.  The  Colonial  business  was  domesticated  in  Fiji  in  December  1999  gaining  the  new 
name of Colonial Fiji Life Limited and, as mentioned earlier, was part of the Colonial Group 
acquired by BSP in December 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today, the company takes much pride in calling itself BSP Life (Fiji) Limited. The company is 
in fact the first operation of the PNG domiciled BSP Group’s new life insurance arm.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the BSP Group is one of the few financial conglomerates in Fiji, and 
indeed  a  “total  financial  services  provider”,  owned  by  one  of  the  strongest  financial 
institutions in the region. 
Consumers  in  the  financial  services  industry  are  more  often  now  seeking  broadly-  based 
financial  service  providers.  The  BSP  Group  in  Fiji  is  a  truly  diverse,  financial  services 
organisation, with core businesses in life insurance, banking, and investment management.  
I am convinced that Suva City, with all her strong fundamentals and promising potential, has 
provided a great business environment, and the BSP Group has responded by re-branding 
this building and again refurbishing one of its branches in this prime location. The market for 
high quality financial services and products is large and growing in Suva, and all it takes is 
for a financial institution to be competitive in its brand, to benefit. 
The BSP Life Centre and new Customer Service Centre 
I  congratulate  BSP  Life  Limited  for  owning  its  own  headquarters  here  in  Fiji  with  the 
re-branding of this building to be the BSP Life Centre. I have fond memories of this building, 
especially the Level 4 space, which we occupied as the Central Monetary Authority of Fiji, 
before we moved in 1984 to the current Reserve Bank building.  
Dominion House was one of the few high-rise buildings at that time, and to this day is still 
considered  a  prime  location  in  Suva’s  CBD.  We  note  the  new  lease  of  life  after  this 
re-branding, which will see its landmark status continuing for many years to come. 
I  am  informed  that  BSP  Life  now  has  all  its  major  operational  areas  located  here  and  the 
rebranding of the complex as the BSP Life Centre signifies its flagship status. 
The refurbishment of BSP Life’s Customer Service Centre is spread over two levels and is a 
welcome addition to this ground floor from its previous location on Level 4. It is accessible to 
all customers and convenient to all members of the public now that it is on the ground floor, 
and is complimentary to the bank branch, located practically in the same space. It thus gives 
meaning in Fiji to the term “bancassurance”. I understand that the upper level will house the 
back office operations including the call centre. 
BSP’s Thomson Street Branch 
Ladies and Gentlemen, not to be out done, the refurbished bank branch operation will offer 
various banking services including deposit-taking, credit facilities, investment facilitation, and 
other financial services activities including E-Channel initiatives such as SMS banking. It will 
now have the capacity to allow for an additional 200 transactions per day over and above the 
600 transactions it managed daily prior to the refurbishment. 
With the bank branch joining the BSP Life offices in this location, providing quality financial 
and banking services, customers in Suva and its surrounding suburbs will no doubt benefit. 
In fact, I believe we are fortunate to have a strong brand like BSP in this central city space. 
You  will  of  course  soon  have  further  competition  when  another  bank  open’s  its  does  just 
across the street soon!  
The  diversity  of  products  and  services  offered  by  all  our  financial  institutions  and  the 
presence  of  a  critical  mass,  will  enrich  our  financial  system  and  help  position  Suva  as  a 
vibrant and growing financial centre. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Official Opening 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the rebranding and launching of the life and bank businesses of the 
BSP Group at this fine location tonight continues the new era in financial sector development 
in  Fiji.  The  people  of  Suva  are  the  beneficiaries  of  such  services  and  stand  to  benefit 
accordingly.  
Once  again,  thank  you  for  the  kind  invitation  to  share  your  launching  and  I  wish  the 
BSP Group all the best in its operations in Fiji. 
I now have much pleasure in declaring open the new BSP Life Centre, with its refurbished 
Customer Service Centre and BSP’s Thomson Street branch. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
