Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Branchless banking in Pakistan 
Speech by Mr Kazi Abdul Muktadir, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 
Karachi Press Club, Karachi, 9 October 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen!  
Assalam o Alaikum! 
Let me first thank the organizers for inviting me to share my thoughts with the distinguished 
guests at the opening of ATM being installed by Summit Bank at the Karachi Press Club. It is 
an  opportune  moment  for  me  to  be  here  amongst  an  august  gathering  of  Writers  and 
Journalists. I would like to place on record my appreciation to the important role played by 
the  members  of  the  Karachi  Press  Club  in  the  struggle  for  freedom  of  expression  in  the 
country.  Karachi  Press  Club  and  the  media  have  always  tried  to  uphold  their  professional 
integrity, strength and commitment despite facing a lot of challenges. Their untiring effort to 
provide latest news and write ups and opinions on current issues is the prime responsibility 
of  Journalists  and  in  my  experience  the  thirst  of  media  somehow  always  seems  to  be 
unquenched and remains unfulfilled. This in turn has contributed to information explosion and 
mass awareness that is one of the basis of active democracy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
As press is the part of service sector, banking is also a service provider of financial produces. 
Banking thrives on standards and service rendered by it. Standard and consumer protection 
have to be regulated in order to ensure quality. 
As  banks  operate  on  commercial  considerations;  their  branch  expansion  has  traditionally 
been skewed towards big cities and commercial centers. Therefore, SBP under its Branch 
Licensing  Policy  has  made  it  compulsory  for  banks  to  open  at  least  20%  of  their  new 
branches in rural localities and under-served areas. These regulatory measures are bearing 
fruit and branch penetration in rural areas has started to improve. 
State  Bank  of  Pakistan  as  a  supervisor  and  regulator  of  the  banking  industry,  is  trying  to 
make banking services available at the door step of the people. Promoting access to banking 
services  is  the  corner  stone  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan’s  policy  framework.  As  opening  of 
physical  branches,  entails  substantial  costs  and is  time  consuming,  SBP  has  always  been 
encouraging adoption of alternate delivery channels for providing financial services to clients 
by the banks. 
Access to Branch banking is limited by time. The availability of Automated Teller Machines 
(ATMs) is a convenient and efficient tool to access accounts by clients for cash withdrawals 
and other related services on a 24 hour 7 day basis. In developed countries, there are three 
ATMS  against  one  bank  branch;  however,  being  a  developing  economy,  the  availability  of 
ATMs in Pakistan is low. Presently we have only 5600 ATMs across Pakistan, just about one 
ATM against two bank branches. Therefore, there was a strong need for the Central Bank to 
come  up  with  some  policy  initiative  to  improve  this  position.  As  such,  SBP  has  recently 
issued policy instructions to all banks binding them to expand their ATM network in a phased 
manner so as to achieve a target level of one ATM for each bank branch. Once this target is 
achieved, we have plans to gradually raise the bar so as to come close to the international 
levels. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  banking  industry  of  Pakistan  has  tremendous  growth  potential 
and can deliver  a lot more than what it is delivering right now. The driving force  behind the 
efficiency  and  dynamism  of  the  banking  business  today  is  the  use  of  technology.  The 
significance  of  e-banking  and  e-commerce  cannot  be  overemphasized  because  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fact  that both  have  brought  about  remarkable  changes  in  the  ways  people  think  and  do 
their  banking business today. 
The  outcome  of  e-banking  in  Pakistan  will  be  gradual  but  the  trends  towards  adoption  of 
information  technology  are  quite  encouraging.  Transformation  from  traditional  banking 
modes  to  modern  ways  of  banking  is  taking  place  at  a  fast  pace.  A  number  of  alternate 
delivery channels for provision of banking services like ATMs, Credit Cards, POS (Point of 
Sale)  terminals,  Internet  Banking,  Debit  Cards  already  exist  in  our  country  to  benefit  the 
masses. Currently, 93% of the total bank branches are offering Real-Time Online services. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  are  now  leveraging  the  mobile  phone  technology  and  agents 
network,  that  has  resulted  in  the  development  of  branchless  banking  to  a  higher  tier  of 
accessibility and resource utilization. Branchless Banking is now helping in reaching out to 
the  low  income  groups  and  unbanked  people  through  more  than  30,000  access  points 
across the country. Following trends are noteworthy: 
• 
Nearly  30  million  transactions  worth  Rs.115  billion  have  been  processed  through 
branchless banking during the fourth quarter of last fiscal year. 
The average daily transactions have been reported to be 315,178. 
Total  number  of  branchless  banking  accounts  have  also  increased  to  over 
1.7 million. 
 According to the World Bank’s Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), Pakistan is the 
fastest growing branchless banking market in the world. The banking architecture for such 
services is being developed in a robust manner in collaboration with the telco industry that is 
not only helping its growth but also ensuring quality of services and connectivity. 
While we seek to encourage the introduction of innovative instruments for payments, we are 
also mindful of the need to ensure that high levels of service standards that are required to 
be maintained for safety, security and cost effectiveness with adequate levels for protection 
of consumers’ interests. 
In conclusion, let me re-emphasize on the need for an efficient and thriving banking system 
that  guarantees  superior  services  with  enhanced  access  with  higher  returns  to  the 
stakeholders  and  also  create  both  forward  and  backward  linkages  with  the  rest  of  the 
economy.  As  a  financial  regulator,  State  Bank  is  open  to  provide  an  enabling  regulatory 
environment to all financial institutions for advancing and promoting financial inclusion in the 
country. Providing people with access to finance is a challenging task, not just for the central 
bank but for all the stakeholders. I believe that with the concerted efforts of all, we will be 
able to achieve the desired goal of “Banking for All”. 
With  the  opening  of  ATM  at  the  Karachi  Press  Club,  I  am  sure  all  members  would  be 
facilitated with access to banking from within the Club’s premises. My best wishes to you all. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
