Kiyohiko G Nishimura: The future of the euro – challenges ahead 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Discussion hosted by the Deutsche Bank Group, Tokyo, 12 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I am very grateful to the organizer for giving me the opportunity to participate in this panel 
hosted  by  the  Deutsche  Bank  Group.  The  panel  cannot  be  more  timely:  its  theme,  as  I 
interpret it, is how the current eurozone crisis should be resolved and what the eurozone will 
look  like  in  the  future,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  role  of  Asian  investors,  especially 
those from Japan. Since the European authorities share a firm commitment to save the euro, 
I  believe  that  the  whole  project  of  the  euro  ultimately  will  succeed.  Given  the  scale  and 
complexity of the problems facing Europe, however, there is likely to be a long and bumpy 
road ahead toward a genuine monetary and economic union. 
Today, I will share my views – which also reflect some of the concerns of Japanese market 
participants – on critical issues regarding the euro in three time horizons: short, medium, and 
long term. 
Short-term challenge: crisis containment 
II. 
Let  me  start  with  the  short-term  issue  of  crisis  containment.  In  this  respect,  to  convince 
investors  is  the  key,  and  thus  top  priority  should  be  given  to  having  a  strong  firewall  and 
putting in place powerful fire extinguishers in sufficient numbers. 
Money markets remain stable currently, and sovereign bond yields in Spain and Italy have 
declined noticeably in response to the promise of bond purchases by the European Central 
Bank (ECB). However, the yields remain at elevated levels, while in contrast major European 
countries’  shorter-end  sovereign  yields  continue  to  be  extremely  low  and  in  some  cases 
negative  due  primarily  to  investors’  preference  for  safety.  In  short,  strong  nervousness 
continues to linger in financial markets. 
Thus, it is vital to prevent further shocks from triggering market disruptions. Right now, there 
seem to be no particular funding problems for financial institutions outside Europe, including 
those  in  Japan.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the  lingering  nervousness  among  market 
participants globally, it is critical to alleviate the funding uncertainty to the extent possible. 
The  stability  of  eurozone  money  markets  has  been  maintained  by  the  ample  liquidity 
provision from the ECB. Still, how the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) and the ECB’s 
bond-purchasing  operations  will  play  their  role  is  the  key  to  preventing  contagion  of  a 
financial crisis across borders. In this regard, there are two issues. First, one may argue that 
once these operations start, it will become extremely difficult to cancel them outright even if 
the  outcome  is  unsatisfactory,  since  cancellation  might  imply  cutting  the  lifeline  of  the 
recipient  (in  other  words,  a  classical  time-inconsistency  problem  will  arise).  Thus,  the 
success  of  these  operations  depends  critically  on  their  “gateway”:  how  to  craft  the 
conditionality of the operations sufficiently to bring about the desired outcome, not sacrificing 
much in the recipient country, and how to construct the mechanism to ensure and encourage 
its  compliance.  Second,  market  participants  are  concerned  with  possibility  beyond  the 
immediate problem: in particular, (1) whether the ESM’s firepower will be sufficient to fulfill its 
mandate;  and  (2) whether  the  ESM  will  be  used  flexibly  and  in  a  timely  manner.  In  both 
respects, recent developments are encouraging, and it is anticipated that further clarification 
of these points will help dispel concerns in financial markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Medium-term challenge: avoiding further negative feedback 
III. 
The second issue is how to avoid a further adverse feedback loop among fiscal conditions, 
the financial system, and the real economy. To this end, creating a European banking union 
has  enormous  significance.  A  banking  union  will  also  redress  the  inconsistencies  in  the 
current banking framework, that is, financial institutions operate freely within the euro area, 
while bank supervision and the safety net provision are fragmented along national borders. 
For a banking union to be effective, it is crucial to secure sufficient funds to cover losses if 
the default of a financial institution occurs. This is a lesson Japan learned from the financial 
crisis of the late 1990s. In Japan, under the revised Deposit Insurance Act, when a particular 
financial institution’s default raises real systemic concerns, the losses can be borne by not 
only  the  deposit  insurance  but  also  the  national  coffers.  This  ensures  the  credibility  of 
Japan’s financial safety net, thereby contributing undoubtedly to financial system stability. 
To be sure, in Europe, loss sharing of this kind involves the difficult issue of fiscal transfer 
among member countries. It is very much hoped that appropriate measures will be taken in 
this regard in a European way. 
Long-term challenge: convergence 
IV. 
Over  the  longer  time  horizon,  economic  convergence  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  euro  area 
financial markets to become a genuine single market with high liquidity. 
However, what we observe right now is divergence or fragmentation, not convergence. The 
economies  of  the  euro  area  countries  had  not  converged  sufficiently  when  the  euro  was 
introduced, and the gaps among them widened further after the bubble burst in the middle of 
2000s. Divergence is evident in unit labor cost growth and current account balances. Yield 
differentials in the European bond markets have also widened. Such market fragmentation 
has forced investors to reconsider country risks, which had been considered eliminated with 
convergence to a single financial market. 
To  accomplish  a  greater  degree  of  convergence,  while  taking  into  consideration  strong 
national  identities  and  the  slow  process  of  population  movements  across  borders,  three 
options are often mentioned, ones that are not mutually exclusive. The first is to carry out 
so-called internal devaluation in the periphery. The second is to boost productivity and create 
value-added industries in the periphery. And the third is to implement fiscal transfer from the 
core  to  the  periphery  on  the  grounds  of  mutual  benefits.  Here  I  believe  that  the  keys  to 
success  are  the  European  people’s  belief  in  the  euro  system  and  their  “solidarity”  or  the 
common cause of “European citizenship”. Although achieving any of these options will take a 
long time and painstaking effort, it is hoped that the euro area nations will continue to do their 
best on these fronts. 
A new hope: strengthening market infrastructure 
V. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  touch  briefly  on  the  new  hope  seen  in  the  strengthening  of  market 
infrastructure both in Europe and Japan. For many market participants, strengthening market 
infrastructure is important for sustained investment in Europe and elsewhere. In this regard, 
the  Eurosystem  has  been  pushing  forward  with  TARGET2-Securities  (T2S),  a  single 
pan-European IT platform for securities settlement. At the same time, the Bank of Japan is 
working to revamp the Bank of Japan Financial Network System (BOJ-NET) to enhance the 
system’s flexibility and accessibility. It is hoped that both of these initiatives will succeed in 
making global financial markets more resilient and efficient. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
