Mojmír Hampl: Czechs and Austrians – even closer than they appear 
Speech  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the 
Wirtschaftskammer Österreich, Vienna, 14 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests, 
It is a great honour and utmost pleasure for me to speak here today. And believe me, these 
are not just standard nice opening words. I really mean it. 
As if there is anywhere I particularly enjoy visiting, it is Vienna and also Austria as a whole. 
And as the statistics show, the same goes for many Czechs. More than two million of us visit 
Austria annually, and the number is going up every year, regardless economic circumstances 
(not the other way around). This is not due solely to the typical and widespread enthusiasm 
among Czechs for skiing. Many Czechs simply like Austria as a country. It would be hard for 
me to find a Czech who does not feel good, safe and comfortable here. 
And it is no accident. So, please forgive me if I do not discuss today macroeconomic trends, 
the extraordinary synchronisation of economic cycles in our two countries, and factors behind 
continually rising mutual trade. Much of this will be surely covered in the discussion. There is 
something else I would like to talk about. I would like to make a personal comment about the 
closeness of our two countries. 
After several  years  spent  within  the  Austrian financial  group  Erste  and  its  Czech  daughter 
bank,  after  many  visits  to  Austria  on  business  and  on  pleasure,  and  after  many  working 
meetings with Austrian partners on various occasions, I have become convinced that Czechs 
and  Austrians  have  a  very  similar  mentality  and  share  many  habits  and  customs.  I  would 
even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  hardly  any  other  nation  is  so  similar  to  the  Czechs  than 
Austrians – maybe not even the Slovaks. There are many on either side who will not like this 
thesis, but I believe there is a lot of truth in it. Not only are Czechs and Austrians typical small 
savers with a conservative approach to money and debt, and not only do they have similar 
cultural attitudes to those many petty things important for our lives, from the culture of alcohol 
drinking  to  obsession  with  academic  titles,  from  very  similar  attitude  to  clothing  to  shared 
mania with sometimes overly bureaucratic procedures here and there. And from comparable 
attitude  to  what  we  deem  as  the  so-called  status  products  in  our  lives  to  similar 
phenomenons and problems also in politics. 
Moreover however, there is a similar attitude to work. It was Jack Stack, the former head of 
Erste  Group’s  Czech  subsidiary  Česká  spořitelna,  who  made  me  realise  this.  He  once 
remarked that it was almost unbelievable how Czechs and Austrians as employees produce 
very similar outputs and results when given the same tasks to perform. For example, argued 
Stack, they like to deliver something they regard as perfect straight away, and they do not 
like it when their boss finds fault with what they deliver and firmly believe is perfect from the 
very  beginning.  They  are  essentially  very  disciplined,  and  that  is  the  gospel  truth.  As  an 
American, Mr Stack had an unbiased view and a great eye and feel for this sort of thing. And 
he was in many aspects right and revealed what was hidden to many of us. 
I can confirm that these similarities between Czechs and Austrians are particularly visible in 
Central  European  and  international  teams.  I  have  been  reminded  of  them  on  many 
occasions. 
The last time was fairly recently, when we were negotiating the new position of our countries 
in  the  mighty  International  Monetary  Fund  with  colleagues  and  friends  from  the  Austrian 
central bank. This year we achieved an incredible outcome: Austria, the Czech Republic and 
Hungary  will  have  the  right  to  appoint  an  executive  director  –  one  of  the  24  executive 
directors  in  the  IMF  –  each  country  for  a  fixed  term.  As  a  group  of  Central  European 
countries  we  will  therefore  have  the  same  representation  as far  larger  and  more  populous 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
countries. When the agreement was officially signed at the Hofburg Palace here in Vienna 
this summer, with the Austrian president in attendance, I was reminded that it would perhaps 
have been impossible to achieve such an outcome on such a delicate and sensitive issue 
without this foremost mental closeness and some similarity of thought. 
However over the top it might seem to some, we are indeed very close mentally as well as 
geographically – perhaps more so than we would care to admit and more than we would like 
to admit, I should add. 
So, if you want to know a bit about the future of our economic, civic and other relationships 
and want to know how the other country is going to respond/react, all you need to do is look 
in the mirror. As really, you look at your neighbour in the Czech Republic or Austria, you will 
see something of yourself. Our relationships are sometimes like those within a broad family. 
Needless to say,  we don’t always get along swimmingly. Besides many positive emotions, 
there is sometimes envy, spite, bickering, lack of understanding. Again, how typical are all 
these  emotions  for  broader  families.  As  a  result,  issues  can  arise  between  us.  But  that 
feeling of closeness in my eyes remains and should remain. It is a feeling I firmly believe we 
might share. 
I don’t want to get too sentimental, but it is clear that our centuries-long common and shared 
history is no mere accident and that without exactly this similarity and closeness maybe our 
shared history could never have been so long in the first place. 
Again, this does not mean that we do not have our differences. Yes, we are still not equally 
wealthy, for example. Our elites have different opinions on many issues. Logically, we have 
different historical national wounds and pains. But again, this changes nothing in our mental 
– and not just geographical – closeness. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are in Vienna, and my favourite Czech philosopher Vilém Flusser 
once said that Vienna and Prague are just two halves of one, single city. I very much agree. 
Perhaps this is ultimately why Czechs feel good in Austria: they feel very much at home. 
Therefore allow me right here my last point: if you are looking for anecdotal evidence of the 
closeness I am talking about, here is one anecdote I like to give here in Austria. Because we 
have friends here at the central bank, it is good to realise that the governor of the Austrian 
central bank is named Nowotny, his vice-governor and my dear friend is named Duchatczek, 
and  the  head  of  the  local  financial  markets  authority  is  called  Pribyl.  All  these  are  typical 
Czech names. Meanwhile, the head of the Czech National Bank goes by the name of Singer, 
his deputy is a certain Mr Hampl, and our executive directors include a Mr Schmidt and a 
Mr Bauer. In other words, there is some truth in the idea that we are close. I believe this is 
something we can build upon. I am very much looking forward to discussing with you. 
Vielen Dank für Ihre Aufmerksamkeit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
