Mario Draghi: Opening statement at Deutscher Bundestag 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the discussion on 
ECB policies with Members of Parliament, Berlin, 24 October 2012. 
 Dear President Lammert,  
Honourable Committee Chairs, 
Honourable Members of the Bundestag,  
I am deeply honoured to be here today.  
As  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  it  is  a  privilege  for  me  to  come  to  the 
heart  of  German  democracy  to  present  our  policy  responses  to  the  challenges  facing  the 
euro area economy.  
I know that central bank actions are often a topic of debate among politicians, the media and 
the  general  public  in  Germany.  So  I  would  like  to  thank  President  Lammert  and  all 
Committee Chairs most warmly for this kind invitation – and the opportunity it gives me to 
participate in that discussion.  
It is rare for the ECB President to speak in a national parliament. The ECB is accountable to 
the  European  Parliament,  where  we  have  scheduled  hearings  every  three  months  and 
occasional hearings on topical matters. We take these duties of accountability to the citizens 
of Europe and their elected representatives very seriously.  
But I am here today not only to explain the ECB’s policies. I am also here to listen. I am here 
to listen to your views on the ECB, on the euro area economy and on the longer-term vision 
for Europe.  
To lay the ground for our discussion, I would like to explain our view of the current situation 
and  the  rationale  for  our  recent  monetary  policy  decisions.  I  will  focus  in  particular  on  the 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) that we formally announced in September.  
Financial markets and the disruptions of monetary policy transmission  
Let me begin with the challenges facing the euro area. We expect the economy to remain 
weak in the near term, also reflecting the adjustment that many countries are undergoing in 
order to lay the foundations for sustainable future prosperity. For next year, we expect a very 
gradual recovery. Euro area unemployment remains deplorably high.  
In  this  environment,  the  ECB  has  responded  by  lowering  its  key  interest  rates.  In  normal 
times, such reductions would be passed on relatively evenly to firms and households across 
the euro area. But this is not what we have seen. 
In some countries, the reductions were fully passed on. In others, the rates charged on bank 
loans to the real economy declined only a little, if at all. And in a few countries, some lending 
rates have actually risen. 
Why did this divergence happen? Let me explain this in detail because it is so important for 
understanding  our  policies.  A fundamental  concept  in  central  banking  is  what  is  known  as 
“monetary policy transmission”. This is the way that changes in a central bank’s main interest 
rate are passed via the financial system to the real economy.  
In  a  well-functioning  financial  system,  there  is  a  stable  relationship  between  changes  to 
central bank rates and the cost of bank loans to firms and households. This allows central 
banks to influence overall economic conditions and maintain price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  the  euro  area  financial  system  has  become  increasingly  disturbed.  There  has  been  a 
severe  fragmentation  in  the  single  financial  market.  Bank  funding  costs  have  diverged 
significantly across countries. The euro area interbank market has been effectively closed to 
a  large  number  of  banks  and  some  countries’  entire  banking  systems.  Interest  rates  on 
government  bonds  in  some  countries  have  risen  steeply,  hurting  the  funding  costs  of 
domestic banks and limiting their access to funding markets. 
This has been a key factor why banks have passed on interest rates very differently to firms 
and households across the euro area. Interest rates do not have to be identical across the 
euro area, but it is unacceptable if major differences arise from broken capital markets or the 
perception of a euro area break-up. The fragmentation of the single financial market has led 
to a fragmentation of the single monetary policy. And in an economy like the euro area where 
about  three  quarters  of  firms’  financing  comes  from  banks,  this  has  very  severe 
consequences for the real economy, investment and employment.  
It meant that countries in economic difficulties could not benefit from our low interest rates 
and return to health. Instead, they were experiencing a vicious circle.  
Economic  growth  was  falling.  Public  finances  were  deteriorating.  Banks  and  governments 
were being forced to pay even higher interest rates. And credit and economic growth were 
falling further, leading to rising unemployment and reduced consumption and investment. A 
number of economies could have seen risks of deflation.  
All  of  this  meant  that  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole  was  increasingly 
fragile. There were potentially negative consequences for Europe’s single market, as access 
to  finance  was  increasingly  influenced  by  location  rather  than  creditworthiness  and  the 
quality of the project.  
The disruption of the monetary policy transmission is something deeply profound. It threatens 
the single monetary policy and the ECB’s ability to ensure price stability. This was why the 
ECB decided that action was essential. 
Restoring the proper transmission of monetary policy  
So  let  me  now  turn  directly  to  our  recent  policy  announcements.  To  decide  what  type  of 
action  was  appropriate,  we  had  to  make  two  key  assessments.  First,  we  had  to  diagnose 
precisely  why  the  transmission  was  disrupted.  And  second,  we  had  to  identify  the  most 
effective  policy  tool  to  repair  those  disruptions,  while  remaining  within  our  mandate  to 
preserve price stability. 
In our analysis, a main cause of disruptions in the transmission was unfounded fears about 
the future of the euro area. Some investors had become excessively influenced by imagined 
scenarios of disaster. They were therefore charging interest rates to countries they perceived 
to  be  most  vulnerable  that  went  beyond  levels  warranted  by  economic  fundamentals  and 
justifiable risk premia. 
Clearly,  it  was  not  by  chance  that  some  countries  found  themselves  in  a  more  difficult 
situation  than  others.  It  was  mainly  those  countries  that  had  implemented  inappropriate 
economic policies in the past. This is also why the first responsibility in this situation is for 
countries to make determined reforms and convince markets that they are credible.  
But many were already doing this, only for interest rates to rise even higher. There was an 
element of fear in markets’ assessments that governments, acting alone, could not remove. 
Markets were not prepared to wait for the positive effects of reforms to emerge. 
In  our  view,  to  restore  the  proper  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  those  unfounded  fears 
about  the  future  of  the  euro  area  had  to  be  removed.  And  the  only  way  to  do  so  was  to 
establish a fully credible backstop against disaster scenarios. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We designed the OMTs exactly to fulfil this role and restore monetary policy transmission in 
two key ways. 
First, it provides for ex ante unlimited interventions in government bond markets, focusing on 
bonds with a remaining maturity of up to three years. A lot of comments have been made 
about  this  commitment.  But  we  have  to  understand  how  markets  work.  Interventions  are 
designed to send a clear signal to investors that their fears about the euro area are baseless.  
Second,  as  a  pre-requisite  for  OMTs,  countries  must  have  negotiated  with  the  other  euro 
area  governments  a  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  programme  with  strict  and 
effective  conditionality.  This  ensures  that  governments  continue  to  correct  economic 
weaknesses while the ECB is active. The involvement of the IMF, with its unparalleled track 
record in monitoring adjustment programmes would be an additional safeguard.  
The consequences of the ECB’s actions 
So  what  are  the  likely  consequences  of  the  ECB’s  actions?  Before  announcing  the  OMT 
programme,  we  considered  very  carefully  the  possible  risks  –  and  we  designed  our 
operations  to  minimise  them.  But  I  am  aware  that  some  observers  in  this  country  remain 
concerned  about  the  potential  impact  of  this  policy.  I  would  therefore  like  to  use  this 
opportunity to go through those concerns – one by one – and explain our views. 
First,  OMTs  will  not  lead  to  disguised  financing  of  governments.  We  have  specifically 
designed our interventions to avoid this. They will take place solely on secondary markets, 
where bonds that have already been issued are traded. If interventions take place, they will 
involve  buying  government  debt  from  investors,  not  from  governments.  All  this  is  fully 
consistent with the Treaty’s prohibition on monetary financing. Moreover, they will focus on 
shorter maturities and leave room for market discipline.  
Second, OMTs will not compromise the independence of the ECB. The ECB will continue to 
take all decisions related to OMTs in full independence. It will decide whether to intervene 
based  on  its  own  assessment  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  with  the  aim  of 
safeguarding price stability. The fact that governments have to comply with conditionality will 
actually protect our independence. The ECB will not be forced to step in for a lack of policy 
implementation.  
Third, OMTs will not create excessive risks for euro area taxpayers. Such risks would only 
materialise if a country were to run unsound policies. This is explicitly prevented by the ESM 
programme.  And  we  have  been  very  clear  that  each  time  a  programme  starts  being 
reviewed, we will routinely suspend operations and resume them only if the review has been 
concluded  positively.  This  will  ensure  that  the  ECB  intervenes  only  in  countries  where  the 
economy and public finances are on a sustainable path. 
Fourth, OMTs will not lead to inflation. We have designed our operations so that their effect 
on monetary conditions will be neutral. For every euro we inject, we will withdraw a euro. In 
our assessment, the greater risk to price stability is currently falling prices in some euro area 
countries.  In  this  sense,  OMTs  are  not  in  contradiction  to  our  mandate:  in  fact,  they  are 
essential for ensuring we can continue to achieve it.  
Moreover, we see no signs that our announcement has affected inflation expectations. They 
continue to be firmly anchored. This is testament to our track record on price stability over 
the last decade and our credible commitment to maintaining price stability. The citizens of the 
euro area can be confident that we will remain permanently alert to risks to price stability. We 
have  all  the  necessary  tools  at  our  disposal  to  maintain  it  and  to  withdraw  any  excess 
liquidity in case of upward risks to price stability. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude these opening remarks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Three elements are essential for understanding the policies of the ECB: immutable focus on 
price stability; acting within our mandate; and being fully independent. 
The  ECB’s  new  measures  help  to  ensure  price  stability  across  the  euro  area.  They  also 
contribute  to  improving  the  economic  environment.  But  completing  that  task  of  economic 
renewal demands continuing action by the governments of the euro area.  
It is governments that must set right their public finances. It is governments that must reform 
their  economies.  And  it  is  governments that  must  work  together  effectively  to  establish  an 
institutional architecture for the euro area that best serves its citizens. 
We  are  already  moving  in  the  right  direction.  Across  the  euro  area,  deficits  are  being  cut. 
Competitiveness is being improved. Imbalances are closing. And governments are working 
seriously to complete economic and monetary union. 
It is important that Europe’s leaders stay on course. In doing so, they will be able to unlock 
fully  the  enormous  potential  of  the  euro  to  improve  living  standards  and  carry  forward  the 
project of European integration. 
Thank you for your attention – and I look forward to our discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
