Andreas Dombret: Speech at Columbia University – the current crisis, 
EMU and the euro 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Columbia University, New York, 2 November 2012. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to you today. On this occasion, please let me 
express my deepest sympathies for the hardships New Yorkers are facing right now. 
Columbia University’s reputation for undertaking groundbreaking research is  well deserved 
and that applies all the more to financial and economic matters. Over the years, many central 
bank decisions have been influenced by the work of Columbia researchers, and many people 
would argue that the very existence of the European Central Bank and the Eurosystem owes 
a great deal to the findings of Columbia economist Robert Mundell. His theory of optimum 
currency areas, on which scholars like Kenen, Frankel and Rose later expanded, provided 
the theoretical foundation for European Monetary Union. 
There were high hopes that the euro would set in motion a process of lasting convergence 
among the member states. The crisis has put an end to these hopes being fulfilled, at least 
for  the  time  being.  And  given  the  exceptional  scale  and  scope  of  the  crisis  and  the  high 
degree  of  uncertainty  we  are  currently  experiencing,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  there  are 
diverging  views  on  how  to  overcome  it.  But  it  seems  to me  that,  even  though  views  differ 
about crisis resolution, a consensus has emerged on how the crisis developed. 
That might seem paradoxical at first: If there really is an agreed diagnosis of the causes, how 
is it that prescriptions for remedying the euro area’s woes differ so starkly? In my remarks, I 
wish to argue that such differences of opinion are motivated largely by a constant tug-of-war 
between  two  competing  economic  objectives:  Efficiency,  in  particular  through  proper 
incentives, on the one side, and distributional issues, on the other. 
Or, to put it more bluntly, one line of argument is about how EMU’s growth engine can be 
fixed and how it can be run more reliably, whereas the other line of argument is about who 
will foot the bill – for past and future burdens alike. Based on the diagnosis of how the crisis 
originated, I would argue that if EMU is not put on a sound footing that allows it to run better 
in  the  future,  the  objective  of  equity  and  redistribution  will  become  self-defeating  because 
there will be much less available to distribute. 
So, let us first take a look at what went wrong in the run-up to the crisis. 
The origins of the crisis 
2.  
For many countries in Europe, the introduction of the euro, and therefore the elimination of 
exchange  rate  risks,  ushered  in  a  new  era  of  abundant  capital.  In  the  case  of  Ireland,  for 
instance,  capital  inflows  amounted  to  about  2  trillion  euros  between  1999  and  2008. 
Qualitatively, this is exactly what standard economic reasoning predicts: Capital flows from 
capital-rich to capital-poor economies, where risk-adjusted returns should be higher. These 
flows complement limited domestic saving in capital-poor countries and reduce their cost of 
capital, boosting investment and growth. 
As we know, it did not exactly  work out like that. In some member countries, capital flows 
were put to unproductive use, as overinvestment in real estate as well as public and private 
consumption failed to raise productivity. Unit labour costs soared, competitiveness declined 
and, due to rigid labour and product markets, this process gained even more momentum. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
When  the  financial  crisis  broke  out  in  2007,  the  vulnerabilities  became  apparent.  Growth 
imploded, deficits – often already too high before the crisis – exploded, and cracks started to 
show  in  the  banking  system,  implying  possibly  huge  liabilities  for  the  public  sector.  Not 
surprisingly, investor sentiment began to shift, and interest rates for the countries in question 
started to rise sharply, triggering a crisis that is still far from being resolved. 
So how could things go so wrong? Key to understanding the crisis is the euro area’s unique 
institutional  set-up.  Overlooking  this  set-up  can  easily  lead  to  simplistic,  but  erroneous 
analogies  being  drawn  with  other  economies.  The  euro  area  teams  up  a  single  monetary 
policy  with  17  national  fiscal  and  economic  policies.  On  the  one  hand,  this  is  one  of  the 
benefits  of  a  unified  Europe  composed  of  peoples  and  nations  which  often  have  quite 
different  backgrounds  and  cultures:  member  states  retain  enough  room  to  preserve  such 
diversity, that is, to establish their own model of success or to tailor institutions and policies 
to their own national preferences, for example, with respect to income redistribution or the 
role of the state in the economy. 
On the other hand, this set-up also creates vulnerabilities. Firstly, such a combination creates 
a  deficit  bias,  as  it  allows  costs  to  be  shifted  partially  on  to  others.  If  a  worsening  fiscal 
position in one country has repercussions for monetary union as a whole, others may step in 
and bail out. And secondly, central banks’ balance sheets can serve as a conduit for shifting 
risks among national taxpayers, even if there are no explicit fiscal transfers and irrespective 
of the approval of national legislatures. 
The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw that risk. Precautions were taken in the form 
of the prohibition of monetary financing of government deficits, price stability as the primary 
objective, the no-bail-out clause and the Stability and Growth Pact that was to give teeth to 
the  constraints  on  public  finances  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  But  even  as  the 
assumption of sovereign debt was ruled out, the fiscal rules were breached numerous times, 
not least by Germany and France. In addition, investors made hardly any distinction between 
the bonds of individual member states. From 1999 to 2007 the average difference between 
EMU government bonds, excluding Germany and German government bonds, for instance, 
was a mere 14 Basis Points. I leave it to you to decide whether this was because investors 
were  neglecting  the growing  differences  in  economic fundamentals  or  because  they  never 
really believed that the no-bail-out clause would hold when the going got tough. 
While the provisions against unstable fiscal positions proved to be insufficient, the drafters of 
the institutional framework turned a blind eye to other macroeconomic imbalances of the type 
I have just mentioned – in other words, risks stemming from divergences in competitiveness, 
exaggerations in national real estate sectors and overblown financial systems. Hence, even 
countries such as Ireland or Spain that had impressive fiscal data before the crisis ran into 
deep trouble once the enormous implicit liabilities in their banking sectors became apparent. 
In that regard, the current crisis is not simply a sovereign debt crisis, but can also be seen as 
a  balance  of  payments  crisis,  as  the  Bundesbank  has  just  pointed  out  in  its  most  recent 
Monthly Report. 
The trade-off between sound incentives and burden sharing 
3. 
To me, the diagnosis of the crisis I have presented so far seems to be largely uncontested. 
True, some would argue that there was a degree of complicity on the part of simple-minded 
or unscrupulous investors and of economies with persistent current account surpluses, but 
the main responsibility is seen as lying within the framework of EMU and the countries that 
are at the epicentre of the crisis. But then, what can explain the vast array of opinions on how 
to resolve the crisis? 
As I said at the beginning of my speech, the debate runs along the front lines of one of the 
most well known trade-offs in economics: the trade-off between efficiency and distribution, or, 
put differently, between sound incentives and burden sharing. Such a trade-off informs the 
debate  at  the  national  level.  For  example,  labour  market  reforms  in  the  countries  at  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
periphery  would  lower  barriers  to  entry  and  hence  promote  employment,  but  incumbent 
employees  are  taking  issue  with  such  reforms  because  they  fear  downward  pressures  on 
wages  or  a  greater  risk  of  losing  their  jobs.  And  the  trade-off  informs  the  debate  at  the 
European level. On the one hand, there is the desire to strengthen incentives and controls in 
order to contain risks. On the other hand, there is the desire to share the economic, social 
and political burdens through mutualising risks. Such a tug-of-war between sound incentives 
and  greater  burden-sharing  occurred  in  the  debate  on  the  construction  of  the  rescue 
mechanisms, in the debate on introducing Eurobonds, in the debate on a true fiscal union, 
and now it takes place in the debate on a possible banking union. 
The Bundesbank position in these debates has been clear and consistent. Sound incentives 
are  indispensable for  countering the  biases  inherent  in the  euro  area’s architecture.  Some 
burden  sharing  is  necessary,  and  it  is  implemented  via  the  rescue  mechanisms  that grant 
financial  assistance.  But  if  burdens  are  shared  in  a  manner  that  distorts  incentives  even 
further, no lasting resolution of the crisis will be possible. Studies by the Bundesbank have 
shown that, in the euro area, which may be interpreted as a particularly credible variant of 
fixed  exchange  rate  regimes,  usual  adjustment  mechanisms  are  less  immediate  and  less 
harsh than in other exchange rate regimes. Through the convergence of short-term interest 
rates and the nearly unlimited provision of liquidity, the common monetary policy smoothes 
an  otherwise  more  abrupt  adjustment  process,  which  would  entail  significant  costs  to  the 
financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  But  insofar  as  normal  adjustment  forces  are 
suspended,  sound  incentives  need  to  be  put  in  place  to  bring  about  lasting  gains  in 
competitiveness  and  productivity.  And  given  the  dimension  of  existing  inefficiencies,  the 
current crisis of confidence and past experience of implementation lag and drag, there is no 
compelling argument for delaying the necessary adjustments while putting additional burden 
sharing first. 
The hotly debated banking union is a good case in point. Let me first take a step back and 
take  a  look  at  why  the  close  link  between  banks  and  sovereigns  has  proved  to  be  so 
problematic during this crisis. If many banks get into trouble at the same time, possibly due to 
the burst of a large asset bubble, financial stability as a whole is threatened. The state then 
often has no option but to step in if it wants to prevent a meltdown of the real economy. But 
such a rescue can place a huge burden on government finances – this is what happened in 
Ireland,  where  the  need  to  prop  up  the  financial  system  pushed  the  deficit  above  30%  of 
GDP  in  2010.  Conversely,  weak  government  positions  can  destabilise  banks  –  directly 
through their exposure to sovereign bonds or indirectly through worsening macroeconomic 
conditions. That is also what we see right now. 
Breaking the link between banks and sovereigns is vital to make the euro area more stable. 
A banking union can be a big step in that direction – but only if we harness the disciplinary 
forces  of  the  market,  not  if  we  do  away  with  them.  Core  elements  of  a  banking  union 
therefore  have  to  be,  first,  a  comprehensive  bail-in  of  bank  creditors,  and  second,  an 
adequate risk-weighting of sovereign bonds in banks’ balance sheets. 
In order to minimise the risk that bank rescues pose to government finances, creditors have 
to be the first in line when it comes to bearing banks losses. Implicit guarantees have to be 
removed  as  taxpayers’  money  can  only  be  the  last  resort.  By  the  same  token, 
sovereign-bonds  need  to  be  adequately  risk-weighted  when  it  comes  to  the  adequacy  of 
capital  buffers.  Riskier  bonds  have  to  become  more  expensive  in  terms  of  the  amount  of 
equity that they tie down, as is already the case with non-sovereign bonds. This serves two 
purposes:  Firstly,  such  surcharges  should  translate  into  lower  demand  and  hence,  larger 
spreads, which gives a disciplining signal to the respective sovereign. And, secondly, banks 
would become more resilient in cases of market turmoil. In addition, there should be caps on 
banks’  maximum  exposure  to  individual  sovereign  creditors,  as  is  already  the  case  with 
private creditors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Such  enhancements  of  the  regulatory  framework  need  to  complement  the  envisaged 
European supervisory mechanism. In principle, this single European supervisor could help to 
prevent future crises by enforcing the same high standards irrespective of the banks’ country 
of origin and by taking transnational interdependencies into account. 
At the moment, it looks as though the ECB should carry out this task. This is, first of all, an 
expression  of  confidence  in  the  competence  of  central  banks.  But  conducting  monetary 
policy  and  financial  supervision  does  not  come  without  risks.  If  the  institution  tasked  with 
ensuring  banks’  financial  soundness  simultaneously  influences  their  financing  conditions 
through its monetary policy, conflicts of interest might arise. Besides restructuring, let alone 
closing  down  banks  is  an  intervention  into  property  rights  which  requires  democratic 
accountability. If the ECB were really to be tasked with supervising European banks, there 
would  have  to  be  a  strict  separation  of  monetary  policy  and  supervision.  But  such  a 
separation  is  difficult,  from  both  a  legal  and  an  organisational  point  of  view.  Here,  many 
questions still need to be resolved. 
A  banking  union  will  only  contribute  to  financial  stability  if  its  design  preserves  sound 
incentives for all the actors involved. This holds true not only for future risks, but also for risks 
that have already materialised. After all, a banking union is also an insurance mechanism. 
And as with any insurance, only future loss or damage that is unknown ex ante should be 
covered.  Therefore,  the  legacy  assets,  these  are  those  risks  which  evolved  under  the 
responsibility of national supervisors have to be dealt with by the respective member states. 
Anything  else  would  amount  to  a  fiscal  transfer.  It  may  be  that  such  fiscal  transfers  are 
desirable  or  even  deemed  to  be  necessary.  But  then,  they  should  be  conducted  through 
national budgets and be subject to the approval of national parliaments, rather than under 
the guise of a banking union, which would then have to start under a heavy burden. And, in 
the  event  of  such  transfers  being  made,  the  proper  sequencing  of  events  is  the  key.  We 
should not end up in a world where risks from bank balance sheets are rapidly mutualised, 
while an effective single supervisory mechanism would be slow in coming. 
Getting the single supervisory mechanism and a common resolution and restructuring regime 
operational is a daunting task. Several conceptual issues have not yet been resolved. How 
do  we  deal  with  the  ten  EU  members  that  do  not  belong  to  the  euro  area? What  are  the 
specific roles of the single supervisor and of the national supervisors who do the daily work in 
checking about 6,000 banks in the euro area? And even when these questions have been 
resolved, the legal preparations both at the European level and in the member states would 
be  hugely  demanding  –  as  it  is  often  the  case with  such  large  projects,  the  devil  is  in  the 
detail. 
I do not want to appear as an inveterate objectionist, even though the institution of which I 
am a representative is sometimes accused of that role. Rather, I am deeply convinced that 
Europe has to get this banking union project right and cannot afford a bumpy start. For this 
reason, too, a banking union will not be a quick fix for the current crisis. But it can be a major 
milestone  towards  a  more  stable  and  prosper  monetary  union  and  hence  instrumental  in 
re-establishing confidence in the euro area. 
4. 
 Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A lot went wrong in Europe over the past decade, and the crisis has revealed serious flaws in 
the  euro  area’s  architecture.  Yes,  some  governments,  enterprises,  banks  and  households 
have wasted the opportunities presented by the euro, but the benefits clearly outweigh the 
excesses.  According to  a  recent  report  on  Europe’s  growth  model  published  by  the World 
Bank, one of Europe’s most attractive features is that it is a “convergence machine”. Simply 
by virtue of being European and enjoying the benefits of European integration, a European 
country has a better chance of moving to the top of the prosperity ladder than other countries 
in the world. But we need to get this machine running again, we need to make it strong again 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and make it more reliable. The task is daunting, often tedious and sometimes sobering. But I 
am convinced that it can be done and that, ultimately, we shall succeed. The monetary union 
and the euro are here to stay. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
