Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Promoting deposit mobilization and financial 
inclusion in Pakistan 
Speech by Mr Kazi Abdul Muktadir, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 
launch of Easypaisa Khushaal, Karachi, 16 October 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen!  
A very good afternoon, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  launching  ceremony  of  Easypaisa  Khushaal  and  I  would 
have  to  congratulate  Tameer  Microfinance  Bank  and  its  key  partner  Telenor  on  designing 
another  innovative  product  which  will  go  a  long  way  in  promoting  deposit  mobilization  and 
motivating other microfinance sector players to move in this direction. 
1. 
Due  to  slow  progress  in  deposit  mobilization,  Microfinance  Banks  have  not  yet 
become  fully  sustainable  in  generating  substantial  internal  funding.  Such  type  of 
innovations  in  product  designing  will  not  only  attract  small  savings  to  generate 
internal funding of Microfinance Banks but will also provide savers a feeling of safety 
and security in terms of insurance embodied with the product. Now the time is only 
of demand driven innovative products, through which  MFBs can easily  handle the 
challenges like scarcity of funding and financial exclusion. 
Since inception, Government and the State Bank of Pakistan have been supporting 
the microfinance sector to reach out to the millions of unserved low-income people. 
This growth is facilitated by several factors, including an enabling policy framework, 
institutional  reforms,  technology  initiatives,  regulatory  flexibility,  tax  incentives  and 
technical  support  through  different  programs  and  projects.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan 
has  also  issued  a  Strategic  Framework  for  Sustainable  Microfinance  in  Pakistan 
which  mainly  focuses  promoting  use  of  alternative  delivery  channels  to  enhance 
financial services to people without access to finance which is recognized as one of 
the  fundamental  constraints  in  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  in  many 
developing countries. 
SBP has always been encouraging innovations in products and delivery channels in 
order  to  promote  financial  inclusion.  For  the  reason,  SBP  has  also  launched  a 
“Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund”  under  its  DFID-funded  Financial  Inclusion 
Program  (FIP) 
in 
microfinance which will give further impetus to branchless banking. 
With  our  all  assertive  efforts, our financial  sector  is  now  going  through a  dynamic 
transition,  led  by  increasing  uptake  of technology  solutions. This  transition  can  be 
seen  in  recent  branchless  banking  data,  with  a  transactional  volume  of  nearly 
30 million valuing Rs. 115 billion during a single quarter of April–June, 2012 by only 
two  players.  We  are  delighted  that  the  active  players  have  registered  more  than 
1,447,381 mWallet accounts of previously un-banked and under-banked to operatio 
of the economy. 
With the entry of new players and scaling-up of the existing institutions the present 
growth  momentum  will  further  build.  Our  Tele  density  also  highlights  the  inherent 
potential for mobile banking in Pakistan. Achievements in the Branchless Banking 
Services  have  put  Pakistan  at the Global  Centre  Stage  of  Financial  Inclusion  and 
innovation.  World  Bank’s  Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor  (CGAP),  in  its 
recent study has also recognized Pakistan as one of the fastest growing branchless 
banking market in the World.  
in  product  and  delivery  channels 
to  support 
innovation 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
State  Bank  of  Pakistan  as  a  supervisor  and  regulator  of  the  banking  industry,  is 
trying to make banking services available at the door step of the people. Promoting 
access  to  banking  services  is  the  corner  stone  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan’s  policy 
framework.  As  opening of  physical  branches,  entails  substantial  costs  and  is  time 
consuming,  SBP  has  always  been  encouraging  adoption  of  alternate  delivery 
channels for providing financial services to clients by the banks. 
Access  to  Branch  banking  is  limited  by  time.  The  availability  of  Automated  Teller 
Machines (ATMs) is a convenient and efficient tool to access accounts by clients for 
cash withdrawals and other related services on a 24 hour 7 day basis. In developed 
countries,  there  are  three  ATMS  against  one  bank  branch;  however,  being  a 
developing economy, the availability of ATMs in Pakistan is low. Presently we have 
only 5600 ATMs across Pakistan, just about one ATM against two bank branches. 
Therefore,  there  was  a  strong  need  for  the  Central  Bank  to  come  up  with  some 
policy  initiative  to  improve  this  position.  As  such,  SBP  has  recently  issued  policy 
instructions  to  all  banks  binding  them  to  expand  their  ATM  network  in  a  phased 
manner so as to achieve a target level of one ATM for each bank branch. Once this 
target is achieved, we have plans to gradually raise the bar so as to come close to 
the international levels. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  banking  industry  of  Pakistan  has  tremendous  growth 
potential and can deliver a lot more than what it is delivering right now. The driving 
force behind the efficiency and dynamism of the banking business today is the use 
of 
technology.  The  significance  of  e-banking  and  e-commerce  cannot  be 
overemphasized  because  of  the  fact  that  both  have  brought  about  remarkable 
changes in the ways people think and do their banking business today. 
The  outcome  of  e-banking  in  Pakistan  will  be  gradual  but  the  trends  towards 
adoption  of  information  technology  are  quite  encouraging.  Transformation  from 
traditional banking modes to modern ways of banking is taking place at a fast pace. 
A number of alternate delivery channels for provision of banking services like ATMs, 
Credit Cards, POS (Point of Sale) terminals, Internet Banking, Debit Cards already 
exist in our country to benefit the masses. Currently, 93% of the total bank branches 
are offering Real-Time Online services. 
I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  efforts  of  Tameer  Bank  and  Telenor  towards 
financial inclusion and deposit mobilization. It will not only bring economic prosperity 
but  also  help  alleviate  poverty  and  improve  living  standards  of  the  people  of 
Pakistan.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  looks  forward  to  the  success  and  positive 
outcomes  of  Easypaisa  Khushaal  and  expects  more  innovative  products  from 
Tameer  Microfinance  for  promoting  deposit  mobilization  and  financial  inclusion 
agenda.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
