Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy in the financial crisis – measures, 
effects, risks 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Swiss Banking Global Symposium, Zurich, 16 November 2012. 
 The speaker thanks Mathias Zurlinden for his support in preparing this speech. He would also like to thank Katrin 
Assenmacher, Rita Kobel and Peter Kuster for their helpful comments, and also extends his thanks to the English 
Language Services. 
When  the  Swiss  Bankers  Association  was  founded  100  years  ago  as  Vertreter  des 
schweizerischen  Bankgewerbes,  or  Representatives  of  the  Swiss  Banking Trade,  this step 
was warmly welcomed by the Swiss National Bank (SNB). Surprisingly, perhaps, the senior 
representatives of the SNB were even members of the Association between 1916 and 1937. 
Since that time, of course, the role and the tasks of central banks have changed significantly. 
It would be unthinkable for the SNB nowadays to belong to a private sector interest group. 
Nevertheless, I am happy to observe today that the relationship between the SNB and the 
Swiss  Bankers  Association  has  remained  good  and  reliable  over  the  years.  The  Swiss 
Bankers Association has been a key dialogue partner for the Governing Board on all matters 
relating to the financial centre, and continues to be so. 
My topic today is the monetary policy which central banks have pursued during the past few 
years to manage the financial and economic crisis. I will discuss the impact of the various 
conventional  and  unconventional  measures,  and  I  will  talk  about  the  risks.  Since  the 
beginning of the crisis, the expectations placed in central banks by politicians, media and the 
general  public  have  increased  substantially.  Therefore,  I  will  also  touch  upon  the  political 
economy risk with respect to the independence and mandate of central banks. In line with 
the title of this symposium, I will be extending my view beyond the SNB and Switzerland. 
The response of monetary policy from 2008 to 2012 
The crisis began in the financial sector, and it was possible to deploy monetary policy rapidly 
and effectively. As a consequence, central banks were in the front line right from the start. 
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008, they rapidly reduced short-term 
interest rates: in Switzerland, the US, the UK and Japan to almost zero percent; in the euro 
area and many other countries to historically low levels slightly above zero. The aim of these 
interest rate reductions was to stabilise the financial system and mitigate the looming deep 
recession. They also served to counter deflation expectations and prevent a negative price 
spiral. 
With  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  close  to  zero,  further  interest  rate  reductions  were 
soon  impossible.  This  meant  that  conventional  monetary  policy,  in  other  words,  managing 
the  economy  via  short-term  interest  rates,  was  no  longer  an  option.  Yet  concerns  that 
monetary policy might lack any further instruments were unfounded. The measures that can 
still  be  used  are  often  described  as  unconventional  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  the 
customary instruments. 
Most  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  make  use  of  these  unconventional  measures. 
While the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England are chiefly focused on ensuring a more 
expansionary monetary policy, the goals of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the SNB 
are  somewhat  different. In the  case  of  the  ECB,  its  unconventional measures  are  directed 
against  disruptions  in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  arising  out  of  the 
deterioration in government finances and credit conditions in the single currency area. The 
SNB, for its part, took a stand against an unwarranted tightening of monetary conditions as a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
result  of  the  strength  of  the  Swiss  franc  –  a  strength  whose  origin  was  to  be  found  in 
international developments. 
Unconventional measures mainly take one of the following three forms – forward guidance 
regarding  the  future  path  of  policy  interest  rates,  quantitative  easing  (QE),  or  foreign 
exchange market interventions.1 What is involved here, and what do we hope to achieve? 
In  the  case  of  forward  guidance,  the  central  bank  provides  explicit  information  on  the 
expected  movement  in  short-term  interest  rates.  To  a  certain  extent,  central  banks  had 
already  provided  such  indications  previously.  This  applies,  in  particular,  to  countries  that 
communicate  their  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  an  inflation  forecast  conditioned  on  a 
given interest rate path. Even where this interest rate path – as in the case of Switzerland – 
corresponds  to  the  unchanged  current  rate  of  interest,  the  resulting  inflation  forecast  can 
provide insights with respect to the interest rate path that may be expected. 
What is new is that a number of central banks provide explicit information on the length of 
time they expect interest rates to remain unchanged. This was done by the Bank of Canada 
a few years ago and is being carried out at the moment by the Federal Reserve. According to 
the  expectations  hypothesis  of the  term  structure  of  interest  rates,  long-term  interest  rates 
reflect  expected  future  short-term  interest  rates  plus  a  risk  premium.  Consequently,  if  the 
Federal Reserve indicates – as it did in September 2012 – that it expects to hold short-term 
interest rates exceptionally low until mid-2015 at least, its objective is to influence long-term 
interest rates, and ultimately the economy. 
Quantitative  easing  is  another  unconventional  method  of  stimulating  the  economy  when 
short-term interest rates are at zero. For many, this is the unconventional instrument per se. 
The idea is to increase liquidity further in order to reduce long-term interest rates, or more 
generally, term and risk premia. Quantitative easing is usually associated with the acquisition 
of medium-term and longer-term securities by the central bank. Examples of this are Federal 
Reserve purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities, or the programme of lengthening 
the average maturity of the bonds in its portfolio, referred to by some as “operation twist”. 
These  kinds  of  measures  can  be  effective  where  they  have  an  impact  on  expectations 
relating to the duration of zero interest rate policies, or where the different financial assets in 
investor portfolios are imperfect substitutes.2 Apart from the Federal Reserve, both the Bank 
of  England  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  have  conducted  similar,  large-scale  securities 
programmes. With respect to Switzerland, the SNB’s extensive repo transactions and foreign 
exchange swaps, carried out in August 2011, may be viewed as quantitative easing.3 
An  alternative  to  quantitative  easing  is  intervening  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Apart 
from  the  SNB,  Japan  is  an  example  of  a  country  that  has  made  use  of  this  instrument  in 
recent years. It is perhaps useful to recall that, between the early 1980s and 2009, the SNB’s 
interventions on the foreign exchange market were extremely rare. Generally speaking, such 
actions involved very small amounts as part of coordinated intervention by central banks of 
the Group of Ten countries. This changed in March 2009, after the short-term interest rate 
had been reduced to practically zero, when the SNB began purchasing foreign currency to 
stem  the  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc  and  to  prevent  an  undesirable  tightening  of 
                                                
1 
In order to simplify the breakdown, quantitative easing includes credit easing – an activity which often focuses 
on individual segments of the bond market. The breakdown could be simplified even further, since currency 
purchases from foreign exchange interventions may be regarded as a form of quantitative easing. 
2  Cf.  speech  by  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  “Monetary  policy  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 31 August 2012. 
In a foreign exchange swap, a given amount of foreign currency is purchased and sold simultaneously for two 
different dates. Consequently, this is a money market transaction that does not involve any exchange rate risk, 
thus differing from foreign exchange interventions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
2 
 monetary  conditions.  Once  the  economic  recovery  had  gained  hold,  the  foreign  currency 
purchases were suspended in June 2010. 
However, in summer 2011, the situation became so acute that the SNB had to take action 
again. After having employed the less far-reaching measures which I mentioned before, we 
set a minimum exchange rate against the euro on September 6, 2011. Since then, the SNB 
has made it perfectly clear that it is prepared to enforce this minimum rate through unlimited 
foreign  currency  purchases,  if  necessary.  In  setting  a  minimum  exchange  rate  against  the 
euro of CHF 1.20, we were reacting to the extreme appreciation in the Swiss franc. As you 
may recall, the price of the euro temporarily fell to as little as CHF 1.00 and that of the dollar 
to 70 centimes. 
The  SNB’s  aim  with  the  minimum  exchange  rate  is  not  to  fine-tune  the  economy,  but  to 
provide the market with some guidance during a phase of great uncertainty. The objective is 
to prevent severe damage to the Swiss economy from a very substantial and possibly long-
lasting  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  Accordingly,  the  SNB  has  set  the  minimum 
exchange rate at a level where the value of the Swiss franc remains high. 
Impact and risks 
When  evaluating  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  unconventional  measures,  we 
need to take account of effects as well as risks. What can we say about the effects? The way 
I read the available data, conventional and unconventional measures taken by central banks 
have  made  a  decisive  contribution  to  preventing  the  global  economy  from  drifting  into 
deflation and depression. However, the slow recovery reminds us that monetary policy is not 
omnipotent  and  is  not  in  a  position  to  solve  all  problems.  Fiscal  consolidation  and  the 
structural reforms required for the improvement of growth potential in many countries cannot 
be replaced by monetary policy measures. 
An evaluation of the impact of the individual unconventional measures is more difficult. The 
simplest  to  assess  is  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  This  instrument  has  made  a  decisive 
contribution to stabilising the Swiss economy. The export industry is gaining ground again, 
and the deflationary expectations that were threatening to take hold were checked. It is more 
difficult  to  assess  the  impact  of  forward  guidance  and  quantitative  easing.  Certainly,  long-
term interest rates have fallen to record lows this year in some areas. However, it is likely 
that the deterioration in the economic outlook and the flight to safe investments also played a 
role  in  this  development.  Having  said  that,  it  is  worth  mentioning  the  results  of  empirical 
studies  on  the  effects  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  first  two  QE  programmes.  Overall,  they 
suggest  that  these  programmes  led  to  an  economically  significant  reduction  in  long-term 
interest rates. However, the effects of the first QE programme appear to have been greater 
than the second. 
What can we say then about the risks associated with the accommodative monetary policy 
and unconventional measures? 
In  public  discussion,  the  focus  is  often  on  the  risk  of  inflation.  In  many  countries,  the 
monetary base has grown very substantially. In the opinion of some observers, this will lead 
to a marked increase in inflation. I would therefore stress that inflation rates in the advanced 
economies  have  remained  low  against  the  background  of  capacity  underutilisation.  The 
same applies to inflationary expectations obtained from financial market data and surveys of 
households and companies. It is correct that the monetary base will need to be normalised 
when the crisis subsides. The challenge will be to determine this moment accurately. Yet this 
problem  is  not  fundamentally  different  from  the  normal  task  of  a  central  bank,  which  is  to 
select the appropriate volume of liquidity. 
Apart from the risk of inflation in an accommodative monetary policy, another main area of 
public  concern  are  the  risks  in  central  bank  balance  sheets.  These  risks  have  become 
greater with unconventional monetary policy and the associated lengthening of central bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
balance  sheets.  In  the  case  of  the  SNB,  foreign  currency  investments  have  increased 
substantially as a result of foreign exchange interventions. This has exposed the SNB to a 
substantial exchange rate risk, which is a consequence of monetary policy considerations. 
Consequently,  it  is  one  that  the  SNB  must  take.  We  reduce  the  risks  through  suitable 
diversification of our foreign currency investments. However, the primacy of monetary policy 
means that our scope for diversification is limited.4 
Additional risks in connection with zero interest rate policies can result from the fact that it 
has become very difficult for investors to achieve a satisfactory return on bonds. There is a 
danger that investors seeking an attractive yield will become imprudent and take excessive 
risks.  The  longer  a  low  interest  rate  phase,  the  greater  the  danger  of  unintended 
consequences in the form of speculative price developments and misallocations. We have 
been  observing  a  substantial  increase  in  real  estate  prices  in  Switzerland  for  some  years 
now, with strong growth in mortgage loans. The SNB has repeatedly expressed its concern 
over these developments. Prolonged low-interest phases also present the insurance industry 
and pension funds with considerable challenges. 
It goes without saying that central banks continually evaluate and reassess the effects and 
risks of monetary policy in the light of the most recent data. This applies in normal times and 
even  more  so  in  exceptional  situations  such  as  we  have  experienced  over  the  past  few 
years. The exceptional nature of the situation can be seen not least from the long duration of 
interest rates close to zero. Apart from the case of Japan in the 1990s, there has been no 
other example of this in monetary history. There is certainly no precedent for the extent to 
which unconventional instruments have been used. 
Central bank independence and mandate 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen, I  would  now  like  to turn  to questions  relating to  the  independence 
and mandate of central banks. During the crisis, central banks intervened flexibly and on a 
huge  scale,  and  with  success.  The  downside  of  this  success  is  that  politicians  and  the 
general  public  have  higher  expectations  of  central  banks  when  it  comes  to  crisis  and 
economic management. This carries the risk that monetary policy will be overburdened in the 
long term. In addition, the unconventional measures of the past few years have blurred the 
boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy in places. This is not without its problems as, 
ultimately, the central banks have no political authority to make fiscal policy decisions. In its 
recent Annual Report, the Bank for International Settlements issued a stark warning about 
the  political  economy  risks  of  unconventional  monetary  policy.  Risks  of  this  nature  mainly 
relate  to  the  potential  long-term  impact  on  central  bank  independence.  These  warnings 
should be taken seriously. 
As you probably recall, in the 1990s, following the painful inflation experiences of previous 
decades,  a  global  consensus  developed  that  monetary  policy  should  focus  primarily  on 
maintaining price stability over the medium term. In addition, those central banks that were 
not  yet  independent  were  given  independence,  while  their  duty  of  accountability  was 
extended. This consensus with regard to the mandate and constitution of central banks led to 
a long period of low inflation for the global economy, and at the same time demonstrated that 
a focus on price stability did not result in greater cyclical fluctuations, as had been feared by 
some.  On  the  contrary:  The  low  inflation  rates  were  accompanied  by  a  very  stable  real 
economy, by historical standards. 
The  focus  on  price  stability  remains  essential,  even  against  the  background  of  the 
experiences of the financial and economic crisis. Central banks could not have implemented 
                                                
4  Cf. speech by Fritz Zurbrügg, “Challenges posed by the growth in the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves”, SNB 
Money Market Event, Geneva, 8 November 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their  unconventional  measures  for  stabilising  the  economy  in  the  crisis  if  they  had  not 
acquired a high level of credibility in the preceding years. Long-term interest rates can only 
be influenced by a central bank if market participants are convinced that price stability will 
prevail  in  the  long  term.  For  monetary  policy,  it  remains  essential  that  price  stability  be 
ensured, even – and most particularly – in difficult situations like the one we are experiencing 
at the moment. 
After the beginning of the financial and economic crisis, the question of what central banks 
could contribute to financial stability became more important. In the previous years, the view 
had become established that monetary policy served financial stability best by focusing on 
price  stability.  This  was  linked  to  the  widespread  opinion  that  monetary  policy  should  not 
“lean” against a growing bubble on the equity or real estate markets. It should wait until the 
bubble  had  burst  before  intervening  and  cleaning  up.  The  “lean  or  clean”  question  was 
reassessed as a result of the financial crisis. It became evident that financial stability was not 
necessarily guaranteed, even where monetary policy – as measured by the criterion of price 
stability – was very successful. Moreover, the damage caused when a bubble bursts can be 
so enormous that it is not easily remedied using monetary policy instruments. 
To  simplify  things  somewhat,  we  can  distinguish  two  ways  in  which  central  banks  can 
attempt  to  make  a  more  substantial  contribution  to  financial  stability.  The  first  is  to  steer 
monetary policy decisions more strongly in the direction of financial stability. The argument 
against this is the danger of overburdening monetary policy. One lesson from the years of 
the Great Inflation was that the overall result is not improved when monetary policy tries to 
achieve too many goals simultaneously. The credibility and success of monetary policy will 
inevitably suffer as a result. For this reason, the second option has much in its favour. This is 
to supplement the central banks’ instruments in such a way that – alongside the maintenance 
of  price  stability  –  central  banks  can  also  make  a  greater  contribution  to  financial  stability 
than  they  have  done  in  the  past.  The  specific  tools  being  referred  to  here  are  the 
macroprudential instruments that have attracted increasing interest in recent years, and that 
have been introduced in many countries. Such instruments can be used in a supplementary 
manner, as required. 
In the case of Switzerland, the SNB has a statutory mandate to pursue a monetary policy 
serving the interests of the country as a whole, to ensure price stability and in so doing, to 
take due account of the development of the economy. Within this primary framework, it also 
has the task of contributing to the stability of the financial system. There is no contradiction 
between these tasks if target hierarchy is observed. As far as financial stability is concerned, 
the SNB works closely together with the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority and 
the  Federal  Department  of  Finance  to  create  a  regulatory  environment  that  promotes 
stability.  The  SNB  concentrates  on  the  macroeconomic  and  macroprudential  aspects  of 
regulation.  For  the  macroprudential  tasks,  a  new  instrument  was  created  this  year  –  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer.  According  to  the  relevant  regulation,  this  buffer  can  be 
activated by the Federal Council following a proposal by the SNB. 
The  SNB’s  monetary  policy  remains  focused  on  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the 
medium  term  and,  since  September  2011,  on  the  enforcement  of  the  minimum  exchange 
rate.  Consequently,  possible  distortions  in  the  growth  of  credit  aggregates  that  could 
endanger financial stability should be managed, first and foremost, with the macroprudential 
toolkit.5 
                                                
5  Cf.  speech  by  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  “Taming  the  financial  cycle”,  30th  SUERF  colloquium,  Zurich, 
5 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Concluding remarks 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  we  are  living  in  an  exceptional  monetary  policy 
situation,  and  not  in  a  new  world.  The  flexibility  shown  by  central  banks  in  the  crisis  was 
necessary  to  prevent  a  downward  spiral.  Apart  from  the  central  banks,  governments  have 
also taken measures to manage the crisis. Important steps have been taken in the regulation 
of banks, including the tightening of capital requirements. Measures to bring about a long-
term  restructuring  of  public  finances,  however,  remain  unsatisfactory  in  many  countries. 
Monetary  policy  has  opened  up  a  time  slot  that  will  enable  this  to  be  done.  It  would  be 
disastrous for the long-term future of the global economy if it were not used. In the countries 
most  concerned,  government  budgets  must  be  returned  to  a  sustainable  path  as  soon  as 
possible.  Moreover,  a  consolidation  of  this  kind  would  reduce  the  risk  of  overburdening 
monetary policy. 
As  far  as  Switzerland  is  concerned,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  against  the  euro  will 
continue  to  apply.  The  reasons  behind  the  setting  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  in 
September  2011 retain their  validity.  The financial  problems  in  many  countries  continue  to 
provide a basis for potential safe haven capital flows. In addition, at its current rate, the Swiss 
franc remains high and is weighing on the Swiss economy. Consequently, at its most recent 
monetary  policy  assessment  in  September,  the  SNB  confirmed  that  it  would  leave  the 
minimum exchange rate unchanged and continue to enforce it with the utmost determination. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
