Ardian Fullani: Monetary policy, from the past to the present 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  10th  international 
conference on “Monetary policy, from the past to the present”, Tirana, 26 October 2012. 
 for 
the  100th  anniversary  of 
H.E. Prime Minister, 
Your Excellencies Ambassadors, 
Honourable Minister of Finance, 
Honourable Governors, 
Distinguished Guests and Participants, 
I am very honoured and privileged to open the proceedings of the Tenth Conference of the 
Bank of Albania. This conference is particularly important this year as it is organised in the 
framework  of  activities 
the  Declaration  of  Albania’s 
Independence and the 20th anniversary of the Bank of Albania. While retaining the scientific 
approach,  the  conference  pays  tribute  to  the  endeavours  made  over  the  years  in  the 
monetary and finance aspects. 
In  Bank  of  Albania’s  view,  the  past  is  an  essential  element  for  the  analysis  and  decision-
making, and a requisite for theoretic or empirical research. At present, this is a necessity, a 
challenge that the economics world is facing.  
To scan, diagnose and cure the situation of the economy, a successful scholar would have to 
be able to read the human thought. Unfortunately, such a doctor does not exist.  
Therefore,  in  our  days,  the  economic  science  is  turning  its  attention  to  individual 
characteristics such as: history, ethnography and other national traits, considering them as 
substantial  determinants  for  the  stochastic  process  that  leads  the  behaviour  of  economic 
agents. 
The history plays also a significant role in the formation and development of institutions. The 
declaration of independence introduced a new era for Albanian state institutions, paving the 
way  for  the  establishment  of  a  central  bank,  a unified  Albanian  monetary  system,  and  the 
administration  of  economic  life  through  the  monetary  policy.  Despite  its  short  life,  the 
National Bank established in 1913 is a cornerstone in the history of the Albanian state. The 
then  Prime  Minister,  Ismail  Bej  Vlora  said  about  it:  “I  say  the  affair  of  the  Bank  is 
praiseworthy; for Albania, it is a second victory, after freedom, from both the economic and 
political perspective.” 
The events that followed the declaration of independence, in the national and international 
aspect, have played a crucial role concerning the nature and character of these institutions 
and, at the same time, determined the nature of the monetary policy.  
Economic and political partnerships, and the charisma of the Albanian statesmen to build a 
modern society, led to the establishment of the first functional national bank in 1925, with the 
characteristic  and  distinctive  profile  embodied  in  the  building  that  was  constructed  in  the 
centre of Tirana. 
Historic  developments  in  early  1990s  became  once  again  determinant  factors  for  the 
financial system and the central bank. Introduction of modern economics concepts led to the 
creation of the Bank of Albania as a bank with all the attributes of a modern central bank. 
Its institutional evolution led to the development and modernisation of monetary and financial 
policies. The Bank of Albania became also an important institution for the development of the 
financial and economic systems in Albania. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  challenges  of  the  past  20  years  have  transformed  the  central  Bank  into  a  modern, 
responsible and credible institution; a centre of professionalism; an institution that applies the 
most modern methods of monetary management; the heart of the financial system.  
Aware of the decisive role that modern theories on economic growth assign to institutions for 
the prosperity of a nation, and taking advantage of the support from the political class and 
the trust of the Albanian society during these 20 years, the Bank of Albania has undertaken 
to  transform  itself  into  a  modern  institution  and  a  dignified  public  entity  across  the 
institutional, moral, professional, ethical and intellectual dimensions.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  this  as  a  highly  significant  task  and  contribution  to  state 
formation and prosperity in the future. 
Its efforts for the infrastructural and conceptual modernisation of the institution, including the 
Bank’s  construction  projects  during  the  last  three  years,  are  a  requisite  to  guarantee 
contemporary  standards  for  the  management  of  the  activities  of  the  institution.  In  other 
words, this literally implies rapid approximation with homologous institutions in Europe. Upon 
the completion of these projects, the Bank of Albania will be more opened to the public that 
will  benefit  from  financial  education  policies,  scientific  research,  library  services,  and 
legislative, history, museum, and numismatic-related activities.  
These novelties will be offered to the public as a modest contribution to the formation of a 
modern and dignified state for the Albanian nation. 
At present, fulfilling these obligations has become a more difficult task due to negative effects 
arising from the global economic crisis. Most evidently, labour markets, capital markets and 
economic activity remain under the effect of contraction of consumption and investments in 
the private sector. 
The  anaemic  reaction  of  the  markets  has  placed  central  banks  in  a  difficult  position,  a 
solution without any choice, i.e. intervene in the economy with all the instruments to address 
current emergencies while the other factors are forced to contract in favour of the long-term 
stability  of  public  and  private  balances.  In  this  situation,  central  banks  are  obliged  to 
undertake a series of extreme and qualitatively-different measures, which have been never 
tested before and exceed all imaginary boundaries of the monetary policy. 
Actually,  politicians  are  obliged  to  cope  with  debt  crisis  through  an  extreme  fiscal  policy 
aiming  at  short-term  balancing  and  long-term  stability  of  the  fiscal  policy.  The  focus  and 
emphasis of the economic policy remains long-term rebalancing by cutting on expenses. An 
important  part  of  these  measures  is  very  focused  on  the  short-term  problematic,  hence 
risking to disregard the undesired effects in the long term. Under the pressure from social 
costs,  the  philosophy  of  current  policies  is  to  overcome  the  situation  and  maintain  social 
peace and macroeconomic stability at the expense of sovereignty. 
This  emergency  compromise  has  shifted  the  focus  away  from  structural  reforms,  which 
guarantee rebalancing through the increase of income. Often, the perspective of economic 
policies  does  not  extend  beyond  some  quarters  ahead,  while  a  much  longer  time  vision 
should be considered. The anchoring of the future should start from the present.  
The actual philosophy of stabilising policies is based on past experiences with the hope that 
the current crisis is similar to previous ones. This reasoning has urged the authorities to insist 
on  recycling  stabilising measures. The  time,  however,  shows  that the global  economy  has 
undergone radical changes. The current crisis is happening as the global economic map is 
being  redesigned  in  terms  of  economic  size,  geographic  distribution  of  savings,  debt,  and 
trade and current balances. Advanced economies have traded positions with the emerging 
ones across all these dimensions. 
Consequently, old recipes do not provide an exit given that axioms on which they are based 
have changed. The solution of current and future challenges requires a new philosophy of 
thinking based on the new global reality. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This reality, globalisation, is no longer a choice, but a fact that should be taken into account 
when formulating long-term development strategies. 
Turning to a regional setting, I think that this philosophy should be embraced and supported 
without hesitation. In order to make it more productive, we should be more opened to each 
other and take regional cooperation to new and higher levels. 
Individual  prosperity  of  the  economies  of  the  region  requires  that  we  leave  behind  the 
philosophy of competition encouraged and inherited by state-formation efforts and sclerotic 
models that dominated the last century. We need to prepare the way for elevated economic 
and financial cooperation and coordination. 
We  need  to  tear  down  Balkan  barriers  and  raise,  instead,  a  comprehensive  functional 
infrastructure, a regional payments system, a regional energy system, a regional market of 
financial  products  and  lastly  but  may  be  most  importantly  a  regional  market  of  production 
factors. In Martin Luther King’s words “we may have all come on different ships, but we’re in 
the same boat now”.  
Dwelling a little longer on the regional theme, I would like to briefly touch on another problem. 
The  experience  of  the  past  year  shows  that  as  a  result  of  regulatory  capital  requirements 
imposed by euro area supervisors, various bank groups reduced their participation not only 
in the euro area markets but also in our region.  
This  process,  known  as  deleverage,  yielded  negative  consequences.  To  prevent  such 
phenomena,  policymakers  and  supervisors  of  partner  economies  need  to  cooperate  more 
closely. 
In  this  regard,  the  Vienna  Initiative  is  a  good  but  limited  cooperation  platform.  It  is 
conceptualised as an instrument to address emergency crisis situations, whereas the current 
situation  requires  platforms  for  dialogue  to  enable  effective  and  persistent  communication 
among  policymakers.  This  dialogue  should  aim  at  preventing  undesired  mutual  effects;  a 
more  ambitious  programme,  on  the  other  hand,  would  aim  at  drafting  and  implementing 
coordinated initiatives of mutual interest. 
Nonetheless,  potential  emergencies  arising  from  contamination  from  euro  area  partners 
would create additional difficulties and huge effective costs for the economies of the region. 
Therefore,  we  call  for  the  establishment  of  appropriate  mechanisms  and  instruments  for 
liquidity provision by the European Union to peripheral euro area countries. 
I believe that the financial integration makes this common defence more urgent, through the 
right  understanding  of  the  common  fate  of  our  trade  partner  economies.  I  take  the 
opportunity, given the presence of many central bank officials from the region, to call 
for an en bloc coordinated position in this regard. 
The experience of the latest crisis showed that the countries which had more space to react, 
in  the  form  of  healthier  fiscal  balances  or  the  financial  system,  and  in  the  form  of  more 
reliable public institutions, were able to cope better with the consequences of the crisis. This 
lesson should not be neglected. Among other things, it implies timely measures and, through 
counter-cyclical  policies,  establishment  of  the  necessary  space  to  buffer  potential  shocks. 
Likewise,  it  implies  ongoing  efforts  by  macro  and  micro-prudential  policies  to  minimise 
financial misbalances across all the sectors of the economy and the financial market. 
These  policies,  which  are  often  known  as  “leaning  against  the  wind”,  have  been  and  will 
continue to be part in the logics behind the actions of the Bank of Albania. 
Concluding, I would like to assure you that the Bank of Albania will make maximum efforts to 
continue its success story into the third decade of its life. I am confident that these issues I 
shared  with  you  provide  a  summarised  vision  of  some  of  the  main  directions  of  our  work 
during this period.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Looking forward to a productive exchange during the proceedings of the conference,  
I thank You for your attention!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
