Deepak Mohanty: Perspectives on India’s balance of payments 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
School of Management, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, 7 December 2012. 
 The assistance provided by Rajan Goyal & Rajeev Jain is acknowledged. 
I  thank  Professor  Sar  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  young  audience.  In  the  recent  years, 
India’s integration with the global economy has increased significantly. This is reflected in our 
expanding  volume  of  external  trade  and  financial  transactions.  While  this  process  has 
several benefits arising from wider access to consumption and investment, there is attendant 
cost  of  periodic  instability.  Over  the  last  two  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  drawing 
attention  to  the  widening  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  in  our  balance  of  payments  (BoP). 
The risks to our BoP have increased both in the global and domestic context: first, following 
the  global  financial  crisis  trade  volumes  have  slumped  and  capital  flows  have  become 
volatile; second, slowing domestic growth coupled with a large fiscal deficit alongside a high 
CAD poses twin deficit risks. In this context, I propose to capture the evolution of India’s BoP 
in the historical context and trace how did we respond to risks to external stability from time 
to time? 
Let me start from the basics. What is BoP? It is our transaction account with the rest of the 
world.  It  can  be  better  appreciated  in  terms  of  the  national  income  accounting  identity: 
GDP = C+G+I+X-M. In other words, domestic output (GDP) is equal to private consumption 
(C), plus government consumption (G), plus domestic investment (I), plus net exports (X-M). 
If net exports of goods and services (X-M) are negative, the domestic economy is absorbing 
more than it can produce. In other words, absorption (C+G+I) by the domestic economy is 
greater than domestic output (GDP). This is reflected in current account deficit (X-M) which 
needs  to  be  financed  by  external  borrowings  and/or  investments.  In  normal  times  external 
finance  may  not  be  a  problem.  However,  it  could  be  challenging  if  both  the  global  and 
domestic economic outlook are not very favourable. Against this background, my scheme of 
presentation  will  be  as  follows:  identify  the  key  events  those  shaped  India’s  BoP  since 
independence; examine the changes in the composition of capital inflows; and in conclusion 
highlight a few risks and make some suggestions to reinforce India’s BoP. 
India’s  BoP  evolved  reflecting  both  the  changes  in  our  development  paradigm  and 
exogenous shocks from time to time. In the 60 year span, 1951–52 to 2011–12, six events 
had a lasting impact on our BoP: (i) the devaluation in 1966; (ii) first and second oil shocks of 
1973  and  1980;  (iii)  external  payments  crisis  of  1991;  (iv)  the  East  Asian  crisis  of  1997; 
(v) the Y2K event of 2000; and (vi) the global financial crisis of 2008. I will analyse the BoP 
trend in this sequence.  
The first phase can be considered from the 1950s through mid-1960s. In the early 1950s, 
India  was  reasonably  open.  For  example,  in  1951–52,  merchandise  trade,  exports  plus 
imports,  accounted  for  16  per  cent  of  GDP.  Overall  current  receipts  plus  payments  were 
nearly  19  per  cent  of  GDP.  Subsequently,  the  share  of  external  sector  in  India’s  GDP 
gradually  declined  with  the  inward  looking  policy  of  import  substitution.  Moreover,  Indian 
export  basket  comprised  mainly 
jute 
manufactures. Not only the scope of world trade expansion in these commodities was less 
but additionally India had to face competition from new emerging suppliers, such as Pakistan 
in jute manufactures and Ceylon and East Africa in tea.  
During this period, policy emphasis was on import saving rather than export promotion, and 
priority was given to basic goods and capital goods sector. It was argued that investment in 
heavy industries would bring in saving in foreign exchange, as output from such industries 
would replace their imports in the long-run. Import-substituting strategies were expected to 
tea,  cotton 
textile  and 
traditional 
items 
like 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
gradually increase export competitiveness through efficiency-gains achieved in the domestic 
economy.  But  this  did  not  happen.  Hence,  exports  remained  modest.  In  fact  our  external 
sector contracted in relation to GDP from the level observed in the early 1950s. By 1965–66, 
merchandise trade was under 8 per cent of GDP and overall current receipts and payments 
were below 10 per cent of GDP (Table 1). 
 Notwithstanding  the  contracting  size  of  the  external  sector,  as  imports  growth  outstripped 
exports  growth,  there  was  persistent  current  account  deficit  (CAD).  Emphasis  on  heavy 
industrialisation in the second five year Plan led to a sharp increase in imports. On top of 
this, the strains of Indo-China conflict of 1962, Indo-Pakistan war of 1965 and severe drought 
of  1965–66  triggered  a  major  BoP  crisis.  India’s  international  economic  relations  with 
advanced countries came under stress during the Indo-Pak conflict. Withdrawal of foreign aid 
by countries like the US and conditional resumption of aid by the Aid India Consortium led to 
contraction  in  capital  inflows.  Given  the  low  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and 
burgeoning trade deficit, India had no option other than to devalue. Rupee was devalued by 
36.5 per cent in June 1966.1 
Though  India’s  export  basket  was  limited,  the  sharp  devaluation  clearly  increased  the 
competitiveness of India’s exports. Concurrently, India had to undertake a number of trade 
liberalising  measures.  Even  though  the  net  impact  of  devaluation  was  a  contentious  issue 
among  the  leading  economists,2  data  show  that  exports  growth,  though  modest,  outpaced 
imports growth (Chart 1).  
                                                 
1   Official rate increased from Rs.4.76 per US dollar to Rs.7.50 per US dollar. 
2   For example, Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1975) argued that the effective devaluation was more for imports than 
the  exports.  “Foreign  Trade  Regimes  and  Economic  Development:  India”,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, New York. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In fact, the current account turned into a surplus in 1973–74 as not only the exports growth 
was significant but invisible3 receipts also showed a sharp turnaround from deficit to surplus 
mainly on account of official transfers which largely represented grants under the agreement 
of  February  1974  with  the  US  Government  on  the  disposition  of  PL  480  and  other  rupee 
funds. Since surplus in current account balance (CAB) was used for repaying rupee loans 
under the same agreement with the US, accretion to reserves was only marginal.  
Surplus in India’s CAB was, however, short-lived as the first oil shock occurred by October 
1973. Sharp rise in international oil prices was evident in higher imports growth in 1973–74 
and 1974–75. The share of crude oil in India’s import bill rose from 11 per cent in 1972–73 to 
26  per  cent  by  1974–75.  As  exports  improved,  particularly  to  oil  producing  Middle-East 
countries, BoP recovered quickly from the first oil shock. By this time, the Indian rupee, which 
was  linked  to  a  multi-currency  basket  with  pound  sterling  as  intervention  currency, 
depreciated against the US dollar (Chart 2).  
                                                 
3   Comprises services, transfers and income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Depreciating  rupee  along  with  other  policy  incentives  to  exporters  acted  as  a  supporting 
factor  for  India’s  exports.  At  the  same  time,  invisible  receipts  grew  sharply  stemming  from 
workers’  remittances  from  the  Middle  East.  Consequently,  the  current  account  balance 
turned into surplus in 1976–77 and 1977–78 (Chart 3). 
Thus, the private transfers added a new positive dimension to India’s BoP after the first oil 
shock. Further, with the official exchange rate nearly converging to  market exchange rate, 
there  was  not  much  incentive  for  routing  remittances  through  unofficial  exchange  brokers. 
The  rapid  growth  of  private  transfers  reinforced  the  trade account  adjustment  to  make  the 
current account situation much more comfortable (Chart 4). 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
During  the  1980s,  BoP  again  came  under  stress.  The  second  oil  shock  led  to  a  rapid 
increase in imports in early 1980s. Oil imports increased to about two-fifths of India’s imports 
during  1980–83.  At  the  same  time,  India’s  external  sector  policy  was  changing  towards 
greater  openness.  Various  measures  were  undertaken  to  promote  exports  and  liberalise 
imports for exporters during this period. However, several factors weighed against external 
stability.  First,  despite  a  number  of  export  promotion  measures,  the  subdued  growth 
conditions in the world economy constrained exports growth. Second, the surplus on account 
of invisibles also deteriorated due to moderation in private transfers. Third, the debt servicing 
had  increased  with  greater  recourse  to  debt  creating  flows  such  as  external  commercial 
borrowings (ECBs) and non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits. Fourth, deterioration is the fiscal 
position stemming from rising expenditures accentuated the twin deficit risks. 
Given  the  already  emerging  vulnerabilities  in  India’s  BoP  during  the  1980s,  the  incipient 
signs of stress were discernible which culminated in the BoP crisis in 1991 when the Gulf 
War led to a sharp increase in the oil prices. On top of that, a slowdown in the world trade 
following the recessionary conditions in industrialised countries and the economic disruption 
in Eastern Europe including the erstwhile USSR had begun to affect India’s exports. A large 
number  of  Indian  workers  employed  in  Kuwait  had  to  be  airlifted  to  India  and  their 
remittances  stopped.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  had  already  dwindled  due  to  significant 
drawdown for financing of CAD in earlier years. During 1990–91, at one point of time, the 
foreign  currency  assets  had  dipped  below  US$  1.0  billion,  covering  barely  two  weeks  of 
imports.  With  increasing  recourse  to  the  borrowings  on  commercial  terms  in  the  previous 
years,  financing  of  CAD  had  also  become  more  sensitive  to  creditors’  confidence  in  the 
Indian economy. 
Short-term credits began to dry up and the outflow of NRI deposits was also very substantial. 
Downgrading  of  India’s  credit  rating  below  the  investment  grade  also  constrained  India’s 
access in the international markets for funds, especially ECBs and trade credit. Even though 
the  stress  in  India’s  BoP  was  unprecedented,  the  Government  decided  to  honour  all  debt 
obligations without seeking any rescheduling (Reddy, 2006).4 
In  response  to  the  BoP  crisis,  a  combination  of  standard  and  unorthodox  policies  for 
stabilisation and structural change was undertaken to ensure that the crisis did not translate 
into  generalised 
included  pledging  gold  reserves, 
discouraging of non-essential imports, accessing credit from the IMF and other multilateral 
and  bilateral  donors.  While  dealing  with  the  crisis  through  an  IMF  programme,  a 
comprehensive programme of structural reforms was undertaken simultaneously with special 
emphasis on the external sector.  
The broad approach to reform in the external sector was laid out in the Report of the High 
Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman: C. Rangarajan, 1993). Trade policies, 
exchange rate policies and industrial policies were recognised as part of an integrated policy 
framework  so  as  to  boost  the  overall  productivity,  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of  the 
economy. In addition, to contain the trade and current account deficits and enhance export 
competitiveness, the exchange rate of rupee was adjusted downwards in two stages on July 
1 and July 3, 1991 by 9 per cent and 11 per cent, respectively. A dual exchange rate system 
was introduced in March 1992 which was unified in March 1993. Subsequently, India moved 
to current account convertibility in August 1994 by liberalising various transactions relating to 
merchandise trade and invisibles. 
The  impact  of  policy  changes  was  reflected  in lower  CAD  and  its  comfortable  financing  in 
subsequent  years.  India  could  manage  the  external  shocks  that  emanated  from  the  East 
Asian  crisis  in  1997  and  subsequently,  the  rise  in  international  oil  prices  and  bursting  of 
instability.  Such  steps 
financial 
                                                 
4   Reddy, Y.V. (2006), “Dynamics of Balance of Payments in India”, Speech at the first Diamond Jubilee lecture 
of the Department of Commerce, Osmania University on December 16. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
dotcom bubble in 1999–2000. Indeed, the Indian economy remained relatively insulated from 
the East Asian crisis owing to the reforms undertaken in previous years and proactive and 
timely  policy  measures  initiated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  minimise  the  contagion  effect. 
Monetary  tightening  coupled  with  flexible  exchange  rate  and  steps  to  bolster  reserves 
through issuance of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs) helped in stabilizing the BoP. 
The BoP came under some stress again in the first half of 2000–01 due to a sharp rise in oil 
prices  and  increase  in  interest  rates  in  advanced  countries.  At  the  same  time,  India’s 
software exports got a boost following the demands to address the Y2K challenges. This also 
encouraged migration of Indian software engineers to the advanced countries. As a result, 
the  surplus  in  the  services  exports  and  remittance  account  of  the  BoP  increased  sharply 
which more than offset the deficit in the trade account. Software exports rose from 0.9 per 
cent of GDP in 1999–2000 to a peak of 3.8 per cent of GDP by 2008–09. Private remittances 
also rose from 2.7 per  cent of GDP to 3.8 per cent during this period. Thus, in the 2000s 
software  exports  and  private  remittances  emerged  as  two  main  financing  items  for  the 
current  account  mitigating  to  a  large  extent  the  merchandise  trade  deficit  (Tables  2  &  3). 
Owing  to  a  combination  of  factors,  in  fact,  the  current  account  recorded  a  surplus  during 
2001–04. Subsequently, as international oil prices started rising and domestic growth picked 
up, deficit in current account re-emerged during 2004–05 to 2007–08 albeit remained range 
bound.  
After a period of stability, India’s BoP came under stress in 2008–09 reflecting the impact of 
global  financial  crisis.  As  capital  inflows  plummeted,  India  had  to  draw  down  its  foreign 
currency  assets  by  US  $  20  billion  during  2008–09.  Stress  since  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers largely emanated from decline in India’s merchandise exports and deceleration in 
growth  in  services  exports.  Though  there  was  some  improvement  during  2010–11  on  the 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
back  of  a  strong  pick-up  in  exports  mainly  led  by  diversification  of  trade  in  terms  of 
composition as well as direction, it proved to be short-lived. BoP again came under stress 
during  2011–12  as  slowdown  in  advanced  economies  spilled  over  to  emerging  and 
developing economies (EDEs), and there was sharp increase in oil and gold imports. Let me 
now turn to the financing aspects of the current account. 
India’s openness, both in terms of trade flows and capital flows which increased in the 1990s 
accelerated in the 2000s (Chart 5). This was made possible due to substantial liberalisation 
of the capital account and greater openness to private capital. 
 In  the  first  three  decades  after  the  independence,  CAD  was  mainly  financed  by  external 
assistance  and  drawdown  of  forex  reserves.  Since  much  of  India’s  planning  strategy  was 
conceived  in  terms  of  a  closed  economy  theoretical  framework,  private  investment  inflows 
into the economy were not encouraged much. Therefore, foreign resources came primarily in 
the  form  of  official  transfers.  The  private  investment  came  mainly  through  technology 
transfer, but played a minuscule role. During this period, the development efforts and stress 
on BoP from time to time led India to tap diverse aid sources for specific projects. 
In the 1980s, as the traditional source of official concessional flows dried up there was a 
need  to  access  private  capital.  But,  this  came  in  the  form  of  debt  creating  flows  though 
costly  external  commercial  borrowings  (ECBs)  and  NRI  deposits.  The  limitations  of 
financing CAD through debt creating flows were exposed in the 1991 crisis. Subsequent 
reforms  and  opening  up  the  capital  account  to  non-debt  creating  flows  of  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) and portfolio equity flows not only completely transformed the sources of 
financing of  the BoP  but it also resulted in substantial addition to  reserves in the  2000s 
(Table 4 & Chart 6).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Concluding remarks 
With  the  gradual  external  liberalisation  of  Indian  economy,  not  only  the  size  of  BoP  has 
increased manifold, but the pattern of current and capital account has changed. Even though 
the reform process has strengthened resilience of India’s external sector, at the same time 
vulnerabilities  arise  with  greater  exposure  of  the  economy  to  the  rest  of  world  through 
liberalised trade and investment environment.  
India’s current account particularly remains vulnerable to developments in the trade account. 
It is evident from the size of trade deficit growing from 0.5 per cent of GDP during 1951–55 to 
8.7 per cent during 2007–12. In 2011–12, the current account deficit has widened to a record 
4.2 per cent of GDP (Chart 7). Over the years, current account derived some resilience from 
surplus generated by invisibles, particularly software exports and private transfers, but trade 
deficit continues to dictate the overall trend in the current account. Whenever trade account 
worsens reflecting downswings in the global business cycle or rise in international oil prices, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  current  account  also  comes  under  stress  as  is  evident  in  the  present  context.  Going 
forward, since India’s linkage with the world economy, in terms of trade and finance, is likely 
to  grow  further,  it  is  important  that  resilience  in  its  trade  account  is  built  up  mainly  by 
promoting productivity based export competitiveness and improving domestic fundamentals 
that  are  supportive  of  least  costly  non-debt  creating  flows,  particularly  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI). In this context, I make a few suggestions. 
 First, the current level of CAD is far above the level sustainable for India. As per estimates, at 
a nominal growth rate of about 13 per cent, the sustainable current account to GDP ratio is 
2.3 per cent (Rangarajan, 2012).5 Reserve Bank’s own research shows that economy can 
sustain CAD of about 2.5 per cent of GDP under a scenario of slower growth (RBI, 2012).6 A 
slowing global economy and protracted high levels of unemployment in advanced economies 
make it difficult to boost services exports in the short run. If the slowdown continues, it could 
also  have  an  adverse  impact  on  inward  remittances.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  to  reduce 
imports and boost merchandise exports to bring the CAD to sustainable levels.  
Second, structural policy measures are needed to reduce vulnerability emanating from high 
oil  and  gold  imports.  While  oil  has  been  a  major  component  of  India’s  imports,  the  sharp 
increase in demand for gold has put an additional pressure. During 2008–09 to 2011–12, on 
average,  the  net  gold  imports  stood  at  about  2  per  cent  of  GDP,  almost  double  the  level 
recorded  during  2004–05  to  2007–08.  Thus,  during  the  same  period,  CAD-GDP  ratio, 
excluding net gold imports, would seem less problematic at 1.1 per cent as compared to a 
surplus of 0.2 per cent. In addition to the traditional motive of gold demand for jewellery, gold 
seems to have become a safe investment asset and a hedge against inflation as is observed 
in  other  advanced  economies.  Its  dematerialisation  like  any  other  financial  product  can 
                                                 
5   Rangarajan,  C.  (2012),  “India’s  External  Sector:  Do  We  need  to  worry”,  ECGC  Business  Commencement 
Commemorative Lecture at Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd., Mumbai on October 3. 
6   Reserve Bank of India (2012), Annual Report, 2011–12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
reduce its physical imports (Gokarn, 2012)7. Furthermore, inflation indexed bonds could also 
be  another option  to offer  investors  the  inflation  linked  returns  and  detract  them  from  gold 
investments.  In  the  case  of  oil,  we  need  to  become  more  energy  efficient  to  reduce  our 
dependence on oil imports. Stepping up of production of electricity could reduce oil demand 
from  backup  generation  systems.  Moreover,  the  domestic  pricing  of  oil  should  be  aligned 
further to the international prices to rationalise oil consumption. 
Third, current policies towards further diversification of India’s export basket, both destination 
and products, needs to be stepped up. Indian exporters need to accelerate efforts to move 
up in the value chain at the global level. 
Fourth, given the global uncertainties and volatility in capital flows, the resilience of capital 
account needs to be further enhanced by encouraging FDI inflows.  
To conclude, the Indian economy is much more open and globalised now than ever before. 
The periodic pressures on BoP have been addressed through policy changes. While the BoP 
has again come under stress since 2011–12 as emphasised by Governor Dr Subbarao, the 
situation is not as serious as it was in 1991.8 This is because the structure of the economy 
has changed in a fundamental way with flexible exchange rate and greater depth in financial 
markets, besides much larger foreign exchange reserves than those in 1991. However, there 
is a need to bring the CAD to sustainable levels in the short run and over the medium-term to 
accelerate  efforts  towards  structural  reforms  that  help  boosting  our  competitiveness,  raise 
growth potential and bring in more stable flows into the economy. 
 
                                                 
7   Gokarn,  Subir  (2012),  “India’s  Gold  Problem:  Finding  Solution  through  Financial  Products”,  speech  at 
BANCON, on 25th November, 2012 at Pune. 
8   Subbarao, D., “Macroeconomic Situation Assessment and Prospects”, Speech delivered at Indian Merchants’ 
Chamber, Mumbai on June 19, 2012. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
