H R Khan: Corporate debt market – developments, issues & challenges 
Special address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry’s (FICCI) 9th Annual Conference 
on  Capital  Markets:  CAPAM  2012:  “Developing  Indian  capital markets –  the  way  forward”, 
Mumbai, 12 October 2012. 
 Speaker  acknowledges  the  contributions  of  Dr  Subbaiah  Singala,  Shri  Brij  Raj,  Shri  Raj  Kumar  Jain,  Shri 
N.R.V.V.M.K.  Rajendra  Kumar  and  Shri  Vivek  Singh  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  He  is  also  grateful  to  Shri 
Surajit Bose for his assistance. 
It  is  an  honour  to  address  the  distinguished  participants  of  the  9th  Annual  Conference  on 
Capital  Markets  (CAPAM  2012)  on  an  issue  which  is  attracting  a  lot  of  attention  of  the 
policy-makers  and  market  participants  –  the  corporate  debt  market.  Deeper  and  broader 
financial  markets  are  desirable  for  public  policy  objectives  as  they  play  a  critical  role  in 
improving the efficiency of capital allocation within the economy. Capital market comprising 
equity and debt market is one of the most important segments in the financial system of any 
country.  While  India  has  a  very  advanced  G-sec  market,  its  corporate  bond  market  is 
relatively under developed. Developing a more vibrant corporate bond market has therefore 
become an important agenda among the concerned stakeholders, i.e., Government of India 
(GoI),  the  Reserve  Bank  of India, the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI),  the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA), etc. and in the recent times they 
have made co-ordinated efforts to achieve this objective.  
Need for a well-developed corporate bond market in India 
A.  
The 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC) highlighted the need to reduce the dominance of the 
banking system in financing corporate sector by developing a good corporate bond market. 
India’s  infrastructure  funding  requirements  (estimated  at  around  10  per  cent  of  GDP 
annually)  need  a  robust  corporate  bond  market  for  diversifying  risk,  enhancing  financial 
stability,  and  for  better  matching  of  risk-return  preferences  of  the  borrowers.  Historically, 
India’s  financial  system  has  been  bank-dominated,  supplemented  by  the  Development 
Financial Institutions (DFIs). However, the financial system has undergone several changes 
during the  recent  years and  DFIs  have  been  converted  into  banks.  Commercial  banks,  by 
nature, are not able to fill the gap in long-term finance, given the asset-liability management 
issues. 
A  well-developed  corporate  bond  market  is  critical  for  Indian  economy  as  it  (i)  enables 
efficient allocation of funds, (ii) facilitates infrastructure financing, (iii) improves the health of 
the  corporate  balance  sheets,  (iv)  promotes  financial  inclusion  for  the  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) and the retail investors, (v) safeguards financial stability and (vi) enables 
development of the municipal bond market. Accordingly, development of the corporate bond 
market  has  been  high  on  the  agenda  for  the  regulators.  I  will  cover  each  of  these  areas 
briefly. 
Efficient allocation of resources  
A  well-developed  corporate  bond  market  provides  additional  avenues  to  corporates  for 
raising funds in a cost effective manner and reduces reliance of corporates on bank finance. 
A deep and liquid debt market augments financial savings and helps match the savers to the 
borrowers in an efficient manner. By enlarging the financial sector, capital markets promote 
innovation in financial instruments. In addition, it instils discipline in behaviour of firms leading 
to increased efficiency of the system. The existence of a well-functioning bond market can 
lead to the efficient pricing of credit risk as expectations of all bond market participants are 
incorporated  into  bond  prices.  In  order  to  achieve  the  objective,  it  is  desirable  to  have 
diversified issuer and investor base. Issuer profile in India, however, is concentrated among 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financial 
(NBFCs), 
institutions,  housing 
a  few  category  of  market  participants  dominated  by  financial  sector  firms  including  banks, 
Non-Banking  Financial  Companies 
finance 
companies  (HFCs)  and  Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  (81  per  cent)  while  other  non-finance 
corporates  account for only  19  per  cent  of  total  issuances  made  in  2011–12.  Similarly,  on 
demand  side,  majority  of  investment  are  made by  banks  and  institutions  including  Foreign 
Institutional Investors (FIIs) with very little or negligible part played by retail investors. Thus, 
there is an urgent need to further develop the Indian corporate debt market. 
Infrastructure financing 
The Committee on Infrastructure Financing (Chairman: Shri Deepak Parekh) has estimated 
that ₹51.46 trillion would be required for infrastructure development during the 12th Five Year 
Plan (2012–17) and that 47 per cent of the funds could come through the PPP route. If we 
add the potential financing needs for upgrading our railways, urban and rural infrastructure, 
the financing needs could be much larger. As much as the G-sec market development has 
provided  a  boost  to  the  development  of  the  corporate  bond  market,  the  municipal  bond 
market  could  derive  similar  benefits  from  a  well-developed  corporate  bond  market.  This 
would  provide  boost  to  financing  the  urban  infrastructure  in  an  assured  and  sustainable 
manner. In this context, it is important to note that GoI’s capital expenditure has remained 
stagnant during the last two years at around 13 per cent. Hence, the role of private sector 
assumes greater importance in the context of infrastructure development. 
Health of the corporate balance sheet 
External borrowings of the corporate sector have increased substantially in the last decade, 
in part due to the falling implicit cost of the external commercial borrowings (ECBs). While 
the  external  debt  could  help  the  corporate  sector  diversify  the  funding  sources,  excessive 
reliance on the same could pose balance sheet risks when the availability of funding liquidity 
is subject to sharp volatility in the international markets, making the debt rollovers difficult or 
rollovers are possible only at high interest rates. A Standard & Poor’s (S&P) forecast in June 
2012  had  warned  that  more  than  half  of  the  48  companies  that  are  due  to  redeem  an 
estimated  US$  5  billion  of  convertible  bonds  in  2012  may  default,  while  the  others  may 
redeem  by  borrowing  at  high  cost  or  stiffer  terms.  The  recent  phenomenon  of  sharp 
fluctuation  in  the  exchange  rate,  particularly  sharp  depreciation  of  Rupee  has  imparted 
severe  pressure  on  the  profitability  of  many  Indian  firms  having  large  foreign  exchange 
obligations.  A  well-developed  domestic  corporate  bond  market  could,  thus,  reduce  such 
vulnerability  of  our  corporates  to  both  currency  and  liquidity  risks  besides  reducing  our 
external sector vulnerabilities as share of ECBs as per cent of our foreign exchange reserves 
has been declining in the recent years. A perusal of the various sources of raising resources 
in the domestic market reveals that the large non-financial corporates have been raising only 
about  4  per  cent  through  the  debt  route  while  the  bank  borrowings  and  foreign  currency 
borrowings account for 17.8 per cent and 3.2 per cent respectively as on March 31, 2011. 
Financial inclusion of the SMEs and retail investors 
Corporate debt can provide our SMEs with an avenue for sourcing funds. Since this would 
require rating and would result in greater external scrutiny, it would help SMEs become more 
transparent and follow proper accounting, governance and disclosure practices. It would also 
increase their understanding of this important market for sourcing funds in addition to banks 
and other alternative funding options. It is expected that Chambers of Commerce and SME 
associations would take this up on a priority basis so that our SMEs too could access the 
corporate debt market in the coming years as has been the experience in the US, Europe 
and some Asian countries. This would also go a long way in fulfilling our financial inclusion 
objectives for the SMEs, most of whom, as we know, do not have access to formal financial 
sector. Corporate debt can also provide an excellent long term investment avenue for retail 
investors, who lack knowledge and understanding of this important asset class. One hopes 
that, market bodies, such as, the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of 
India (FIMMDA), the Primary Dealer Association of India (PDAI), etc. together with the stock 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exchanges take up the task of spreading awareness with all sincerity that it deserves. This is 
very relevant as Indian households have one of the highest savings rate in the world but the 
household  wealth  in  India  is  generally  parked  in  bank  deposits,  gold  and  real  estate  with 
almost negligible investment in corporate bonds. If retail investors prefer to invest in shares 
of  certain  companies,  there  should  be  no  reason  why  they  should  be  hesitant  to  also 
consider investing in its debt. 
Financial stability 
Various  financial  crises  have  highlighted  that  even  well  regulated,  supervised,  capitalized 
and  managed  banking  systems  may  have  limitations  in  mitigating  financial  vulnerabilities. 
The crises have underscored that the banking systems cannot be the predominant source of 
long-term investment capital without making an economy vulnerable to external shocks. Alan 
Greenspan had argued that bond markets could act like a “spare tyre”, substituting for bank 
lending as a source of corporate funding at times when banks’ balance sheets are weak and 
banks are rationing credit. The capital inflows to the country through ECBs, while helping the 
country fund the current account deficits and corporate to raises resources at a lower cost, 
could  become  a  source  of  the  transmission  of  severe  external  shocks  to  the  domestic 
economy. Therefore, it is important to develop the domestic corporate bond market to enable 
corporates to meet a substantial part of their funds requirement domestically. Further, credit 
flow  to  infrastructure  sector  by  banks  has  grown  manifold  in  last  few  years.  There  is, 
however,  a  risk  of  exposure  attached  to  banks  with  such  long  term  financing  considering 
ALM  mismatch.  Moreover,  banks’  ability  to  withstand  stress  is  critical,  especially  in  the 
context of the recent increase in banks’ non-performing assets on account of their exposure 
to the infrastructure sector. Bond markets also aids financial stability by spreading credit risks 
across the economy and thereby shielding the banking sectors in times of stress. Further, a 
well-developed  bond  market  can  also  help  banks  raise  funds  to  strengthen  their 
balance-sheets.  Viewed  in  the  above  context,  a  vibrant  debt  market  is  critical  to  meet  the 
funding  requirement  for  infrastructure  sector.  Hence,  going  forward,  there  is  a  need  to 
increase  the  reliance  on  the  corporate  bond  financing  so  as  to  reduce  macro-economic 
vulnerability to shocks and mitigate systemic risks. 
Development of municipal bond market 
According  to  the  High  Powered  Expert  Group  Committee  (Chairperson:  Dr.  Isher  Judge 
Ahluwalia) India will need to invest ₹39,187 billion between 2012 and 2031 to meet its urban 
infrastructure requirements. Municipal bonds could be an important source of financing this 
requirement. Since 1997, only 25 municipal bond issues have taken place in India mobilising 
only ₹14 billion. An active corporate bond market could enable market for municipal bonds 
issued  by  the  Urban  Local  Bodies  (ULBs).  In  this  context,  a  World  Bank  study  (October 
2011)  on  “Developing  a  Regulatory  Frame  work  for  Municipal  Borrowing  in  India”  has 
focused on such bonds. Keeping in view sustainability it has recommended that there should 
be  interest  cap  on  such  bonds  and  they  should  be  treated  as  tax-free  bonds  in  the  same 
manner as other tax free instruments. The study has also recommended that a new asset 
class  called  “rated  municipal  securities”  needs  to  be  added  instead  of  “non-government 
securities” to both the IRDA and the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority’s 
(PFRDA) investment guidelines. 
Growth of Indian debt market  
B.  
Recommendations  of  various  committees  have  been  implemented  by  the  respective 
regulators to promote debt market in India. The growth of corporate bond market in India has 
been  aided  by  existence  of  a  well-developed  G-sec  market  which  provides  a  benchmark 
yield curve for bond pricing, a well-functioning depository system, credible system of rating 
agencies and adequate legal framework. Measures, such as, rationalising the listing norms, 
standardisation of market conventions, reduction in the shut period, setting up of reporting 
platforms,  and  implementation  of  DvP  settlement  of  corporate  bond  trades  have  had  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
encouraging impact on the market resulting in considerable increase in issuance as well as 
secondary  market  trading  of  corporate  bonds.  Total  issuance  has  increased  from 
₹1,747.81 billion  in  2008–09  to  ₹2,968.94  billion  in  2011–12.  Similarly  trade  volume  has 
increased  from  ₹1,481.66  billion  in  2008–09  to  ₹5,937.83  billion  in  2011–12.  During  the 
current fiscal year up to September 2012, the trade volumes have been ₹3261.14 billion. The 
share of bonds issued through public issues has increased from 0.86 per cent in 2008–09 to 
7.3  per  cent  in  2011–12.  Out  of  the  four  modes  of  resource  mobilisation  namely,  IPOs, 
FPOs,  bonds  and  rights  issues,  the  share  of  bonds  have  increased  from  9.2  per  cent  in 
2008–09  to  73.5  per  cent  in  2011–12  indicating  greater  reliance  of  entities  on  bonds  for 
resource mobilisation in the recent period. 
Structure of corporate debt market in India 
C.  
The  primary  market for corporate  debt  is  mainly  dominated  by  private  placements  (93  per 
cent of total issuance in 2011–12) as corporates prefer this route to public issues because of 
operational  ease,  i.e.,  minimum  disclosures,  low  cost, tailor  made  structures  and  speed  of 
raising  funds.  Banks/FIs  (42.3  per  cent  of  total  issuances)  followed  by  finance  companies 
(26.4 per cent) were the major issuers in 2011–12. India lacks a long-term debt market for 
pure project finance. Corporate bonds issued in India usually carry a rating of AAA indicating 
lack of interest in bonds of lower rated borrowers in the debt market. Institutional participants, 
such  as,  banks,  primary  dealers,  mutual  funds,  insurance  companies,  pension  funds, 
corporates,  etc.  are  the  major  players  in  this  market.  Retail  investors  are  also  gradually 
entering  this  market.  Their  participation  is,  however,  minuscule.  As  regards  regulation  of 
corporate debt market, the regulatory involvement is clearly delineated between the Reserve 
Bank of India and the SEBI. Reserve Bank is responsible for the market for repo transactions 
and OTC credit derivatives besides framing prudential regulations for banks, etc. in respect 
of their exposure to corporate bonds. In all other cases, SEBI has the regulatory jurisdiction 
except in case of unlisted privately placed bonds. 
Measures taken to develop the corporate bond market 
D.  
Government,  SEBI  and  other  stakeholders  have  initiated  several  measures  to  develop  the 
corporate debt market. Reserve Bank of India has also taken various initiatives in this regard. 
Some of these are recounted below: 
i. 
To  promote  transparency  in  corporate  debt  market,  a  reporting  platform  was 
developed by FIMMDA  and it was mandated that all RBI-regulated entities should 
report  the  OTC  trades  in  corporate  bonds  on  this  platform.  Other  regulators  have 
also prescribed such reporting requirement in respect of their regulated entities. This 
has  resulted  in  building  a  credible  database  of  all  the  trades  in  corporate  bond 
market providing useful information for regulators and market participants. 
Clearing  houses  of  the  exchanges  have  been  permitted  to  have  a  pooling  fund 
account with RBI to facilitate DvP-I based settlement of trades in corporate bonds. 
Repo  in  corporate  bonds  was  permitted  under  a  comprehensive  regulatory 
framework. 
Banks  were  permitted  to  classify  their  investments  in  non-SLR  bonds  issued  by 
companies  engaged  in  infrastructure  activities  and  having  a  minimum  residual 
maturity of seven years under the Held to Maturity (HTM) category; 
The  provisioning  norms  for  banks  for  infrastructure  loan  accounts  have  been 
relaxed. 
The exposure norms for PDs have been relaxed to enable them to play a larger role 
in the corporate bond market. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
Credit  Default  Swaps  (CDS)  have  been  introduced  on  corporate  bonds  since 
December  01,  2011  to  facilitate  hedging  of  credit  risk  associated  with  holding 
corporate  bonds  and  encourage  investors  participation  in  long  term  corporate 
bonds. 
FII limit for investment in corporate bonds has been raised by additional US$ five 
billion on November 18, 2011 taking the total limit to US$ 20 billion to attract foreign 
investors into this market. In addition to the limit of US$ 20 billion, a separate limit of 
US$ 25 billion has been provided for investment by FIIs in corporate bonds issued 
by infrastructure companies. Further, additional US$ one billion has been provided 
to the Qualified Financial Institutions (QFI). 
The  terms  and  conditions  for  the  scheme  for  FII  investment  in  infrastructure  debt 
and  the  scheme  for  non-resident  investment  in  Infrastructure  Development  Funds 
(IDFs) have been further rationalised in terms of lock-in period and residual maturity; 
and 
Further, as a measure of relaxation, QFIs have been now allowed to invest in those 
MF schemes that hold at least 25 per cent of their assets (either in debt or equity or 
both)  in  the  infrastructure  sector  under  the  current  US$  three  billion  sub-limit  for 
investment in mutual funds related to infrastructure. 
Revised guidelines have been issued for securitisation of standard assets so as to 
promote  this  market.  The  guidelines  focus  on  twin  objectives  of  development  of 
bond market as well as provide investors a safe financial product. The interest of the 
originator  has  been  aligned  with  the  investor  and  suitable  safeguards  have  been 
designed. 
Banks have been given flexibility to invest in unrated bonds of companies engaged 
in infrastructure activities within the overall ceiling of 10 per cent; 
Bank has issued detailed guidelines on setting up of IDFs by banks and NBFCs. It is 
expected  that  IDFs  will  accelerate  and  enhance  the  flow  of  long-term  debt  for 
funding the ambitious programme of infrastructure development in our country. 
Issues and challenges in Corporate Bond Market 
E.  
While  the  measures  taken  so  far  have  generated  the  momentum  needed  to  develop  the 
market,  the  indicators  are  suggesting  that  the  market  is  yet  to  develop  to  its  potential  in 
relation  to  needs  of  our  macro-economy.  The  size  of  the  Indian  corporate  bond  market  at 
11.8  per  cent  of GDP  is  lower  than  the  average  for  Emerging  East  Asia  and  for  Japan  at 
17.2 and  19.8  per  cent  respectively.  There  are  potential  risks  associated  with  this  market, 
such as, absence of robust bankruptcy framework, insufficient liquidity, narrow investor base, 
refinancing risk, lack of better market facilities and standardisation. Some of the issues and 
challenges which need attention are: 
i. 
Taking  measures  to  improve  liquidity,  such  as,  consolidation  of  particularly  the 
privately placed bonds, etc; 
Setting up a suitable framework for market making in corporate bonds; 
Providing tools to manage credit, market and liquidity risks {e.g. CDS, Interest Rate 
Futures (IRF), Repo in corporate bonds, etc.}; 
Introducing  a  suitable  institutional  mechanism  for  credit  enhancement  to  enable 
SMEs  and  other  corporates  with  lower  credit  rating  to  access  the  corporate  bond 
market; 
Developing a smooth yield curve for the government securities market for efficient 
pricing of the corporate bonds; 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
Enhancing  transparency  by  setting  up  of  centralised  database  for  tracking  rating 
migration, issue size, etc.; 
Increase the scope of investment by provident/pension/gratuity funds and insurance 
companies in corporate bonds; 
Calibrated opening of the corporate bond market to the foreign investors; 
Developing safe and sound market infrastructure; 
Establishing a sound bankruptcy regime; 
Rationalization of stamp duty across states; 
Developing the securitization market under the new regulatory framework; 
Wider  participation  of  retail  investors  in  the  market  through  stock  exchanges  and 
mutual funds. 
I would briefly touch upon some of these issues, particularly those with which the Reserve 
Bank is connected directly or indirectly. 
Improving liquidity 
Low  liquidity  is  an  issue  that  needs  to  be  addressed  urgently.  Several  reports  have 
suggested consolidation of the corporate bond issues through reissues to promote liquidity. 
We  need  to  make  a  beginning  in  this  area  by  involving  PSUs  and  large  corporate  with 
significant volumes of bonds outstanding in devising a suitable scheme of consolidation of 
their issues. There are suggestions to the effect that in respect of regular issuers that there 
could  be  restriction  on  the  number  of  securities  they  can  issue  in  a  year  so  that  reissues 
would become necessity. 
Market making 
Banks and PDs have played the role of market making in the G-Sec with reasonable success 
and  we  need  to  explore  the  possibility  of  replicating  the  experience  in  the  corporate  debt 
market as well, albeit with the realisation that primary dealers would be exposed to greater 
credit  risk  if  they  carry  a  sufficiently  large  inventory  of  corporate  bonds  that  is  needed  for 
market making. Moreover their limitation to increase exposure to corporate bonds with the 
context  of  growing  issuance  size  of  Government  bonds  has  to  be  kept  in  view.  Some 
suggestions  to  incentivise  PDs  for  market  making  are,  however,  being  discussed  with  the 
stakeholders.  Further, 
for  a  debate  on  creation  of  a  separate 
agency/institution to promote market making in corporate bonds, on the lines of institutions 
established to promote government securities market. 
Credit derivatives 
In  the  context  of  development  of  the  corporate  bond  market  and  promoting  infrastructure 
funding, CDS has been introduced with all safeguard, such as, not allowing naked CDS for 
the  users,  mandating  position  limits  for  the  market  makers,  compulsory  reporting  of 
transactions to the trade repository in CCIL, etc. and high expectations. CDS could provide 
an avenue for participants to mitigate credit risk and enable effective redistribution of credit 
risk  within  the  system.  With  the  necessary  infrastructure  that  included  trade  repository, 
documentation, publication of CDS curve for valuation, standardisation of contracts, etc. in 
place, participants were permitted to enter into CDS with effect from December 1, 2011. 
Though the guidelines were framed after detailed discussions with the market participants, 
only few trades have taken place since the launch of the product. Some of the reasons being 
attributed  are  difficulty  in  signing  separate  Credit  Support  Annex  (CSA  for  India),  non-
availability of netting benefits and posting of collateral on daily basis. Bothe SEBI and IRDA 
are likely to permit their regulated entities to participate in CDS as users soon. These are not 
major operational issues and should not deter market participants from undertaking trades. 
Stringent capital adequacy guidelines are also being termed as stumbling block. Since CDS 
is  a  need 
there 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is  a  complex  derivative  product  and  downside  risk  is  very  high,  Reserve  Bank  intends  to 
follow a cautious and gradual approach in the nascent stage of development of the market. 
As  for  as  capital  adequacy  guidelines  are  concerned,  Reserve  Bank  has  broadly  followed 
Basel  norms.  Hence,  it  is  imperative  that  market  participants  use  the  product  to  suit  their 
business and risk management requirements. 
Interest rate derivatives 
Interest  rate  derivatives  (IRD)  products  like  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS)  and  IRF  enable 
market  participants  to  hedge  their  interest  rate  risk  and  take  a  trading  call  in  the  market, 
leading to the development of the underlying cash market in terms of enhancing liquidity and 
price  discovery.  Thus,  success  of  IRDs  will  be  key  to  the  development  of  corporate  debt 
market. Though the market for IRS has evolved over the past decade and is fairly liquid with 
average daily trade volumes comparable with the volume traded in the G-Sec market, same 
is not true for exchange traded IRF. Reserve Bank is examining the recommendations made 
by Working Group on “Enhancing Liquidity in G-Sec and Interest Rate Derivatives  Market” 
(Chairman: R. Gandhi) relating to introducing IRF based on overnight call borrowing rate, fine 
tuning  the  product  design  of  the  delivery-based  10-yr  IRF  by  permitting  single-bond 
contracts, larger contract size, etc. to revive IRF market. As regards IRS, Reserve Bank has 
already  taken  various  initiatives  like  setting  up  of  a  reporting  platform for  IRS  transactions 
and enabling non–guaranteed central clearing of IRS trades. The process for introduction of 
guaranteed  settlement  of  IRS  transactions  is  underway.  It  is  expected  that  market 
participants  will  make  use  of  various  IRD  products  for  hedging  interest  rate  risk  in  their 
portfolio. There is also a need for altering the skewed participation profile in the IRS market 
given  that  majority  of  the  participants  are  foreign  and  private  sector  banks  with  miniscule 
interest from public sector banks. 
Repo in corporate debt 
Among the various initiatives taken by RBI, introduction of repo in corporate bonds has been 
one  that  is  aimed  to  impart  secondary  market  liquidity  to  the  corporate  bond  market.  The 
guidelines permitting repo incorporate bonds were issued in March 2010 and the same were 
fine-tuned in December 2010. However, except for a handful of trades, the market has not 
taken  off.  The  reasons  cited  for  lack  of  interest  include  non-signing  of  the  Global  Market 
Repo Agreement (GMRA), lack of lenders, such as, mutual funds and insurance companies 
in repo market, etc. Reserve Bank is engaging with other regulators to address these issues. 
While SEBI has permitted the mutual funds to participate in this repo market, authorisation 
from IRDA is expected soon. There is a view that an exchange traded tripartite repo structure 
could enhance attractiveness of corporate bonds and improve trading volumes. There are, 
however, concerns, among others, relating to the capacity of central counterparty (CCP) to 
handle the risk, particularly given the low level of liquidity in the underlying cash market and 
liquidity accessing capacity of the CCP under extreme situations when settlement obligations 
have to be met in an orderly manner. The efficacy of these instruments (CDS, IRF and repo) 
hinges around the crucial issue of whether market participants would use the instrument to 
hedge risks or they remain as available instruments not used. Though all these instruments 
were  introduced  after  having  detailed  consultation  with  the  market  participants,  it  is  rather 
perplexing for regulator to find almost no activity in these instruments. It is hence necessary 
that the market participants make best use of the product. 
Credit enhancement – bank guarantee 
Other  issue  which  market  has  been  demanding  is  allowing  banks  to  provide  credit 
enhancement/partial credit enhancement to corporate bonds by means of guarantee, credit 
facility,  liquidity  facility,  etc.  The  measure  may  appear  to  be  expedient  but  the  underlying 
objective  of  de-risking  the  bank  balance  sheets  through  development  of  corporate  debt 
market will not be met as such a product will place the entire risk on the banking system. 
Further,  banks  providing  credit  enhancements/partial  credit  enhancement  like  issuing 
guarantees  for  corporate  bonds  will  distort  the  pricing  of  the  corporate  bonds,  discourage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
institutional  and  retail  investors  to  appraise  and  assume  credit  risk  and  add  to  the 
reputational  and financial  risk  of  banks.  Further,  if guarantees  are  offered  by  public  sector 
banks,  investors  tend  to  form  an  impression  that  the  bonds  have  implicit  Government 
support.  Thus,  provision  of  bank  guarantee  will  impinge  on  the  genuine  development  of 
corporate  bond  market.  In  fact  there  is  hardly  any  parallel  in  the  world  of  credit 
enhancements being provided by the banking sector to corporate bonds. In this regard, some 
structure  for  partial  credit  enhancement,  outside  banking,  could,  however,  be  considered. 
Under the extant regulations of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), entities like 
multi-lateral/regional  financial  institutions,  government  and  financial  institutions,  foreign 
equity holders, etc. have been enabled to provide credit enhancement and for this guarantee 
fees  up  to  200  bps  could  be  paid  by  the  Indian  issuers.  Some  international  and  domestic 
financial  institutions  have  in  fact  shown  some  interest  in  this  regard  and  these  initiatives 
could be taken forward. 
Smooth sovereign yield curve 
The absence of a risk-free term structure of interest rates makes it difficult to price credit risk 
of  instruments  issued  by  the  private  sector  and  quasi-sovereign.  In  the  Indian  context, 
however,  with  issuance  of  Government  bonds  for  different  maturities  up  to  30  years  the 
sovereign  risk  free  curve  does  exists.  There  is,  however,  an  issue  relating  to  having  a 
smooth yield as also almost flat nature of the curve beyond 10 years since trading is confined 
to a few points, particularly in the 10 to 14 year segment. Fixed Income and Money Market 
Derivatives  Association(  FIMMDA)  has,  however,  taken  steps  to  create  a  yield  curve  by 
taking available trade data from different points and applying the Cubic Spline interpolation 
model for smoothening the yield curve. In addition to passive consolidation being adopted by 
the Reserve Bank over the years, it is, in consultation with the Government, considering the 
process  for  active  consolidation  involving  buybacks/switch  operations  besides  regular 
issuances at different points of the curve. 
Enhancing transparency 
It  is  desirable  that  the  level  of  information  dissemination  available  in  G-Sec  and  money 
market  is  replicated  in  corporate  debt  market.  This  is  required  as  there  is  paucity  of 
information  on  individual  issuances  as  there  is  no  comprehensive  database  (though  one 
private  firm  collects  quite  a  bit  of  data)  which  constrains  policy-making.  The  proposed 
measures of SEBI to simplify the disclosure norms for debt listing will definitely improve the 
situation. However, there is an urgent need to design and create such centralised database 
with more details like issue size, option availability, rating, etc. for better market transparency 
and improve regulation. It may also be noted that there is also a bias towards issuance of 
bonds  through  private  placement  which  is  not  a  very  transparent  method  and  thus,  is 
impacting  the  secondary  market  liquidity  in  corporate  debt.  Hence,  there  is  need  to 
encourage public issuance of bonds. 
Relaxing investment restrictions 
Keeping  in  view  the  long  term  funding  requirements  of  infrastructure  sector,  insurance, 
provident funds (PFs) and pension companies are best suited for making investment in such 
bonds.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  to  revisit  the  investment  guidelines  of  such  institutional 
investors  since  the  existing  mandates  of  most  of  these  institutions  do  not  permit  large 
investment  in  corporate  bonds.  Prudential  requirements  of  the  sectoral  regulations  would, 
however, need to be balanced with the need for a developed bond market which ultimately 
would be in the interest of all the financial market participants. 
Expanding access to the foreign investors 
There  is  a  growing  demand  to  open  up  the  corporate  debt  market  and,  in  particular 
infrastructure debt segment to the FIIs/QFIs. There is also a demand for fiscal concession to 
the FIIs. It has to be kept in view that based on our experience and lessons learnt from the 
global  financial  crisis,  we  have  adopted  a  cautious  approach.  Nevertheless,  the  limits  and 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
conditions for investments by the FIIs have been liberalized particularly for the infrastructure 
bond as mentioned in para 12 above. The limits available so far, however, have not been 
used up significantly. The recent announcement regarding reduced withholding tax to five per 
cent  for  foreign  currency  denominate  infrastructure  bonds  and  its  likely  extension  for  the 
Rupee  infrastructure  bond  investments  by  the  FIIs  may  lead  to  greater  utilization  of  the 
available limits. 
Settlement systems/ trading platform 
The  success  of  order  matching  trading  platform  in  G-Sec  market  can  act  as  guidance  for 
setting up of order-matching trading platforms for the corporate debt market. Considering that 
the  trading  platforms  on  exchanges  are  non-functional,  a  quote  driven  anonymous  screen 
based trading platform could possibly bring about the desired focus on trading in corporate 
debt market due to reduction in transaction cost and improved time efficiency in execution of 
trades. 
Efficient bankruptcy regime 
A  robust,  timely,  effective  and  efficient  bankruptcy  regime  is  essential  to  development  of 
corporate  debt  market  from  investors’  point  of  view.  Steps,  such  as,  reforming  bankruptcy 
law,  early  resolution  of  bankruptcy  cases  and  streamlining  the  procedures  relating  to 
insolvency would go a long way in achieving the same. The issue of insolvency of financial 
institutions established under statutes bi-lateral netting among them during bankruptcy also 
need  resolution.  Possibly  as  recommended  by  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector 
Assessment,  a  comprehensive  insolvency  regime  for  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
need to be expedited.  
Implementation of Basel III and corporate bond market 
F.  
Many  steps  have  been  taken  to  promote  bank  lending  to  infrastructure  sector  like 
liberalisation of credit exposure norms, liberal dispensation for classification of investments 
under  HTM  category,  expansion  of  list  of  businesses  included  under  infrastructure  sector, 
etc. As a result, banks’ exposure to infrastructure lending has grown by more than four times 
between 2005 and 2011. However, two factors are limiting the ability of the banks. First, in 
the  context  of  Basel  III  guidelines  for  the  banks,  the  additional  capital  requirement  is 
estimated  at  ₹5  trillion  for  the  banks,  of  which  non-equity  capital  will  be  of  the  order  of 
₹3.25 trillion while equity capital will be of the order of ₹1.75 trillion. Capital augmentation of 
banks  in  future  could  be  a  challenge  and  this  could  constrain  them  from  increasing  their 
lending to infrastructure in line with the financing needs of the sector. Therefore, there is a 
clear  need  for  a  corporate  debt  market  to  serve  as  a  source  of  long-term  finance  for 
corporates  and  as  an  alternate  to  a  bank-dominated  financial  system.  The  specific 
characteristics of infrastructure bonds like long duration and high coupon make these bonds 
attractive for insurance and pension companies who should step up their investments given 
the  limitations  on  banks’  capacity.  Steps  being  contemplated  by  IRDA  for  insurance 
companies may provide necessary boost. 
The second constraint faced by the banks is that of ALM mismatches that limits the banks 
role in lending to infrastructure. For banks it would be difficult to assume bulk of the project 
risk  and  capital  costs  indefinitely  in  infrastructure  projects  without  a  commensurate 
development  of  the  corporate  bond  market.  Therefore,  the  importance  of  long-term  debt 
financing for  infrastructure  projects  can  hardly  be  overstated  owing  to the  longer  pay-back 
period, multiplicity of approvals required, delays due to complexities in the design, safety and 
environmental  aspects,  etc.  It  may,  however,  be  noted  that  we  may  see  large  issues  of 
bonds  by  the  banks  to  augment  capital  requirements  for  Basel  III  as  indicated  above  and 
this, in turn, add to the volumes in the corporate bond market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Concluding remarks 
long-term  resource  raising 
G.  
I  have  highlighted  the  criticality  of  corporate  bond  market  in  the  economy  as  it  allocates 
resources  efficiently  and  enables 
to  sectors,  such  as, 
infrastructure. A vibrant corporate bond market provides an alternative to conventional bank 
finances and also mitigates the vulnerability of foreign currency sources of funds. From the 
perspective  of  financial  stability,  there  is  a  need  to  strengthen  the  corporate  bond  market. 
Limited investor base, limited number of issuers and preference for bank finance over bond 
finance are some of the other obstacles faced in development of a deep and liquid corporate 
bond market. I have also briefly discussed the growth and structure of Indian corporate bond 
market  and  outlined  measures  taken  by  the  regulators,  in  particular  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India to develop the market. I have flagged some of the issues and challenges faced by this 
market  and  the  approach  to  be  adopted to  address  them  in  order to  enable  the market  to 
reach its potential. 
The  task  before  us  is  to  improve  liquidity,  enhance  transparency,  provide  safe  and  sound 
market  infrastructure,  enable  appropriate  institutional  structure,  such  as, robust  bankruptcy 
framework,  etc.  The  regulators  have  taken  proactive  steps  and  provided  the  market  with 
tools of risk management. Efforts are on to enable wider participation the market and create 
scope  for  market  making.  The  regulators,  like  Reserve  Bank,  have  always  followed  a 
consultative approach and welcomed suggestions from the stakeholders. It is also expected 
that the market participants need to be more active and participate in corporate bond market 
and make use of risk management tools/financial products. This would enable growth of the 
corporate bond market and cater to the needs of the real economy and the financial sector. I 
am sure that the panellists of the next session would deliberate on some of the issues raised 
above and other related issues and provide useful and implementable suggestions to meet 
the challenges of developing a more vibrant corporate bond market in India. 
I  once  again  thank  FICCI  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  on  such  a 
topical subject. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
