V K Sharma: The financial innovations that never were 
Keynote address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Finnoviti 2012, organised by Banking Frontiers, Mumbai, 8 November 2012. 
 The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
I  deem  it  an  honour  and  privilege  to  be  addressing  this  very  distinguished  and  august 
audience. Right at the outset, I would like to impress upon this very learned and discerning 
audience that responsible Financial Innovation is not an end in itself, but instead, a means to 
an end of sub-serving the real sector and in that sense it is consistent with, and a natural fit 
to,  public  policy  purpose  of  “financial  sector-real  sector  balance”.  As  this  distinguished 
audience is aware, there is broad consensus and unanimity now among all key stakeholders 
that it was the unsustainable “financial sector-real sector imbalance” due to certain financial 
innovations that was the real cause of the last global financial crisis. 
Generic financial innovation has typically evolved in the form of both on-balance sheet and 
off-balance  sheet  derivative  instruments.  While  Collateralized  Debt  Obligations  (CDOs), 
CDO-squared, CDO-cubed, Credit Linked Notes (CLNs) etc., are the typical examples of on-
balance  sheet  financial  innovations,  Currency  Swaps,  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS),  Futures, 
Options,  Credit  Default  Swaps  (CDS),  etc.,  are  those  of  off-balance  sheet  financial 
innovations. In both the types, the underlying theory and practice has been the so-called law 
of one price or, what is the same thing as the no-arbitrage argument, involving replication of 
derivatives cash flows in the cash markets. In other words, a derivative of an underlying cash 
market  asset  will  be  so  priced/valued  that  it  is  not  possible  to  arbitrage between  the  cash 
market and the derivative market, provided the derivative in question is fairly priced/valued. 
For, if a derivative were priced expensive relative to the underlying asset, an arbitrageur will 
engage in riskless arbitrage by selling the expensively priced derivative and buying the asset 
in the cash market by financing it at the going repo rate. In the opposite case, an arbitrageur 
will  engage  in  riskless  arbitrage  by  shorting  the  asset  in  the  cash  market,  investing  the 
proceeds  of  short  sale  at  the  higher  going  repo  rate  and  buying  the  relatively  cheap 
derivative until, in equilibrium, the derivative was fairly priced/valued relative to the asset in 
the cash market. Another way to posit the above is to say that a derivative’s cash flows/pay 
offs  can  be  exactly  replicated  in  the  cash  market  provided,  of  course,  seamless,  and 
frictionless,  arbitrage  is  allowed.  Significantly,  and  interestingly,  such  seamless  and 
frictionless  arbitrage  also  applies,  just  as  much,  to  derivatives  themselves!  Illustratively,  a 
long position in forward can be replicated by buying a call option and selling a put option with 
the strike prices for both at the current forward price. If the actual forward price is expensive 
relative to the “synthetic” forward (call + put options), an arbitrageur will engage in risk-less 
arbitrage by selling the expensively priced forward and buying the relatively cheap “synthetic” 
forward  (call  +  put  options)  and  vice  versa!  The  reason  why  I  am  laboring  this  point  is 
because this is very central to the key message of my address today. 
Specifically,  I  propose  to  cover  in  my  address today  three financial  innovations  proxied  by 
three derivative instruments, viz., Interest Rate Swap (IRS), Credit Default Swap (CDS) and 
Interest Rate Futures (IRF) as they evolved, or did not evolve, in India. 
Interest Rate Swap (IRS) market 
The  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  (Chairman:  Dr.  Rakesh 
Mohan) noted that the notional principal amount of outstanding Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) of 
all commercial banks increased from Rs. 10 trillion+ as on 31st March 2005 to Rs. 80 trillion+ 
as  of  31st  March  2008.  However,  due  to  trade  compression,  involving  multilateral  early 
termination, by the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), the notional principal amount of 
outstanding  IRS  of  commercial  banks  declined  to  Rs.  50  trillion+  as  of  30th  June  2012.  A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
granular  analysis  reveals  that  of  all  the  commercial  banks  engaging  in  IRS,  public  sector 
banks with about 74% of total bank assets accounted for less than 2% of notional principal 
amount of outstanding IRS and private sector and foreign banks, with about 19%, and 7%, of 
total  bank  assets,  accounted  for  18%,  and  80%,  of  total  notional  principal  amount  of 
outstanding IRS, respectively. In other words, with combined assets of just Rs. 6 trillion or so, 
foreign banks accounted for notional principal amount of outstanding IRS of Rs.40 trillion. 
Significantly, it is disturbing to note that, day in, and day out, the IRS yields trade way below 
yields of comparable maturity Government securities. Specifically, currently the 5 year IRS 
yield is trading at a negative spread of 120 basis points to 5 year G-Sec! Besides, while the 
G-Sec yield curve is almost flat, the IRS yield is steeply inverted to the extent of 120 basis 
points defying term, credit risk and liquidity risk premia which typically characterize a normal 
yield curve of risk assets! A typical, but fallacious, and vacuous, rationalization offered of this 
counter-intuitive,  warped,  weird  and  preposterous  feature  is  that  while  IRS  yields  are 
influenced by expected path of future interest rates, those of G-Secs are influenced by their 
supply!! Nothing could be farther from the truth for this rationalization turns the very logic and 
reason on their head. For, as I said, being pure time value of money, G-Secs are influenced 
by, and immediately price in, inflationary expectations arising from higher fiscal deficit which, 
in turn, is the cause of additional supply of G-Secs and not the other way round. Thus, here 
we have an IRS market completely up side down and running on its head. This is completely 
anti-thetical to the law of one price, or the no-arbitrage argument. For, if this law held, given 
hugely negative spreads to Govts., fixed rate receivers, who far exceed, and overwhelmingly 
outnumber,  fixed  rate  payers,  would  have  engaged  in  a  very  simple  arbitrage,  involving 
buying corresponding maturity G-Sec in the cash market by financing it in the overnight repo 
market, and paying fixed, and receiving overnight, in the IRS market! This very normal, and 
logical,  arbitrage  would  have  had  the  effect  of  benefiting  all  the  three  stake-holders,  viz., 
(a) fixed rate receivers receiving much higher yield than they are currently, (b) Government 
of  India  borrowing  at  much  lower  cost,  and  (c)  business  and  industry  in  general,  and 
infrastructure sector, in particular, getting long-term-fixed-rate-low-cost financing solutions. In 
other words, this would  have been a  win-win for all key stake- holders but, the fact of the 
matter is that, if anything, this is just not happening. As to the explanation of this almost a 
permanent, structural, though quirky and weird, counter-intuitive, perverse, and preposterous 
feature of the Indian IRS market, the stock, but specious, refrain is that arbitrage, involving 
receiving fixed on G-Secs and paying fixed in IRS, is not possible because of the so-called 
“basis risk”! But this is totally untenable for the simple reason that “basis risk” applies just as 
much to “hedging” as indeed it does to “arbitrage”! In other words, “basis risk” is “arbitrage-
hedging”  agnostic  and,  therefore,  it  inevitably,  and  incontrovertibly,  follows  that  the  IRS 
market is also not being used even for “hedging”. If that be so, as indeed it is, the question, 
especially,  but  significantly,  when  one  also  considers  the  fact  that  only  2%  of  the  notional 
principal  amount  of  the  outstanding  IRS  is  accounted  for  by  the  real  sector  i.e.  business 
customers, it begs is what then is 98% of this Rs. 50 trillion+ IRS market being used for. In 
other  words,  in  the  case  of  the  Indian  IRS  market,  what  holds  instead  is  the  “law-of-two-
prices-AND-no-arbitrage-argument”! In this background, it would be no exaggeration to say 
that  these  hugely  negative  spreads  of  IRS  to  G-Secs  are  as  counter-intuitive,  quirky, 
anomalous,  warped  and  preposterous  as  a  father’s  negative  age  spread  to  his  son’s  is! 
Indeed, in the analytical framework of my Singapore Speech for identifying systemic financial 
risks, this situation can be reasonably interpreted, in a disturbing and sit-up-and-take-notice 
manner of speaking, as a veritable IRS “Super-Bubble”, signifying “huge huge” under-pricing 
of interest rate/credit risks. This I say with analytical conviction because a “bubble”, signifying 
“huge” under-pricing of risks, is typically diagnosed with spreads of riskier assets to risk-free 
G-Secs being unusually low, but still positive, whereas, here in the IRS segment, spreads to 
G-Secs have persistently, and consistently, been negative to the extent of 100 to 150 basis 
points  for  5  year  maturity!  It  thus  follows  that  the  situation  here  in  IRS  segment  is  almost 
getting to the point where the IRS market, instead of being a means to an end of sub serving 
the  real  sector  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  existing,  almost  entirely  for  its  own  sake  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
almost  complete  exclusion  of  the  needs  of  the  real  sector,  creating  a  massive  “financial 
sector-real sector imbalance”. On this touch-stone, and hallmark, the IRS market in India is 
then a non-derivative, nay, a financial innovation that never was. 
Credit Default Swap (CDS) 
Like Interest Rate Swap, or for that matter any other derivative, Credit Default Swap is no 
exception  to  cash  market  replication  principle  of  derivatives  pricing.  Without  going  into 
mathematical gymnastic proper, price of a CDS, in spread terms, is reasonably approximated 
by the difference between the spread of a reference bond to corresponding maturity G-Sec 
yield and the spread of IRS to the same maturity G-Sec yield. Thus, if Sc be corporate bond 
spread  and  Ss  be  IRS  spread  to  risk-free  G-Sec  yield  of  corresponding  maturity,  then  the 
fair/theoretical/model  value/price  of  a  CDS  is  approximately  equal  to  Sc  minus  Ss. 
Tautologically,  since  G-Sec  yield  is  common  to  both  spreads,  another way  to  approximate 
CDS price is simply to take the difference between the yield of the reference bond and the 
same  maturity  IRS  yield.  As  this  learned  audience  is  aware,  finally  when  the  product  was 
launched  on  7th  December,  2011,  it  was  a  stillborn.  In  fact,  its  epitaph  was  written  in  the 
warped, anomalous, quirky and preposterous feature of hugely negative IRS yield spreads to 
corresponding maturity G-Sec yields itself! For, as this discerning audience will readily see 
from the above formula, because of hugely negative IRS spread, fair price of a CDS would 
be so high as to make it both pointless, and useless, to buy a reference bond and also hedge 
it with a CDS! In other words, one is much better off straightaway buying a corresponding 
maturity  risk-free  G-Sec  itself!!  Significantly,  if  actual  CDS  premium/price/spread  is  higher 
than  the  above  theoretical/model  price,  then  an  arbitrageur  will  sell  a  CDS  (which  is 
equivalent to going long the reference corporate bond) and receive this actual spread and 
short the reference bond and invest the proceeds of short sale at the going corporate bond 
repo rate and receive fixed, and pay overnight, in an IRS, and do the opposite arbitrage if the 
actual  CDS  spread  is  lower  than  the  theoretical/model  spread/price  until  the  arbitrage 
opportunity disappears and theoretical/model and actual market prices align again. But sadly, 
like in a classical catch-22, this arbitrage is just not possible simply because of its complete 
absence, as I said before, in the IRS market and, therefore, alas, much as we would all wish, 
a  happening  corporate  bond  market  cannot  happen,  inter  alia,  to  supplement  huge 
infrastructure funding needs of the Indian economy. 
Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) 
If  the  CDS  was  a  stillborn,  IRF  too  suffered  mortality  in  its  infancy  the  second  time  round 
after  its  2003  version  which  itself  was  almost  a  stillborn.  For,  after  their  second  launch  in 
August  2009,  Interest  Rate  Futures  on  10-year  notional  government  bond  had  seen  two 
settlements, viz. the December 2009 contract and  March 2010 contract. Significantly, both 
traded  volumes  and  Open  Interest  (OI),  witnessed  decline  over  the  two  settlements, 
eventually  decaying  very  quickly  to  zero  permanently.  In  particular,  the  December  2009 
contract,  which  had  a  peak  Open  Interest  of  Rs.  980  million  declined  to  a  pre-settlement 
Open  Interest  of  Rs.  610  million  and  settled  “entirely”  by  physical  delivery,  representing 
physical settlement of 62% of the peak Open Interest. In contrast, the March 2010 contract, 
which witnessed a peak Open Interest of Rs. 570 million declined to a pre-settlement Open 
Interest of Rs. 420 million and also settled entirely by physical delivery, representing physical 
settlement of 72%! Both these settlements were a far cry from the hall-mark and touch-stone 
of an efficient, frictionless, seamlessly coupled, and organically connected, physically-settled 
futures market even where physical delivery typically does not exceed 1% to 3% of the peak 
Open Interest! This happened because of the inefficient “disconnect” and “friction” in the IRF 
market  due  to  only  one  way  arbitrage  viz.  buying  the  cheapest-to-deliver  (CTD),  with  the 
highest  implied  repo  rate  (IRR),  by  financing  the  same  at  the  actual  repo  rate  and 
simultaneously  selling  futures.  In  fact,  as  ascertained  from  one  market  participant,  who 
accounted for almost the entire Rs. 600 million worth of physical delivery into the December 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
2009 contract, the implied repo rate of the CTD was 6.75% as against the actual repo rate of 
3.4%, representing a risk-free arbitrage profit of 3.35%!! Unlike this, on the other side, for the 
so-called  benchmark,  and  most  expensive-to-deliver,  Government  security,  the  IRR  was 
almost  zero to  negative,  suggesting  an  arbitrage  opportunity  of  short-selling  this  bond  and 
investing the proceeds of short sale at much higher actual repo rate and buying the futures 
contract! But this arbitrage could not be engaged in for want of short selling for a period co-
terminus  with  that  of  the  futures  contract.  It  is  the  possibility  of  this  two-way  arbitrage, 
working in the opposite directions, that, like a “good conductor” of “heat” and “electricity” in 
physics, will seamlessly  conduct/transmit liquidity from the relatively more liquid (the most-
expensive-to-deliver) benchmark government bonds to the so-called illiquid (the cheapest-to-
deliver) bonds in the deliverable basket! Here, I hasten to caution that the totally misplaced 
temptation, and impatience, to introduce/launch “cash-settled” IRF, any how, some how, and 
at any cost, must be firmly, and decisively, resisted for such medicine will be worse than the 
disease!  The  reason  is  that  unlike  assets  such  as  equity,  foreign  currencies,  commodities 
which are “homogeneous”, government bonds, except , of course, for their same credit risk, 
are,  given  their  differing  coupons  and  maturities,  “heterogeneous”  and,  therefore,  for  the 
cogent  arguments  adduced  above,  “physically-settled”  contracts  will  make  for  seamless 
transmission/conduction  of  liquidity  from  the  most  liquid  benchmark  bonds  to  the  relatively 
less liquid bonds in the deliverable basked and thus impart, and permeate, “much-needed” 
homogeneity in the entire deliverable basket of government bonds! But I again hasten to add 
that I am not even remotely suggesting that it is perfectly legitimate to have “cash-settled” 
derivatives  contracts  in  the  case  of  “homogeneous”  assets  like  equity,  currencies  and 
commodities!! For any “cash-settled” derivative, where physical settlement is possible, tends 
to  become  a 
the  cardinal  principle  of  arbitrage-free 
pricing/valuation and, therefore, as I said before, comes to exist almost entirely for its own 
sake and to almost complete exclusion of the larger public policy purpose of sub-serving the 
hedging needs of the real sector, creating a massive “financial sector-real sector imbalance” 
and, thus, in turn, become the very antithesis of responsible financial innovation. 
“non-derivative”,  violating 
instantaneous  monetary 
for  effective,  efficient  and 
Market segmentation 
Continuing market segmentation in India is the biggest undoing of an efficient, deep, liquid, 
organically connected, and seamlessly integrated financial market which is also a “sine qua 
non” 
transmission.  Market 
fragmentation/segmentation contributes to price distortion and inefficiency. The most tangible 
and manifest evidence of market segmentation in India is the “dis-connect” between IRS, IRF 
and  government  securities  markets  as  reflected  in  the  IRS  (bank  credit  risk)  yields  being 
100 to 125 basis points below G-Sec yields and IRF yields (when last traded) being about 
70 basis points higher than their fair value, signifying almost complete absence of arbitrage 
and thus a pernicious violation of the “no-arbitrage”, or what is the something as, the “law-of-
one-price, argument” which, as the discerning audience is by now  well  aware, is the most 
fundamental  basis  of  “fair  value  derivatives  pricing”.  Such  manifest  “dis-connect”  militates 
against  the  development  of  a  seamlessly  integrated  financial  market  with  coupling  and 
organic connect between all the three! However, this market segmentation can be credibly, 
effectively and decisively addressed if the nuts-and-bolts reforms propositioned below, which 
are,  if  you  will,  equally  also  the  necessary,  and  sufficient,  conditions,  are  synchronously 
orchestrated in all-at-the-same-time-no-piecemeal- and-no-half-way-house manner: 
(i) 
For the cogent reasons elucidated in the paragraph 7 above, the totally misplaced 
temptation, and impatience, to introduce/launch cash settled IRF must be firmly, and 
decisively,  resisted.  For  else,  this  will,  to  quote  Jamie  Dimon,  Chairman  of  JP 
Morgan Chase, tantamount to “doing the “easy’ and not the ‘right’ thing” and, in the 
process, replicating an IRS genie in the IRF/CDS markets which then grows so fast 
so much that it becomes difficult to put it back into the regulatory bottle. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
What  must  certainly  not  be  done  is  even  to  contemplate,  much  less  permit,  the 
most-liquid-single-bond IRF for the very simple reason that this benchmark security 
represents less than 10% of the current 10-year IRF deliverable basket and would, 
therefore,  at  a  time,  when  we  are  talking  about  “inclusion”,  this  will  amount  to 
veritable “exclusion” of 90% of the 10-year Government securities from the benefit of 
hedging which arguably runs counter to the public policy purpose of IRF providing 
hedging to as wide a universe of government securities as possible. 
What  also  must  certainly  not  be  done  is  even  to  contemplate,  much  less  allow, 
selling/repoing  of  securities  acquired  under  market  repo,  another  name  for 
“rehypothecation”, if the IMF finding in the wake of the 2007-Global Financial Crisis 
is anything to go by! The IMF noted that pre-2007, thanks to re-hypothecation, the 
shadow-banking system in the USA generated funding/liquidity of US $ 4 trillion with 
the underlying “original collateral” of just US $ 1 trillion, implying astronomical and 
whopping margins/haircuts of “minus” US $ 3 trillion! 
What also must certainly not be done is allocate specific government securities to 
different Primary Dealers for market making as this will be a “triple whammy” in that 
this  will  straight  away  fragment/segment  market,  lead  to  concentration  of  risk  and 
militate against portfolio diversification. 
Symmetrical  and  uniform  accounting  treatment  of  both  cash  and  derivatives 
(IRF/IRS/CDS) markets. 
Removal  of  the  “hedge  effectiveness”  criterion  of  80%  to  125%  which  militates 
against use of derivatives for hedging purposes for it is better to have “ineffective” 
hedge than to have no hedge at all! 
Roll-back  of  the  Held  to  Maturity  (HTM)  protection  i.e.  substituting  the  current 
“accounting hedge” with “derivative hedge”. This is because with HTM, there is no 
incentive/compulsion  whatsoever  for  use  of  market-based  solutions  like  IRS/IRF 
which  also  require  constant  monitoring,  infrastructure,  transaction  costs  like 
brokerage and margins etc. Indeed, fears that such roll-back may be disruptive, and 
disorderly, are totally unfounded if one considers the fact that there is “overwhelming 
net fixed rate receiving” appetite/ interest in the Rs. 50 trillion+ IRS market which will 
be even more so with the introduction of IRF, what with the total outstanding amount 
of  dated  Government  securities  at  Rs.  30  trillion  being  much  less  than  the 
outstanding amount of IRS of Rs. 50 trillion!! 
Delivery-based short-selling in the cash market for a term co-terminus with that of 
the futures contract and introduction of term repo, and reverse repo, markets, co-
terminus again with the tenure of futures contract for borrowing and lending of cash 
and G-Secs. 
Both for IRS and IRF, actual notional/nominal amount of IRS/IRF must be allowed 
on  duration-weighted  basis  unlike  the  current  regulation  which  restricts  the 
maximum  notional/nominal  amount  of  hedging  instrument  to  no  more  than  the 
notional/principal amount of the exposure being hedged resulting in under-hedging 
of risk. 
While  lavishing  praise  on  a  speech,  of  course,  in  his  characteristically  inimitable  style,  the 
illustrious and very distinguished Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. D. Subbarao, 
famously  remarked  and  I  quote  “The  Speech  is  significant  not  because  of  the  answers  it 
provides  but  because  of  the  questions  it  raises”! With  the  very  fond  hope  that  my  today’s 
speech measures upto, and passes muster on, Governor’s touch-stone and hall-mark, I wish 
all stakeholders God speed so that at the next edition of this event, some Keynote Speaker 
delivers a speech titled “The Financial Innovations That Are Since There”! 
Finally, I wish Finnoviti 2012 all the success that it so very much deserves! 
Thank you all so very much indeed!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
