Benoît Cœuré: Towards a consistent, coherent and complete Economic 
and Monetary Union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “Financial stability and the Single Market – the keys to growth in Europe” 
on  the  occasion  of  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  Single  Market,  organised  by  the  European 
Commission, Brussels, 19 November 2012. 
 I wish to thank Wouter Coussens for his contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
Introduction 
Commissioner Barnier, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to thank the European Commission for inviting me to speak at this conference on 
“Financial Stability and the Single Market”. 
The  crisis  has  demonstrated  the  incomplete  character  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union. 
Much thought has already been given to diagnosing the issues, identifying the shortcomings 
of our current institutional set-up and outlining possible solutions. Further food for thought will 
no doubt be offered throughout the day in this room. But the time that lies ahead is the time 
to take decisions.  
Since the publication in June of the first draft of the “Four Presidents’ Report” on the future of 
EMU, the commitment by the European Council to the banking union, the ECB’s decision on 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  and  also  thanks  to  visible  adjustment  efforts  in  euro  area 
countries, there has been a return of confidence in the outlook for the euro area. Both the 
status  quo  and  a  piecemeal  approach  to  EMU  reform  would  weaken  the  assumptions 
underlying this return of confidence. 
Today, therefore, I wish to make a plea for consistency, coherence and completeness in the 
institutional reforms we are seeking. And I will do so by elaborating on each of the building 
blocks identified by the four Presidents in June. 
What  I  will  do  for  each  of  these  building  blocks  is  to  highlight  in  what  respect  EMU  is 
incomplete, why it matters, and how the situation can, in my view, at least be remedied. In 
doing so, I hope it will become clear to you how these four building blocks form a consistent 
whole. 
Why the euro needs a banking union 
Let me begin with the so-called financial or banking union. The heart of the problem here is 
the  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  banking  system.  I  will  not  dwell  on  the  symptoms  of 
fragmentation. They are well known and have been documented, e.g. in the ECB’s reports 
on Financial Integration in Europe and Financial Stability Reviews, and have covered, among 
other  matters,  the  renationalisation  of  interbank  markets,  dispersion  of  bank  funding  costs 
and bank lending rates along national lines. 
Equally  well documented is the high correlation between the creditworthiness of banks, as 
well as their funding conditions, and the creditworthiness of their respective government. The 
ultimate  protection  of  senior  bank  creditors,  depositors  in  particular,  comes  from  the  fiscal 
backstop  provided  –  or  not  –  by  the  sovereign.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  the 
fragmentation of the banking system along national lines only became visible and damaging 
after the start of the sovereign debt crisis, even though the fault lines had existed beneath 
the surface. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The fundamental reason why this matters is that the single currency is really single only if the 
banking system is also single. Money, remember, is the liability of the banking system. Base 
money, issued by the Eurosystem, is undoubtedly single, but it represents only a fraction of 
broad  money.  The  remainder  is  issued  by  commercial  banks.  If  the  credit  of  the  banking 
system – including deposits – is fragmented along national lines, then so is money. 
More prosaically, if there is a national bias in the funding cost of banks, then monetary policy 
impulses cannot be transmitted uniformly across the euro area. 
So how can the singleness of the banking system be ensured? 
The first option would be to strengthen the creditworthiness of individual sovereigns so that 
differences between them became negligible. It would mean moving to the situation, not as it 
was,  but  as  it  should  have  been,  and  was  perceived  to  be  before  the  crisis.  Under  this 
approach,  national  governments  would  remain  responsible  for  backstopping  their  banking 
system, but this backstop would be robust across the euro area. 
This is appealing, but it has two shortcomings. 
First,  current  conditions  are  not  favourable.  Most  governments  have  excessive  levels  of 
public debt and will need several years to restore their creditworthiness to the point where all 
could  be  deemed  equally  robust.  In  the  meantime,  bank  access  to  funding  would  remain 
fragmented  along  national  lines.  This  would  perpetuate  divergences  in  the  conditions  of 
access  to  credit for firms  and  households,  and  jeopardise  national  adjustment  efforts. The 
potential for negative feedback loops or “multiple equilibriums”, to use the economic jargon, 
is obvious. National economies would continue to diverge. 
The  second  shortcoming  is  that  this  approach  assumes  that  market  discipline  is  totally 
effective.  The  “keeping  the  house  in  order”  approach  functions  if  markets  are  correctly 
differentiating. I  am  a firm  believer  in  the  usefulness  of market  signals. Note, for  instance, 
that the Outright Monetary Transactions will leave ample room for market forces to play: at 
the short end of government yield curves in normal times, and at the long end at all times. 
But we know from what happened before and during the crisis that we cannot always rely on 
market signals. 
The  alternative  is  that  the  banking  system  is  backstopped  at  the  European  level.  In  other 
terms,  the  link  between  national  banking  systems  and  their  sovereign  is  severed  and 
replaced by a relationship between the euro area banking system as a whole and European 
institutions. In that case, we would truly have a single banking system. 
Here again, several options can be envisaged, but the key is completeness and consistency. 
What it means, in my view, is the following. 
A genuine banking union is one where the location of deposits does not play a role in the 
confidence they inspire. This will require three interconnected elements: first, a strong, single 
supervisory  mechanism  to  prevent  crises;  second,  a  common  resolution  scheme  which 
allows  effective  and  early  decisions  to  be  taken  if  a  crisis  nonetheless  occurs;  and  third, 
eventually, a common European backstop which can be called upon in the event that there is 
still a need for public resources despite the involvement of the private sector. These three 
elements are complementary and mutually reinforcing. 
Since work on the SSM has advanced the most, and since it involves the ECB as host, let 
me make a few observations in this regard. 
First, it is crucial that all banks are covered by the SSM. A two-tier system would result in an 
uneven playing field, effectively segmenting the banking sector, which is precisely what we 
are  trying  to  repair.  Putting  all  banks  under  the  umbrella  of  the  SSM  does  not  mean  that 
supervision would be conducted entirely from Frankfurt. That would be neither effective nor 
desirable. We  should  –  and  would  –  rely  on  the  resources  and  knowledge  of  the  national 
supervisors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A second point is that arrangements need to be made to separate financial supervision from 
the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  function.  We  are  examining  procedures  that  would  separate 
clearly  the  relevant  workstreams  supporting  the  two  functions,  and  strictly  limit  Governing 
Council involvement in supervisory matters. 
Yet  separation  should  not  mean  isolation.  There  are  important  synergies  to  be  achieved 
between the two functions, an argument that is gaining international recognition and that the 
Eurosystem made publicly as early as 2001.1 Most euro area governors are already banking 
supervisors. Supervision could allow for better-informed monetary policy-making. In parallel, 
monetary  policy  operations  could  provide  useful  signals  to  the  supervisory  function,  for 
instance, when a bank relies disproportionately on central bank funding. The creation of the 
SSM  is  an  opportunity  for  Europe  to  rethink  the  links  between  banking  supervision  and 
monetary policy  in a  way that can strengthen both functions and learn the lessons of past 
banking  crises,  such  as  avoiding  “zombie  banks”  infused  with  central  bank  money  or  the 
evergreening of non-performing loans. 
The  SSM  does  not  need  to  be  limited  to  the  euro  area.  As  the  cornerstone  of  a  financial 
market union, it is necessary for the euro area, but it is desirable for the EU as a whole. The 
participation  of  additional  Member  States  is  welcome  and  would  strengthen  the  Single 
Market.  These  countries  have  raised  legitimate  concerns  about  a  fair  involvement  in  the 
decision-making  of  the  SSM.  We  are  working  hard  on  arrangements  that  would  address 
those concerns consistent with article 127.6 TFEU.  
Two versions of the fiscal union 
There exists a link between the notion of a banking union and the second topic highlighted by 
the four Presidents in June, that is the fiscal union. A fully-fledged banking union, including 
resolution and deposit insurance, assumes a partial fiscal union. Let me note that this does 
not imply that the structure and powers of the SSM can only be decided upon when we know 
the full details of the fiscal union. The SSM as such does not have fiscal consequences, and 
should be implemented promptly. 
What I am referring to here is a first interpretation of the fiscal union: a limited risk-sharing 
capacity  allowing  the  absorption  of  idiosyncratic  shocks.  These  shocks  cannot  entirely  be 
absorbed by national policies alone, given the constraints imposed by the single monetary 
policy  and  the  lack  of  an  exchange  rate.  Therefore,  there  has  to  be  a  euro  area  fiscal 
capacity, as a form of limited rainy day insurance. Whether other tasks could be assigned to 
this common fiscal capacity, such as supporting allocative efficiency, is a matter of choice, 
not necessity. 
Let  me  voice  two  words  of  caution.  First,  such  risk-sharing  capacity  should  serve  as  a 
complement, not a substitute to fiscal responsibility at national level. It should not undermine 
the  implementation  of  the  strong  national  fiscal  governance  rules  enshrined  in  the  Fiscal 
Compact. Second, the fiscal union should be precisely delineated so that is does not mutate 
into a transfer union. Transferring resources permanently from core to peripheral countries 
would be tantamount to accepting that economies will not adjust and that countries will not 
find their way back in the global economy. 
This brings me to a second possible interpretation of fiscal union, which refers to a transfer of 
fiscal governance from the national to the European level, in the form of enforceable control 
of national budgets.  
I would argue that such a transfer of governance would not amount to a loss of sovereignty 
but  to  recovering  sovereignty.  Let  me  explain.  To  be  able  to  borrow  in  a  recession  –  and 
                                                
1  See www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/prudentialsupcbrole_en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
crucially  to  be  able  to  do  so  at  affordable  rates  –  governments  rely  on  confidence  among 
investors that their fiscal position is sustainable. When this confidence is eroded, government 
debt no longer acts as a safe haven. The cost of raising finance goes up and this can set 
adverse debt dynamics in motion. In extreme circumstances, governments can lose access 
to markets, which has happened in several euro area countries. From this perspective, the 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area is tantamount to a loss of fiscal sovereignty.  
With respect to the establishment of a fiscal union that fully supports the return of the euro 
area  to  full  viability,  we  ought  therefore  to  distinguish  between  fiscal  rules  which  underpin 
sustainability, and rules of enforcement which underpin credibility. 
Fiscal  rules,  as  they  have  now  been  designed,  agreed,  and  enshrined, in  particular  in  the 
six-pack  and  two-pack  legislation  as  well  as  the  Fiscal  Compact,  are  an  important  step 
forward. These rules are designed by reference to structural deficits, thereby assigning clear 
and realistic medium-term objectives, while allowing for the absorption of cyclical shocks. 
Where credibility can still be improved, however, is at the level of enforcement. A number of 
ideas  have  been  put  forward  in  this  context,  including  that  of  endowing  a  European 
Commissioner with the power to intervene in national budgets.2 Each of these options raises 
its own set of issues, not least the clear-cut need for strong political legitimacy of any form of 
control. 
Which of these two interpretations of the fiscal union should eventually prevail? I would say 
both. Europe is a unique construct that needs to find its own balance between the roles of 
the euro area and national fiscal responsibilities. 
Economic union 
The  genuine  completion  of  banking  and  fiscal  unions  would  ensure  that  the  union  and  its 
members are better able than they are now to withstand a wide variety of shocks: cyclical 
shocks,  exogenous  asymmetric  shocks,  as  well  as,  if  need  be,  shocks  arising  from  the 
banking system.  
There  exists,  however,  a  final  category  of  shocks  to  which  monetary  union  must  be 
impervious. They derive from inadequate policies – labour market policies, for instance – or 
the absence of corrective policies, which amounts to the same. If left unaddressed, this either 
results in prolonged economic divergence – which is inconsistent with the objectives of the 
Union, or in permanent fiscal transfers – which is politically unacceptable. 
What is necessary here, at the very least, to complete monetary union? 
First and foremost, in my view, is the completion of the single market in all its aspects. The 
European  Union  is  a  market  economy  in  which  each  country  can  benefit  by  exploiting  its 
comparative advantages. The euro was introduced to serve the single market and ensure its 
viability.  The  argument  is  symmetric:  the  completion  of  the  single  market  is  necessary  to 
allow  each  country  to  effectively  exploit  its  comparative  advantages  and  to  prevent  the 
imbalances  that  would  otherwise  undermine  the viability  of the  euro. That  is  why  the  ECB 
fully supports the Single Market Acts I and II. 
Second, where macroeconomic imbalances occur as a consequence of inadequate policies, 
those imbalances need to be identified early and corrective action taken. I believe that the 
surveillance  tools  are  now  in  place,  in  particular  through  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance 
Procedure, and that the emphasis should now be on implementation and enforcement by the 
European Commission. 
                                                
2  Other  ideas  include  the  notion  of  making  the  validity  of  national  budgets  conditional  on  prior  approval  at 
European level. Along the same lines is the notion, included in the first report of the four Presidents, that debt 
issuance would be subject to prior approval. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The interim report on the future of EMU in October suggested that euro area Member States 
could enter into contracts with EU institutions, under which they would commit to undertake 
specific  structural  reforms,  on  the  basis  of  measurable  and  verifiable  targets.  Correctly 
designed, those contracts could both enhance national ownership and reinforce – rather than 
weaken – existing economic coordination procedures. There could be a role here for the euro 
area fiscal capacity, which could provide financial incentives to countries partaking in those 
contracts. 
Political union 
The last building block identified by the four Presidents in June is political union. In fact this is 
not a separate building block – it cuts across the entire discussion on other points. Decisions 
that  have  fiscal  consequences  require  democratic  backing.  Any  form  of  European  control 
over  national  policies  must  be  based  on  political  legitimacy  and  strict  accountability,  in 
particular vis-à-vis the European Parliament. We at the ECB are very well aware of the need 
for democratic accountability wherever power is delegated. The ECB’s new supervisory task 
must be matched by additional reporting and accountability channels. 
Yet,  I  think  the  general  issue  here  is  one  of  clarification,  rather  than  one  of  institution-
building. The notion that the euro is a currency without a state is in my view misguided. The 
euro is a currency with a state, only with a state whose branches of government are not yet 
clearly defined. Here again, let me explain:  
As I underlined earlier, the euro was created to serve the single market. That market itself is 
a political construct. It not only presupposes the freedom to play a part in the market – that 
would  be  anarchy.  It  also  presupposes  the  means  to  protect  that  freedom,  such  as  the 
protection  of  property  rights  and  the  enforcement  of  contracts.  For  there  to  be  a  single 
market, there must be a legislative body that establishes the rules and a judiciary that can 
enforce  them.  If  there  is  a  legislative  and  a judiciary,  there  has to  be  an  executive  arm  to 
implement their decisions. For a market to function, the three branches of government have 
to exist. This makes the single market a political union. 
What is not yet entirely clear in the case of the euro area, and apart from the ECB which has 
a clear but limited mandate, is who exactly will execute these powers, and to whom it will be 
accountable. As we move towards a genuine EMU, this clarification will become ever more 
necessary. 
Conclusion 
Mr Commissioner, Ladies and gentlemen,  
There has always existed a debate as to whether the euro area is an optimum currency area. 
I think this is a flawed debate, if by optimum we mean perfect, because no currency area is 
ever perfect. The question we are facing is what the minimum conditions are to ensure the 
full viability of the euro area over time. 
As  I  said  in  my  introduction,  there  has  been  increasing  confidence  in  recent  months  that 
these conditions will be met. Financial market participants have understood that there exists 
a  political  commitment  to  the  euro.  Practical  decisions  are  needed  now  to  anchor  this 
confidence and commitment. 
I will end my remarks by quoting – as is appropriate within these walls – from none other 
than  Jean  Monnet:  “Ce  qui  est  important,  ce  n’est,  ni  d’être  optimiste,  ni  pessimiste,  mais 
d’être déterminé.” 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
