Veselin Pješčić: Desirable tendencies in the debt securities market 
Speech  by  Mr  Veselin  Pješčić,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the 
11th International Belgrade Stock Exchange Conference, Belgrade, 21 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
On  the  occasion  of  the  anniversary  of  the  Belgrade  Stock  Exchange,  founded  on 
21 November  1894,  I  wish  to  thank  the  organisers  for  their  long-lasting  and  steadfast 
commitment to the development of the domestic capital market and organisation of a number 
of industry-related and educational activities. Though generally we cannot boast any major 
results, what makes a difference is the perseverance and dedication of key market players to 
design  and  take  all  available  measures  to  further  upgrade  the  financial  market  in  these 
turbulent  times.  The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  is  aware  of  its  role  of  one  of  the  key 
stakeholders, along with the Government, banks and other financial institutions. 
When  speaking  of  desirable  tendencies  in  further  development  of  debt  instruments,  we 
should reflect on the achievements so far, which are not insignificant considering the current, 
unfaltering crisis. The market of government securities had not even been set up until a few 
years  ago,  and  today  it  is  practically  the  dominant  source  of  government  funding.  The 
maturity  of  these  securities  in  the  primary  market  was  extended  up  to  five  (for  dinar 
securities) and 15 years (for foreign exchange securities) and domestic and foreign investor 
participation has significantly increased. Further, we have seen the first issues of municipal 
and bank dinar bonds, with some international institutions also showing interest in using such 
form  of  funding.  These  first  steps  of  development  of  a  proper  capital  market  within  the 
meaning used in developed countries are all the more significant because they represent the 
very driving force of further market growth. 
However, the development of the debt market must be properly guided to be sustainable and 
stable, as well as beneficial to all participants and the market itself. This can be achieved by 
pursuing the following three lines of development: 1) further development of the primary and 
improvement of the secondary market of government securities, 2) broadening the circle of 
issuers and the investor base of debt securities, and 3) stronger development of dinar debt 
instruments. 
As  for  the  primary  market,  the  maturity  of  government  securities  has  been  extended  to  a 
greater  degree  over  the  past  two  years:  in  March  2011,  dinar-denominated  securities  with 
three-year maturity  were issued for the first time, and in January this  year those with five-
year maturity. This has led to an extension of the dinar yield curve, creation of investment 
instruments  of  financial  institutions  with  a  long-term  investment  horizon,  such  as  pension 
funds and insurance companies, and the creation of room for the valuation of other long-term 
riskier  securities.  Investment  in  government  securities  has  also  been  aided  by  legislation 
which  ensures  a  more  favourable  tax  treatment  of  investments  in  these  securities.  The 
National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  its  part,  directly  contributes  to  the  development  of  the 
government securities market by designing its basic monetary policy instruments. Thus, for 
instance,  the  main  open  market  operations,  as  well  as  all  lending  operations  –  use  dinar-
denominated government securities as collateral. 
This will further enhance the secondary market of government securities as banks can utilise 
these  instruments  to  more  actively  manage  their  liquidity,  which  will,  ultimately,  make 
government securities more attractive in the primary market as well. 
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  contributes  to  the  development  of  the  secondary  market  by 
taking  active  part  in  a  number  of market  initiatives  and  projects. We  are  in  the  process of 
drafting standardised interbank repo agreements which should provide a legal framework for 
repo  transactions  in  compliance  with  the  international  practice.  The  development  of  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
market segment is directly dependant on the legal security and effectiveness of the financial 
collateral and calls for the improvement of regulations in this field, including the netting and 
better protection of creditors prior to initiating the bankruptcy proceedings. Legislation in this 
area is of a systemic importance, as it enhances market liquidity, reduces risks associated 
with transactions and contributes to financial stability. The National Bank of Serbia also took 
part in initiatives such as the introduction of the platform for secondary trading in government 
securities  (in  early  November  this  year),  which  is  expected  to  increase  the  liquidity  and 
transparency of this market segment. 
The second desirable line of development is the broadening of the circle of issuers and the 
investor  base  of  debt securities.  Apart from  the government, there  are  no  other  significant 
issuers,  while  the  investor  base  is  concentrated  in  the  banking  sector  and  lacks  broader 
participation.  Speaking  of  corporate  securities,  they  are  mainly  issued  in  order  to  ensure 
short-term funding from buyers known in advance. 
However,  issues  of  long-term  dinar  debt  securities  by  some  domestic  banks  are  an 
encouraging  sign.  In  May  this  year,  Societe  Generale  Banka,  Serbia,  issued  a  three-year 
dinar  bonds  for  a  broader  circle  of  investors,  while  Erste  Banka,  Novi  Sad  sold  in  early 
November, in primary trading, the first series of two-year dinar bonds in the Belgrade Stock 
Exchange.  The  successful  sale  of  these  securities  proved  that  market  participants  are 
interested in investing not only in government securities, but also in long-term debt securities 
of the banking sector. 
We expect that other banks will follow suit and rely increasingly on this type of financing in the 
future. The same goes for other categories of issuers, domestic companies with good solvency 
and viable development plans, as well as local governments which could encourage investors 
by granting tax and other incentives commonly used in international practice. 
The  third  desirable  line  of  development  is  the  stronger  development  of  dinar  debt 
instruments, which would contribute to greater use of the dinar and improved stability of the 
domestic financial system. A larger share of the dinar sources of funding of banks means a 
larger  potential  for  dinar  lending,  whereas  in  the  case  of  other  institutions,  including  the 
government,  it may  also  mean  lower  exposure  to foreign  exchange risks.  For the  National 
Bank  of  Serbia,  the  expansion  of  this  type  of  financing  means  lower  exposure  to  foreign 
exchange  risks  and,  by  extension,  greater  financial  stability.  А  larger  share  of  the  dinar 
sources  of  funding  would  reinforce  the  effectiveness  of  the  key  policy  rate  and  other 
monetary  policy  instruments  and  the  overall  efficiency  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  why  the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  monetary  instruments  are  designed  to  encourage  borrowing  in 
dinars  (through  reserve  requirements)  and  dinar  government  securities  (through  repo 
operations and lending facilities). 
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  also  fully  supports  the  announced  issuing  of  dinar  debt 
securities  by  international  financial  institutions.  Namely,  in  cooperation  with  the  National 
Bank of Serbia, some of them have been considering issuing long-term local currency bonds 
for  quite  some  time  already.  These  issues  would  not  only  provide  longer-term  sources  for 
dinar lending by these institutions, but would also have multiple positive effects on the capital 
market  –  their  first  class  rating  would  attract  investors  and  they  would  increase  the 
transparency and credibility of local money market indices.  
Finally, it is no secret that the growth prospects for the market of debt instruments depend on 
international  and  local  developments.  We  may  and  must  affect  local  developments  by 
creating a favourable investment climate, by upgrading market infrastructure and by ensuring 
stable  and  sustainable  macroeconomic  conditions.  The  success  in  following  the  desirable 
lines of development of debt instruments will also depend on the initiatives and coordinated 
actions  of  all  players  in  the  market.  As  so  far,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  will  not  only 
actively participate in these initiatives and actions, but also take the leading role. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a successful and enjoyable Conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
