Peter Praet: The “Great Rebalancing” of the euro area and the global 
economy 
Keynote speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Hamburg Summit “China meets Europe”, Hamburg, 30 November 2012. 
 I wish to thank Maurizio Michael Habib and Arnaud Mehl for their contributions to this speech. 
Many  thanks  for  your  kind  invitation  to  speak  at  this  summit  on  the  future  of  China  and 
Europe in the global economy. 
The pre-crisis period is sometimes referred to as the “Great Moderation”,1 and the onset of 
the crisis in 2007 and 2008 as the “Great Recession”.2 Today I’d like to provide an additional 
perspective and suggest that we may now be experiencing a “Great Rebalancing”. 
The  period  before  the  crisis  was  marked  by  the  global  build-up  of  large  external  and 
domestic imbalances. The United States had large current account deficits and China large 
surpluses,  while  there  were  serious  macroeconomic  imbalances  across  the  euro  area. 
However, the eruption of the global crisis about five years ago marked the start of a major 
rebalancing.  Demand  patterns  –  both  at  the  global  level  and  within  the  euro  area  –  have 
been  undergoing  a  significant  rebalancing  process,  which  has  admittedly  been  painful  in 
some ways, but necessary from an overall perspective.  
A key question now is whether this process is cyclical or structural. Today I will argue that 
part of the “Great Rebalancing” is structural, which is welcome. But another part is cyclical, 
meaning that it might fade out as soon as global economic growth turns a corner. So it’s a 
concern that if countries are not sufficiently committed to carrying out the necessary reforms, 
unsustainable imbalances might re-emerge which would then put the global recovery at risk.  
Let me now focus, in turn, on signs of a “Great Rebalancing” in the United States, the euro 
area, and China, as well as on the role of macroeconomic policies in this process. 
Let  me  start  with  the  United  States.  Before  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  2008,  the 
large external deficits of the United States were a major source of concern. The US current 
account  deficit  reached  6%  of  GDP  in  2006,  its  highest  level  since  1945.  Such  deficits 
reflected  a  wide  array  of  factors,  including  a  housing  bubble,  increasingly  leveraged 
households and growing fiscal deficits. Many observers feared an abrupt unwinding of these 
deficits, leading to a disorderly adjustment in global financial markets.3  
The  adjustment  started  with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Some  of  the  internal  and 
external imbalances in the US economy that were at the origin of the crisis have now begun 
to correct. The real estate market has gone through a major adjustment, declining by 30% 
compared  to  its  pre-crisis  peak;  excessive  leverage  of  households  and  financial  firms  has 
been  reduced;  and  the  US  current  account  deficit  has  roughly  halved  relative  to  pre-crisis 
levels, to about 3% of GDP. 
The  adjustment  will  only  remain  durable,  however,  if  efforts  to  complete  the  necessary 
reforms continue. These include continuing financial sector and regulatory reform; designing 
a credible strategy for medium-term fiscal consolidation to ensure the sustainability of public 
                                                
1  See  “The  Great  Moderation”, remarks  by  Federal  Reserve Chairman  Ben  Bernanke at  the  meetings of  the 
Eastern Economic Association, Washington DC, 20 February 2004. 
2  See Rogoff, K., “The Second Great Contraction”, Project Syndicate, 2 August 2011. 
3  See,  for  example,  Obstfeld,  M.  and  Rogoff,  K.,  “Global  current  account  imbalances  and  exchange  rate 
adjustments”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:2005, pp. 67–123. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
finances;  and  pursuing  structural  reforms  to  help  strengthen  the  competitiveness  of  the 
export sector. 
Consider now the situation on this side of the Atlantic.  
The euro area as a whole was not imbalanced prior to the crisis, nor is it so even today. The 
current account of the euro area has been roughly balanced since the start of Economic and 
Monetary Union in 1999. On average, the general government primary budget of euro area 
Member States will be almost in balance this year, and will record a small surplus next year, 
according to the IMF.  
However, this has masked significant intra-euro area imbalances in terms of current account 
positions,  competitiveness  and  public  finances.  For  instance,  the  real  effective  exchange 
rates  of  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal  and  Spain  had  appreciated  on  average  by  16% 
relative  to  that  of  Germany  between  1999  and  2008,  whereas  the  real  effective  exchange 
rate of the euro appreciated by only 3% over the same period. 
A  significant  process  of  rebalancing  is  now  under  way  in  Europe,  particularly  in  the  euro 
area. After several years of artificial calm in global financial markets and the hunt for yield 
before the crisis, there has been a major repricing of risk. This has led to a marked tightening 
of borrowing conditions, initially for financial corporations and subsequently for sovereigns. 
Some  of  the  most  severely  affected  sovereigns  were  euro  area  Member  States  that  had 
enjoyed relatively benign financing conditions before 2008. But they had not taken sufficient 
advantage  of  these  conditions  to  put  public  finances  on  a  sustainable  path,  or  implement 
structural reforms that would have improved their economic competitiveness and smoothed 
their adjustment.  
A sometimes painful, but necessary, rebalancing process has started within the euro area. 
Some fundamental progress has already been made in tackling intra-euro area imbalances:  
Budgetary  deficits  are  being  reduced.  The  IMF  expects  the  euro  area  to  have  a 
• 
primary budget deficit of 0.5% of GDP this year, well below the average of the G20 
advanced economies (4.8% of GDP). Moreover, it is those countries most in need 
that are making the largest structural adjustments;  
Competitiveness  in  programme  and  vulnerable  countries  is  being  restored.  In  the 
countries  most  affected  by  the  crisis,  noticeable  progress  is  being  made  in  the 
correction  of  unit  labour  costs  and  current  account  imbalances.  In  full  EU-IMF 
programme  countries  (Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal),  unit  labour  costs  have 
improved  by  around  10%  since  2008,  relative  to  the  euro  area  average.  This  has 
translated  into  current  account  deficits  that  are  on  average  more  than  five 
percentage points of GDP lower than they were then; 
Thanks  to  the  ECB’s  non-standard  measures,  which  have  given  European  banks 
the  breathing  space  needed  to  implement  their  restructuring  plans  in  an  orderly 
fashion,  those  banks  have  substantially  increased  their  capital  buffers.  There  has 
been  no  disorderly  deleveraging,  which  was  perceived  as  a  major  concern  at  the 
end of last year. 
  This process of rebalancing within the euro area is coupled with sluggish growth and slower 
euro area import growth, which is arguably not without cyclical implications for the rest of the 
world. In particular, trade between the euro area and China has recently declined. In the first 
half  of  2012  China’s  exports  to  euro  area  countries  contracted  by  around  3%  in  nominal 
terms, compared with growth of about 30% between 2002, when China joined the WTO, and 
2008,  when  the  crisis  erupted.  In  2008  more  than  15%  of  Chinese  goods  exports  were 
destined for the euro area, a share which was also rising relative to that of the United States 
and Japan. By contrast, that share has since declined to about 13%. 
The crisis not only exposed the imbalances existing within the euro area but also revealed 
the  incomplete  character  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  The  governance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
framework  underpinning  EMU  proved  insufficient  to  create  adequate  incentives  to  address 
macroeconomic  imbalances,  foster  sound  public  finances  and  prevent  the  propagation  of 
shocks to the European financial system.  
In  order  to  secure  long-term  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  ensure  a  durable  rebalancing, 
some  of  the  initial  design  flaws  in  the  euro  area’s  governance  structure  need  to  be  fixed 
permanently. This requires a concerted effort from governments to complete EMU. 
In this regard, the “Four Presidents” (of the European Council, the European Commission, 
the Eurogroup and the ECB) have identified four pillars on which to build a genuine EMU and 
so a more stable and prosperous Europe. These pillars are: a banking union with a single 
supervisor; a fiscal union that can effectively prevent and correct unsustainable budgets; an 
economic union that can guarantee sufficient competitiveness to sustain high employment; 
and a political union that can deeply engage euro area citizens. 
Progress  is  being  made  on  all  four  pillars  to  build  a  genuine  EMU.  However,  the  road 
towards  a  complete  EMU  is  still  long.  A  firm  commitment  from  governments  is  the  best 
insurance that we are building the bridge to a more stable and prosperous euro area, one in 
which the rebalancing we observe today will be here to stay.  
There  is  evidence  that rebalancing  has  also  started  in  China. The current  account surplus 
has narrowed markedly, from 10% of GDP in 2007 to less than 3% of GDP in 2011; foreign 
exchange  reserve  accumulation  has  slowed  down  significantly,  with  reserve  holdings 
remaining roughly stable in the course of 2012; and, finally, there seem to be signs that the 
economy is gradually shifting from external sources of demand to domestic sources . A key 
question is how much of this rebalancing is due to cyclical factors, in particular slower growth 
in  advanced  economies.  There  have  been  concerns  that  China’s  growth  model  remains 
overly reliant on investment at the expense of consumption, and that house price valuations 
are stretched. 
So in China, too, a permanent rebalancing hinges on the continuation of structural reforms, 
including: the continued expansion of social safety nets; the reform of the banking sector; the 
gradual liberalisation of the capital account; and the strengthening of exchange rate flexibility, 
as envisaged by Chinese authorities. The latter two are pre-conditions for further currency 
internationalisation to allow foreign investors to invest in China, deepen financial markets and 
improve the allocation of capital in the economy. 
What  is  the  role  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  in  this  process?  In  those  cases  where 
unsustainable fiscal policies were at the very origin of imbalances, the priority is to restore 
and  ensure  the  medium-term  sustainability  of  public  finances.  Another  priority  is  to 
strengthen  financial  sector  stability  and  avert  the  build-up  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities, 
including  unsustainable  lending  booms,  through  adequate  regulatory,  supervisory  and 
macro-prudential tools.  
As  regards  monetary  policy,  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  also  been  doing 
their  part,  helping  to  make  the  rebalancing  process  as  smooth  as  possible.  Central  banks 
acted  within  their  particular  mandates,  which  in  the  euro  area  is  to  preserve  price  stability 
over the medium term. They have taken non-standard measures, which have helped avoid 
an  abrupt  deleveraging  of  the  banking  sector,  which  might  have  had  highly-damaging 
consequences.  
There  have  also  been  concerns,  notably  among  emerging  market  policy-makers,  that 
measures  taken  by  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  could  foster  excessive  flows  of 
capital to their economies, put upward pressure on their exchange rates and lead to bubbles 
in  domestic  financial  asset  prices.  The  relation  between  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies and global financial flows is not purely mechanistic, however. Financial flows to 
emerging economies depend on a host of factors over and beyond interest rate differentials, 
including  the  attractiveness  of  emerging  market  economies  themselves  in  terms  of  growth 
potential  or  global  risk  aversion.  Moreover,  the  monetary  policy  of  major  advanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
economies is not only beneficial to their domestic economies, but has positive externalities 
for the growth of the global economy as a whole, including emerging market economies.  
Let me now conclude. 
The outbreak of the crisis triggered a “Great Rebalancing” process at the global level. It is a 
painful,  but  necessary,  process,  which  is  partly  cyclical.  Each  continent,  America,  Europe 
and Asia, must continue making every effort to ensure that this process remains durable. 
In recent years, particular attention has been paid to the situation and reform agenda in the 
euro  area.  However,  not  only  euro  area  countries,  but  all  other  countries  too,  have  to 
implement  structural  reforms,  many  of  which  are  discussed  within  the  G20,  to  progress 
towards  more  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  We,  in  Europe,  are  doing  our  part  by 
endeavouring to advance on the reforms needed for a durable intra-euro area rebalancing.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
