Philip Lowe: The labour market, structural change and recent economic 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Financial  Services 
(FINSIA)  Leadership  Event,  Hobart, 
9 October 2012. 
Institute  of  Australasia 
 I would like to thank Patrick D’Arcy for his valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Hobart  today  and  I  would  very  much  like  to  thank  Finsia  for  the 
invitation to this lunch.  
My remarks this afternoon are largely centred on the Australian labour market. They pick up 
on two important issues. The first is one that the Reserve Bank has spoken about at length 
over  recent  years,  and  that  is  structural  change.  Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  how  this 
change has been affecting the operation of the Australian labour market. The second issue is 
a more timely one, and that is how recent developments in the labour market can help us 
better understand the current balance between supply and demand in the economy.  
Structural change 
No doubt, you have all heard much discussion over recent times about structural change in 
Australia, and why it is occurring. At the centre of a number of the changes that are taking 
place  is  the  industrialisation  and  growth  of  Asia.  This  has  resulted  in  high  prices  for 
Australia’s commodity and food exports, as well as a high exchange rate. The most obvious 
effect is the rapid expansion of the resources sector that has been underway for some time. 
Another important factor has been the marked change in Australians’ propensity to borrow to 
buy  assets,  especially  houses.  And  then  there  is  the  ongoing  growth  in  our  demand  for 
services as our incomes grow and the population ages. Just as other forces have done so for 
more than 200 years, these forces are reshaping our economy.  
But the concept of structural change – which is talked about a lot by economists – is a fairly 
abstract one for many people. It does become very real though when it affects people’s jobs 
–  the  nature  of  their  work,  the  industries  they  are  employed  in,  the  security  of  their 
employment,  their  career  opportunities  and  the  wages  they  get  paid.  The  Reserve  Bank 
must, by the nature of our responsibilities, focus primarily on aggregate outcomes. However, 
we also try to understand what is going on beneath these aggregates, and how people’s lives 
are being affected.  
Before  I  talk  about  the  detail,  it  is  worth  starting  with  the  aggregate  unemployment  rate 
(Graph 1). The key point here is that unemployment remains low. In the past 30 years, there 
have only been four years in which the unemployment rate has averaged below its current 
5¼  per  cent.  Australia  has  one  of  the  lowest  unemployment  rates  among  the  advanced 
economies, an outcome that seemed improbable for much of my professional career.  
Underneath this low and steady unemployment rate, there is a great deal of movement at the 
individual worker level. Although it is still typical for most people to have relatively long tenure 
in a single job, a large number of people change jobs each year. The latest data available 
from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) show that at February 2012 around 2.3 million 
people – almost one-fifth of the total number of employed people – were newly employed, 
having been in their job for less than a year. While a little under half of these were starting 
work for the first time or were not previously working, 1.2 million people moved from one job 
to  another.  And  this  is  in  a  year  when  the  net  growth  in  published  employment  was  just 
23,000. This changing in jobs occurred for a range of reasons. Around three-quarters were 
voluntary,  including  for  personal  reasons  or  to  take  advantage  of  new  opportunities.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
remaining  quarter  was  involuntary,  including  because  the  previous  employer  went  out  of 
business or the nature of the business has changed.  
Graph 1 
 The structural changes in the economy are clearly one factor contributing to this movement 
of  people.  This  is  of  course  nothing  new.  There  is  always  a  degree  of  structural  change 
occurring,  and  the  strong  growth  in  the  resources  sector  is  but  the  latest  example. 
Nevertheless, there is some evidence that the changes taking place have led to a higher rate 
of job turnover in recent times than has been the case for the past two decades (Graph 2). 
The number of people who left a job over the year to February 2012, as a share of those 
employed some time during the year, was the highest in two decades, with fairly high rates of 
both voluntary and involuntary separations.  
Graph 2 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This high rate of turnover, with relatively modest aggregate employment growth, is consistent 
with a lot of new job opportunities opening up in various parts of the economy and, at the 
same time, other jobs ceasing to exist. Another indication of this is that the official measure 
of  job  vacancies  has  remained  relatively  high,  yet  employment  growth  has  been  relatively 
subdued.  
An  additional  way  of  looking  at  these  changes  is  to  examine  the  dispersion  –  or  standard 
deviation – in employment growth across the 19 industries for which the ABS publishes data 
(Graph 3).  For  a  number  of  years  now,  there  has  been  a  high  dispersion  in  employment 
growth across these industries, with especially strong growth in the mining sector.  
Graph 3 
 The  cumulative  effect  of  this  dispersion  in  growth  rates  can  be  seen  in  total  employment 
growth in different industries (Graph 4). Since 2007, around 300,000 net new jobs have been 
created  in  the  health  care  sector,  200,000  jobs  in  professional  and  scientific  services  and 
around 130,000 jobs in each of the mining and education sectors. In contrast, the number of 
manufacturing  jobs  has  declined  by  around  70,000,  and  the  number  of  jobs  in  retailing  is 
largely unchanged.  
Graph 4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 These disparate trends have added to a general sense of uncertainty in many parts of the 
community. Job losses can be very disruptive when they occur. They tend to be more visible 
than job gains. And they often take place all at once when firms are downsizing or closing, 
rather  than  the  more  gradual  process  of  job  creation.  The  large  variation  in  experience 
across  industries  is  probably  one  reason  why  many  people  view  the  labour  market  to  be 
quite weak. Over the past year, we have had the rather unusual situation in which consumers 
have  become  quite  concerned  about  rising  unemployment,  yet  the  overall  unemployment 
rate has been steady (Graph 5).  
Graph 5 
 More positively, and to the surprise of many people, the significant variation in employment 
growth across industries has not led to greater variation in the unemployment rates across 
the country. One way to see this is to compare the distribution of unemployment rates across 
the 68 regions for which the ABS publishes data with the distribution of unemployment rates 
10 years ago (Graph 6). The picture is pretty clear: the average unemployment rate is lower 
and  the  variation  across  the  country  is  also  lower.  Today,  around  half  the  regions  have 
unemployment rates below 5 per cent and 50 of the 68 regions have an unemployment rate 
below 6 per cent. In only three regions is the unemployment rate above 8 per cent, compared 
with 13 regions a decade ago.  
Graph 6 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One factor that has played at least some role in these outcomes is the willingness of people 
to travel or move to where the jobs are. The most high-profile example of this is perhaps the 
FIFO – Fly In Fly Out – and the DIDO – Drive In Drive Out – workers. Industry estimates and 
recent census data suggest that there are currently upwards of 50,000 such workers. Internal 
migration, of course, has also played some role, with the rate of net interstate migration to 
Western Australia over the past year is the highest for around 25 years (Graph 7). It is also 
worth  noting  that  interstate  migration  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  Tasmanian 
economy, with the situation switching from sizable net inflows to net outflows and back again 
over the course of just a few years. For a period in the 2000s, internal migration was adding 
around  ½ per  cent  to  Tasmania’s  population  annually.  Today,  it  is  subtracting  almost  this 
amount.  
Graph 7 
 The  structural  changes  that  have  taken  place  across  the  economy  have  also  altered  the 
relative  wages  in  different  industries. Workers  in  the  resource  sector  have  long  been  paid 
higher  wages  than  in  many  other  industries,  and  this  gap  has  widened  over  recent  years 
(Graph 8).  Since  2004,  average  wages  in  mining  have  increased  by  about  10 per  cent 
relative to the average for the economy as a whole. Workers in professional services have 
also  experienced  faster-than-average  increases,  partly  due  to  spillover  effects  from  the 
resources sector. Conversely, relative wages have declined in the manufacturing, retail and 
the accommodation industries, each of which has experienced difficult conditions over recent 
times.  These  divergent  trends  since  the  mid  2000s  stand  in  contrast  to  the  period 
immediately before that, when there was less structural change.  
The  overall  impression  from  these  various  facts  and  figures  is  that  the  labour  market  has 
coped reasonably well with the significant changes taking place in the Australian economy. 
While there have been shortages of skilled workers in some areas, these have been fairly 
limited.  Workers  have  moved  in  large  numbers  to  the  industries  that  are  benefiting  from 
growth in Asia and the increasing domestic demand for services. They have done this at a 
time of close to full employment and larger divergences in unemployment rates across the 
country  have  been  avoided.  The  adjustment  of  relative  wages  has  helped,  and  this 
adjustment  has  occurred  without  igniting  the  type  of  economy-wide  wages  blowout  that 
contributed to the derailment of previous mining booms.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 8 
 One  reason  that  things  have  worked  out  this  way  is  that  the  industrial  relations  system  is 
more flexible than it was two decades ago. The exchange rate appreciation has also been an 
important  factor,  helping  to  maintain  a  reasonable  balance  between  demand  and  supply 
during what has turned out to be a once-in-a-century investment boom. Another factor has 
been  Australia’s  monetary  policy  regime,  which  has  provided  a  strong  anchor  for  both 
inflation and wage expectations. After two decades of the inflation-targeting regime there is a 
fairly  broad  understanding  that  unsustainable  aggregate  wage  growth  is  likely  to  lead  to 
higher inflation, and thus higher interest rates.  
Looking forward,  it  is  clear  that the  structure  of  the  economy  will  continue  to  evolve.  Over 
time, the strong growth in investment in the resources sector will give way to a large increase 
in exports of resources. This will likely mean some moderation in the demand for labour in 
the resources sector, and other forms of activity and employment will need to pick up. As this 
transition occurs, the types of new jobs that are created will also continue to evolve.  
Inevitably, there are uncertainties as to what these new jobs will be, and where they will be 
located.  In  the  face  of  this  uncertainty,  it  is  essential  that  the  labour  market  retains  its 
flexibility. The industrial relations laws and practices are important here, but they are by no 
means the full story. Flexibility also comes from having an adaptable workforce – one that 
has the right general skills, the right training and the right mindset. Over the medium term, 
whether or not Australia fully capitalises on the opportunities that the growth of Asia presents 
depends critically upon the ability of both workers and businesses to adapt, and to build and 
use  our  human  capital.  Many  of  these  opportunities  lie  beyond  the  resources  sector  –  in 
areas like the unique tourism experiences that are possible here in Tasmania, in high-end 
manufacturing, in high-quality food and in professional services. If we are to take advantage 
of these opportunities, a highly skilled and outward-looking workforce is critical.  
Recent outcomes 
I would now like to shorten my gaze a little to look at quite recent developments in the labour 
market and what they tell us about the overall balance between supply and demand.  
As I discussed at the outset, the current national unemployment rate is 5¼ per cent, and has 
been in the 5 to 5¼ per cent range for two years now. As I said, this is a very good outcome 
by international standards.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Notwithstanding this, the labour market appears to have generally softened in recent months, 
with  only  modest  growth  in  total  employment,  a  decline  in  average  hours  worked,  and  a 
decline  in  the  employment-to-population  ratio  (Graph 9).  Various  indicators  also  suggest  a 
lower rate of job creation than was the case a while ago.  
Graph 9 
 Two industries stand out as having particularly weak employment growth over recent times 
(Graph 10).  The  first  is  the  construction  industry  where,  according  to  the  ABS,  there  has 
been a net decline in employment of 70,000 over the past 12 months. Activity in important 
parts  of  the  industry  –  including  in  house  building  and  commercial  construction  –  remains 
subdued, as does the immediate outlook, and this has led to a fair amount of job shedding. 
The second industry is public administration, where employment has fallen by 50,000 over 
the past year, with governments cutting back due to budgetary pressures.  
Graph 10 
One  interesting  aspect  of  the  recent  outcomes  is  that  despite  only  modest  overall 
employment  growth,  the  unemployment  rate  has  not  moved  up,  as  had  been  widely 
expected.  Part  of  the  reason  for  this  is  that  there  has  been  a  decline  in  labour  force 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
participation – that is, in the share of the working-age population either with a job or looking 
for a job (Graph 11). While one always needs to interpret short-run movements with caution, 
the current participation rate is around ½ a percentage point lower than the average of the 
past five years. This stands in contrast to the general upward trend in participation over the 
past 30 years.  
Graph 11 
 The  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  spent  some  time  trying  to  understand  what  is  happening 
here and what it says about the balance of supply and demand in the labour market.  
On the supply side, demographic changes are potentially an important factor. As with many 
other  countries,  the  Australian  population  is  ageing.  This  tends  to  reduce  labour  force 
participation, as older people are less likely to have a job, or be looking for a job, than are 
younger  people.  Our  estimate  is  that  this  ageing  effect,  by  itself,  has  reduced  the 
participation rate by around 1 percentage point since the mid 2000s.  
Over this period, however, this effect has been more than offset by the higher participation of 
successive generations of women in the workforce as well as a tendency for older workers in 
general to participate in the workforce longer than their predecessors. Taking account of this 
so-called cohort effect, as well as the ageing effect, it would appear that these longer-term 
supply-side factors are not a central part of the recent decline in participation.  
A second potential factor is the relatively high rate of structural change in employment that I 
talked about earlier. With the increased rate of job turnover, it may be the case that workers 
who have left a job have decided not to re-enter the labour market immediately. This could 
be for a variety of reasons – perhaps employment prospects are poor or perhaps they are 
seeking to update their skills before re-entering the labour force. Unfortunately, the existing 
data make it difficult to assess how important these effects are. To the extent that they are 
playing some role, there is likely to be a bit more capacity in the labour market than indicated 
by the unemployment rate alone.  
A third possibility is that the decline in participation is linked to the recent fall in demand for 
construction workers. There has been a large decline in the number of people who identify 
themselves as being self-employed and many of these worked in the construction industry. It 
may  be  the  case  that  some  of  these  people  are  not  recorded  as  unemployed,  despite 
actually not working in the reference week and being available for additional work. Again, if 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this were the case it would suggest that there is a bit more capacity in the labour market than 
suggested by the unemployment rate alone.  
This  weakness  in  the  construction  sector,  particularly  of  new  homes,  has  been  one  of the 
bigger surprises in the economic outcomes over recent times. Looking forward, a pick-up in 
construction  activity  is  one  of  the  factors  that  could  provide  an  offset  to  the  eventual 
moderation in the current very high level of investment in the resources sector. A pick-up in 
other forms of investment could also play this role.  
With the peak in mining investment now coming into view, it is not surprising that attention is 
turning to the questions of what forms of activity might pick up, where the future jobs might 
come  from,  and  what  combination  of  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  might  keep  the 
overall  economy  on  an  even  keel.  No  doubt,  international  developments  will  have  an 
important  bearing  on  the  answers  to  these  questions.  Recently,  the  global  outlook  has 
softened somewhat and the various indicators that I have just mentioned suggest the labour 
market  also  has  moved  in  this  direction.  Given  these  developments,  and  the  outlook  for 
contained inflation, the Board judged at its meeting last week that it was appropriate for the 
stance of monetary policy to be a little more accommodative than it had been.  
Despite the recent focus on the weaker global economy, it is important not to lose sight of the 
longer-term benefits to the Australian economy of the growth of Asia. It remains the case that 
this  growth  provides  Australia  with  tremendous  opportunities.  Over  recent  years  we  have 
seen  these  in  the  resources  sector.  But  in  coming  years  we  are  likely  to  see  them  more 
clearly in a wide range of other areas. Our flexible, adaptive and well-trained workforce will 
be the key to taking advantage of these opportunities.  
Thank you for listening and I would be very happy to answer any questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
