Ignazio Visco: 2012 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 88th World Savings Day, 
organized by the Association of Italian Savings Banks (ACRI), Rome, 31 October 2012. 
 Savings and the financial system 
1. 
Savings  constitute  a fundamental  raw  material for  the  balanced  development  of  a  country, 
making it possible to finance investment without running an external deficit. Savings make 
households  less  vulnerable  to  cyclical  downturns,  so  that  they  can  look  to  the  future  with 
confidence. 
In  Italy  the  saving  rate  –  traditionally  one  of  the  industrial  world’s  highest  –  has  been 
diminishing for over twenty years. Since the onset of the crisis the decline has sharpened. 
The share of national income saved is now below the European average: under 17 per cent, 
about 4 percentage points less than in the middle of the last decade, compared with 22 per 
cent in Germany and 18 per cent in France. 
The  decline  in  the  saving  rate  is  due  above  all  to  decreasing  saving  on  the  part  of 
households. Households can rely on bank loans more than in the past. At the end of 2011 
outstanding consumer credit was equal to 11 per cent of households’ disposable income and 
mortgage  loans  to  32  per  cent,  about  three  times  the  values  recorded  in  the  late  1990s. 
A  second  major  factor  in  the  diminishing  propensity  to  save  is  a  fall  in  real  household 
income  of  9  per  cent  over  the  last  five  years,  after  rising  modestly  in  the  decade 
preceding  the  financial  crisis.  Italian  households  have  buffered  the  impact  on  their 
consumption habits by drawing on their accumulated savings  and  reducing  new  saving.  In 
France  and  Germany,  by  contrast,  households’  disposable income and consumption have 
risen, if only slowly, over the entire period. 
Households are finding it harder to set aside the amount of resources they would like to in 
order to cope with the risks to jobs and future income. Istat’s surveys have found that since 
the  first  half  of  the  last  decade  the  share  of  households  wanting  to  save  has  risen  by 
15 percentage  points  to 90  per  cent,  while  the  share  of  those  able  to  do  so  has  fallen  by 
10 points  to  26  per  cent.  The  gap  is  widest  for  the  older  and  the  younger  households, 
and  among  the  latter  above  all  for  the  better educated, those with fixed-term jobs, and 
tenants. 
There  is  the  risk  of  a  vicious  circle:  economic  growth  is  slow,  saving  capacity  is  reduced, 
households  are  more  uncertain  and  discouraged,  growth  weakens  further.  In  the  past 
year  the  decline  in  household  and  business  confidence  has  come  on  top  of  the  direct 
effects  of  heightened sovereign  risk  and  the  consequent  tensions  in  the  credit  market, 
the  public  finance  adjustment  measures  and  the  slowdown  in  world  demand.  For  the 
economy  to  return  to  its  potential  growth  path,  to  the  benefit  of  saving  capacity,  the 
gradual  easing  of  these  effects  must  continue  and strengthen. 
The  state  of  saving  and  its  function  within  the  economy  also  depend  on  the  health  of  the 
financial  system,  which  is  central  in  putting  its  formation  in  relation  with  its  utilization,  in 
distributing  funds  from  place  to  place  and  from  today  to  tomorrow,  ensuring  that  funds 
reach those who deserve them and removing liquidity constraints. 
The Italian financial system has not suffered from the hypertrophy, the periods of tumultuous 
expansion,  that  in  other  countries  were  conducive  to  improper  behaviour  and  generated 
uncontrollable  imbalances.  In  2011  the  assets  held  by  financial  institutions  were  worth 
3.5  times GDP in Italy, 6 times GDP in the euro area as a whole, 14.5 times in the United 
Kingdom  and  23  times  in  Ireland.  Between  2001  and  2011,  the  nominal  value  of  these 
assets increased by nearly 90 per cent in Italy, 110 per cent in the euro area, 160 per cent 
in the UK and 240 per cent in Ireland. The Italian financial system is far removed from the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
excesses  that  have  marked  other  countries  as  regards  the  interconnection  of  financial 
institutions, a characteristic that may entail high risk. 
Episodes of improper conduct, however serious, have not dented the stability of the system. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  intransigent  with  respect  to  mismanagement;  it  uses  all  the 
instruments  at  its  disposal,  including  extraordinary  measures,  to  avoid  irregularities,  to 
contain  their  repercussions  on  consumer  confidence  and  the  soundness  of  banks,  and  to 
favour the optimal allocation of savings. 
The  reform  of  financial  intermediation  that  was  initiated  in  2010  for  non-bank  institutions 
providing  credit,  financial  agents  and  loan  brokers  is  designed  to  favour  the  market 
presence  of professional  operators, reliable  and  diversified  distribution  channels  and  more 
effective supervision through specialized entities. The primary legislation in this field is now 
complete. The full rationalization of the sector and effective supervisory action  now depend 
on the issue of the necessary ministerial measures. 
The financial system’s main counterparties – households and firms – are not suffering from 
serious imbalances in Italy. The net wealth of Italian consumer and producer households is 
high  by international  standards  and  is  associated  with  low  debt.  The  ratio  of  households’ 
financial  debt  to disposable income is 65 per cent in Italy, above 80 per cent in France and 
Germany, and nearly 100 per  cent  in  the  euro  area.  The  vulnerability  of  the  2  per  cent  of 
Italian  households  that  have  to sustain  debt  service  of  more  than  30  per  cent  of  income 
depends strictly on cyclical developments and  the  state  of  the  labour  market,  and  it  has 
been  attenuated  by  programmes  of  support  for households in difficulty, such as the debt 
moratorium  agreed  on  by  the Italian  Banking  Association and consumer organizations and 
recently extended to January 2013. 
The financial debt of Italian firms amounts to about 80 per cent of GDP, some 10 percentage 
points more than in Germany but over 20 points less than in France, almost 30 points less 
than  in the  UK  and  over  50  less  than  in  Spain.  However,  corporate  balance  sheets  are 
suffering  from  the  impact  of  two  recessions  within  the  span  of  just  four  years  and  the 
consequent decline in profitability  to  a  twenty-year  low.  Despite  low  interest  rates,  financial 
expense  now  absorbs  over one fifth of internally-generated resources. 
In the course of the year some faint signs of improvement have emerged. The lengthening of 
payment  terms  between  businesses  has  ceased,  and  large  corporations  have  resumed 
issuing  bonds. Financial  analysts’  forecasts  and  the  most  recent  business  surveys  point 
to  an  attenuation  of  the  pessimism  over  the  outlook  for  economic  activity,  especially 
exports. 
In very difficult times the Italian financial system has continued to function as a fundamental 
infrastructure  for  the  economy.  In  the  early  part  of  the  crisis  the  Italian  system  was  less 
severely  affected  than  those  of  other  countries,  having  practically  negligible  recourse  to 
government  support,  far  less  than  other  banking  systems.  The  latest  survey  by  the 
European  Commission  found  that  as  of  last  June  public  capital  injections  into  Italian 
banks  amounted  to  0.2  per  cent  of  GDP, against 5.2 per cent in the Netherlands, 4.3 per 
cent in  Belgium and  1.8  per  cent  in Germany.  Here, in  contrast  with  other  countries,  the 
banks  suffered  from,  did  not  cause,  the  deterioration  in  the public finances. The sovereign 
debt crisis is still limiting their access to wholesale funding. 
The  Bank  of  Italy’s  controls  and  supervisory  practices,  banks’  low  exposure  to  structured 
finance products, and the absence of a real estate bubble are what underlie the stability of 
the  Italian  banking  system.  These  factors  explain  the  lesser  need  for  government 
intervention.  However,  the banks are suffering from the protracted economic recession. To 
preserve their ability to finance the economy, they must take full advantage of the scope for 
increasing efficiency. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Credit and the banking system 
2. 
The  deleterious  spiral  linking  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  banks’  access  to  funds,  credit 
availability  and  economic  growth  must  be  broken  once  and  for  all.  The  measures  decided 
by  the ECB  Governing  Council,  together  with  those  adopted  by  governments  at  national 
and  European  level,  are  already  having  positive  effects.  But  we  still  have  not  reached  a 
definite turning-point. 
The  growth  of  bank  lending  remains  negative.  In  the  three  months  to  September  the 
annualized  contraction  in  loans  was  3.5  per  cent  for  firms  and  0.8  per  cent  for 
households.  The  weakness  of  demand  has  weighed  increasingly  on  the  recent  trend  in 
credit. Firms are cutting back on  investment,  given  the  unfavourable  economic  prospects, 
while  households  are  cautious  in  the face of the uncertain trend in the housing market and 
the difficulties for income and employment. 
But supply-side conditions that are still restrictive, though an improvement on the exceptional 
tensions  registered  in  late  2011  and  early  2012,  also  continue  to  be  factor.  In  the  bank 
lending  survey  conducted  at  the  start  of  October  for  the  third  quarter  of  this  year,  the 
banks  relate the  tightening  of  supply  to  the  poor  economic  situation  and  the  consequent 
increase  in  credit  risk. The  surveys  of  firms  give  mixed  signals  of  the  speed  at  which  the 
credit  tightening  is  unwinding.  In  the  quarterly  survey  carried  out  by  the  Bank  of  Italy 
together  with  Il  Sole  24  Ore,  the  percentage  of  firms  indicating  a  deterioration  in  their 
conditions of access to credit declined to about 26 per cent in September, from 33 per cent 
in June; whereas the monthly Istat survey showed a new increase. 
The  reduction  in  official  rates  in  July  has  had  positive  effects  on  the  cost  of  credit.  Bank 
lending rates came down over the summer by 0.3 percentage points both on new loans to 
firms  and  on  new  mortgage  loans  to  households,  to  3.5  and  3.9  per  cent  respectively  in 
September. A contributory factor was the narrowing of the yield spread between Italian and 
German government bonds following the announcement of new interventions by the ECB on 
the sovereign debt market. 
However, the cost of business loans is still higher than in Germany and in the euro area as 
a whole  (by  1.1  and  0.8  percentage  points  respectively);  before  the  summer  of  2011  the 
differential  was  practically  nil.  The  gap  reflects  the  sovereign  debt  tensions  and  the 
consequent  unevenness  of  monetary  policy  transmission  in  the  diverse  economies  of  the 
area.  Other  conditions  being  equal,  an  increase  of  100  basis  points  in  the  yield  spread 
between  ten-year  Italian  and  German  government  bonds  tends  to  be  reflected  in  an 
increase  of  about  50  basis  points  in  the  average  rates  on  loans  to firms in Italy after one 
quarter and fully after a year. 
In  September,  the  banks’  total  funding,  excluding  Eurosystem  refinancing,  was  down  by 
2.6 per  cent  from  twelve  months  earlier.  The  difficulty  of  raising  funds,  particularly  acute 
between the summer of 2011 and last spring, has regarded foreign deposits – almost entirely 
interbank deposits – and bond issues on international wholesale markets. In recent months, 
however,  we  have  begun  to  see  signs  of  a  recovery,  including  in  the  uncollateralized 
segment; total issues have amounted to €11 billion, of which €8 billion unsecured. 
In  periods  of  strain  the  decline  in  fund-raising  on  the  market  has  been  offset  by  greater 
recourse to Eurosystem refinancing (which has increased by €250 billion since May 2011), 
thanks to  which  Italian  banks  can  cover  the  wholesale  bonds  falling  due  in  2013–14. 
In  more  recent months,  with  the  general  improvement  in  market  conditions,  central  bank 
lending to Italian banks has stabilized. 
Retail funding remains a strong point of Italian banks. Italian households’ deposits grew by 
3.7 per cent in the twelve months to September, and substantial subscription of bank bonds 
by retail investors continued. 
Loan quality is worsening. In the second quarter of this year, the ratio of adjusted new bad 
debts to loans outstanding rose to 2.1 per cent, returning to around the end-2009 level. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
deterioration involved loans to firms, the default rate on which reached 3.2 per cent, with a 
high of over 6 per cent for construction firms. Preliminary data indicate that the deterioration 
has not halted in the last few months. By contrast, the default rate on loans to households 
remained stable at 1.2 per cent, relatively low by the standards of the past. 
In  June  of  this  year  gross  impaired  loans  (bad  debts,  substandard  and  restructured  loans 
and overdue positions), three quarters of which involved firms, amounted to 12.3 per cent of 
total  bank  lending;  in  2007  the  figure  had  been  5.1  per  cent.  Taking  into  account  the 
write-downs  already made, the ratio falls to 8.1 per cent. 
These  numbers  are  still  far  below  the  peaks  registered  in  the  early  1990s,  but  they  could 
cause  concern  if  set  against  those  of  other  advanced  economies.  But  international 
comparisons are difficult. The accounting criteria used by banks in Italy to classify loans as 
impaired are dictated by particularly severe prudential rules. Added to this is strict prudential 
and  on-site  supervision  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  which  requires  even  more  stringent 
assessments  of  loan  quality.  For  example,  on-site  inspections  in  the  first  half  of  2012 
resulted  in  the  reclassification  of  20  per  cent  of  the  loans examined.  Furthermore,  the 
extreme  length  of  credit  recovery  proceedings,  due  to  the  slowness  of the justice system, 
obliges banks to keep impaired loans on their balance sheets longer than in other countries, 
which works to Italy’s disadvantage in international comparisons. 
Even if banks have increased their value adjustments, the ratio of these write-downs to the 
total amount of impaired exposures has fallen since 2007 from more than 49 per cent to just 
over 37 per cent. It is higher for banks belonging to the top five banking groups, lower for 
smaller  banks. Focusing  on  bad  debts  alone,  the  coverage  ratio  is  above  54  per  cent; 
for  those  not  backed  by collateral or personal guarantees it is naturally higher, at 68 per 
cent. 
Coverage ratios need to be raised. The Bank of Italy regularly monitors their adequacy, bank 
by  bank,  in  relation  to  the  credit  risks  deriving  from  economic  and  financial  market 
developments. We  expect  banks  to  devote  the  greatest  care  to  taking  this  aspect  into 
account  in  their  balance sheets. 
Although the setting is unfavourable, the banks have strengthened their capital position very 
substantially.  This  action  must  continue,  both  in  order  to  cope  with  the  worsening  of  loan 
quality  and  to  satisfy  the  new,  higher  capital  ratios  required  by  the  Basel  III  rules. 
Supervision  of  capital  adequacy  is  particularly  stringent  for  banks  whose  impaired  loan 
coverage ratios are low. 
Smaller  loan  volumes  and  larger  value  adjustments  to  loans  have  had  repercussions 
on banks’  earnings.  On  an  annualized  basis  and  net  of  goodwill  impairments,  ROE  fell  to 
3.2 per  cent in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  compared  with  4.1  per  cent  in  the  first  half  of 
2011.  A  recovery  in profitability  can  support  the  necessary  further  improvement  in  banks’ 
capital position. It must come from an improvement in efficiency both in supplying products 
and in curbing costs. 
Encouraging signs can be glimpsed with regard to costs, which decreased by 1.2 per cent 
in  the  first  half  of  this  year  compared  with  a  year  earlier;  the  decline  was  sharper  for 
labour  costs, which fell by 1.8 per cent. It is necessary to continue containing staff numbers 
and curbing personnel costs, not just for new employees as envisaged by the new national 
labour  contract,  but  also  managers’  and  directors’  compensation.  Dividend  distribution 
must  be  weighed  carefully,  especially  where  there  is  a  need  to  maintain  or  strengthen 
capital ratios. 
The rules on banks’ compensation systems are producing their effects. The aim is to relate 
the  pay  of  top  managers  and  directors  to  effective  performance  and  make  it  reflect 
the  risks assumed. In 2011 the compensation of top executives in the five largest banking 
groups  decreased by  an  average  of  25  per  cent  compared  with  the previous  year;  for  the 
first fifteen listed groups, the decrease  came  to  20  per  cent,  net  of  severance  packages. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  subjecting  banks where  compensation  has  risen  to  special  scrutiny, 
and  inquiries  are  under  way  on  the  mechanisms  for  determining  the  variable  pay 
components. 
In the event of the early conclusion of employment relationships, the rules lay down that a 
significant part of compensation must be deferred for a sufficient period of time or subject to 
claw- back clauses. These provisions must be such as to discourage mismanagement and 
to  protect  banks  even  after the termination  of employment.  Directors must guarantee their 
effectiveness. 
Banks  must  rationalize  their  distribution  networks,  by  making  more  efficient  use  of 
information and communication technologies. The number of bank branches rose in the last 
decade, despite the sharp increase in the share of telephone and on-line banking services. 
An  overlapping  of  distribution  channels  may  be  justified  in  part  by  differences  in  banks’ 
customer  base  and  commercial  strategies,  but  efficiency  gains  are  certainly  possible  and 
necessary. Non-strategic assets need to be sold off. 
In the immediate, cost-cutting must be relied on in order to avoid severe imbalances in profit 
and  loss  accounts.  Beyond  the  short  term,  however,  this  will  not  be  sufficient.  It  is  time 
now  to  realistically  assess  the  opportunities  for  greater  diversification  of  income,  for  a 
reorganization  of  business  processes,  especially  in  the  granting  of  credit.  Greater  support 
must be given to creditworthy borrowers, accompanying them in strengthening their financial 
structure and expanding in international markets. 
fuel  doubts  about 
the  sustainability  of 
their  public  debt,  and 
The stability of the euro area and the European banking union 
3. 
The  crisis  in  the  euro  area  reflects  two  risk  factors:  the  weaknesses  of  several  member 
states,  which 
the 
incompleteness  of  the European construction, which is the source of broader fears that the 
single currency may be reversible. 
To  address  the  first  risk,  the  authorities  in  the  countries  most  exposed  to  the  crisis  have 
taken  resolute  action  to  adjust  the  public  finances  and  mend  structural  shortcomings.  In 
Italy  the  measures  taken  since  the  second  half  of  2011  to  consolidate  the  public 
finances  and  the  major  package  of  structural  reforms  now  being  enacted  have  helped 
stanch  the  loss  of  confidence  in  our economy.  The  budget  measures  could  not  but  have 
negative  repercussions on  short-term economic developments, but they averted far bleaker 
scenarios than the current one. 
In  the  medium  term,  the  structural  reforms  will  sustain  the  country’s  growth  potential.  It  is 
vital that the announced budget targets be met, the reform programme implemented in full 
and  its  scope  widened  even  further.  To  definitively  dispel  fears  about  the  solidity  of 
monetary union, it is essential  to proceed, with  the necessary gradualness, from economic 
and  monetary  union  towards  political  union,  via  reform  of  economic  governance  and 
banking  and fiscal  union. This  is  a  project for the long term. The persistence of tensions in 
the  sovereign  debt  markets  during  its  implementation  could  compromise  the  uniformity  of 
monetary policy transmission, as the experience of recent years has shown. 
To  avert  this  risk,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  approved  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions (OMTs). This has already had important effects, as is attested by the signs of 
renewed  interest  in  Italian  government  bonds  on  the  part  of  foreign  investors  and  the 
consequent narrowing of the spread between BTPs and Bunds. Given that the fears of euro 
reversibility are bound up with those for the sustainability of the public finances of member 
countries, the start and continuation of OMTs  is conditional  on the assumption  and respect 
of specific commitments regarding the public finances and structural reforms. 
As  I  noted,  we  are  mindful  that  a  definitive  solution  to  the  euro-area  crisis  requires  the 
completion  of  the  European  construction.  Much  has  been  done  with  the  reforms  of 
economic  governance  aimed  at  strengthening  budget  coordination  and  extending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
multilateral  oversight  to  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Banking  union  represents  a  further, 
important step in breaking the link between  the  conditions  of  sovereign  states  and  those 
of  banks  and  in  consolidating  the  financial stability of the area. Banking union will mean a 
single  mechanism  for  banking  supervision  and  a European  blueprint  for  the  resolution  of 
banking crises, in addition to a common deposit insurance scheme. 
The  inception  of  the  single  supervisory  system  will  help  reassure  the  markets  that  the 
European  institutions  and  member  states  are  determined  to  strengthen  monetary  union.  A 
few  days ago,  the European  Council  called  on  national  legislators  to  give  absolute  priority 
to the talks under way so as to define the new legislative framework before 1 January 2013, 
to be implemented in the months  that  follow.  Implementation  must  necessarily  be  gradual 
but  there  must  be,  from  the  very beginning, a clear vision of what the final mechanism will 
look like and a detailed calendar for the intermediate steps. 
This  is  a  challenge  that  carries  important  institutional  and  operational  implications.  The 
responsibility  for  common  supervision  will  be  centralized  at  the  Governing  Council  of  the 
ECB,  of  which  the  national  central  bank  governors  are  members.  A  special  body  for 
planning and carrying out  supervision  will  be  established  at  the  ECB.  National  authorities 
will  be  required  to  be  fully engaged, both in the day-to-day conduct of supervision and in 
decision-making. 
Given  the  large  number  of  small  banks  operating  in  the  area,  it  is  unrealistic  to  imagine 
centralizing every task. The ultimate responsibility for all the banks in the euro area will lie 
with  the  ECB,  but  to  a  varying  degree  and  with  modalities  differentiated  according  to  the 
banks’ characteristics.  It  will  have  full  and  direct  responsibility  for  decisions  concerning 
systemically important  banks  and  those  that  receive  public  support.  For  the  other  banks, 
supervision  can  be carried out more effectively by the national authorities. In any event, the 
ECB will take decisions on the  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  with  reference  for  example  to 
supervisory  recommendations  and guidelines, including stress testing. 
Uniform  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards  will  have  to  be  guaranteed  for  all  banks,  in 
order  to  avoid  segmentation  and  arbitrage  and  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  the  European 
banking market. It is vital to avoid any lowering of supervisory standards; on the contrary, we 
must  seize  the  opportunity  to  ensure  convergence  towards  the  most  rigorous  practices 
among  those  adopted  by  the  various  national  authorities.  Supervisors  will  require  a 
comprehensive  and  detailed  dataset,  as  well as  methodologies  of  risk  analysis  capable  of 
providing timely indications of emerging instability at individual banks and at systemic level. 
The  European  blueprint  for  the  resolution  of  banking  crises  must  have  shared  financial 
resources.  The  authorities  must  have  the  power  to  order  the  conversion  of  debt 
instruments  into  equity  or  the  reduction  of  a  bank’s  liabilities,  imposing  losses  on  some 
classes of creditor (through bail-ins). The proposed Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
is a step in this direction. 
 The efforts being made in Europe and in the countries worst hit by the crisis can succeed 
only  if  all  the  parties  involved  keep  full  faith  with  their  commitments.  In  the  end, 
budgetary adjustments without structural reforms would inevitably be counterproductive. 
However, the reforms will be unable to work their effects in full if doubts and uncertainties 
about the future of the single currency were to keep sovereign spreads far above the levels 
consistent  with  each  country’s  economic  fundamentals.  Monetary  policy  can  constitute  an 
effective bulwark  against  such  distortions.  But  its  benefits  can  be  lasting  only  if  budgetary 
discipline  and national and European reform proceed with the necessary determination. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
