Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Ageing, finance and regulations 
Keynote address by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
Joint Forum Meeting, Tokyo, 14 November 2012. 
 Introduction: population ageing, economy and finance 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at the Joint Forum Meeting in Tokyo. 
The  Joint  Forum  has  for  many  years  been  at  the  forefront  of  dealing  with  various 
cross-industry issues related to banking, securities and insurance. The Forum has thereby 
contributed  greatly  to  the  evolution  of  successful  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks. 
However, many challenges remain. For example, as economic globalization and information 
technology  advance,  “cross-border”  and  “cross-industry”  risks  have  become  increasingly 
important  in  financial  services,  and  failure  to  regulate  and  supervise  them  effectively  may 
result in profound economic consequences. “Structured” securitized products and monoline 
insurances are examples of such risks, as we have learned to our cost in the recent crisis. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  consider  another  significant  challenge,  which  I  think  is  increasingly 
important  worldwide,  though  not  yet  widely  recognized  as  crucially  important.  This  is  the 
issue of population ageing and how to regulate and supervise financial products and services 
to  cope  with  problems  arising  from  it.  Indeed,  these  issues  are  deeply  related  to  the 
fundamental  nature  of  financial  services,  including  all  financial  sectors  such  as  banking, 
securities and insurance. 
In fact, I have warned of the unpleasant and in some cases grave consequences of ignoring 
demographic  factors  in  our  economic  thinking  in  a  series  of  recent  speeches  and  papers, 
especially with respect to asset price bubbles, money demand and inflation.1 In particular, I 
have pointed out that asset price bubbles are most likely to occur at the final stage of the 
“demographic bonus” in which a country enjoys the benefits of an increase in the size of the 
working population. In contrast, a decline in growth potential due to “demographic onus” is 
likely to result in prolonged economic stagnation once the bubble bursts. These phenomena 
have been observed not only in Japan, but also in other countries such as the United States 
and peripheral euro area countries. What underlies the recent distress in the euro area is in 
fact  deeply  rooted  in  the  structural  changes  resulting  from  demographic  transition  or 
population  ageing.  Figure  1  shows  the  relation  between  changes  in  the  working  age 
population curve and the timing of bubble bursts. These coincided in Japan around March 
1991, in the United States in December 2005, in Ireland in September 2006, and in Spain in 
September  2007.  And  this  is  not  simply  a  problem  affecting  advanced  economies:  the 
problem  is  just  around  the  corner  for  some  emerging  economies  like  Korea,  China,  and 
Brazil. 
Population ageing is likely to have a significant impact on financial services, and requires a 
new  policy  response.  Here  I  would  like  to  raise  two  issues:  one  is  the  necessity  of 
cross-industry and even cross-border coordination, and the other is the question of how to 
deal with the fundamental uncertainty surrounding population ageing. 
Necessity of cross-industry and cross-border coordination 
Let  me  first  consider  the  necessity  of  cross-industry  and  cross-border  coordination.  As  a 
society  begins  to  age,  its  older  citizens  become  the  dominant  holders  of  financial  assets. 
                                                
1   For example, see Nishimura, K. G., and E. Takáts, “Ageing, property prices and money demand”, BIS Working 
Paper No. 385 (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However, with the coming of age, many people are likely to become risk-averse in managing 
their  financial  assets,  for  natural  reasons.  Thus,  a  mature  economy,  with  its  lower  growth 
potential due to ageing, faces the serious problem of how to provide risk money to promising 
sectors of the economy so as to encourage entrepreneurs’ sound risk-taking and enhance 
value production.  
To be more specific, financial products and services should enable older citizens to maintain 
their quality of life and help foster an environment where longevity is seen as a gift, rather 
than a risk. These products, in addition to retirement savings, are expected to play diverse 
roles.  Given  the  improved  average  health  of  senior  citizens  in  many  countries,  it  is 
increasingly  important  that  these  financial  products  and  services  help  the  older  population 
stay  active  and  contributing to  the  community  to  the  best  of their  abilities,  while  mitigating 
age-related  risks  such  as  illness.  To  provide  such  products,  financial  institutions  must 
cooperate  with  other  industries  to  take  full  advantage  of  their  advanced  technologies  and 
expertise.  At  the  same  time,  financial  institutions  should  utilize  their  own  expertise  to 
measure, distribute, and manage the various risks as intermediates between asset-rich older 
citizens  and  prospective  entrepreneurs.  These  attempts  inevitably  involve  “cross-industry” 
elements. 
Furthermore, with the transition from a growing economy to a mature economy, it is natural 
for  people  in  an  ageing  economy  to  pursue  higher  returns  by  investing  their  savings  in 
growing overseas economies. Thus, it is also important for a mature economy to make full 
use of the benefits of cross-border transactions while managing the accompanying risks.  
This upcoming trend of cross-industry and cross-border expansion of financial products and 
services will pose a serious challenge to the current regulatory and supervisory frameworks. 
It will certainly call for a comprehensive approach. Regulation and supervision focusing only 
on a specific sector will likely result in a “waterbed effect”: problems will be simply shifted to 
other sectors rather than being dealt with effectively. 
Fundamental uncertainty regarding life expectancy and fertility 
The second issue is the fundamental uncertainty surrounding the pace of population ageing. 
I first note the two kinds of risk involved: the first relates to life expectancy or longevity, and 
the second to birth rates or fertility. I then discuss the fundamental uncertainty in measuring 
these risks in the economy as a whole, and the possible consequences of this for regulation 
and supervision.  
Among the various risks we face in the real world, the longevity risk is the most fundamental 
one. No one can tell exactly how long he or she will actually live. While economic textbooks 
impersonally state that efficient allocation of resources can be achieved more easily if there 
is  no  uncertainty,  very  few  people  would  prefer  to  know  the  exact  date  on  which  they  are 
going to  pass  away.  As  human  beings  we  need  to  accept  such  unavoidable  uncertainties, 
and financial services have a critical role to play in helping us manage the risks associated 
with  such  inherent  uncertainties  while  enabling  us  to  enjoy  a  life  full  of  surprises.  As  the 
population ages, the social need increases for financial products and services to respond to 
the longevity risk. 
To provide the tools necessary to respond to the longevity risk, providers need to be able to 
manage the accompanying risks in the economy as a whole. To this end, financial service 
providers  such  as  insurers  have  traditionally  utilized  “the  law  of  large  numbers,”  a  rule 
assuming  that  as  the  number  of  samples  increases,  the  average  figure  of  these  samples, 
such as average life expectancy, becomes more predictable. The same is considered to be 
true for fertility. Although the exact number of children for a given couple is not known for 
sure,  the  average  rate  of  birth  per  couple  becomes  largely  predictable.  The  popular 
perception that demographic change is in general predictable is based on this law of large 
numbers.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Unfortunately,  this  perception  is  not  always  true,  or  to  put  it  bluntly,  not  true  in  many 
instances.  Take  Japan  for  example.  Between  the  1970s  and  early  2000s,  the  total  fertility 
rate  forecasts  regularly  turned  out  to  be  wrong  and  were  consistently  revised  down.  The 
government  repeatedly  published  its  forecast  in  which  the  decline  in  the  fertility  rate  was 
declared  to  be  only  temporary  and  the  birth  rate  expected  to  rise  again  soon  (Figure  2.) 
Similarly, life expectancy forecasts have shown that the actual figures consistently exceeded 
the forecasts (Figure 3). 
These forecast errors show the fundamental uncertainty surrounding the pace of population 
ageing. And if the actual outcome deviates from the estimated life expectancy and longevity 
of the entire population in an economy, all service providers will be affected. For example, in 
the  case  of  longevity  risk  products,  even  a  slight  deviation  could  significantly  increase  the 
exposures of service providers. 
Avoiding patchwork and “spaghetti code” problems 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  reform  is  often  called  for  once  such  deviation  causes  an 
unexpected  accumulation  of  losses.  However,  this  kind  of  loss-induced  regulatory  and 
supervisory reform often leads to patchwork plumbing, which in turn results in a vicious circle 
of  further  losses  and  more  patchwork.  The  repetition  of  such  ad-hoc  adjustments  to  the 
framework can cause what computer programmers refer to as “spaghetti code” problems, in 
which  the  framework  becomes  too  complex  and  entangled,  like  spaghetti,  so  that  no  one 
knows how to fix the problem.  
Thus,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  make  over-optimistic  forecasts,  especially  when  these 
forecasts underlie the overall framework and any forecast error might bring about irrevocable 
losses.  It  is  also  important  to  have  in  advance  a  clear  strategy  on  appropriate  policy 
responses  when  a  forecast  error  is  observed,  especially  in  dealing  with  “spaghetti  code” 
risks.  The  performance  of  the  framework  should  be  subject  to  continuous  review,  and 
necessary measures should be readily available at all times. With these measures in place, it 
should  be  possible  to  prevent  a  mere  forecast  error  from  turning  into  an  “irreversible” 
disorder  of  the  whole  system.  In  this  sense,  it  is  better  to  address  the  challenges  of 
population  ageing  by  incorporating  a  second  best  “fail-safe”  mechanism  into  our  overall 
institutional  framework,  rather  than  by  chasing  the  first  best  solution  while  pretending  our 
forecasts are always rational and unbiased.2 
Concluding remarks 
The recent financial crisis has completely changed the landscape of financial services, both 
for financial institutions and for supervisors. Before the Lehman crisis, people tended to see 
only the “bright side” of new financial products, such as securitized products, derivatives, and 
cross-border  transactions,  believing  them  to  be  backed  by  advanced  and  innovative 
risk-management  and  investment  tools.  However,  since  the  crisis  revealed  the  risks  and 
problems  associated  with  them,  people  have  come  to  see  mostly  the  “dark  side”  of  these 
services. 
Nonetheless, there is still an essential need for financial products and services that can help 
individuals and firms manage their risks, since sustainable economic development can only 
be achieved through sound risk taking by private entities. Moreover, financial institutions will 
be expected to play an even more active role as more countries face the problems arising 
from  population  ageing.  This  is  especially  relevant  to  satisfying  the  need  for  longevity  risk 
                                                
2   For a theoretical framework of rational decision under investment irreversibility and (fundamental) uncertainty 
à  la  Frank  Knight,  see  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki,  “Irreversible  investment and  Knightian  uncertainty,” 
Journal of Economic Theory, 136 (2007) 668–694. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
management and in coping with the problems of declining fertility, since financial institutions’ 
full  use  of  their  technologies  and  resources  is  the  key  to  solving  these  problems.  Thus, 
financial service providers should be able to contribute to the economic society by providing 
people with the tools to address the risks and harsh uncertainties of life, while enabling them 
to enjoy its thrills and happy surprises.  
In this respect, I believe that regulators and supervisors should bear the following two things 
in mind: 
First,  regulators  and  supervisors  should  always  have  a  cross-industry  and  in  some  cases 
cross-border perspective, and they should also have a grand design as to how the economy 
can spread the risks necessary for sustainable growth, especially under population ageing. 
Second, regulators and supervisors should be aware that a desirable regulatory framework 
will  continuously  evolve,  partly  due  to  population  ageing  and  the  consequent  structural 
changes  in  the  economy  and  financial  services.  The  current  structure  and  regulatory 
framework  will  not  last  forever,  and  neither  will  sectoral  classifications  such  as  “banking,” 
“insurance,” and “securities”. For example, increased demand for longevity risk management 
could perhaps foster new cross-industry innovation between medical and financial services. 
From  its  unique  vantage  point,  the  Joint  Forum  is  able  to  observe  the  signs  of  structural 
changes  in  financial  services  and  to  identify  the  need  for  regulatory  and  supervisory 
evolution. I sincerely hope that the Forum will continue to be attentive to new developments 
in financial services and lead the global debate on regulation and supervision. 
Now  I  come  to  the  final  words  of  my  speech  about  ageing.  Just  as  we  mortal  individuals 
mature and come of age, so too do institutions. Here is the Bank of Japan (Figure 4) more 
than a hundred years ago, in its youthful, burgeoning days. And here is the Bank of Japan as 
it is today (Figure 5), surrounded by new architectural additions to the city skyline and still the 
focal point of the landscape. The building itself has indeed matured, and in its maturity has 
come to fit itself perfectly to the new age. I believe the same can surely be said of the Joint 
Forum.  
Thank you for your kind attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
