Paul Tucker: Competition, the pressure for returns, and stability1 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the British Bankers’ Association Annual Banking Conference, London, 17 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
Propelled  by  a  deep  crisis  in  the  financial  system,  the  international  authorities  are 
overhauling the “rules of the game” for global finance. 
The  changes  are  profound.  But  it  is  worth  stressing  that  the  goal  is  not  to  abolish  risk  or 
risk-taking.  We need to find broadly the right balance between, on the one hand, safety and, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  contribution  that  sound  and  honest  finance  can  make  to  economic 
prosperity.  In striking that balance, international policymakers have maintained three beliefs: 
• 
risk  is  an  intrinsic  and  unavoidable  part  of  the  (monetary)  services  that  banks 
provide to the economy, just as risk is intrinsic to the businesses that borrow from 
banks; 
competition in finance is good, although the authorities need to be mindful that the 
drive for superior headline returns can contribute to excessive risk in the system as 
a whole; 
a global financial system must be maintained, but the authorities need to contain the 
way that financial problems can be transmitted easily from one part of the globe to 
others. 
  In  short,  the  things  society  wants  from  finance  come  with  risks  attached.  History  contains 
repeated episodes of herd-like chasing of high headline returns during exuberant phases of 
the credit cycle. It would be too much to promise that that can never recur. Nor can we hope 
completely to eliminate the linkages within the system that can propagate distress. But this 
realism  is  not  remotely  a  counsel  of  despair.  On  the  contrary,  I  want  to  emphasise  this 
morning  that  the  emerging  new  regime  will  enable  the  authorities  to  lean  against 
stability-threatening exuberance and will make the financial system much more resilient. 
The tendency to excessive risk in the system 
That  excesses  occurred  in  the  run-up  to  the  current  crisis  is  not  remotely  in  doubt.  As 
leverage increased,  asset  prices rose,  increasing  net  worth  and so  inducing more  balance 
sheet  expansion.  The  buoyancy  in  markets  gave  intermediaries  the  confidence  to  lend 
secured on wider classes of securities – temporarily enhancing day-to-day liquidity.  Facing 
depressed returns from their core business of providing liquidity to customers, banks sought 
to  sustain  high  headline  returns  by  resorting  to  ever  more  leverage  and  maturity 
transformation.  In other words, increasing leverage fed upon itself. 
This  poses  deep  but  pressing  questions  about  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  capital 
markets in monitoring and pricing risk. Why did boards and investors in bank equity expect 
such high returns? Why didn’t the capital markets downgrade the value of bank equity and 
debt  as  leverage  and  other  sources  of  risk  increased?  Why  didn’t  the  markets  distinguish 
more between banks? 
                                                
1   These remarks draw on a chapter contributed to a book, edited by Andreas Dombret of the Bundesbank and 
Professor Otto Lucius, being published next year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Part of the answer, of course, is that around the world the holders of the largest banks’ debt 
relied  on  a  public  safety  net.  Financial  institutions  being  “Too  Big  To  Fail”  is  the  biggest 
problem  we  have  to  crack.  But moral  hazard  isn’t  a  complete  explanation,  because  equity 
holders  surely  realised  that  they  were  exposed  to  risk,  as  events  proved.  We  need  richer 
explanations. 
Agency problems 
Another  part  of  the  explanation  of  the  tendency  to  excess  has  to  be  layer  upon  layer  of 
principal-agent problems. 
Shareholders of joint-stock companies enjoy the upside, but the downside is capped.  When 
we  add  in  the  fragmentation  of  shareholdings,  diversified  portfolios  and  relatively  liquid 
markets in equity shares, few shareholders seem to have had the incentive or wherewithal to 
monitor individual banks effectively. 
By giving management equity and equity options, shareholders put management in a similar 
position to themselves.  And within the management structure of banks, there were problems 
in how different layers monitor others, with all to a greater or lesser degree incentivised by 
contracts – and accounting regimes – that rewarded short-term performance. 
These problems are compounded by agency issues in the asset-management industry.  Why 
didn’t investors act to constrain the excessive risk taking at various banks?  Possibly because 
their individual stakes were too small for any of them to make a difference.  Possibly because 
they  believed  there  were  impediments  in  securities  laws  or  regulation  to  their  acting  as  a 
co-ordinated  group.  Possibly  because  they  held  back  from  selling  their  holdings  because 
they were reluctant to go underweight a large component of an index they tracked (or were 
measured against). How to improve the performance of the asset management industry has 
been relatively neglected.  That matters because in a market economy regulators should not 
be the first line of defence. 
risk,  and  years  of  smooth  growth,  apparently  attributable 
Myopia 
Agency problems and incentives are not, however, the sole source of exuberance. I doubt 
that,  in  managing  their  banks,  many  bankers  deliberately  or  even  consciously  drove  the 
system over the cliff. Rather, like others, many were myopic about the risks in the system. 
Innovations  in  technology,  the  opening  up  of  the  world  economy,  new  markets  for 
transferring 
to  better 
macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  –  all  of  this  encouraged  a  sense  that  the  world  had 
become  a  safer  place.  High  actual  returns  were  extrapolated  forward  into  required  future 
returns. 
Add in to the mix, complexity obscuring the risks in the system as a whole. And, although UK 
policy  rates  were  relatively  high  for  a  number  of  years,  accommodative  global  monetary 
conditions fuelled a search for yield and underpinned confidence in resiliently liquid capital 
markets.2 
Distorted incentives, myopia, complexity, easy global monetary conditions: a heady mix. And 
a mix which the prevailing regulatory regime was singularly ill equipped to address, and in 
some  respects  had  done  much  to  create  through  inadequate  capital  requirements  and  an 
absence of liquidity requirements. 
In fact, a toxic mix. When credit markets become overly exuberant, not only do the balance 
sheets of lenders become stretched, cheap credit leads borrowers to become over indebted, 
                                                
2   See Tucker (2012), “National balance sheets and macro policy: lessons from the past”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
raising  the  probability  of  default.  When  defaults  eventually  pick  up,  a  general  awakening 
occurs, triggering mass deleveraging. 
This matters to debates about risk measurement and management. It is not simply that the 
models employed over recent years – notably Value-At-Risk – make assumptions, such as 
normally distributed returns, that are manifestly false.3 It is not just a matter of finding better 
models, useful though that might be. The problem of exuberance is not simply one of lots of 
Black Swans. It is that the collective behaviour of market participants can generate the tail 
events that sow the seeds of the system’s destruction. It can breed swans. 
What the authorities are doing 
Given  the  complex  mix  of  factors  behind  the  crisis,  it  would  be  surprising  if  there  were  a 
single  policy  initiative  that  could  make  the  system  safer  in  future.  The  response  is 
multi-dimensional.  But  you  will  be  relieved  to  hear  that  at  this  point  I  am  not  going  to 
summarise the whole of the international agenda.4 I’m going to put to one side, for example, 
the  panoply  of  measures  being  pursued  internationally  to  simplify  capital  markets  through 
greater  use  of  central  counterparties,  and  to  avoid  the  systemic  risks  of  banking  activity 
simply  relocating  to  shadow  banks. 
I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  tour  of  some  of  the 
international and domestic reforms of banking itself, highlighting a few questions for debate 
along the way. 
Expose debt holders to losses: resolution regimes 
First and foremost, we need holders of bank debt to be exposed to losses when banks fail. 
This is not some macho thing.  If banks’ cost of debt finance does not vary with the risks they 
are taking, what should be an important check on the tendency to excess is badly diluted. 
For the financial system to be safe, we need to be able to sort out distressed commercial 
banking and investment banking operations without massive disturbances to the provision of 
services  and  without  taxpayer  solvency  support.  That,  in  a  nutshell,  is  what  is  meant  by 
making  a  firm “resolvable”.  The  economy’s  payments  system  obviously  needs  commercial 
banks  that  can  be  resolved  in  an  orderly  way.  But,  in  addition,  the  capital  markets  need 
sound  intermediaries  which,  if  they  become  distressed,  can  expire  safely  or  whose  viable 
parts  can  be  resurrected.  I  stress  that  because  we  need  to  do  more  than  ensure  that  the 
most  critical  services  are  preserved  come  what  may.  We  need  also  to  avoid  the  massive 
destruction  of  value  that  occurs  when,  under  standard  bankruptcy  proceedings,  a  trading 
portfolio is liquidated in stressed market conditions and without sensitivity to spillovers to the 
rest of the system. We need resilient capital markets. 
That is why around the world countries are introducing resolution regimes that enable them 
to put losses on to bondholders without all the costs of liquidation. Bail-in – a power for the 
Resolution Authority to write down and convert debt into equity – is one way of doing this.5 It 
is  included  in  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  global  standard  on  resolution,  and  it  is  an 
important feature of the EU Commission’s draft directive on recovery and resolution – and so 
it is set to become part of UK law over the next few years. 
Bail-in is only one resolution tool, and no one is claiming that it could be used on its own in 
every circumstance. For example, group-level recapitalisation via bail-in will not work when 
the financial condition of every part of the business is so rotten through and through that the 
                                                
3   See Haldane (2012), “Tails of the unexpected”. 
4   For  a  fuller  account  of  the  international  agenda,  see  Tucker  (2012),  “Banking  in  a  market  economy  –  the 
international agenda”, a chapter in Investing in Change: A book of essays on financial reform in Europe. 
5   See Tucker (2012), “Resolution: a progress report”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
group’s losses cannot remotely be quantified upfront. In those circumstances, the authorities 
do  have  to  focus  on  preserving  continuity  in  the  most  critical  (even  elemental)  services  – 
payments and deposit taking. The UK government’s plans for insulating retail banking are, 
therefore,  a  central  element  of  the  plans  to  make  the  UK’s  large  and  complex  banks 
resolvable.  The  proposals  in  the  recent  Liikanen  Report  on  the  structure  of  EU  banks  are 
welcome in seeking to achieve the same goal. Both Vickers and Liikanen can be viewed as 
working with the grain of the broader international agenda on resolution regimes. 
But bail-in can be attractive when a distressed group does have viable parts and sufficient 
uninsured debts covered by the bail-in power. As the UK’s resolution authority, the Bank is 
working  closely  with  the  FDIC  on  how  to  operationalise  this  type  of  resolution  strategy. 
Meanwhile, the FSB will, over the next month or so, be publishing a consultative paper on 
resolution-strategy planning. 
The prospect of taking losses via resolution gives debt holders a strong incentive to monitor 
banks’ risk taking. That will be a first order change for the financial system. 
Expose management to tail risk: payment in subordinated debt 
Once  debt  holders  are  unambiguously  exposed  to  loss,  the  authorities  need  to  consider 
whether to require management to be paid to a significant extent in subordinated debt: an 
idea  recently  endorsed  by  the  Liikanen  Committee.6  Having  managers  exposed  to 
instruments  whose  value  depends  on  the  survival  of  their  firm  would  give  them  a  healthy 
incentive to maintain a safe and sound bank. 
There should also be a review of the structure of remuneration for desk-level bankers – tying 
pay to the medium-term success of the firm.  Putting it bluntly, that would make it less easy to 
get rich quick irrespective of the quality of business transacted or the compliance culture in 
their part of the firm. 
This  points  to revisiting  the terms  and  scope  of the  existing  codes  on  remuneration  of  the 
G20 Financial Stability Board, the European Union and, in the United Kingdom, the Financial 
Services Authority. 
Industry structure and system resilience 
Incentives will also be influenced by measures that constrain the structure of banking. 
The  UK’s  plans  to  ring-fence  banks’  more  basic  retail  banking  business  will  do  more  than 
help to make complex banks resolvable. The domestic-intermediation part of banks’ activities 
will  effectively  be  separate  from  the  entrepôt,  wholesale  business  centred  in  the  City  of 
London.  This  will  make  it  somewhat  easier  to  see  what  is  going  on  –  where  profits  are 
coming from; how much capital is allocated to domestic intermediation, etc. 
It  will  also  help  establish  different  cultures  in  different  lines  of  business.  Within  domestic 
commercial  banking,  we  need  somehow  to  unwind  some  of  what  I  think  of  as  the 
industrialisation  of  retail  and  business  banking  that  occurred  during  the  years  of  plenty. 
Branch  and  regional  banking  came  too  close  to  being  seen  as  an  exercise  in  sales  and 
marketing. The role of local branch managers in making loans has been diluted over recent 
decades, replaced by credit-scoring techniques operated from the centre. Banking is about 
credit judgments. Boards need to think about how to re-inject that into the role of banks’ front 
line managers. 
                                                
6   See Tucker (2010), Remarks at an FSB conference entitled “Financial Crisis and G20 Financial Regulatory 
Reform: An Overview”: “part of deferred compensation should be in the form of a debt contract, so that the 
managers and workers in large firms eventually become creditors of the firm and so they themselves have the 
same  risks  as  other  debt  holders”.  See  also  Liikanen  (2012),  “High-level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the 
structure of the EU banking sector”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Competition  policy  may  matter  too.  Some  countries  –  notably  Australia  and  Canada  –  are 
sometimes  characterised  as  shielding  their  main  domestic  commercial  banks  from 
competition,7  in  order to dilute  the temptations  of  international  wholesale  banking. The  UK 
should  try,  instead,  to  combine  openness  with  stability.  That  requires  a  profitable  banking 
sector: we should not forget that, as the Bank used to say, the first buffer against losses is 
profits. 
Other  countries  –  perhaps  most  obviously  the  US  –  ban  acquisitions  of  banks  that  would 
result in control of more than 10% of the country’s insured deposits. The approach there is to 
limit the accumulation of market power. 
Questions of industry structure, as well as firm structure, might be relevant to the UK. The 
operations making up Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland accounted for 
about 40% of the stock of lending to UK businesses in 2007. It was a disaster for domestic 
credit  conditions  when  they  failed. With  more  competitors  around,  the  wider  effects  of  the 
failure of an individual bank would in all likelihood be smaller. The stability authorities need to 
be more alert than in the past to this source of economic vulnerability. 
Consistent  with  that,  as  we  prepare  for  the  transfer  of  prudential  supervision,  the  Bank  of 
England wants to reduce barriers to entry somewhat, so that the banking system can, over 
time, become less concentrated. 
But for that to be sensible, we need to be confident in the authorities’ ability to resolve those 
banks  that  get  into  distress  without  dramatic  spillovers  –  lowering  barriers  to  entry  by 
removing  barriers  to  exit.  For  smaller  banks,  that  should  already  be  possible  using  the 
Special Resolution Regime introduced in 2009. Prudential supervisors will need, as a priority, 
to ensure that banks are set up to enable the Financial Services Compensation Scheme to 
pay out rapidly. To be clear, for banks funded by insured deposits, the costs of failure will fall 
on  their  peers.  Over  time,  I  suspect  that  that  will  increase  pressure  for  a  funded 
deposit-guarantee scheme with risk-based levies. The Bank would welcome that. 
Prudential regulation: higher risk-based capital requirements and a cap on leverage 
But  the  reform  agenda  is  not  just  about  handling  failure.  Banks  will  be  better  capitalised, 
more liquid, and less interconnected. 
To take just one of those changes in the global order, higher capital requirements will affect 
behaviour as well as resilience. For example, as a matter of simple arithmetic, the first round 
effect of higher capital requirements is probably to depress the headline return on equity. It 
has seemed to me quite likely that that will prompt shareholders to demand a larger share of 
the  cake,  with  a  smaller  share  going  to  managers.  There  have  already  been  signs  of  this 
happening.  This  might  help  temper  the  gains  available  to  managers  in  buoyant  credit 
conditions, and so reduce the incentive to shield their eyes from the risks. 
But,  most  important  of  course,  higher  equity  capital  requirements  provide  a  bigger  buffer 
against  losses  –  the  increase  is,  perhaps,  about  an  order  of  magnitude  (around  1%  of 
risk-weighted assets to around 10%), all things taken into account.8 
                                                
7   See,  for  example,  Kent  and  Debelle  (1999),  “Trends  in  the  Australian  Banking  System:  Implication  for 
Financial Stability and Monetary Policy”. 
8   Basel  2  in  effect  required  a  minimum  equity  capital  ratio  of  2  percent.  Under  Basel  3  almost  all  regulatory 
deductions from capital come out of core tier 1 capital (ie equity) rather than being split equally across tier 1 
and  tier  2  capital  or  taken  from  total  capital.  Also,  some  risk-weights  are  increased,  for  example  on 
counterparty credit risk exposures. Together those changes mean that the old Basel 2 core tier 1 minimum 
risk-weighted  asset  ratio  is  equivalent  to  around  1%  on  a  Basel  3  basis.  Taking  into  account  the  capital 
conservation buffer and the surcharge for systemically important financial institutions, the Basel 3 minimum 
comes to around 10% for the largest banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
That  is  on  a  risk-weighted  basis.  Policymakers  need  to  be  confident,  therefore,  that  the 
risk-weights are determined robustly. Leaving banks completely free to choose risk-weights, 
using  internal  models,  is  not  safe.  It  effectively  allows  banks  to  determine  their  own 
regulatory capital requirements, which hardly fits with society’s purpose in regulating banking 
in the first place. That being so, the introduction of mandated floors on risk-weights should be 
debated in Basel. They are already being introduced in the US. 
That would be one concrete step to contain the risks from complexity in the current Capital 
Accord. The planned Basel leverage limit should be viewed in the same light. 
This is not to say that it would be sensible to rely entirely on a simple regulatory constraint. 
History  teaches  us  that  they  do  not  work  on  their  own  –  just  remember  the  1980s’  Latin 
American  and  East  European  debt  crisis,  which  left  much  of  the Western  banking  system 
perilously  close  to  bankruptcy,  notwithstanding  the  leverage  limits  applied  in  the  US  and 
elsewhere. On its own, a simple leverage limit incentivises banks to increase the riskiness of 
asset portfolios. The new Basel package is an attempt to use simple measures to put bounds 
on the consequences of flaws in more complex measures, which were themselves designed 
to  avoid  the  perverse  incentives  to  hold  only  very  risky  assets  created  by  the  previous 
generation of simple measures. 
More  will  need  to  be  done  in  the  years  ahead  to  simplify  and  underpin  the  Basel  regime. 
Market discipline can help, but only if there is much more transparency around the drivers of 
risk  weights  –  both  why  they  change  over  time and  why  they  differ, for similar  exposures, 
across institutions. The market needs to be able to understand what is published. 
Microprudential supervision under the new UK Twin Peaks system 
But the new UK regime will not rely on getting the regulations exactly right. That would be a 
fool’s paradise. Effective supervision is absolutely vital. Whether we like it or not, firms will be 
able to find their way around any set of rules – complex or simple – if they are determined to 
do so. This is not good. 
But the UK’s new Twin Peaks structure will help. In the first place, the reforms will finally give 
London a dedicated securities regulator a quarter century after the Big Bang that made it so 
necessary. The Financial Conduct Authority’s approach to enforcement will need to preserve 
– and, where necessary, restore – honesty in a market community for which side-stepping 
rules and principles has become too close to being part and parcel of commercial life. 
More widely, the future Prudential Regulation Authority will work to transform the climate of 
prudential  regulation.  The  Bank’s  prudential  supervision  will  avoid  ticking  boxes,  instead 
being centred on making judgments about big risks to safety and soundness. We want this to 
be as collaborative, open and honest as possible – a different relationship between banks 
and  their  supervisors.  One  that  revolves  around  penetrating  and  forensic  analysis  of  the 
business and, where necessary, frank discussions with senior management and the board. 
Not a negotiation. And a regime where the Bank’s Prudential Regulation Authority has the 
powers to underpin pursuit of material concerns about safety and soundness, based largely 
on  whether  firms  meet  the  broad  statutory  criteria  –  the  Threshold  Conditions  –  for  being 
authorised. 
Macroprudential policy: keeping the regime up to speed, and taking away the 
punchbowl 
No set of static rules, regulations and structures will keep the system safe for ever. As time 
passes,  and  the  financial  system  evolves  we  cannot  put  an  ever  increasing  burden  on 
microsupervisors  of  individual  firms  to  compensate  for  outdated  regulatory  regimes.  The 
market will eventually take the system to the edges of the box the authorities have tried to 
put  it  in.  Policymakers  therefore  need  to  be  able  to  move  the  box  when  circumstances 
warrant. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  is  where  macroprudential  comes  in  –  keeping  the  rules  of  the  game  up  to  date,  and 
leaning against exuberance. In the UK, the Financial Policy Committee is charged precisely 
with those tasks. 
Although  to  date  most  of  the  Interim  FPC’s  deliberations  have  concerned  bank  capital 
adequacy, I expect the FPC’s longer-term focus to be as much on the capital markets and, 
thus,  the  policies  of  the  FCA.  In  a  world  where  banks  have  been  re-regulated,  some  risk 
taking will migrate to other parts of the system. It is, therefore, hugely welcome that the Bill 
currently  before  Parliament  gives  the  FCA  a  statutory  objective  of  helping  to  preserve 
stability.9 That is going to be important, for example, to contain any systemic risks stemming 
from  shadow  banking,  such  as  money  market  funds,  or  from  fault  lines  in  the  trading 
infrastructure or disclosure regimes.10 
Sometimes a permanent fix will be needed. The FPC will be able to make recommendations 
to HMT to move the perimeter of microregulation, and to PRA or FCA to change their rules 
and policies. 
But sometimes it will be more a matter of choking off a transient burst of exuberance. Even 
where market participants become aware of the potential risks, a collective action problem 
can impede their taking their foot off the accelerator. A telling experience in the run up to the 
crisis was of Chief Risk Officers on Wall Street talking openly about a dilemma between what 
they called financial risk and business risk. On the one hand, the Street was taking a lot of 
financial risk, which could end in tears. On the other hand, they were not certain that it would 
end in tears and they were worried that if they left the field too early, their customers 
would cross the street to their competition, destroying their franchise.11 
Central  banks  can  help  to  solve  that  collective  action  problem,  as  Federal  Reserve  Board 
Chairman McChesney  Martin highlighted more than half a century ago when he explained 
our  role  as  being  to  take  away  the  punchbowl  when  the  party  is  getting  going.  Chairman 
Martin was talking about monetary policy, and monetary policymakers do sometimes need to 
take  the  long  view.  But  often  it  will  fall  instead  to  the  FPC  temporarily  to  adjust  capital  or 
liquidity or margin requirements to build system resilience and lean against 
the  exuberance.  When  we  reach  that  point,  as  we  shall,  turning  down  the  music  will  be 
unpopular. That is why the current debates in the UK Parliament about the Bank of England’s 
new Financial Policy Committee are so very important: in a word, legitimacy. 
Concluding remarks 
When the financial tide goes out, it lays bare problems that had been gathering during the 
“good” times. Work by the international central banking and regulatory community to make 
                                                
9   The single strategic objective of the FCA will be to ensure that financial markets and markets for regulated 
financial services function well. That is supplemented by three operational objectives, including “protecting and 
enhancing  the  integrity  of  the  UK  financial  system”  which  is  in  turn  defined  in  the  legislation  to  include  “its 
soundness, stability and resilience”. This is in line with Principle 6 of IOSCO’s objectives and principles for 
securities regulation: “the Regulator should have or contribute to a process to monitor, mitigate and manage 
systemic risk, appropriate to its mandate”. 
10  See  Tucker  (2011),  “Building  resilient  financial  systems:  macroprudential  regimes  and  securities  market 
regulation”, International Council of Securities Associations. 
11  This was highlighted by the Bank of England in 2006 Financial Stability Review p. 8: “Many may have believed 
that the price of certain assets had become too high and the premium for taking risk too low. But there are 
business risks associated with acting on that view when others are not; it may not only reduce profitability in 
the short run, but may also risk losing market share or failing to establish a foothold in a rapidly expanding 
market.  These  concerns  often  seem  to  have  outweighed  the  risks  to  balance  sheets  associated  with 
potentially  overpriced  assets.  As  a  result,  in  the  early  part  of  this  year,  there  appears  to  have  been  an 
extension of risk-taking activities by financial institutions, including some UK banks. “ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the system safe and sound has made real progress in recent years, but it is not complete and 
absolutely must continue with energy.  G20 Leaders and Finance Minsters need to keep our  
We may not be able to abolish the occasional waves of optimism that grip humanity and the 
tendency to excess they set off. But we can and must dampen their effects on the financial 
system  and  economy.  This  must  include  changing  the  incentives  that  bankers  face.  It  will 
include a simplification of the capital markets; and constraints on the effects of exuberance 
through policies on leverage, capital and liquidity – applied beyond banking where warranted. 
And  it  must  include  macroprudential  regimes  that  help  us  to  refresh  the  microregulatory 
regimes and enable the authorities to take away the punchbowl when the party threatens to 
get out of control. 
Markets  will,  in  time,  forget  about  the  risks,  but  the  system  will  be  safer  if  we  succeed  in 
building official institutions that do not forget. Parliament can underpin that by holding us to 
account in this endeavour, as it does on monetary policy – incentives  matter in the official 
sector too. That will make for a safer and sounder financial system that can meet the abiding 
needs of the economy as a whole. And, to those of you here today, I would say that the Bank 
believes what it always believed: that sound and honest finance is not only essential for the 
economy, it will be good for the City too. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
