Jwala Rambarran: Prospects for Caribbean economies and opportunities 
for the financial services sector – the catalytic potential of diaspora 
bonds 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Annual Meeting of the Caribbean Association of Banks (CAB), Montego Bay, Jamaica, 
15 November 2012. 
 Indeed, 
industry. 
financial  services 
I  commend  CAB 
At  the  outset,  I  thank  the  Caribbean  Association  of  Banks  (CAB),  formerly  the  Caribbean 
Association  of  Indigenous  Banks, for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  its first  conference  under  the 
CAB  name  and  brand,  and  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  on  the  relevant  sub-theme 
“Prospects for Caribbean Economies and Opportunities for the Financial Services Sector.”  
Over almost four decades, CAB (through its previous incarnation) has played an important 
role in sensitizing Caribbean leaders to regional and global financial policies that are likely to 
impact  our  banking  and 
for 
spearheading  the  effort  to  alert  Caribbean  policymakers  to  the  implications  of  the  Foreign 
Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), an issue that revolves around tax transparency and 
the fight against cross-border tax evasion, and has the potential to affect every Caribbean 
person or entity with any interest in U.S. financial assets.  
At a time when closer partnership across the region’s financial sector is becoming even more 
relevant,  I  look  forward  to  CAB  remaining  a  strong,  respected  voice  and  advocate  for 
financial institutions in the Caribbean.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Caribbean is gradually recovering from a deep recession caused 
by the global economic crisis, which originated in the United States some five years ago and 
has since spread to the Euro zone. Given the Caribbean’s close trading and investment ties 
to North America and Europe, the region experienced sharp contractions in key sectors such 
as  tourism,  energy  and  alumina,  a  virtual  sudden  stop  of  foreign  direct  investment,  and 
weaker flow of remittances.  
Some  Caribbean  countries  have  approached  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  for 
financial support to weather the crisis. Others have delayed or resisted the implementation of 
harsh  austerity  measures,  preferring  to  rely  mainly  on  fiscal  stimulus  to  kick  start  growth, 
which, in turn, is elevating the risk of debt distress.  
The twin constraints of low growth and high debt are weighing on economic prospects for the 
Caribbean, and the state of affairs in the Eastern Caribbean is not too encouraging.  
So, this morning, I want to talk about three things:  
• 
First, some of the key risks and challenges to global growth occupying our attention 
which have implications for the pace and strength of the economic recovery in the 
Caribbean;  
Second, current growth and financing challenges facing the Caribbean; and  
Third, propose an innovative financial solution that can help to strengthen regional 
economic growth, transformation, and development.  
 Global growth prospects  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin with a brief overview of global growth prospects. Sadly, 
the news is not so good. Downside risks continue to dampen the outlook.  
As you may be aware, financial markets remain the Achilles’ heel to a global recovery which 
has suffered several setbacks over most of 2012. Prospects for stronger world growth are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
hampered mainly by the seemingly unhurried approach of policymakers across both sides of 
the  Atlantic  to  resolve  both  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  Euro  Area  and  the  fast 
approaching U.S. “fiscal cliff” and possible breach of the U.S. debt ceiling.  
The  economic  situation  in  Europe  remains  challenging  given  rising  fears  about  Spain  and 
about a black swan scenario in which Greece exits the Euro zone. Weakness seems to be 
spreading from the periphery to the core of the euro area, as even Germany has not been 
immune. Lack of broad-based agreement among European governments on a progressive 
path towards a more complete monetary union is also worsening the situation.  
Across the Atlantic, the re-election of President Obama took place against a slow recovery of 
the  U.S.  economy  from  a  deep  recession,  even  as  the  “fiscal  cliff”  and  breach  of  the 
U.S. debt ceiling loom dangerously near. The U.S. Congressional Budget Office has warned 
that  an  automatic  fiscal  withdrawal  in  2013  could  push  the  U.S.  economy  back  into 
recession, unless legislation is adopted to prevent it.  
More  recently,  concerns  have  arisen  about  the  significant  economic  losses  caused  by  the 
devastation from Hurricane Sandy, which battered states along the U.S. Eastern seaboard 
as  well  as  islands  in  the  Caribbean.  Hurricane  Sandy  is  expected  to  initially  depress 
U.S. economic activity, but then support it over time as reconstruction commences.  
Monetary  policy  has  been  easing  across  the  world  economy  and  is  likely  to  remain  very 
accommodative  to  softer  economic  conditions.  The  European  Central  Bank  recently 
announced its Outright Monetary Transactions programme, which helped to temporarily calm 
market sentiment. The U.S. Federal Reserve adopted a new round of quantitative easing in 
September 2012 where it was announced it would continue “Operation Twist” until the end of 
the year, and extend its low-interest rate guidance from late 2014 to mid-2015.  
Other  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies  have  either  cut  policy  rates  or  postponed 
interest rate hikes. Many central banks in emerging market and developing economies have 
postponed anticipated monetary tightening, and some have cut policy rates, including in the 
Caribbean.  
Beyond these concerns, I want to mention two downside risks in a world economy that has 
become quite interdependent and interconnected. First, economic prospects are moderating 
for  the  major  emerging  market  countries,  raising  concerns  about  their  ability  to  provide 
much-needed support to a weaker global economy. With slowing export demand partly due 
to contagion effects from the European sovereign debt crisis and their economies adjusting 
to  policy  tightening  conducted  over  2010–2011,  growth  in  Brazil,  Russia,  India,  China  and 
India is expected to be lower in 2012 and 2013.  
Second, commodity prices are projected to remain high during 2012–13, given geopolitical 
tensions  and  supply  constraints.  Escalating  tensions  in  the  Middle  East  could  set  off  a 
prolonged surge in oil prices, hitting global growth and metal and food prices. The impact of 
the unprecedented severe drought in the United States and dry summer in Russia, Ukraine 
and Kazakhstan is yet to be fully reflected in global food prices, and threatens the health and 
well being of millions of people, particularly in the Sahel and Eastern Africa regions.  
In  its  October  2012  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  IMF  revised  downwards  its  near-term 
forecasts for world economic growth to around 3 ¼ percent in 2012, rising slightly to just over 
3 ½ percent in 2013, which are somewhat lower than earlier estimates in April. Projections 
for growth in the United States have been trimmed slightly, with a larger downward revision 
for the Euro area.  
Economic growth and financing challenges in the Caribbean  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this brings me to my second point – economic growth and financing 
challenges  in  the  Caribbean  against  this  unsettled  global  backdrop.  In  the  rest  of  my 
discussion,  please  note  that  all  references  to  the  Caribbean  refers  to  members  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), all of which, with the exception of Belize and Guyana, 
are island economies that form part of the archipelago of the Caribbean Sea.  
At the outset, we must recognize that the Caribbean region has important strengths on which 
it can build to better meet its economic challenges. These strengths include political stability, 
strong investor protection frameworks and healthy observance of the rule of law.  
More  importantly, the Caribbean appears to be gradually recovering from the global crisis, 
even though the region was not sufficiently prepared to deal with such a protracted external 
shock. After posting a cumulative contraction of around 3 percent in 2009–2010, and modest 
growth  of  just  over  1  percent  in  2011,  the  Caribbean  is  expected  to  grow  by  close  to 
2 percent in 2012, and strengthen to about 2 ½ percent in 2013.  
The  tourism  intensive  economies  still  face  headwinds  from  the  lukewarm  recovery  in 
employment  in  North  America  and  Europe.  By  the  end  of  2011,  tourist  arrivals  from  the 
United States to the main Caribbean markets had declined by 3 ½ percent from 2007 levels, 
when the global crisis originated. Tourist arrivals from Continental Europe, which accounts 
for nearly one-quarter of the Caribbean tourism market, were more than 10 percent lower in 
2009 than in 2007. Although Canada accounts for one-tenth of Caribbean tourism flows, it 
was the only main market to show substantial growth in tourist arrivals since 2007.  
The islands of Jamaica and St. Lucia are experiencing a faster pick up in tourist arrivals while 
Barbados and Belize are seeing some degree of stabilization. St. Vincent and Grenadines, 
the  Bahamas,  Grenada  and  Antigua  and  Barbuda  continue  to  experience  falling  tourist 
arrivals relative to 2007.  
Despite the recent pickup in tourist arrivals, the Jamaican economy appears to be moving 
back  into  recession.  According  to  the  Planning  Institute  of  Jamaica  (PIOJ),  the  Jamaican 
economy  contracted  by  under  a  ¼  percent  (year-on-year)  in  the  second  quarter  of  2012, 
following a flat performance in the previous quarter.  
Barbados  continues  to  experience  sluggish  economic  growth.  Following  an  expansion  of 
nearly 1 ½ percent (year-on-year) in the first quarter of 2012, Barbados’ economy contracted 
by  2  percent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2012.  The  Government  of  Barbados  is  on  a 
privatization drive and has outlined plans to sell 30 percent stakes in the government-owned 
Grantley Adams International Airport, the Barbados National Oil Company, and the Barbados 
Port Authority.  
Prospects  seem  somewhat  better  for  the  commodity  exporters  in  the  Caribbean  (Belize, 
Guyana,  Suriname  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago),  where  output  is  expected  to  grow  by  an 
average of 2 ¾ percent in 2012, before rising to 3 ¾ percent in 2013. Belize has weathered 
the global crisis relatively well compared to its Caribbean peers, with a moderately positive 
economic  outlook.  Large  public  and  private  investments  are  anticipated  to  underpin 
Suriname’s  favourable  economic  outlook.  Guyana’s  economy  remains  resilient,  with 
medium-term  growth  projected  at  an  impressive  5  percent  in  the  context  of  continued 
implementation  of  the  Low  Carbon  Development  Strategy.  High  prices  for  key  commodity 
exports, particularly for gold and oil, are expected to also support growth in Suriname and 
Guyana.  
The  Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy  is  yet  to  experience  a  full  and  steady  recovery. 
Preliminary estimates from the Central Bank suggest that real GDP declined further by just 
over 3 ½ percent in the second quarter of 2012, following a relatively flat performance in the 
first quarter of 2012. The contraction in output was mainly attributed to longer-than- expected 
plant maintenance operations carried out by energy sector companies as well as prolonged 
strike action at Trinidad Cement Limited.  
Available  information  for  the  third  quarter  of  2012  shows  that  cement  supplies  have 
normalized,  while  there  are  signs  of  a  revival  in  production  levels  of  natural  gas  and 
petrochemicals.  Overall,  the  Central  Bank  projects  real  GDP  growth  for  the  Trinidad  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Tobago economy to be in the order of 1 percent in 2012, and possibly accelerating to close 
to 2 ½ percent in 2013.  
Meanwhile,  Haiti  is  projected  to  expand  by  close  to  4  ½  percent  in  2012,  accelerating  to 
6 ½ percent in 2013, reflecting increased earthquake reconstruction efforts.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  although  the  Caribbean  appears  to  be  on  a  recovery  path, 
persistently  large  external  current  account  and  fiscal  deficits  as  well  as  high  public  debt 
constrain stronger regional growth prospects.  
In the Eastern Caribbean, external current account deficits are widening again due to higher 
oil  and  food  imports  and  weak  exports.  Grenada,  St.  Kitts  &  Nevis,  and  St.  Vincent  &  the 
Grenadines are expected to run sizeable external current account deficits, averaging more 
than 20 percent of GDP during 2012–2013. Further increases in oil and food prices would put 
further pressure on the already aggravated external current account positions of Caribbean 
economies.  Oil  imports,  for  example,  account  for  more  than  half  of  all  imports  in  the 
tourism-dependent economies.  
Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  the  only  country  in  the  Caribbean  that  consistently  maintains  a 
surplus on its external current account due to its position as an energy-exporter. Excluding 
energy  exports,  however,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  runs  a  significant  non-energy  trade  deficit. 
Most of the Caribbean’s external imbalances are financed by foreign direct investment (FDI) 
which, although regarded as the most stable source of international capital, declined sharply 
during 2007–2011 but is now showing some signs of revival. Official flows, including from the 
IMF, are also helping to finance the region’s external imbalances. Antigua and Barbuda and 
St. Kitts and Nevis are receiving financial assistance from the IMF in the context of Standby 
Arrangements, while Grenada and Haiti are under the Extended Credit Facility. In addition, 
Dominica received IMF financing in early 2012 under the Rapid Credit Facility.  
As  many  of  you  are  aware,  Jamaica  is  actively  negotiating  a  new  IMF  program.  The 
Government of Jamaica hopes to conclude a new Standby Agreement with the IMF by the 
end  of  2012.  Some  of  the  outstanding  issues  revolve  around  Jamaica’s  tax  and  pension 
reform, and the need for cuts in the public sector payroll.  
Financing through concessional loans from the Petrocaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement 
with  Venezuela  is  also  helping  to  buffer  the  impact  of  high  oil  prices  for  some  Caribbean 
countries. Nonetheless, there are concerns about the capacity of these countries to repay the 
debt that is building up from the Petrocaribe agreement.  
Remittances  have  become  a  fairly  stable  source  of  non-traditional  external  financing  for 
many  Caribbean  countries.  In  fact,  the  Caribbean  is  among  the  larger  recipient  of 
remittances 
its  GDP.  For  countries  such  as  Haiti  (21  percent), 
Jamaica (16 percent) and Guyana (13 percent), remittances represent a lifeline, contributing 
to smoothing household consumption, easing balance of payments pressures, and financing 
domestic investments.  
Progress  at  fiscal  consolidation  is  weak,  with  fiscal  fatigue  and  a  growing  resistance  to 
austerity measures evident across some Caribbean countries. In 2012, the region’s overall 
fiscal deficit is expected to deteriorate by an average of 1 percentage point to 4 ½ percent of 
GDP. Some degree of fiscal consolidation is anticipated in 2013, with the overall fiscal deficit 
narrowing by close to 1 ½ percentage points to just below 3 percent of GDP. Even Trinidad 
and Tobago, which had achieved strong fiscal surpluses since 2002 owing to the buoyancy 
of  energy  prices,  began  running fiscal  deficits from  2009,  and  is  not  expected  to  return  to 
fiscal balance until 2016.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, public debt persists at extraordinarily high levels in the Caribbean. 
The region’s gross public debt climbed rapidly from 65 percent of GDP in 1998 to a peak of 
almost 100 percent of GDP in 2002, before falling to a still elevated 80 percent of GDP in 
2012. The accumulation of public debt was even faster in the Easter Caribbean, moving from 
in  proportion 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
just over 60 percent of GDP in 1998 to a high of almost 120 percent of GDP in 2004, before 
falling to 95 percent of GDP in 2012.  
Generally, a public debt ratio of over 50 percent of GDP is considered high. By this measure, 
only three countries – Haiti, Suriname and Trinidad & Tobago – are expected to have low 
debt  in  2013.  Another  six  countries  are  projected  to  have  heightened  debt  vulnerabilities, 
averaging in the range of 50 to 90 percent of GDP, in 2013. These are the Bahamas, Belize, 
Dominica, Guyana, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  
Four countries in the Caribbean will continue to accumulate exceptionally high public debt, 
averaging in excess of 90 percent of GDP in 2013: Jamaica (140 percent), St. Kitts & Nevis 
(139 percent), Grenada (109 percent), and Antigua & Barbuda (93 percent).  
The  dramatic  rise  in  Caribbean  debt  partly  reflects  a  shift  in  the  composition  of  regional 
external financing flows away from aid, grants and other concessional flows to an expansion 
of  private  capital,  especially  expensive  commercial  borrowing.  It  also  reflects  the  growing 
inability  of  Caribbean  governments  to  generate  high  enough  primary  fiscal  surpluses  to 
stabilize debt.  
The gravity of the Caribbean’s debt situation is generating debt restructuring or credit events 
in  a  few  countries.  In  April  2012,  St.  Kitts  and  Nevis  concluded  an  orderly  debt  exchange 
offer  on  US$150  million  out  of  the  US$750  million  subject  to  its  global  debt  restructuring 
exercise,  and  which  saw  its  bondholders  and  external  commercial  creditors  accept  deep 
haircuts. Progress has been made in respect of the debt/land swap with domestic creditors.  
Belize missed a semi-annual coupon payment due August 2012 on its US$544 million dollar 
bond, widely known as the “super bond” but made a partial payment in September when the 
30-day grace period ended. Nevertheless, this prompted Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services 
(S&P) to classify the foreign currency rating on Belize as “selective” default, one step below a 
full default. Belize is negotiating a debt exchange offer with bondholders but no consensus 
has been reached as yet on proposed new terms.  
In  October  2012, Grenada  made  its  overdue  coupon  payment  on  its  US$193  million  bond 
due  2025  before  expiry  of  the  30-day  grace  period  which  the  country  was  given  when  it 
missed  the  scheduled  September  payment.  Standard  &  Poor’s  subsequently  downgraded 
Grenada’s credit rating to “selective” default, but following the payment upgraded Grenada’s 
status to CCC+, still below the previous level.  
Although the financial system in the Caribbean has a strong presence of Canadian banks, 
which has helped to limit the contagion impact of the global crisis, financial stress still exists 
across the region.  
Credit  quality,  particularly  for  indigenous  banks,  has  deteriorated  in  light  of  the  downturn, 
coupled with weak oversight and low loan provisioning ratios. High exposure to sovereigns 
(including  to  those  that  have  recently  restructured  or  about  to  restructure  debt)  requires 
regional central banks to keep closer oversight and stand ready to intervene, if necessary.  
On the nonbank side, almost four years after the collapse of the insurance subsidiaries of the 
CL Financial Group, resolution has been uneven. In Trinidad and Tobago, the recent launch 
of the CLICO Investment Fund (CIF) has brought some closure to the settlement of claims 
due  to  CLICO  policyholders,  but  has  come  at  considerable  cost  to  the  state.  Contingent 
liabilities associated with the resolution in Trinidad and Tobago have reached an estimated 
one-tenth  of  GDP.  In  Barbados,  the  resolution  is  still  pending.  In  the  Eastern  Caribbean 
Currency  Union  (ECCU),  where  insurance  claims  exceed  17  percent  of  GDP,  part  of  the 
insurance  subsidiary  is  being  sold,  and  a  fraction  of  the  claims  are  pending  a  regional 
resolution.  
With  predominantly  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  in  the  CARCIOM  region  (10  out  of 
14 countries)  inclusive  of  a  currency  board  arrangement  for  the  Eastern  Caribbean, 
devaluation  is  not  an  option  for  Caribbean  countries  to  support  their  weakening  external 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
positions. Barbados, in particular, remains vehemently opposed to such an action, which it 
considers  ill-conceived  and  will  not  correct  fundamental  economic  problems  facing  small, 
middle-income Caribbean countries.  
The Caribbean region as a whole, therefore, needs to explore innovative sources of financing 
to contain the onerous public debt overhang, regain fiscal stability and strengthen economic 
growth.  
Diaspora bonds – an innovative financing solution  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  beyond  managing  the  near-term  risks  associated  with  the  global 
crisis, the Caribbean region must continue to address its fundamental economic issues over 
the  medium  term,  paying  particular  attention  to  the  legacies  of  the  crisis.  In  this  regard,  I 
firmly believe that Caribbean policymakers will need to adopt innovative financing solutions in 
support of the region’s economic growth, transformation and development.  
Many of you may be aware that the Caribbean has a large, highly educated diaspora pool. 
Using  a  well-established  World  Bank  methodology  and  adopting  a  narrow  but  useful 
definition  of  the  diaspora  as  those  born  in  the  country  but  presently  living  outside  of  the 
country,  the  stock  of  the  Caribbean  diaspora  is  estimated  at  around  3.5  million  people  or 
more than one-fifth of the region’s population.  
The  annual  savings  of  the  Caribbean  diaspora  is  estimated  at  over  US$10  billion  or  more 
than 15 percent of the region’s GDP. Most of these savings are invested in the host countries 
of the diaspora, especially in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. Diaspora 
savings,  therefore,  represent  a  potential  alternative  source  of  long-term  funding  for  the 
Caribbean.  
In my respectful view, diaspora bonds represent an innovative financing mechanism for the 
Caribbean  region  to  target  a  previously  untapped  investor  base.  Diaspora  bonds  offer  the 
huge  Caribbean  diaspora  community  a  chance  to  help  their  country  of  origin  while  also 
providing  an  investment  opportunity.  Both  Israel  and  India  have  successfully  tapped  their 
respective  diaspora  for  funding.  Since  then  other  countries  with  significant  diaspora 
populations such as South Africa, Sri Lanka, Ghana, Kenya and the Philippines have either 
issued or announced plans to issue these financial instruments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, almost a decade ago Jamaica considered tapping into the wealth of 
its diaspora but unfortunately did not proceed with this bold initiative. Permit me to use the 
example  of  Jamaica  to  demonstrate  its  suitability  to  pioneering  diaspora  bonds  as  an 
innovative financing solution.  
As we all know, Jamaica has one of the highest rates of skilled migration in the world and 
must have access to more stable and less costly financing to achieve meaningful public debt 
sustainability.  
Some of the more important considerations that the Jamaican government must contemplate 
before issuing a diaspora bond are the size and wealth of its diaspora; the compactness or 
dispersion of that diaspora; level of patriotism; integrity and stability of its legal system; and 
the  potential  for  full  subscription  of  the  bond  itself.  In  Jamaica’s  case,  several  of  these 
requirements augur favorably for policymakers to seriously explore issuing a diaspora bond.  
Using the same World Bank methodology, the annual savings of the near 1 million Jamaican 
diaspora  is  estimated  at  around  US$3  billion.  Put  another  way,  the  savings  of  Jamaica’s 
diaspora  can  finance  more  than  two-fold  Jamaica’s  external  current  deficit.  Effectively,  a 
substantial pool of low-cost savings exists which the Jamaican government can mobilize in 
pursuit of its economic development strategy.  
Simply identifying and targeting the Jamaican diaspora, however, will not ensure the success 
of the bond issue. These bonds must be properly structured and distributed to make them 
attractive  to  the  Jamaican  diaspora,  even  though  they  do  have  a  more  intimate 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
understanding  of  the  economics  and  politics  of  their  country  of  origin  than  non-Jamaican 
investors. 
Lingering concerns about investing in Jamaica, whose sub-investment grade credit rating is 
under pressure, can be mitigated through a partial risk guarantee of these diaspora bonds 
from  either  the  World  Bank,  or  the  International  Development  Association  (IDA),  or  the 
Multilateral  Investment  Guarantee  Agency  (MIGA).  Such  a  guarantee  structure  would  not 
only catalyze additional private financing for Jamaica, but might also raise the rating on the 
diaspora bonds to investment grade. 
A  5  percent tax-free  U.S.  dollar  interest  rate, for  example,  could  attract  a  large  number  of 
Jamaican  investors  who  are getting  close to  zero  interest  rate  on their bank  deposits.  Not 
only  Jamaicans,  but  also  foreign  individuals  interested  in  helping  Jamaica  are  likely  to  be 
interested  in  these  bonds.  That  would  further  expand  the  pool  of  potential  investors  in 
Jamaica’s  diaspora  bonds.  Marketing  of  such  diaspora  bonds  in  the  U.S.  would,  however, 
require a temporary exemption from U.S. SEC regulations.  
Unlike  borrowing  from  the  multilateral  financial  institutions  or  international  capital  markets 
with  fixed  terms  and  conditions,  a  diaspora  bond  can  be  structured  with  greater  flexibility. 
One  example  of  this  flexibility  would  be  the  option  to  pay  the  interest  in  Jamaican  dollars 
rather  than  in  U.S.  dollars.  This  may  relieve  an  investor  from  having  to  remit  funds  on  a 
periodic basis to assist families and relatives in Jamaica and from having to incur high money 
transfer  fees.  On  the  government  side,  there  will  be  little  or  no  pressure  on  the  Jamaican 
currency to service debt interest payments.  
Finally, Jamaica’s diaspora bonds can offer investors the opportunity to do – good‖ in their 
country  of  origin,  especially  if  targeted  to  finance  specific  projects  in  which  the  Jamaican 
diaspora  has  a  special  interest.  These  projects  can  range  from  non-traditional  economic 
areas  targeted  under  the  government’s  medium  strategy,  to  infrastructure  projects  in 
Jamaica’s bauxite, mining, and tourism sectors, and to specific education, health and poverty 
alleviation initiatives.  
Conclusion  
In  conclusion,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  problems  facing  the  Caribbean  region  are  too 
deep-rooted to be solved with traditional policy measures. Innovative solutions are needed to 
contain  the  onerous  public  debt  overhang,  regain  fiscal  stability  and  strengthen  economic 
growth. Diaspora bonds represent a new instrument in the policy arsenal.  
It  is  disheartening  however  that  despite  the  impressive  size  of  the  potential  market  for 
Caribbean diaspora bonds, no country in the Caribbean has actually issued a diaspora bond. 
A  number  of  factors  may  explain  this  outcome.  Perhaps  the  most  important  factor  is  that 
many regional governments are either completely unaware about diaspora bonds, or even if 
they have some awareness they are often deterred by the complexities of bond instruments.  
I,  therefore,  encourage  the  CAB  to  fully  consider  the  significant  opportunities  that  could 
accrue to the region’s financial services sector from the issuance of diaspora bonds. I also 
encourage  CAB  to  develop  an  education  program  that  would  sensitize  its  members  and 
regional governments to the feasibility of tapping into the wealth of its diaspora.  
We  must  begin  to  champion  the  change  we  wish  to  see  in  the  economic  growth, 
transformation and development of our Caribbean region.  
I do wish you fruitful deliberations during the rest of your meeting.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
