Mark Carney: Uncertainty and the global recovery 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  to  the  Vancouver  Island  Economic  Alliance,  Nanaimo,  British 
Columbia, 15 October 2012. 
 to  Asia,  you  are  well  aware  of 
Introduction 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Nanaimo  at  the  Vancouver  Island  Economic  Summit. With  British 
Columbia  serving  as  Canada’s  gateway 
the 
interconnectedness of the global economy. To the benefit of billions of people, goods, capital 
and ideas flow across borders as never before. 
Unfortunately, so too does angst. This is my topic today. 
While the “Great Recession” is over, what has followed is an unfamiliar process of repairing 
public and private balance sheets across advanced economies. The depth and duration of 
this deleveraging are unclear. Deleveraging is holding back the global recovery and laying 
bare distinct challenges in different parts of the world. 
The  euro  area  is  stagnating  as  it  struggles  with  an  underlying  balance-of-payments  crisis. 
The United States is at the edge of a fiscal cliff. China and other emerging markets are trying 
to sustain rapid growth amid weak demand in their traditional export markets. 
There is a synchronous slowdown under way in the global economy. This past weekend in 
Tokyo,  when  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  marked  down  its  growth  forecast,  no 
region  or  major  economy  was  spared.  Further,  the  IMF  warned  that  downside  risks  have 
risen.1  
Against this background, it is not surprising that uncertainty over the global economic outlook 
is  high.  It  is  being  reinforced  by  concerns  over  how  policy-makers  will  address  these 
challenges. This combined uncertainty is further complicating the recovery, prompting firms 
and  consumers  to  retrench.  There  is  some  evidence  of  this  dynamic  here  in  Canada  as 
businesses feel the weight of darkening global prospects. 
While I will not be able to dispel all of these concerns today, my objective is to explain how 
policy-makers  are  addressing  some  uncertainties  and  to  put  some  others  in  their  proper 
context. 
Uncertainty and Its Impact 
It  is  only  human  to  respond  to  uncertainty  with  caution.  Faced  with  a  highly  volatile 
environment,  households  shy  away  from  spending  on  big-ticket  items  such  as  houses  or 
cars, and firms put off making large capital investments and hiring new workers. The effect 
on business investment can be particularly significant. This is because uncertainty increases 
the value of waiting for new information when firms decide whether to undertake big projects, 
leading them to reduce current investment.2  
That uncertainty has such real effects is clear. However, the precise degree of uncertainty at 
any given point in time and its impact on economic activity are themselves uncertain. 
                                                
1   See the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO), “Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth,” October 2012, 
includes  a  discussion  of  uncertainty.  Available  at  http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/ 
which  also 
weo/2012/02/index.htm. 
2   B.  Bernanke,  “Irreversibility, Uncertainty,  and  Cyclical  Investment,” The  Quarterly Journal  of  Economics  98, 
no.1 (1983): 85–106. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According  to  standard  measures  of  financial  market  volatility,  such  as  the  VIX,  or  implied 
volatilities  from  options  prices  in  other  asset  classes,  the  current  environment  does  not 
appear to be particularly uncertain.3 In fact, many of these measures are at post-crisis lows. 
The comfort offered by these market-based measures may be misleading. For one, they may 
be  importantly  influenced  by  the  extraordinary  liquidity  provided  by  central  banks.  This 
liquidity has supported financial markets and thereby provided insurance against downside 
risks. The dampening effect of central bank action may not persist if economic fundamentals 
do not ultimately improve, meaning that there could be a discontinuous shift in volatility at 
some point in the future. 
Moreover, trading volumes across asset classes have generally been low in recent months, 
as  many  market  participants  with  large  cash  holdings  sit  on  the  sidelines.  Paralysis,  not 
confidence, may better account for the observed declines in actual and implied volatility. This 
apparent lack of conviction in markets can itself be considered a sign of unusual levels of 
uncertainty. 
Other indicators, such as surveys of households and businesses, tend to be more consistent 
with  what  many  feel.  For  instance,  the  most  recent  Small  Business  Problems  &  Priorities 
survey of the U.S. National Federation of Independent Business finds that “uncertainty over 
economic conditions” ranked second in their list of most “critical” problems. “Uncertainty over 
government actions” was fourth. 
Another  index  of  economic  policy  uncertainty  for  the  United  States,  constructed  by 
researchers at Stanford, has shown a clear upward trend in recent years.4 They estimate that 
the rise in policy uncertainty between 2006 and 2011 reduced the level of real U.S. GDP by 
approximately 3 per cent and was associated with a loss of about 2.3 million jobs. 
Using  a  similar  methodology,  Bank  of  Canada  researchers  estimate  that  the  increase  in 
policy  uncertainty  observed  since  the  reintensification  of  the  euro-area  crisis  late  last  year 
may have lowered the level of euro-area GDP by roughly 1 per cent. 
Analytically,  there  is  a  clear  question  of  causality  here  –  does  uncertainty  cause  slower 
growth or is it the other way around, with difficult economic times inducing greater qualms 
about  the  future?  Surely  it  works  both  ways.  Thus,  the  current  combination  of  economic 
weakness and heightened uncertainty may be forming a vicious circle in the global economy. 
That there is uncertainty about how the global economy will respond to an unprecedented 
period of deleveraging is not surprising. More troubling is the apparent uncertainty about the 
stance and perceived effectiveness of economic policy. 
The question is what can policy-makers do about it? 
Europe 
Let me start with Europe. 
The euro-area economy is stagnating, with GDP still 2 per cent below its pre-crisis peak and 
private domestic demand a stunning 6 per cent below. The causes of this underperformance 
are deep-seated. 
An adverse feedback loop between weakening economic activity and sovereign and banking 
sector vulnerabilities has made the task of fiscal consolidation even more difficult. 
                                                
3   The  VIX  refers  to  the  Chicago  Board  Options  Exchange  Volatility  Index,  a  popular  measure  of  the  implied 
volatility of S&P500 index options. It represents a market estimate of short-term stock market volatility. 
4   S.  Baker,  N.  Bloom  and  S.  Davis,  “Uncertainty  and  the  Economy,”  Policy  Review  175  (2012).  The  index 
incorporates newspaper coverage of policy-related economic uncertainty, the number of tax code provisions 
set to expire in future years and the extent of disagreement among economic forecasters. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Europe’s  banking  losses  and  fiscal  shortfalls  are  merely  symptoms  of  a  more  serious 
underlying  illness  –  a  balance-of-payments  crisis.  To  repay  the  creditors  of  Europe’s  core 
economies,  the  debtors  of  peripheral  economies  must  regain  competitiveness.  Although 
there has been some progress, this process will be neither easy nor quick. 
There are two ways to address the uncertainties plaguing Europe. 
First,  Europe  is  often  said  to  be  suffering  an  existential  crisis  –  meaning  that  the  very 
existence  of  the  euro  is  being  questioned.  Recent  actions,  particularly  by  the  European 
Central Bank (ECB), are now directly addressing this risk. The ECB has recently introduced 
a  new  program  – the Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  program  –  that  is  specifically 
designed to eliminate the risk of euro redenomination. 
Simply  put,  subject  to  certain  conditions,  the  ECB  will  act  to  ensure  that  yields  on  any 
particular euro-area country’s short-term government bonds should reflect only the credit risk 
of that sovereign, not the risk that the country will leave the euro.5 By lowering yields in this 
manner, the ECB will substantially improve the transmission of monetary policy, and thereby 
increase the prospects for economic recovery in Europe. 
Second, it would be helpful if European authorities would reframe the expectations of citizens 
and market participants regarding the time horizon over which European monetary union will 
be refounded. You are no doubt aware that there has been a seemingly endless series of 
crisis summits held about the euro in recent years – nineteen meetings at the Leader level in 
the  past  two  years.  Although  there  has  been  important  progress,  there  was  never  any 
chance any one meeting could solve the issue. 
For the euro area to be a viable currency union, several reforms over a 3 to 5 year period will 
be required. These include: 
• 
• 
necessary institutional changes, including a banking union; 
a  closer  fiscal  union,  including  a  fiscal  transfer  system  and  some  form  of 
mutualisation of sovereign debt; 
reforms  to  enhance  labour  market  flexibility  and  mobility,  as  well  as  measures  to 
promote competition and productivity in product markets; and 
steady reductions in (cyclically adjusted) budgetary deficits. 
• 
By reframing expectations to a realistic timeline, and ensuring that any financing assistance 
program for countries is sufficient for this period, European authorities could arrest the cycle 
of crisis summits, and thereby reduce policy uncertainty. 
 The slowdown in China 
In  emerging  economies,  growth  has  slowed  at  a  greater-than-anticipated  rate  in  recent 
months. In China, real GDP grew 7.6 per cent in the second quarter, its slowest pace in three 
years, and recent data suggest continued softening in the third quarter. 
The  slowdown  in  China’s  growth  reflects  two  broad  influences.  First,  external  demand  for 
China’s  exports  has  weakened,  owing  in  particular  to  the  recession  in  Europe,  China’s 
largest trading partner. 
Second, past policy actions in China are having an effect. With large vulnerabilities building 
in  the  housing  sector,  increasing  evidence  of  overinvestment,  and  inflation  above  target, 
                                                
5   Under the OMT, the ECB will be able to purchase sovereign debt with maturities of 1 to 3 years without limit. 
Participation  in  the  program  is  restricted  to  member  countries  that  undergo  a  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility/European Stability Mechanism program. This condition is critical, as “strict and effective conditionality” 
is needed to ensure that countries continue to undertake required reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
policy-makers  appropriately  tightened  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  once  the 
economy shook off the effects of the 2008–09 global crisis. 
Given these excesses, the reduction in China’s growth to more sustainable rates is welcome. 
However, recent signs that the slowdown in the Chinese economy may become too intense 
have  prompted  authorities  to  unwind  some  of  the  past  policy  tightening.  This  process  has 
begun, with notable fiscal stimulus measures announced recently. 
Nonetheless,  there  remains  significant  uncertainty  over  how  quickly  China  can  adjust  its 
growth model. With the limits of an export-led growth strategy now obvious, rebalancing to 
encourage domestic sources of growth is needed. Yet prior rounds of stimulus appeared to 
stoke  already  very  high  levels  of  residential  and  business  fixed  investment,  rather  than 
consumption, which remains exceptionally low. 
The risk is that, once again, the right stimulus will end up in the wrong places. 
For  outside  observers,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  in  China  is 
compounded by the difficulty in obtaining reliable information regarding the extent to which 
the economy has already slowed. 
That said, it is important to put China’s recent performance in context. The Bank of Canada 
expects growth in China’s GDP to average about 7.5 per cent over the next few years. While 
this is substantially below the unsustainable double-digit rates seen in recent years, it is still 
considerable.  In  fact,  7.5  per  cent  real  growth  in  Chinese  GDP  in  2012  will  add  roughly 
$800 billion to the global economy, an amount equivalent (in real terms) to the 14 per cent 
rate of growth in China in 2007, and approximately twice the dollar value of U.S. growth this 
year. 
The U.S. outlook 
The  U.S.  recovery  remains  modest,  consistent  with  the  experience  of  other  advanced 
economies that have faced financial crises. Although the fiscal challenges continue to loom, 
the recovery appears to be on a somewhat surer footing. 
American households have recovered more than two-thirds of the $16 trillion in net worth lost 
in the aftermath of the crisis. While it will take several more years to make up the balance, 
the process of household deleveraging appears well advanced, particularly now that the U.S. 
housing market is beginning to recover. 
In addition, major U.S. banks have substantially increased their capital, and U.S. corporate 
balance sheets are very strong. 
Despite this progress, aggregate debt across all sectors of the U.S. economy has not budged 
from its peak of about 250 per cent of GDP. The burden of deleveraging in the United States 
has, in a sense, been transferred from the private to the public sector. 
It  is  clear  that  the  U.S.  public  debt  burden  needs  to  be  reined  in  over  the  medium  term. 
Precisely how is less obvious. Existing legislation incorporates automatic tax increases and 
spending  cuts,  set  to kick  in  next  January,  amounting to  roughly  4  per cent  of GDP  –  the 
so-called “fiscal cliff.” If authorities do not change these provisions, this massive fiscal drag 
will likely push the U.S. economy back into recession next year. That is not what we expect, 
but like others, we cannot be sure. 
There is evidence that uncertainty surrounding the resolution of the fiscal cliff issue is already 
having an adverse impact. While the general tone of the U.S. data has improved slightly of 
late and financial markets have held up, high-frequency indicators related to U.S. business 
investment  –  where  one  would  expect  to  see  the  greatest  impact  of  uncertainty  –  have 
weakened.  For  example,  new  orders  for  capital  goods  have  fallen  sharply,  declining  by 
26 per cent over the most recent three months. This is by far the weakest result since the 
end of the recession. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Bank assumes that the United States will, in the end, step back from the fiscal cliff. Even 
with  that  assumption  in  place,  the  Bank  projected  in  its  July  Monetary  Policy  Report  that 
fiscal  tightening  in  the  United  States  will  remove  1  percentage  point  from  U.S.  growth  in 
2012,  and  1.5  percentage  points  in  each  of  2013  and  2014.  Under  such  a  scenario,  the 
near-term hit to the economy is largely avoided, but the need for fiscal consolidation persists 
– as indeed it does under any plausible scenario. 
A clear, consistent and committed medium-term U.S. fiscal plan, one that demonstrates how 
this  consolidation  will  be  achieved,  would  be  helpful  in  mitigating  a  major  uncertainty  that 
would otherwise endure. 
More positively, recent Fed actions have actually reduced uncertainty. Specifically, the Fed 
has provided greater certainty by indicating that its policy rate could be expected to remain at 
extremely  low  levels  until  mid-2015.  It  has  also provided  more  certainty with  respect  to  its 
reaction function, linking future unconventional monetary policy to substantial improvements 
in the outlook for the U.S. labour market. In addition, the Fed has indicated that it will leave 
highly accommodative policy in place “for a considerable time after the economic recovery 
strengthens.” 
If  conditions  were  to  deteriorate  and  further  easing  were  required,  the  U.S.  central  bank 
could  provide  even  greater  certainty  with  further  refinements,  such  as  precise  numerical 
targets and a time frame for achieving these targets. 
The  Fed  did  not  just  sharpen  communication,  it  also  announced  its  intention  to  purchase 
$40 billion in securities per month – a strategy nicknamed “QE3.” As with previous rounds of 
monetary stimulus, QE3 can be expected to support the American recovery, both directly by 
lowering interest rates, and more broadly, through the so-called portfolio-balance effect. This 
channel tends to lift asset prices and reduce the value of the U.S. dollar. The overall impact 
of QE3 for Canada is estimated to be modestly positive, reflecting its supportive implications 
for U.S. and global activity and the resulting boost to commodity prices. 
What does all this mean for Canada? 
Elevated global uncertainty is holding back global economic growth and, thus, the demand 
for Canadian exports. In addition, there is some evidence that global uncertainty is affecting 
domestic activity. According to the Bank’s most recent quarterly Business Outlook Survey, 
released  this  morning,  Canadian  firms  have  become  more  circumspect  about  new  capital 
expenditures  and  less  inclined  to  hire  new  workers.6  In  this  environment  of  slow  global 
economic  growth  and  uncertainty  about  demand,  firms  have  also  tempered  their  sales 
expectations for the next 12 months. 
However, while Canada’s economy is being affected by the global angst, the key areas of 
uncertainty  abroad  are  all  points  of  justifiable  confidence  here  at  home.  Canada’s  public 
finances are sound. Monetary policy is clear and credible. Canada’s financial system showed 
itself  to  be  among  the  most  resilient  in  the  world  through  the  crisis.  Since  then,  it  has 
strengthened  further.  One  thing  Canadian  businesses  can  expect  is  that  their  financial 
system will be there if times get tough again. 
In this uncertain world, then, Canada is rightly viewed as an attractive investment destination. 
This  is  having  an  important  effect  on  Canadian  financial  conditions.  Capital  inflows  are 
tending  to  push  up  the  value  of  our  dollar,  thus  acting  as  a  headwind  to  the  Canadian 
economy.  However,  foreign  capital  is  also  tending  to  push  domestic  asset  prices  up  and 
longer-term interest rates down, which has a supportive effect on domestic growth. The Bank 
takes all of this into account when setting monetary policy. 
                                                
6   Bank of Canada, Business Outlook Survey, Autumn 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The Bank provides as much certainty as it can in the conduct of monetary policy. While we 
obviously cannot determine events over which  we have no control, we can be transparent 
about what we expect and how  we  would react to different scenarios. That includes being 
clear  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  supporting  financial  stability  in  Canada.  For 
example,  if  we  were  to  lean  against  emerging  imbalances  in  household  debt,  we  would 
clearly declare we are doing so and indicate how long we expect it would take for inflation to 
return to the 2 per cent target.7  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Eighty years ago, faced with a more dire set of economic circumstances than we are today, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt famously told Americans that “the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself.” But this is not the Great Depression. The IMF expects the global economy to grow by 
more than 3 per cent this year and next, or just under the average of the past 10 years. What 
we  face  now  is  better  described  as  uncertainty  rather  than  fear.  Nonetheless,  the  spirit  of 
FDR’s  comment  applies  –  we  must  take  care  not  to  allow  uncertainty  to  dominate  our 
actions, letting profitable opportunities slip away and, more generally, compounding the very 
real, but still manageable, challenges facing the global economy. 
At  times  of  extreme  economic  and  policy  uncertainty,  it  pays  to  be quick  and  bold,  as the 
central banks of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro area have been. 
As  Canadians,  we  need  to  focus  on  what  we  can  control.  We  can’t  save  the  euro,  fix 
America’s  fiscal  cliff  or  restart  the  U.S.  housing  market.  Should  we  just  wait  out  a 
decade-long  deleveraging  process 
lower  our 
expectations? Or should we control our destiny by building on our strengths in the new global 
environment? We can improve Canada’s low productivity growth and sharpen our focus on 
emerging markets. And we can continue to invest in our greatest resource – our people. 
Against this backdrop, next week’s Monetary Policy Report will provide a full update on the 
Bank’s  outlook  for  economic  growth  and  inflation  in  Canada.  It  will  take  into  account  the 
impact  of  the  uncertainty  that  I  have  been  discussing  today.  The  Bank  will  take  whatever 
action  is  appropriate  to  achieve  the  2  per  cent  CPI  inflation  target  over  the  medium  term. 
That  certainty  is  our  contribution  to  ensuring  that  Canadians  can  invest  and  plan  with 
confidence. 
the  crisis  economies?  Should  we 
in 
                                                
7   Bank of Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
