Njuguna Ndung’u: The importance of information sharing and 
collaboration among financial sector supervisors 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the  Kenya  Commercial  Bank  Supervisory  College,  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies, 
Nairobi, 3 October 2012. 
 for  enhanced 
The IMF East AFRITAC Officials here present; 
Distinguished delegates from the EAC Partner States Central Banks here present;  
Dr. Martin Oduor Otieno, Kenya Commercial Bank Group Chief Executive Officer; 
Distinguished Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  is  delighted  to  host  this  inaugural  meeting  of  a  Supervisory 
College in the East African region. This is a great milestone for the region’s Central Banks in 
enhancing the existing mechanisms for information sharing and collaboration. 
At the onset, let me commend the IMF’s East AFRITAC for their unwavering support towards 
enhanced  stability  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  region.  Today’s  launch  of  the  pioneering 
supervisory college has been made possible through the technical assistance and capacity 
building by the East AFRITAC. I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the 
organisation of this meeting. Let me also extend a warm welcome to all participants. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  requirement 
information  sharing  and 
collaboration among financial sector supervisors has gained more prominence recently. This 
is informed by the continued cross-border expansion of financial sector players as well as the 
convergence  of  their  cross-sector  operations.  As  a  result,  for  us  to  be  able  to  adequately 
address all potential risks from the continued convergence of players and their cross-border 
expansion, the time to embrace consolidated supervision within and across our borders is at 
hand. 
As you may be aware the importance of cooperation between home and host regulators of 
banking  groups  dates  back  three  to  four  decades  ago.  The  Basel  Committee  for  Banking 
Supervision developed guidelines in 1975 to guide cooperation between national authorities 
in  the  supervision  of  banks  with  cross-border  establishments.  These  guidelines  were 
enhanced with the issuance of the Basel Core Principles on Effective Supervision in 1997, in 
particular,  Basel  Core  Principle  24  on  Consolidated  Supervision  which  requires  that 
supervisors  should  regulate  banking  groups  on  a  consolidated  basis,  and  Basel  Core 
Principle  25  on  Home-host  Relationships  (Cross-border  consolidated  supervision)  which 
requires  cooperation  and  information  exchange  between  home  supervisors  and  the  host 
supervisors. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Following financial crises experienced from 2007, the importance of 
information sharing and collaboration between banking group supervisors, especially through 
supervisory colleges, was re-emphasised by the G20 Leaders and Financial Stability Board 
Forum held in 2008. To actualise the Forum’s declaration the Basel Committee for Banking 
Supervision  released  a  paper  on  Good  Practice  Principles  on  Supervisory  Colleges  in 
October 2010. The paper supplemented the existing guidance on cross-border cooperation 
and  information-sharing.  It  outlined  expectations  for  both  home  and  host  supervisors  in 
relation  to  supervisory  college  objectives,  governance,  communication  and  information 
sharing as well as potential areas for collaborative work. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Currently, 10 Kenyan banks have established presence across the 
Eastern  Africa  region  including  two  in  South  Sudan  and  one  in  Mauritius.  As  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
30th June 2012,  the  10  Kenyan  banks  had  240  branches  outside  Kenya,  an  increase  of 
34 branches from 204 in December 2011. It is worth noting that it is not only Kenyan banks 
that  are  expanding  across  the  borders  but  banks  in  the  other  East  African  countries  have 
also  embraced  the  opportunity.  A  case  in  point  is  the  application  by  Bank  of  Kigali  to 
establish  a  Representative  Office  in  Kenya.  I  envisage  that  more  banks  will  consider 
cross-border  expansion  once  the  on-going  harmonisation  of  the  legal,  supervisory  and 
regulatory frameworks among the EAC Central Banks is completed. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Effectiveness  of  consolidated  supervision  and  in  particular  a 
supervisory college depends on how it is structured. The structure of a supervisory college to 
be adopted depends on the unique characteristics of the banking group being considered. In 
this regard, CBK as the home supervisor of Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) Group, and with 
the technical assistance of East AFRITAC, has designed this supervisory college to reflect 
the nature and complexity of operations of KCB. The structure is expected to promote timely 
information sharing and closer collaborations amongst the KCB Group supervisors. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  As  we  hold  this  supervisory  college  meeting  for  KCB,  it  is  worth 
noting that KCB has made great progress since its predecessor; the National Bank of India 
opened an outlet in  Mombasa in 1896. I take note that as at 30th June 2012, KCB had a 
branch  network  of  226  branches;  56  of  which  were  outside  Kenya.  Further,  as  at 
31st July 2012,  KCB’s  total  assets  were  valued  at  Ksh.295  billion  (USD3.5  billion)  while  its 
total  loans  and  gross  deposits  amounted  to  Ksh.190  billion  (USD2.26  billion)  and 
Ksh.213 billion (USD2.53 billion) respectively. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Despite the commendable efforts towards full integration in the East 
African  Community,  banks  with  cross  border  operations  continue  to  report  operational 
challenges.  The  major  operational  challenge  is  the  need  for  a  huge  capital  outlay,  which 
could  otherwise  be  minimised  through  centralisation  of  some  operations  and  decision 
making. With the advancements in information technology, centralisation of some operational 
processes  is  being  embraced  globally  based  on  the  resultant  cost  savings  as  along  as 
adequate  risk  mitigating  measures  are  assured.  In  this  regard,  I  urge  regulators  in  the 
Eastern  Africa  region  to  always  embrace  a  developmental  mindset  as  they  consider 
proposals  by  market  players.  As 
long  as  adequate  risk  mitigation  measures  are 
demonstrated,  innovations  should  be  facilitated.  It  is  only  through  this  that  our  banking 
sectors  will  effectively  play  their  roles  of  resource  mobilisation,  allocation  and  deepen  the 
market. More importantly, innovations will reduce the cost of banking services and products. 
Lower costs are critical to tapping the vast unbanked populace in our region. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The output from this meeting will provide a framework to enhance 
effective  supervision  of  the  KCB  Group.  It  will  also  set  precedence  for  the  supervision  of 
other  banking  groups  with  cross  border  operations.  I  acknowledge  the  presence  of 
KCB Management who I am informed will showcase their strategy and operational plans. It is 
through a clear understanding of institutional strategies and plans that supervisors are able 
to proactively discharge their supervisory mandates. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I believe that there is a great wealth of supervisory information and 
ideas to be shared in this supervisory college. As the East African Central Banks, there is 
need to be steadfast in supervision of institutions with cross border operations to minimise 
the  likelihood  of  systemic  effects  in  case  of  failure.  I  therefore  wish  to  reiterate  the 
importance  of  seizing  this  opportunity  to  discuss  mechanisms  of  enhancing  regional 
coordination in supervision as well as crisis management/mitigation. 
With  these  few  remarks  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to 
declare  this  inaugural  supervisory  college  meeting  officially  opened  and  I  wish  you  fruitful 
deliberations. 
Thank You 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
