Deepak Mohanty: Managing capital flows 
Welcome remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India-Asian  Development  Bank  conference  on  “Managing  capital 
flows”, Mumbai, 19 November 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
1. 
On  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  my  own  behalf,  I  extend  a  hearty 
welcome  to  you  all  to  this  conference  on  Managing  Capital  Flows,  in  this  great  city  of 
Mumbai. As you know the conference is co-sponsored by Reserve Bank of India and Asian 
Development Bank (ADB). Mumbai is not only the commercial hub of India but also has a 
rich heritage. I hope you will have some time to experience the vibrancy of Mumbai. 
2.  
Turning to today’s conference, there could be no two opinions about the topicality of 
the theme. What is worrying is that the volatility in capital flows has increased significantly in 
the recent years particularly since 2008 crisis. Capital flows management is therefore one of 
the biggest challenges for policy makers particularly in emerging and developing economies. 
Capital  flows  are  a  complex  phenomenon  having  both  benefits  and  costs.  Their  role  in 
enhancing the domestic investment and the potential to trigger financial crisis can be seen as 
the two sides of the same coin. 
3.  
Capital flow management has been perceived to be challenging particularly  in the 
context of Mundell’s “impossible trinity” of fixed exchange rate, independent monetary policy 
and open capital account. All the three cannot be pursued simultaneously, and at least one 
should be sacrificed. Which one has to be sacrificed? Well, it depends upon country-specific 
situation and available policy options. This reminds me of an old adage in Hindu mythology, 
which is somewhat similar to impossible trinity: that the idols of Brahma (the creator), Vishnu 
(the preserver), and Shiva (the destroyer) cannot be kept under the same roof! Among three, 
who should be kept out? There is no rule or convention. It is left to the choice of individual 
households and their belief and faith. 
4.  
Be that as it may, world view on capital flows and capital controls has swung in both 
directions  since  the  days  of  Bretton  Woods.  In  the  1940s,  while  Keynes  and  White,  the 
architects of Bretton Woods, favoured capital controls, there were others who had opposite 
views.  Until  recently,  the  wisdom  of  “Washington  Consensus”  favoured  capital  account 
liberalisation  and  free  capital  flows.  The  Asian  Crisis  put  the  idea  of  full  capital  account 
liberalisation  on  the  back  burner.  Further,  the  recent  crisis  of  2008  has  also  led  to  a 
rethinking on the issue of capital flows. It seems that international opinion is moving towards 
acceptance  of  capital  controls  both  at  the  source  and  the  destination,  if  the  situation  so 
warrants. 
5.  
In India, as some of you may be aware, we have “light” capital controls. The policy 
towards  capital  flows  is  one  of  carefully  calibrated  approach.  We  began  liberalising  the 
capital account in 1991. We view the capital account liberalisation as a “process” and not an 
“event”. The path of capital account liberalisation is well calibrated but is subject to change, 
depending  upon  the  evolving  domestic  and  international  economic  conditions.  Why  is  this 
gradualist  approach?  We  believe  that  the  benefit  of  capital  flows  hinges  on  pace  of 
liberalisation  of  the  overall  economy  and  market  efficiency  and  in  the  absence  of  those, 
unfettered capital flows  could endanger financial stability. Therefore, we are  guided by the 
principle that process of capital account liberalisation should progress in tandem with reforms 
in the financial sector and real sector. 
6.  
Nevertheless, capital flows to India remained volatile especially in the last few years. 
Portfolio  flows  dominated  by  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (FIIs)  showed  large  swings 
having  implications  for  liquidity,  besides  complicating  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
management. More frequent changes in the direction and variation in capital flows have been 
a matter of concern in the context of a widening current account deficit. Our policy response 
to  handle  capital  flows  quite  often  had  to  switch  mode  quickly  from  addressing  excessive 
inflows to sudden outflows. 
7.  
I hope this conference would provide further insight into how to handle capital flows. 
I am sure that we will benefit immensely from the deliberations. I see that there are a number 
of good papers, country presentations and panel discussions which will throw more light on 
the subject. The collaboration with the ADB has brought more EDE and Asian perspective 
which will provide useful policy inputs to sharpen our skills to better manage capital flows. 
8.  
Mumbai. 
Thank You. 
I  once  again  extend  my  hearty  welcome  to  you  all  and  wish  you  a  nice  stay  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
