Hirohide Yamaguchi: Strengthening growth potential, role of the market, 
and “production of information” 
Remarks  by  Mr  Hirohide  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Securities  Analysts  Association  of  Japan  Annual  Conference  commemorating 
its 
50th anniversary, Tokyo 15 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for having me at the annual conference jointly hosted by the Securities Analysts 
Association of Japan (SAAJ) and Asian Securities and Investments Federation (ASIF). All the 
participants  here  have  been  striving  for  the  development  of  securities  markets,  and, 
through such efforts, have been contributing to the sound development of Japan’s economy. 
On behalf of the Bank of Japan, I will pay great respect to your efforts. 
Today, under the title “Strengthening Growth Potential, Role of the Market, and ‘Production 
of  Information’,”  I  will  talk  about  my  views  on  the  importance  of  the  financial  function  that 
supports  economic  growth  and  how  securities  markets  should  be,  and  then  I  will  send 
cheers to securities analysts while referring to their expected roles. 
Japan’s economy and securities markets 
I.  
50 years ago, in 1962 when the SAAJ was established, Japan’s economy was in the midst of 
a  high  growth  period. Japan’s  economy  grew  by  an  annual  average  of  9.7  percent  from 
1956 up to 1970. It made a transition to stable growth, triggered by the oil shocks, but was on 
a  constant  growth  path  until  a  bubble  burst  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s. After  the burst 
of a bubble, things changed completely and the average growth rate declined substantially to 
around 1.5 percent in the 1990s and around 0.5 percent in the 2000s. 
The  history  of  securities  markets  developed  in  tandem  with  such  a  long-term  trend  in  the 
real  economy.  During  the  high  growth  period,  firms’  buoyant  fund  demand  was  mainly 
supported  by  indirect  finance. However,  even  during  such  period,  the  securities  markets 
gradually came close to people as the phrase “goodbye banks, hello securities firms” began 
to  be  heard  in  the  early  1960s  when  investment  trust  started  to  spread  among  people. 
Subsequently,  the  markets  continued  to  grow  by  weathering  trials,  including  securities 
markets’ slump after the Tokyo Olympics and, in the 1980s, both the stocks market and the 
corporate  bonds  market  got  into  full  swing  amid  financial  liberalization  and  globalization. 
While  equity finance  by  convertible  bonds  and  warrant  bonds  rapidly increased  during  the 
bubble period on the back of strong expectations for a rise in stock prices, market expansion 
based  on  excessive  expectations  did  not  last  long  after  all. Since  the  1990s,  a  variety  of 
reforms have taken place mainly to address various events that surfaced in accordance with 
the emergence and the burst of a bubble, and the markets have steadily improved. However, 
amid  the  continued  low  economic  growth,  the  environment  surrounding  securities  markets 
has been severe and there has recently been concern over a decline in the competitiveness 
of Japanese securities markets compared with those overseas. 
Finance, which holds the key to strengthening growth potential 
II.  
I have been mentioning repeatedly on  various occasions the fundamental background to a 
declining trend in the growth potential of Japan’s economy. Put it simply,  the economy has 
not  sufficiently  adapted  to  major  changes  of  the  demographic  vortex  and  globalization. 
Therefore,  to  strengthen  growth  potential,  it  is  essential  to  tap  new  potential  demand 
associated with progress in aging and to incorporate expanding global demand, mainly that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of  Asian  economies. To  that  end,  firms’  attempts  and  an  improvement  in  the  environment 
that supports such attempts are required. 
Given that new attempts are always associated with risks, it is not too much to say that the 
power of finance that evaluates and shoulders such risks will be a key to  strengthening the 
growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  Encouraging  firms’  attempts  and  unlocking  their 
growth  potential  will  promote  business  fixed  investment  and  research  and  development, 
expand employment, raise wages, and, through an increase in interest and dividend as well 
as capital gain, strengthen households’ income and asset formation. 
In  the  2000s,  Japan’s  economy  experienced  an  economic  expansion  of  six  years  and 
one month,  which  was  longer  than  the  Izanagi  boom  during  the  high  growth  period,  and 
the Nikkei  Stock  Average  once  rose  to  about  18,000  yen. However,  corporate  behavior 
to achieve  an  improvement  in  business  performance  through  cutting  wages  and  costs 
was  retained  strongly  during  that  period.  And,  to  start  with,  the  economic  recovery 
relied  heavily  on  exports  on  the  back  of  financial  bubbles  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe. Therefore, while the economic expansion continued for a long time on the surface, it 
did not become  a  sustainable  economic  recovery  backed  by  an  autonomous  mechanism. 
Given such recent experience,  it is not an easy task to bring out many firms’ incentives to 
take  on  the  challenge  of  tapping  potential  demand  and  thereby  strengthening  growth 
potential  amid further  progressing  aging. However,  that  is why there  are  high  expectations 
for  the  role  of financial  and capital markets, in which growth money  is  created. Of course, 
among eventual  fund  providers  in  the  financial  and  capital  markets,  there  are  those  who 
want  to  invest  their  funds  safely  by  making  deposits  and  there  are  those  who  want  to 
increase  their investment  profits  by  taking  certain  risks. It  is  necessary  to  enhance  the 
capability  of  financial  and  capital  markets  as  a  whole  to  convert  a  variety  of  fund 
management needs into economic growth, while utilizing each characteristic of indirect and 
direct finance. 
Three conditions required for securities markets 
III.  
Based on what I have said, now, I will focus on the securities markets in which analysts are 
directly  involved,  and  from  the  viewpoint  of  strengthening  power  that  creates  economic 
growth  and  developing securities  markets  themselves,  I  will mention  three  conditions  for  a 
desirable form of markets. 
First,  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  and  fairness.  Securities  markets  can  function  efficiently 
only  after  proper  pricing  for  risks  and  returns  is  made. Therefore,  it  is  deemed  desirable 
that many investors who have a variety of evaluation criteria should participate and that the 
markets  should  be  highly  liquid.  To  that  end,  first  of  all,  offers  of  versatile  solutions  for 
each  fund  raiser  and  fund  investor  as  well  as  securities  trading  in  the  secondary  markets 
have to be made at low costs, namely, the markets need to be a place of efficient financial 
transactions. In  addition,  in  order  for  the  markets  to  be  a  place  in  which  many  investors 
feel safe in participating, the fairness of transactions based on proper governance and high 
ethical standards has to be guaranteed. In Japanese securities markets, especially after the 
burst  of  a  bubble,  various  kinds  of  system  reform  have  been  made  in  order  mainly  to 
achieve a sound competitive environment. However, securities markets have recently been 
exposed to harsh global competition. In order to maintain the international competitiveness 
of  Japanese  securities markets,  it  is  critical  to  unflaggingly  implement efforts to enhance 
the markets’ efficiency and fairness in the future. In that regard, a move to  establish  Asia’s 
number  one  stock  exchange  by  merging  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  and  the  Osaka 
Securities  Exchange  is  highly  expected  as  a  new  start  of  Japanese  securities markets. 
Second, the existence of investors who aim at increasing their medium- to long-term returns. 
Of  course,  I  do  not  deny  that  aiming  at  short-term  trading  profits  is  one  of  investment 
strategies  or  that  it  enhances  market  dynamism  and  liquidity. However,  not  only  to  chase 
short-term  profits  but,  for  example,  for  investment  institutions,  including pension  funds  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
insurance  companies,  to  make  utmost  efforts  to  raise  medium-  to  long-term  returns  will 
enhance securities markets’ function of selecting promising firms and projects and eventually 
contribute  to  achieving  sustainable  growth  of  Japan’s  economy.  In  that  regard,  it  is  also 
important that households, which are the eventual fund providers, become highly interested 
in  their  own  asset  management.  Given  that  most  of  households’  financial  assets  of 
1,500 trillion  yen  have  still  been  in  cash  or  deposits  even  though  long  time  has  passed 
since “savings to investment” was called for, there seems to be plenty of room for improving 
the environment which gets growth money  out of sleep. For example, to promote  initiatives 
to  raise  interest  in  asset  management,  including  the  enhancement  of financial education 
that fits each age-group, could encourage investment institutions, which receive households’ 
long-term funds, to compete at a higher level. 
Third, the markets need to be a place in which high quality information is created to steadily 
support investment judgment. What is important, first of all, is disclosure of fund raisers and 
investors  relations.  While  it  goes  without  saying  that  honest  and  fair  disclosure  is 
required,  in  addition  to  that,  it  is  critical  that  firms  strive  to  actively  and  convincingly 
explain their own management strategies. Firms’ information will be analyzed and evaluated 
from  various  angles  by  market  participants,  and  utilized  for  investors’  decision making. In 
financial  theory,  a  situation  in  which  fund  providers  do  not  have  sufficient information  of 
fund-raisers  is  called  “information  asymmetry”  and,  if  the  asymmetry  is substantial, even 
growth  of firms  with  great  potential  will  be  constrained  from  the  funding side. Therefore,  it 
is  considered  that  the  resolution  of  “information  asymmetry”  is  the  intrinsic  function  of 
finance  and  added-value  that  finance  contributes  to  economic  activity.  Added-value  is 
created  through  “production  of  information.”  While  the  “production  of  information”  is 
somewhat  an  abstract  expression,  simply  put  its  specific  meaning,  it  is nothing less than 
high-quality analysis  and  evaluation  of the  investment asset  class. And, those who play an 
important role in that regard are securities analysts. 
“Production of Information” and expectations for securities analysts 
IV.  
Now let me offer three specific expectations for securities analysts. 
First,  neutral  information  transmission  based  on  accurate  analysis.  The  standpoint  of 
securities analysts varies according to organizations they belong to, such as the sell-side, the 
buy-side,  and  the  rating  agency. However,  for  the  information  they  transmit  to  be  trusted 
and  influential,  the  accuracy  of  analysis  as  well  as  a  fair  and  neutral  perspective  will  be 
inevitable  elements. As  for  a  specific  angle  of  analysis  and  message  to  be  emphasized, 
individual securities analysts should  devise  ways by fully utilizing their  respective  expertise 
and knowledge. With securities analysts stimulating each other from different perspectives, 
“production of information” in the markets as a whole will be elevated both in terms of quality 
and  quantity. What  I  especially expect  is  the  “production  of  information” that contributes to 
exploring growing companies. Although the growth potential of Japan’s economy  has  been 
declining,  if  looked  at  individually,  there  are  many  firms  with  high profits and growth, and 
there  will  be  further  more  potentially  growing  firms. Finding  out such  promising  investment 
opportunities  one  by  one  and  nurturing  them,  while  it  seems  a roundabout  approach,  will 
offer  a  potent  breakthrough  for  eventually  increasing  growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
Second,  maintaining  full  communication  with  firms. While  the  role  of  securities  analysts is 
basically  to  provide  investors  with  analysis  on  firms,  cherishing  connection  with  firms that 
are the subject of analysis eventually means that securities analysts will ask those firms their 
unique questions. Namely,  securities analysts can contribute to the process, in which firms 
constantly  develop  their  business  strategies  while  incorporating  investors’  perspectives.  In 
other  words,  securities  analysts  play  a  valuable  role  as  an  interactive connecting point 
between firms and investors. 
Third,  playing  an  active  role  as  global  human  resources. While  currently  a  slowdown  in 
emerging  economies  has  become  somewhat  protracted,  those  economies  have  high 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
growth  potential  in  the  medium  to  long  term  and,  on  the  financial  front,  it  is  likely  that 
especially  Asian  securities  markets  will  expand  substantially.  Just  like  today’s  conference, 
information  exchange  and  interaction  of  people  at  a  global  level  will  become  increasingly 
active  in  the  future. In  order  to  improve  the  attractiveness  of  Japan’s  securities  markets 
and  attract  overseas  investors,  and  also  to  utilize  expanding  overseas  investment 
opportunities in the asset formation of Japanese households, I expect securities analysts to 
play an active role with the key words “Asia” or “global.” 
Concluding remarks 
From  the  perspective  of  strengthening  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  today  I  have 
talked  about  the  importance  of  the  role  securities  markets  and  securities  analysts  play. I 
think the aforementioned term “production of information” illustrates how financial business is 
a  knowledge-intensive  industry.  In  Japan’s  economy,  in  which  the  labor  force  has  been 
declining in association with aging, increasing the growth rate of added-value per capita  is 
a  necessary  condition  for  economic  growth. If  the  typical  knowledge-intensive industry of 
financial  business  enhances  the  ability  of  creating  added-value  and  grows,  it  will  itself 
contribute  to  strengthening  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy. I  have  high hopes 
that securities analysts, while holding their strong intellectual curiosity and sensibility to read 
the times, will make a valuable contribution to the development of Japan’s securities 
markets and eventually to the development of Japan and Asia. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
