Benoît Coeuré: SEPA migration, innovation and change 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Payments Council off-site meeting, La Hulpe, 21 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  invitation  to  speak  at  this  year’s  off-site  meeting  of  the 
European  Payments  Council1.  My  remarks  today  uphold  the  tradition  established  by 
Ms Tumpel-Gugerell over the past eight years. It indicates the importance we attach to the 
role and work of the EPC and is a sign of the good cooperation between the ECB and the 
EPC.  
Let me start right away by conveying the three main messages that I have for you. Of course, 
I will be more than willing to take your questions afterwards. 
First  of  all,  the  most  prominent  example  of  European  financial  integration  currently  is  the 
establishment of the “Single Euro Payments Area”– in short, SEPA. The SEPA project, as 
well as other integration projects in payment systems, pre-dated the current financial crisis. 
Payment systems were not disrupted by the financial crisis and certainly did not cause this 
crisis, thanks to solid operations, regulations and central bank oversight. In fact, payments 
and, in particular, retail payments turned out to be one of the few stable business lines left for 
banks. It is no surprise that many banks are rediscovering retail payments. The provision of 
payment services to companies and households is one of the core functions of retail banking, 
and also a key public service. Therefore, the work on the SEPA project remains a crucial part 
of  European  integration  in  the  area  of  financial  services.  The  ECB  is  committed  to 
accompanying  this  work  under  its  Treaty  mandate  to  promote  the  smooth  operation  of 
payment systems, as a contribution to the efficiency of euro area economy, and as a way to 
support continued trust in the euro. 
My second message, or perhaps a word of warning, is that the status quo in retail payment 
services  cannot  be  expected  to  remain  stable.  New  players  are  entering  the  market  and 
offering attractive propositions to end-users. Especially with regard to “innovative” payments, 
such as mobile payments and internet payments, all the creativity seems to be coming from 
outside  the  traditional  banking  sector.  The  ECB  welcomes  new  payment  systems  and 
services,  regardless  of  who  is  offering  them,  provided  that  they  are  efficient,  safe  and 
reliable. For banks, this poses various strategic questions which the EPC might also wish to 
reflect upon during its strategic retreat today.  
My third message deals with the future role of the EPC itself, in light of the ongoing review of 
SEPA  governance.  It  is  not  only  in  the  EPC’s  own  interest  that  it  stays  at  the  centre  of 
European retail payment integration and innovation; it is also in the interest of the market. 
The  EPC  is  well  positioned  to  continue  contributing  to  the  work  of  the  SEPA  Council, 
representing the European banking sector for retail payments. Therefore, I expect the EPC to 
continue taking a pro-active approach and to continue working on developing efficient retail 
payment instruments and services. 
SEPA Credit Transfer, SEPA Direct Debit and the migration end-date  
SEPA is an initiative aimed at achieving a fully integrated market for retail payment services 
in  euro,  with  no  distinction  between  cross-border  and  national  payments.  The  Eurosystem 
                                                
1 
I wish to thank Iddo de Jong for his contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
continues to monitor and support the work in this field. Special attention is being paid to the 
migration to the new SEPA instruments. According to the SEPA indicators, the migration in 
the euro area from domestic credit transfers to SCT reached 30.3% in September 2012. As 
regards SEPA direct debits, the migration amounted to only 1.9% in September 2012, which 
is lower than hoped for.  
An end-date regulation to support the migration to the SCT and SDD schemes was adopted 
in March 2012. It lays down rules for the initiation and processing of credit transfer and direct 
debit  transactions  denominated  in  euro  within  the  European  Union.  It  also  defines  a  clear 
timeline by when these rules need to be implemented. For the euro area, the final deadline is 
1 February 20142. As of this date, existing national credit transfer and direct debit schemes 
will  have  to  be  phased  out  and  replaced  by  the  pan-European  SEPA  alternatives  as 
developed by the EPC. Although not always appreciated, the migration end-date regulation is 
an  example  of  a  close  and  fruitful  cooperation  between  a  self-regulatory  initiative,  the 
European institutions and – ultimately – the European legislator. 
Based on our monitoring of the migration, we know that there are examples of countries that 
have  already  achieved  “mass  migration”.  For  credit  transfers,  Finland,  Luxembourg  and 
Slovenia accomplished migration by the first half of 2012. Public authorities, as large “users” 
of  payment services,  have  taken the  lead  in  these  countries.  Spain  and  France,  with  40% 
and  30%  respectively,  show  that  it  is  not  just  “small”  countries that  can  make  it  work.  For 
direct debits, similar national divergences occur, with Greece and Luxembourg leading the 
way, but also Belgium managed to reach double digits in the first half of 2012. Unfortunately, 
for  direct  debits,  public  authorities  cannot  take  the  role  of  “launching  customer”,  as  not  all 
citizens will like the idea of tax authorities collecting tax payments by means of a direct debit. 
However,  efforts  are  under  way  at  national  level  to  facilitate  migration,  for  instance,  by 
communication campaigns, and I welcome the strong involvement of national central banks 
in coordinating these efforts.  
As regard the role of banks in the migration, communication with their customers, as well as 
close cooperation with their larger business customers, “big billers”, is of the essence. The 
EPC has a very important role to ensure that the banks’ customers are ready. In fact, this 
could be its top priority for 2013. Nevertheless, in 2013 the EPC could also turn its attention 
to the adaptation and deployment of these two schemes for use in new channels, such as 
with internet and mobile payments.  
SEPA for cards 
Beyond credit transfers and direct debits, further progress is still needed in the field of SEPA 
for cards. The Eurosystem is studying the merits of a SEPA Cards Processing Framework 
which would connect card processors. The objective is to process card transactions across 
intra-European borders more efficiently. It would be a strong boost to competition between 
card schemes, domestic and international, as well as between card processors.  
Recently,  the  European  Commission  announced  new  legal  proposals  on  multilateral 
interchange fees. Banks will have to be more mindful of the processing costs, as well as the 
card scheme fees and the bank-internal costs of card transactions. At the same time, it will 
also be a good moment to seize the vast growth potential for card transactions that still exists 
in many countries. Whereas a cashless society continues to be utopian, a “cash-light” society 
is certainly within reach.  
                                                
2  Regulation (EU) No 260/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2012 establishing 
technical and business requirements for credit transfers and direct debits in euro and amending Regulation 
(EC)  No  924/2009.  The  deadline  for  euro-denominated  payments  in  non-euro  area  EU  countries  will  be 
31 October 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Furthermore,  in  July  2012  the  Eurosystem  organised  a  third  meeting  of  the  Forum  on  the 
SEPA  Certification  Framework.  The  Eurosystem  thereby  expressed  its  support  for  the 
continued  joint  efforts  being  made  by  the  stakeholders.  In  this  case:  card  schemes, 
certification  authorities,  evaluation  laboratories,  terminal  manufacturers  and  the  banking 
industry. Together, they are developing a thorough methodology for the security evaluation 
and  certification  of  new  payment  terminals  for  physical  card  acceptance.  The  goal  of  this 
multi-stakeholder cooperation is to allow retailers and terminal manufacturers to buy and sell 
card payment terminals which function securely with all card schemes all across Europe.  
When  thinking  of  card  payments  and  the  internet,  several  things  come  to  mind,  such  as 
cumbersome keying-in card numbers and sometimes excessive surcharging. However, my 
main thought is card fraud. Regrettably, even though banks have a great interest in reducing 
card  fraud,  and  the  EPC  could  in  theory  play  a  major  role,  so  far  it  has  not  engaged 
thoroughly  with  this  important  task.  Some  card  schemes  and  some  national  card 
associations  have  been  more  ambitious  when  it  comes  to  addressing  card  transaction 
security.  Fraud  is  about  criminals  financing  themselves  and  their  activities;  decisions  on 
fraud-prevention should therefore not only be based on a bank’s short-term business case, 
the need to fight fraud is also justified from the perspective of keeping trust in the payment 
system, and from society’s perspective in general.  
It all shows that, in respect of user convenience and of security, cards were not designed for 
use  on  the  internet.  Although  measures  could  be  taken to  improve  this  experience,  banks 
should not pin all their hopes on cards when it comes to delivering payment services for the 
internet.  
Study into costs of retail payments – importance of retail payments 
In October 2012, the ECB published the results of its study into the costs of making retail 
payments, conducted in cooperation with 13 NCBs3. For the euro area, these costs amount 
to around €45 billion, or almost 1% of GDP. If extrapolated to cover all the 27 EU countries, 
they  would  be  around  €130  billion. The  results  underline  the  importance  of  retail  payment 
services  to  the  people  of  Europe  and  its  economy  as  a  whole.  The  study  offers  valuable 
guidance on how overall cost efficiency can be improved even further. 
Retail  payments  are  an  economic  factor  on  their  own,  representing  a  market  segment 
dominated by banks – at the moment. Research shows that that the performance of banks in 
EU  countries  with  more  developed  retail  payment  markets  is  better;  an  effective  payment 
service market is found to be associated with higher bank stability4.  
According to  AT  Kearney5,  Europe’s  retail  banks  are  continuing  to recover  after  bottoming 
out in 2009. Despite the crisis, income remained remarkably stable and is just slightly below 
2007 levels. Not only are traditional retail banks re-discovering the advantages of the more 
traditional transaction services, prominent investment and corporate banks are doing so too. 
Payment services have a low risk profile and therefore do not worsen the solvency ratio; they 
allow  for  stable  profits  and  are  close  to  the  customer,  offering  cross-selling  and  customer 
retention possibilities6.  
                                                
3  For more details, see Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G. and Ruttenberg, W., “The social and private costs of retail 
payment instruments: a European perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No 137, ECB, October 2012. 
4  Hasan,  I.;  Schmiedel,  H.;  Song,  L.  (2009):  Return  to  Retail  Banking  and  Payments.  ECB  Working  Paper 
Series No 1135, Dec. 2009. http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1135.pdf 
5  AT Kearney (2012): 2012 Retail Banking Radar: Change Looms in Europe, 2012. 
6  Lubig, D.; Wandhöfer, O. (2011): Margenstark, risikoarm und kundennah: Die Renaissance des Transaction 
Bankings (in German). Bain & Company, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
During the crisis, the non-cash retail payments market continued to show growth rates well 
above GDP growth. This can serve as a proof of the resilience of payment services and their 
attractiveness  as  a  market  in  which  to  invest.7,
8  Alongside  the  lending  and  the  taking  of 
deposits, the provision of payment services to companies and households is one of the three 
core functions of retail banking, which are also key public services. Retail payments therefore 
not  only  have  an  economic  relevance  for  the  supply  side,  but  also  have  an  overall  social 
relevance. The involvement of the demand side is therefore critical to any change process in 
retail payments. This all shows the importance of payment systems and the SEPA project in 
particular for European financial integration and the benefits this brings to society.  
 Innovative payments 
Whereas SEPA has already contributed to the objectives of the European single market, it 
will also need to be expanded towards new sectors of the economy, such as e-commerce9. 
In the European Commission’s recent proposals on the completion of the single market, one 
key  objective  is  to  facilitate  e-commerce  in  the  EU  by  making  payment  services  easier  to 
use, more trustworthy and competitive10. 
The prospects of full migration to the SEPA credit transfer and direct debit schemes form the 
foundation for innovative payment services offered on a pan-European scale. This is proven 
by the fact that, upon closer inspection, innovations are often related to the way the payment 
is initiated, such as via a mobile phone or the internet. The underlying payment instrument 
used is often a card payment, sometimes a credit transfer and occasionally a direct debit.  
For  m-payments,  smaller  pilots  have  been  organised  in  several  European  countries, 
sometimes  followed  by  actual  deployments,  but  no  EU-wide  solutions  exist.  In  fact,  the 
Eurosystem  is  concerned  that  too  little  attention  is  being  paid  to  technical  standardisation 
and/or  business  interoperability.  This  might  create  for  m-payments  the  same  well-known 
problems which SEPA has been trying to solve.  
As for internet payments, their development, rollout and usage has not kept pace with the 
rapid  development  of  e-commerce.  Certainly  there  are  some  success  stories  at  national 
level.  But  even  43  years  after  the  forerunner  of  today’s  internet  first  linked  two  computer 
networks in the US, solutions are absent in many countries. Of course, when we look beyond 
the traditional banking sector, solutions do exist, even offering a global reach to e-commerce 
merchants.  Other  new  players  are  entering the market  and  offer  appealing  propositions to 
end-users.  The  ECB  welcomes  efficient,  safe  and  reliable  payment  systems  and  services, 
regardless  of  who  is  offering  them.  The  status  quo  in  retail  payment  services  cannot  be 
expected to remain stable. For banks, this poses various strategic questions which the EPC 
might also wish to reflect upon during its strategic retreat today.  
In  view  of  the  limited  progress  achieved  by  the  market  so  far,  the  SEPA  Council11  has 
identified  a  number  of  key  challenges  to  be  examined  in  order  to  ensure  the  provision  of 
                                                
7  Capgemini (2012): World Payments Report 2012. 
8  Recently published figures of Capgemini show an annual growth rate in non-cash payments volume of 3.4% 
for  the  U.S.,  of  4.9%  for  Europe  and  of more  than  30%  for  emerging  markets like  Russia  or  China.  These 
increases in volume were mainly fuelled by card payments and especially by debit card payments. 
9  Monti,  M.  (2010):  A  new  strategy  for  the  Single  Market  – At  the service  of  Europe’s economy  and  society, 
Report to the President of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, 9 May 2010. 
10  European  Commission  (2012):  Single  Market  Act  II,  Together  for  new  growth,  Communication  from  the 
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the Regions, 3 October 2012. 
11  The  stakeholders’  forum,  co-chaired  by  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission,  aims  to  promote  an 
integrated  euro  retail  payments  market  by  ensuring  the  proper  involvement  of  all  parties  and  by  fostering 
consensus on the next steps towards the realisation of SEPA. The banking industry, public administrations 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
EU-wide  internet  payment  services  for  e-commerce.  Among  those  challenges:  ensuring 
sufficient  choice  to  meet  user  requirements,  delivering  user-friendly,  privacy-compliant  and 
highly  secure  payment  services,  as  well  as  fair  and  open  market  access  while  creating  a 
level playing field for incumbent and new players.  
At the request of the EPC, a stakeholder meeting on internet payments was organised on 
8 November.  The  meeting,  which  was  co-chaired  by  the  ECB  and  the  European 
Commission,  provided  new  impetus  for  the  discussion,  especially  on  payment  initiation 
services.  These  services  make  use  of  the  banks’  online  banking  systems  and  are  often 
offered by non-financial institutions which are not always regulated, supervised or overseen. 
During the meeting, it became clear that the various providers of payment initiation services 
have very different operational models. Some have chosen to rely on contractual agreements 
with  the  account-servicing  banks.  Without  such  cooperation,  the  technical  part  of  the 
payment  service  is  more  difficult  to  maintain,  sensitive  data  of  the  account  owner  is  not 
protected, and the payment service is less reliable overall. The SEPA Council will follow up 
on these issues at its next meeting. 
Competition rules and work on integration 
I am aware that there is a debate on “competition versus integration”, which sometimes tries 
to  frame  the  current  status  of  the  SEPA  project  as  being  blocked  by  competition  law. 
However, the issue for the competition authorities has been the anti-competitive way in which 
some market participants have behaved in recent years. The authorities are also concerned 
that work, such as that on standardisation, is being done in an exclusive manner.  
In the field of card payments, the EPC’s reaction to the latter concern has been to establish a 
true stakeholder involvement process, i.e. the Cards Stakeholders Group. For SCT and SDD, 
a Customer Stakeholder Forum has already existed for many years. More recently, a forum 
was established with the clearing and settlement infrastructures processing the transactions. 
In the field of internet payments, the preliminary reaction of the EPC has been less fruitful. 
The EPC decided to stop all its work on its E-payments Framework without addressing the 
issues at stake and without trying to seek the involvement of all stakeholders.  
The challenge will be to address the issues of today and tomorrow, for SCT and SDD, for 
card payments, but also for m-payments and internet payments, in a  way that includes all 
stakeholders.  
Review of SEPA governance and future role of EPC  
In  2012,  the  SEPA  Council  has  conducted  in-depth  discussions  regarding  the  review  of 
SEPA governance – in other words, on the way the SEPA project is being managed. At the 
core of these discussions is the future role of the SEPA Council itself in shaping the future of 
retail payment services in euro. In this context, SEPA should be understood as the European 
payments  area,  and  not  the  time-bound  project  –  so  why  not  call  it  the  European  Retail 
Payments Council? 
One option would be that the SEPA Council becomes an advisory body for public authorities 
in the exercise of regulation. Another option, which is preferable in my view, is to accept a 
body that is empowered with a self-regulatory mandate. As regards the latter, the ECB would 
be willing to continue co-chairing the SEPA Council, as far as it is without prejudice to the 
statutory tasks of the ECB. 
                                                                                                                                                   
and end users (such as consumers and corporate entities, including small and medium-sized enterprises and 
retailers) are represented. Four Eurosystem central banks also participate on a rotating basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Work at different levels is envisaged. At the strategic level, the SEPA Council would discuss 
and  agree  on  the  key  topics  and  would  set  priorities.  At  a  more  pragmatic  level,  concrete 
requirements  would  be  developed  in  a  multi-stakeholder  environment.  For  certain  issues, 
existing standardisation bodies or new organisations would develop technical specifications. 
The debate is ongoing, but should hopefully come to a conclusion by the end of this year or 
in early 2013, as there are many topics to discuss.  
As regards the role of the EPC in the new SEPA governance, it is not only in the EPC’s own 
interests that it stays at the centre of European retail payments integration and innovation; it 
is also in the interests of the market. It is clear that the EPC should continue contributing to 
SEPA Council work, as a representative of the European banking sector for retail payments. 
The involvement would be at the strategic level and often also at the requirements level. 
In addition, as scheme owner of SCT and SDD, the EPC has a continued responsibility for 
maintenance and improvements. It should do that in a transparent way, as is being done with 
the  Customer  Stakeholder  Forum,  the  Clearing  &  Settlement  Forum,  and  with  the 
consultations on new releases.  
Perhaps the EPC should review its involvement in cards, where it is not a scheme owner. 
The SEPA Cards Framework and its subsequent Q&As have not proved to be very effective 
in developing a European card payments market. The work of the Cards Stakeholders Group 
on  the  standardisation  of  functional  requirements  and  the  standardisation  of  the  security 
requirements  for  cards  and  terminals  should  become  the  leading  workstream.  The  EPC’s 
role would then be to channel the positions of the European banking sector at the strategic 
level of the SEPA Council, as well as to provide technical expertise in the discussions of the 
Cards  Stakeholders  Group.  It  is  a  good  example  of  how  social  dialogue  and  multi-
stakeholder involvement can work.  
For innovative payments, such as internet and m-payments, the EPC has a legitimate role to 
enable  the  use  of  the  EPC’s  own  schemes.  It  could  do  so  by  developing  implementation 
guidelines for SCT and SDD for use in such payments. It is important that this is done in a 
way that involves other stakeholders, also those outside the traditional banking sector.  
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. The work on payment systems and on SEPA in particular remains a crucial 
part of European integration in the area of financial services. SEPA is delivering value to all 
European  citizens.  For  banks,  before  and  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  provision  of  retail 
payments is one of their few stable business lines and an area on which many banks are 
focusing.  
The  internet,  in  an  embryonic  form,  started  43  years  ago  today.  Young  people  today  are 
unaware  how  our  economy,  our  society  and  the  world  functioned  before  the  internet,  and 
especially  before  the  World  Wide  Web.  How  do  you  think  they  perceive  the  fact  that  the 
institutions to which they entrust most of their money and on which they rely to make most of 
their payments are still mostly absent when they want to make payments on the internet?  
The ECB welcomes efficient, safe and reliable payment systems and services, regardless of 
who is offering them. But if banks want to play a role in the future of retail payments, they will 
need  to  act  soon,  as  their  position  cannot  be  expected  to  remain  stable.  New  players  are 
entering the market and offer appealing propositions to end users, especially with regard to 
“innovative” payments, such as m-payments and internet payments.  
The  EPC’s  position  will  need  to  be  adapted  in  the  light  of  the  ongoing  review  of  SEPA 
governance. The EPC is certainly well positioned to continue contributing to the work of the 
SEPA  Council,  representing  the  European  banking  sector  on  retail  payments.  Therefore,  I 
expect  the  EPC  to continue  taking  a  pro-active  approach.  Being the  scheme  owner  of the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SEPA  Credit  Transfer  and  Direct  Debit  schemes,  positioning  these  schemes  more 
prominently as building blocks for internet and m-payments seems to be a logical next step.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
