Philip Lowe: Australia and the world 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Commonwealth  Bank  Australasian  Fixed  Income  Conference  Dinner,  Sydney,  30  October 
2012. 
 I would like to thank Tom Rosewall for his valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
Thank you very much for the invitation to join you tonight. It is a pleasure to be here.  
This evening I would like to talk about some developments in the international economy and 
their implications for Australia. Clearly, this is not a new topic. Developments abroad have 
long had a profound impact on the Australian economy and financial markets, and, no doubt, 
they will continue to do so. But the unusual nature of recent developments, particularly in the 
advanced economies, is changing the way in which global outcomes affect Australia. I would 
like to spend some time this evening talking about these changes.  
It is useful to start off with the “big picture” and the key global influences on the Australian 
economy over recent times. Here, I would point to just two. The first is very much a positive 
influence  –  that  is,  the  strong  growth  over  a  number  of  years  in  many  emerging  market 
economies, particularly those in Asia. The second is a negative influence – that is, the fiscal, 
household  balance  sheet  and  banking  problems  in  many  of  the  world’s  advanced 
industrialised  countries.  Together,  these  two  influences  are  reshaping  the  contours  of  the 
global economic landscape. They are also changing the configuration of interest rates and 
exchange rates we are seeing in Australia.  
The Asian story and its implications for us are well known. The strong growth in the region 
has led to a marked increase in the prices of resources and agricultural commodities, relative 
to the price of manufactured goods. This has been to our considerable advantage, given our 
natural resource base and our stable investment climate. It has meant that at a time when 
many  of the  advanced economies  have  been  experiencing  what  is  close  to  an  investment 
drought, Australia has had the highest level of investment, relative to GDP, in over a century, 
and a further increase is expected (Graph 1).  
While the growth in Asia is clearly a positive story for Australia, there are inevitably ups and 
downs in the region and these are having a bigger influence on the Australian economy than 
was  previously  the  case.  Reflecting  this,  we  have  recently  seen  Chinese  economic  data 
being discussed much more in Australia than they were just a short time ago. Earlier in the 
year, growth in China was slowing, but the recent data have had a more positive tone and 
suggest that growth in China has stabilised, albeit at a lower rate than over the past decade 
or so.  
The story in the advanced economies is also well known, but is much less positive. For too 
many years, public spending ran ahead of taxes, with the difference financed at low interest 
rates in the bond market. In some countries, private-sector debt also grew too quickly and 
banks mismanaged their balance sheets. The result has been, and continues to be, a costly 
period of adjustment. Public finances have to be put on a sounder footing. Households are 
reducing debt levels. And financial institutions are strengthening their balance sheets. These 
adjustments  take  considerable  time  and  it  is  likely  to  be  some  years  before  they  are 
complete.  If  this  is  so,  then  a  protracted  period  of  disappointingly  slow  growth  seems  in 
prospect for a number of these economies.  
These two stories are, of course, interlinked. The ongoing momentum in the Asian region has 
provided  some  boost  to  the  advanced  economies  over  recent  times,  and  conversely  the 
problems in these advanced economies have contributed to a slowing in Asian growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This co-dependence is very much the way of the world. But co-dependence does not mean 
that it is inevitable that the sluggish growth in the advanced economies must cause the world 
as  a  whole  to  experience  sluggish  growth.  With  the  right  policy  settings,  it  is  not 
inconceivable  that  strong  growth  in  Asia  –  driven  by  domestic  demand  –  could  continue 
despite  the  problems  in  the  advanced  economies.  Australia  obviously  has  a  very  strong 
interest in this outcome, not least because we have benefited more from the growth in Asia 
than has any other advanced industrialised economy.  
So much for these big-picture influences. I would like to focus on the channels through which 
the  problems  in  the  advanced  economies  are  affecting  the  rest  of  the  world,  including 
Australia.  
The most obvious is the trade channel, with weaker demand from the advanced economies 
weighing on exports from the rest of the world, including from Asia (Graph 2). This has acted 
as  a  drag  on  growth  in  the  Asian  region,  although  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  the 
experience is nothing like that in late 2008 and 2009. For Australia, the direct trade links with 
the troubled advanced economies are not as large, although we face important second-round 
effects through our trade with Asia as well as through softer commodity prices.  
A  second  channel  through  which  the  problems  in  the  advanced  economies  are  having  an 
effect is through adding to uncertainty, for uncertainty leads to decisions being delayed.  
The  two  big  uncertainties  that  have  attracted  attention  over  recent  times  centre  on  the 
looming “fiscal cliff” in the United States and the question of how Europe resolves its fiscal 
and banking problems.  
At least in terms of the European question, some progress is being made, albeit frustratingly 
slowly. A year ago, it was unclear whether the ECB would be prepared to buy sovereign debt 
in large quantities. It was unclear how the funding stresses in the banking system would be 
resolved. And it was unclear just how much political support there was for more centralised 
bank  supervision  as  well  as  the  various  European  financial  support  mechanisms.  Yet,  in 
each of these areas, important decisions have been made. Collectively, these decisions have 
lessened the probability of a very adverse outcome, though clearly more work needs to be 
done.  Investors  rightly  want  to  see  more  than  just  high-level  decisions  from  European 
summits. They want to see agreement on how these decisions are to be implemented. And 
then they want to see further progress on actual implementation.  
This  uncertainty  stemming from  problems  in the  advanced  economies  is  having  an  impact 
here in Australia. It has adversely affected confidence and has led to the deferral of some 
decisions  and  more  cautious  behaviour.  But  the  subdued  level  of  confidence  also  has 
domestic  roots.  Employment  growth,  the  rate  of  asset  price  increases  and  consumption 
growth  are  all  lower  than  they  were  over  the  decade  to  the  mid  2000s. During  this  earlier 
period  the  outcomes  in  these  areas  were  very  strong  as  the  economy  adjusted  to  low 
inflation and the increased availability of credit. But this adjustment is now complete, and the 
return to more normal patterns has come as a disappointing surprise to many who thought 
that the previous outcomes were the norm. This gradual realisation that the future is likely to 
be different from the past is an important factor weighing on sentiment in Australia.  
A third channel through which the problems in the large industrialised countries are having an 
effect is through the very accommodative stance of monetary policy in these economies. In the 
United States, the euro area, Japan and the United Kingdom, official interest rates are either at, 
or  very  close,  to  their  lower  bound,  and  the  size  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheets  has 
increased markedly.  
From one perspective, this setting of monetary policy is hardly surprising. The sluggish growth 
in  many  of  the  advanced  economies  means  that  little,  or  no,  progress  is  being  made  in 
reducing high rates of unemployment. At the same time, core inflation is subdued. As a result, 
monetary  policy  is  accommodative.  And  with  official  interest  rates  effectively  at  zero,  this 
accommodative setting is being achieved through expansion of central bank balance sheets.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But from another perspective, what we are seeing is highly unusual. Since mid 2008, four of 
the world's major central banks – the Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank of Japan and the 
Bank  of  England  –  have  all  expanded  their  balance  sheets  very  significantly,  and  further 
increases have been announced in a couple of cases (Graph 3). In total, the assets of these 
four  central  banks  have  already  increased  by  the  equivalent  of  around  $US5  trillion,  or 
around 15 per cent of the combined GDP of the relevant economies. We have not seen this 
type of planned simultaneous very large expansion of central bank balance sheets before. 
So in that sense, it is very unusual, and its implications are not yet fully understood.  
This type of monetary expansion is supposed to work through a number of mechanisms. At 
the risk of oversimplifying things, I want to focus on just two of these.  
The first is that it increases the prices of assets that the central bank is buying, thus lowering 
the yields on those assets. With the Fed, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England all 
buying their own government’s bonds, it is hardly surprising that yields on those bonds are at 
very low levels (Graph 4). Similarly, in Europe, the prospect of the ECB buying the bonds of 
troubled sovereigns has seen yields on those bonds decline. Also, in the United States, the 
Fed’s  decision  to  purchase  mortgage-backed  securities  has  seen  the  yields  on  those 
securities fall.  In general,  these  lower  yields  should  help  provide  some  boost  to  spending, 
just as would lower interest rates from more conventional policy.  
The second mechanism is through asset allocation decisions, as banks and investors adjust 
their  portfolios  following  the  sale  of  assets  to  the  central  bank.  These  sales  lead  to  an 
increase in the balances that banks hold at the central bank. In addition, where the ultimate 
seller of the assets is a non-bank, they also lead to an increase in bank deposits. At some 
point,  the  institutions  holding  these  higher  balances,  which  earn  zero  or  very  low  interest 
rates, could be expected to conclude that there were other assets somewhere in the world 
that  earned  a  risk-adjusted  return  above  zero.  As  institutions  seek  out these  other  assets, 
their prices would be expected to rise. The ever-larger size of these balances increase the 
incentive for institutions to seek out these other assets.  
There  is  evidence  that  this  transmission  channel  of  quantitative  easing  is  working.  Market 
participants report that, at least in some areas, the appetite for risk is slowly returning, with 
some  investors  looking  at  how  to  improve  their  returns.  Global  stock  markets  have  rallied 
since the middle of the year. Corporate bond spreads in the United States and Europe have 
narrowed,  and  yields  are  around  their  lowest  levels  on  record  (Graph 5).  Corporate  bond 
issuance in the United States has been strong recently and issuance has also picked up in 
Europe.  
Of course, these developments may not be sustained. Any appetite for increased risk taking 
can easily be diminished again by a bad outcome somewhere in the world. But for the time 
being, in some market segments, conditions are slowing improving. It is not unreasonable to 
attribute some of this to quantitative easing. Indeed, this is what the textbook tells us should 
be happening.  
There is an important international dimension to all of this as well. When institutions look for 
alternatives  to  holding  large  deposits  earning  a  near  zero  return,  they  look  not  just  at 
domestic  assets,  but  at  foreign  assets  as  well.  Not  surprisingly,  with  the  rest  of  the  world 
doing better than the troubled advanced economies, many of the assets earning positive risk-
adjusted returns are located outside the countries undertaking quantitative easing.  
As  a  result  of  this,  there  is  an  incipient  outflow  of  capital  from  these  countries,  and  by 
extension downward pressure on their currencies. Of course, this means that the currencies 
of  some  other  countries  are  under  upward  pressure,  which,  by  itself,  weighs  on  growth  in 
these countries. This is not the end of the story though and there are some potential offsets. 
The  first  is  that  if  quantitative  easing  is  successful  in  boosting  growth  in  the  countries  in 
which is it occurring, then the world economy will be stronger. The second is that any rise in 
asset  prices  that  occurs  because  of  the  capital  flows  might  also  provide  a  boost.  And  the 
third  is  that  the  contractionary  effects  of  an  appreciation  can  be  countered  with  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
stimulatory  domestic  policy-setting  –  including  through  lower  interest  rates  –  than  would 
otherwise have been the case.  
This has, by necessity, been a quick tour through the effects of quantitative easing (perhaps 
not quick enough for a dinner!). One key point, though, is that quantitative easing and weak 
growth in the large industrialised economies is likely to lead, for a time at least, to upward 
pressure  on  other  currencies  and  lower  interest  rates  around  the  world.  For  the  countries 
whose currencies are under upward pressure, this can be uncomfortable. However, it should 
not come as a surprise that the countries that are doing relatively well see their currencies 
gain value relative to those that are not doing so well. And it is this movement in exchange 
rates  that  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  low  interest  rates  in  the  large  financial  centres  are 
transmitted around the globe.  
Clearly,  the  real  world  is  considerably  more  complex  than  this.  But  over  recent  times  a 
number of the non-crisis countries with floating currencies have indeed found themselves in 
this general position – that is, they have had low nominal interest rates and a relatively high 
exchange rate (compared with what was expected). This list here could include, to varying 
degrees,  Canada,  South  Korea,  Switzerland,  New  Zealand,  and  some  of  the  Nordic 
countries. In each of these cases, interest rates are very low by historical standards, and in a 
number of them the central bank has recently drawn attention to the upward pressure on its 
currency (Graph 6).  
This  configuration  of  low  interest  rates  and  a  high  exchange  rate  is  a consequence  of  the 
problems in the advanced industrialised economies. It is inevitably affecting the composition 
of growth in the countries concerned, although it need not be inconsistent with trend growth. 
Industries producing traded goods and services tend to be disadvantaged relative to the non-
traded  parts  of  the  economy.  And  low  interest  rates  help  create  an  environment  where 
investors are prepared to borrow to buy assets. To some extent this is desirable, and it is one 
of the channels through which monetary policy works. But it can also increase the probability 
of imbalances developing in credit and asset markets, with potential implications for financial 
and macroeconomic stability. Given the experience of the past decade, it is hardly surprising 
that the central banks in a number of countries have recently indicated that they are watching 
developments on this front very closely.  
So what are implications for Australia of all of this? It is perhaps useful to make four brief 
points.  
The first is that the primary reason the Australian dollar is high compared with its historical 
average is the large shift in the relative price of commodities I spoke about at the outset. This 
shift has been to Australia’s advantage, and the high exchange rate has helped us navigate 
our  way  through  a  once-in-a-century  investment  boom.  The  economy  has  recorded  solid 
growth, the unemployment rate remains relatively low, inflation is consistent with the target, 
public debt is low and the banking system is sound. Few countries can make such claims.  
The second is that the types of portfolio flows I talked about earlier do appear to be having 
an  effect  here.  This  effect  is  perhaps  clearest  in  the  government  bond  market,  with  yields 
near  historic  lows.  But  it  is  also  evident  in  the  credit  markets,  with  credit  spreads  paid  by 
banks having fallen recently. It is also likely that these portfolio flows help explain why the 
exchange  rate  has  changed  little  since  mid  year  despite  a  general  softening  of  the  global 
outlook and a decline in key export prices.  
The  third  point  is  that  Australia’s  interest  rates  remain  above  those  in  other  developed 
economies. The main reason for this is that the rate of return on new investment in Australia 
is  higher  than  in  many  other  countries,  as  evidenced  by  the  high  level  of  investment. The 
very  low  interest  rates  in  many  other  economies  should  not  be  seen  as  a  good  thing  or 
something to  aspire to. They  reflect  those countries’  difficult  economic  circumstances,  and 
particularly the low risk-adjusted returns available on new investment.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The fourth  and final  point  is that  while  our  interest rates  are relatively  high  compared  with 
other countries, they are relatively low compared with historical averages. The international 
connections that I have talked about tonight help to explain this. These lower-than-average 
interest  rates  are  providing  some  support  to  demand  in  the  economy.  There  is  also  some 
sign that they have led to a slight improvement in the property market, although there has 
been little change in the appetite for debt. It would appear that, for the moment at least, the 
lower  interest  rates,  rather  than  encouraging  household  borrowing,  have  allowed  many 
households with mortgages to repay their loans slightly more quickly than was previously the 
case. These trends will obviously need close monitoring over the period ahead.  
So  to  conclude.  These  competing  influences  from  Asia  and  the  troubled  advanced 
economies are having a significant effect on the Australian economy, the exchange rate and 
interest rates. They  are  creating  challenges for both  policymakers  and  investors,  and  they 
have added to the sense of uncertainty. What seems clearer though is that Australia’s strong 
trade links with Asia, our solid financial system, our flexible markets and our credible policy 
framework mean that we are in a better position than many other countries to deal with these 
challenges. I wish you the best of luck as you navigate your way through this complex world.  
Graph 1 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 2 
  Graph 3 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 4 
  Graph 5 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 6 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
