Sabine Lautenschläger: Deutsche Bundesbank’s 2012 Financial Stability 
Review – the risks to the German financial system 
Opening  statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  press  conference  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability 
Review 2012 “The risks to the German financial system”, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 
2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear journalists, 
Dr Dombret and I cannot, unfortunately, give the all-clear in presenting this year’s Financial 
Stability Review. Like last year, we still see substantial risks for the financial sector. The still-
smouldering  sovereign  debt  crisis  continues  to  shape  the  risk  situation,  even  though 
progress has been made at the national and EU level. For this reason, it remains important 
that  governments  put  structural  adjustments  in  place  to  fight  for  their  competitiveness  and 
achieve sustainable public finances – with a view to addressing the root causes of the crisis. 
But risks stem not only from the sovereign debt crisis. The global economic slowdown and 
market liquidity in search of yield may lead to additional risks in the financial sector. And we 
are also keeping a very close eye on the challenges that emanate for insurance companies 
and  banks  from  the  low-interest  rate  environment.  Dr  Dombret  will  come  back  to  that 
question in greater detail later on. 
Before my colleague and I assail you with selected prices, balance sheet data and indicators, 
I  would  like  to  draw  attention  to  one  aspect  which  is  not to  be  underestimated,  and  which 
poses a threat to financial stability in the medium to long term. I am referring to the imminent 
danger of overtaxing monetary policy in the battle against the sovereign debt crisis. 
Government debt crisis 
2. 
Without a doubt, the sovereign debt crisis has revealed weaknesses at the national level and 
weaknesses  at  the  European  level.  To  remedy  these  weaknesses  is  a  challenge  for 
European  policymakers  and  national  governments  alike.  And  to  overcome  this  challenge, 
very difficult and unpopular decisions have to be made. Of late, the search for solutions has 
increasingly  led  to  the  central  banks.  I  consider  this  to  be  a  dangerous  route  to  take. 
Monetary policy cannot eliminate the causes of the crisis; nor can it, therefore, lead to the 
desired objective. The monetary policy measures that are implemented can only buy time. 
There  is  a  general  consensus  on  this  within  the  Eurosystem.  Nor  is  this  time  for  free  –  it 
comes at a price. 
The central banks have already done a great deal to contain the crisis, and have assumed 
considerable risks: not just financial risks but risks to their credibility and independence. The 
Bundesbank has repeatedly emphasised what needs to be done. At the European level, it is 
necessary to strengthen and improve the framework of monetary union. A key premise here 
is  that  an  adequate  balance  must  be  maintained  between  liability  and  control.  Whoever 
ultimately  assumes  responsibility  for  risks,  be  they  in  government  budgets  or  in  banks’ 
balance sheets, must also be able to control and exercise influence on the build-up of risks. 
Greater mutualisation must not go hand-in-hand with weak rights of intervention and controls. 
If  that  were  to  happen,  the  consequences  of  the  political  mistakes  made  by  individual 
member states could easily be passed on to all the others. That would not result in a stable 
framework for monetary union, however. And where there is no stable framework, crises are 
pretty well inevitable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
At present I do not see a political majority for either of the two possible solutions – be it the 
path to a bona fide fiscal union or the way back to the Maastricht Treaties. Many member 
states are unwilling to renounce much more sovereignty, and the mutualisation of risks that 
has been put in place so far can only be reversed with great difficulty. 
However, work on the institutional framework of monetary union has not come to a complete 
standstill. 
Banking union 
3. 
The  establishment  of  a  European  banking  union  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  debate 
since  the  middle  of  this  year.  The  term  “banking  union”  refers  to  the  creation  of  a  single 
European  system  of  banking  supervision,  a  single  resolution  and  restructuring  mechanism 
and a single system of deposit protection. A banking union constitutes a step towards greater 
integration in Europe and – if it is correctly conceived and implemented – it can strengthen 
the institutional framework that is so important. 
A single system of banking supervision makes sense given the substantial financial linkages 
between  European  institutions.  And  in  tandem  with  a  suitable  resolution  regime  it  could 
reduce the strain on national budgets caused by the restructuring of banks. Unlike a national 
authority,  a  European  supervisory  body  has  no  incentive  to  act  out  of  a  false  sense  of 
consideration for “its” banks. What is more, it can help achieve a level playing field within the 
euro area and, at best – thanks to the extensive body of data at its disposal – it can better 
identify risks that threaten the banking system or risks that emanate from it. 
But  setting  up  an  effective,  strong  European  banking  supervision  structure  is  a  highly 
complex  task.  This  is  demonstrated,  not  least,  by  the  many  questions  that  remain  to  be 
answered.  For  instance,  clarification  is  needed  on  how  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision can best be separated organisationally under the umbrella of the ECB, what form 
the governance structures within the ECB should take, how at least 17 national supervisors 
are supposed to cooperate with the ECB within a single supervisory system, and finally who 
is to take what decisions on what legal basis and with what legal protection. And then, this 
system will have to develop a comprehensive supervisory approach to be able to generate 
the  advantages  of  a  European  system  of  supervision.  Seen  in  that  light,  the  timetable 
announced at the EU’s October summit, though it has been somewhat relaxed, still strikes 
me as being very ambitious. 
Effective banking supervision is essential to stable monetary union. Thus, in my opinion it is 
a  central,  forward-looking  project,  and  not  so  much  a  means  of  solving  today’s  problems. 
And because of its importance for the future of monetary union, we must be careful in how 
we proceed. Certainly, Europe will gain nothing from hasty implementation that produces a 
label without content. 
4. 
Situation of and challenges facing the German banking sector five years after 
the onset of the crisis 
The German banking system: the position today 
A) 
Where does the German banking system, which in future is to be supervised by the ECB, 
stand at present? 
Five years on from the outbreak of the financial crisis we are still bogged down in an arduous 
process  of  recovery  and  stabilisation.  Yet  we  have  made  some  discernible  progress.  The 
German institutions are in a more robust condition than they were five years ago. 
Germany’s 12 large complex financial institutions have made distinct improvements to their 
capital  base  in  recent  years.  At  the  end  of  September  2012,  these  institutions  had  a  tier 
1 capital  ratio  of  almost  13.6%,  which  represents  a  considerable  increase  over  the  8.3% 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tier 1  capital  ratio  they  had  in  the first quarter  of  2008. The  institutions  have  improved  the 
size and quality of their capital base, while at the same time steadily scaling down their risk 
assets over recent years. In this way, the banks concerned have also been able to reduce 
their leverage: since 2008, their leverage ratio has fallen from 43 to a value of 32. 
The recapitalisation measures recommended by the European Banking Authority (EBA) have 
also helped make Germany’s banks more resilient. The capital shortfall of almost €13 billion 
identified at five German institutions has been made good, and overall the 12 banks involved 
met the stringent requirement for a core tier 1 capital ratio of at least 9% on schedule – in 
fact, they exceeded the requirement by €15.5 billion. 
In  the  past  year,  the  institutions  have  reduced  their  claims  on  debtors  in  the  euro-area 
periphery countries; their exposure to Greek debt is now negligible. However, German banks 
still have significant claims on the Spanish and Italian governments, amounting to €21 billion 
and  €38 billion  respectively.  Their  exposure  to  Spanish  and  Italian  banks  totals  around 
€36 billion and €44 billion respectively. This means that susceptibility to an escalation in the 
European sovereign debt crisis remains a high risk for the German banking sector. 
The German institutions have also rendered their balance sheets less vulnerable by scaling 
down known toxic assets. In the past two years, the 12 large German institutions have cut 
back  their  exposure  to  these  asset-backed  securities  by  30%  to  around  €116  billion. 
However, the securities still present a latent risk if their rating structure should deteriorate. 
If  the  banks  are  to  build  further  on  the  stabilisation  they  have  already  achieved,  then  an 
adequate  earnings  situation  is  of  central  importance.  After  the  huge  collapse  in  income 
suffered at the beginning of the crisis, the earnings situation of the 12 large complex financial 
institutions has recovered in more recent years and has now stabilised at a moderate level. 
Earnings  performance  at  the  current  end  is  somewhat  modest.  Earnings  for  the  large 
complex financial institutions in the first half of this year – a strong half traditionally – were 
down  on  the  first  six  months  of  last  year.  Interest  income  as  well  as  fee  and  commission 
income – major contributors to profit – have so far been lacklustre. Volatile trading income in 
the  first  six  months  also  came  in  below  the  previous  year’s  level.  In  addition,  risk 
provisioning, which was previously providing support for overall net income, has risen slightly 
of late. The figures we have so far for the third quarter of 2012 show a continuation of these 
trends;  overall,  however,  the  results  are  likely  to  be  an  improvement  on  those  for  the 
disappointing third quarter of 2011. 
Thus, the German banking sector has gone a fair way towards recovering from the effects of 
the  financial  crisis.  However,  a  glance  at  the  reform  agenda  shows  that  over  the  coming 
years the pressure on institutions to adapt will not abate. 
The German banking system: the challenges arising from regulation 
B) 
The  lessons  learnt  from  the  financial  crisis  have  been  worked  through  in  a  range  of 
supervisory  and  regulatory  reform  packages.  We  have  not  only  reformed  supervisory 
structures and the way in which national supervisors work with one another, we have also 
formulated a number of new rules which will make certain lines of business more expensive 
and render banks more resilient. It is important now that we pay attention to consistency in 
further  forthcoming  regulatory  measures,  and  that  we  very  carefully  analyse  and  take 
account of the incentives created and the cumulative effect of the numerous measures. 
Basel III, with its more stringent requirements for the quality and amount of capital held, is 
without doubt the key challenge for German institutions over the coming years. This is very 
clear from the impact studies conducted on the new standards. German banks still have a 
fair way to go before they are able to cover the Basel III capital requirements in 2022, when 
full implementation will take effect. 
Despite  the  need  to  meet  these  capital  requirements,  the  risk  that  Basel  III  might  curtail 
lending to the real economy and to small and medium-sized enterprises in particular appears 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to  be  low.  First,  the  long  transition  periods  will  help  institutions  to  position  themselves 
accordingly.  Second,  small  and  medium-sized  banks,  which  play  an  important  role  in 
supplying credit to small and medium-sized enterprises, are in a strong position to deal with 
the  transition  to  Basel  III,  according  to  our  analysis.  And,  finally,  it  is  clear  from  all 
discussions with banking executives that domestic lending is the area of business in which all 
banks wish to expand. 
What else needs to be attended to? There is no doubt we need to do further work on the too-
big-to-fail problem. And, in my opinion, it is essential in this that supervisors at national and 
international level be equipped with a plentiful armoury of tools. These include a European 
recovery and resolution directive, recovery and resolution plans for the banks affected, and 
detailed consultation between supervisors worldwide on resolution procedures in the event of 
a crisis. 
The Liikanen Group’s proposals for a system of separated banking functions also represent 
an  approach  worth  considering,  in  my  view,  because  in  principle  they  retain  the  universal 
banking model intact. To make a definitive judgement, we need to examine in detail to what 
extent the benefits expected from a separation of business areas are likely to be realised and 
what implications this has for banks, market structures and the real economy. 
The German banking system: outlook 
C) 
What do the challenges I have outlined mean for the future of German institutions?  
The  plethora  of  new  developments  occurring  simultaneously  will  put  a  number  of  banks’ 
business models under pressure. It is not just a matter of the costs that the more stringent 
regulation will bring with it, but also of the stiffer competitive conditions which will emerge. 
First,  refinancing  costs  for  institutions  will  rise,  as  competition  for  deposits  will  become 
considerably fiercer in Germany. And it is not only German institutions which will be wooing 
German  depositors.  Second,  new  competitors  in  lending  business,  the  trend  towards 
enterprises  obtaining  finance  on  the  capital  market,  and  the  present  low  interest-rate 
environment are also likely to squeeze lending  margins. Investment banking, in view of its 
volatile  contribution  to  profit,  will  have  to  demonstrate  whether  it  can  generate  reliable 
earnings over the long term. In addition, the increased capital requirements will make trading 
operations less attractive – if rightly so. 
In  sum,  with  higher  costs  and  stiffer  competition  on  the  cards,  the  question  arises  for  the 
German banking sector whether there will be sufficiently good business in Germany for every 
bank. Some banks will therefore need to work hard on their cost structure. As there are no 
indications whatsoever of a credit crunch, the option of consolidation in the German banking 
sector should also remain on the table. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
