Jens Weidmann: The concurrence of crisis management and regulatory 
policy 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Euro Finance 
Week, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be able to speak at the Euro Finance Week again this year. In my speech 
last year I talked about two topics: the financial markets and the sovereign debt crisis. This 
year I will be talking about the sovereign debt crisis and the financial markets – albeit with a 
somewhat different focus. 
Let’s  begin  by  taking  a  look  at the  overall  situation  in  the  third  year  of  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis. Policymakers in Europe still face two challenges. First, they have to solve the current 
crisis.  And  second,  they  have  to  make  the  structure  of  European  monetary  union  more 
stable. Of course, these two challenges are interconnected, since the short-term measures 
taken to solve the crisis must not clash with what is important for the stability of monetary 
union in the long term. This means that what we need is indeed a meaningful “concurrence 
of crisis management and regulatory policy”. 
The Bundesbank has pointed to two paths towards stable monetary union. One leads via an 
improved  Maastricht  framework  in  which  national  ownership  is  increased  –  meaning 
countries are to decide for themselves, but must themselves also bear the consequences of 
their  decisions.  The  second  way  leads  via  a  fiscal  union  under  which  substantial  national 
sovereignty would be transferred to the European level. 
However, it does not look at present as if policymakers will be taking either of these paths 
with  any  great  commitment.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  joint  liability  has  expanded 
considerably, representing a move away from the Maastricht framework. At the same time, 
however,  little  willingness  is  being  shown  to  cede  national  core  powers.  Thus,  monetary 
union  is  not  moving  much  closer  to  fiscal  union  either.  If  we  are  to  achieve  a  coherent 
structure, therefore, the main foundations still have to be laid. 
Although the future architecture of monetary union remains unclear, work on a new financial 
market architecture is making progress – in the shape, above all, of the European banking 
union. This activity is well justified for, whichever of the two paths monetary union will take, a 
considerably  more  stable  financial  system  will  be  needed  with  rules  that  will  strengthen, 
above all, investors’ individual responsibility. But thoughts differ on the purpose and design of 
the banking union project, too. In my view, at least, the banking union can play a central role 
in a stable monetary union. Let us examine this idea more closely, and begin by asking what 
the fundamental concept behind a banking union is. 
2. 
The problem posed by the connection between sovereign debt crisis and 
private debt crisis 
Ladies and gentlemen, for monetary union, the financial system is an open flank. The crisis 
has  made  that  quite  clear.  The  financial  system  played  an  important  part  in  creating  the 
economic imbalances in the crisis-stricken countries and in the massive rise in private debt 
and government debt that accompanied it. 
Prior 
the  economic  prospects  of  several  countries  were  drastically 
overestimated. When these expectations had to be revised, doubts increasingly arose as to 
the  sustainability  of their  debts and  their  ability  to  repay  the  loans  they had  been granted. 
the  crisis, 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And  although  these  doubts  initially  centred  on  the  creditworthiness  of  households, 
enterprises  and,  in  some  cases,  governments,  the  banks,  too,  quickly  attracted  attention 
given  their  role  as  financial  intermediary.  After  all,  banks’  balance  sheets  are  always  a 
reflection  of  their  respective  economies.  Another  factor  was  that  not  all  national  banking 
systems  were  prepared  for  a  crisis  to  begin  with.  And  because  of  the  systemic  dangers 
involved,  the  risks  of  the  banking  system  became  the  risks  of the  government  that  had  to 
come to the rescue. Ireland, for example, had a balanced budget before the financial crisis. 
During  the  crisis,  the  deficit  then  grew  to  stand  for  a  time  at  more  than  30%  of  economic 
output. At the same time, however, problems in public finances also impose a strain on the 
banking sector. For instance, the Greek haircut tore gaping holes in the balance sheets of 
Greece’s banks. 
When this feedback effect threatens the financial stability of the entire monetary union, the 
result  can  also  be  to  burden  taxpayers  in  other  countries  as  well  as  the  single  monetary 
policy  –  just  think  of  the  rescue  packages  or  the  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures 
implemented by the Eurosystem. These risks that can spread from the financial system to 
monetary union were certainly underestimated before the crisis. 
Banking union – an appropriate response? 
3 
The  question,  therefore,  is:  how  can  such  risks  be  more  effectively  limited  in  future? 
Essentially,  there  are  two  approaches  to  solving  this  question.  First,  by  taking  steps  to 
ensure that such a dangerous situation does not arise in the first place – be it for banks or for 
the government. 
But  situations  of  distress  cannot  be  entirely  prevented.  There  can  be  and  must  be  no 
guarantee of continued operation for – say – individual banks in a market economy. That is 
why  steps  must  also  be  taken  to  ensure  that  at  least  the  vicious  circle  of  weak  banks 
dragging  down  weak  sovereigns  and  vice-versa  is  broken.  This  principle  of  two  lines  of 
defence is not new. It has been the basis of the reform of financial market regulation thus far. 
Coming  back  to  the  specific question  we  are  looking  at,  a  banking  union  should  therefore 
ensure that fewer crises arise within the banking system that could potentially overburden the 
public finances of the member states directly affected, and subsequently cause problems for 
the  rest  of  the  euro  area  and  for  the  single  monetary  policy.  A  banking  union  should  also 
guarantee  that  monetary  union  is  better  equipped  to  deal  with  crises  that  cannot  be 
prevented. 
In keeping with these two lines of defence, debate currently centres on two components of a 
European  banking  union:  common  banking  supervision  and  a  common  restructuring  and 
resolution mechanism for banks. A third component under discussion is a common deposit 
protection scheme. However, that has slipped out of the spotlight somewhat – and I would 
say, rightly so. 
Let us start with common supervision and the advantages it offers. I consider four of them to 
be especially important: 
• 
First, common supervision increases the transparency of national banking systems. 
And in particular, more transparency means less uncertainty about the possibility of 
hidden risks. 
Second, common supervision is likely to make national banking systems less likely 
to  become  swept  up 
their  respective  domestic 
governments. This is because it is easier for a supranational supervisory authority 
than national supervisors to intervene when domestic banks are co-opted to provide 
overly cheap loans to the government or to households. 
Third,  common  supervision  ensures  that  the  same  high  standards  are  applied 
everywhere  and,  therefore,  that  competitive  conditions,  too,  are  the  same.  The 
fiscal  problems  of 
the 
in 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
concentration  of  excessive  risks  in  banks’  balance  sheets,  the  emergence  of 
hypertrophic  banking  systems  and  the  financial  crisis  as  a  whole  were  aided  and 
abetted, amongst other things, by differences between individual countries regarding 
the strictness of their prudential supervisory regimes. 
And  fourth,  common  banking  supervision  also  facilitates  measures  to  deal  with 
cross-border  systemic  effects.  This,  too,  would  have  gone  a  considerable  way 
towards  preventing  the current  crisis,  and  would  have  helped  to  deal  with  it  more 
effectively. 
 To sum up: common supervision could make the banking system more resilient and crises 
less  likely.  This  would  take  considerable  strain  off  both  the  public  finances  of  all  member 
states and the single monetary policy. 
And yet, common supervision cannot of course prevent every case of distress in the banking 
system.  This  is  where  the  second  component  of  a  banking  union  enters  the  picture:  the 
common  restructuring  and  resolution mechanism,  which  facilitates  the orderly  resolution  of 
distressed  banks.  Both  spare  the  government  the  considerable  expense  of  a  bank  rescue 
operation, and shield monetary policymakers from demands that they make a contribution to 
stabilisation that could come into conflict with their main mission, namely price stability. 
It almost goes without saying that, in the event of the resolution of a distressed bank, first the 
owners and creditors of that bank must be made liable. The costs that arise when a bank 
becomes  distressed  must  not  be  passed  on  primarily  to  the  taxpayers  of  the  country  in 
question – far less to those of other member states. For this reason, there is a lot to be said 
for setting up a dedicated fund to which the supervised banks have to make payments. The 
costs of restructuring or resolving a bank could then be reimbursed mainly from the fund’s 
coffers, making only subsidiary recourse to taxpayers necessary, ie if it looks as though the 
fund will be overstretched. 
Getting the design of the banking union right is a precondition for success 
4. 
The  key  components  of  a  banking  union,  then,  are  common  supervision  and  a  common 
restructuring  and 
the  close 
interconnectedness  between  the  banking  system  and  public  finances. However,  the  actual 
design  of  a  banking  union  is  crucial.  A  number  of  points  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  this 
respect. 
• 
resolution  mechanism.  They  would  help 
loosen 
to 
First,  the  banking  union  should  not  overshoot  the  mark  with  regard  to  the 
Europeanisation  of  competences.  National  responsibility  can  remain  in  place 
whenever  risks  can  be  borne  at  the  national  level  and  no  risks  exist  for  the 
taxpayers in other member states. 
Second, the guiding principle of stability-oriented monetary union must also apply to 
the banking union. A balance must be maintained between liability and control. If the 
European  level  is  collectively  liable  for  risks,  it  must  also  have  shared  powers  of 
intervention and control. 
Third, common supervision and a common restructuring and resolution mechanism 
also  call  for  decision-making  guidelines.  This  is  particularly  true  in  times  of  crisis, 
when pressure grows to redefine discretionary leeway on an ad hoc basis. For this 
reason,  clearly  defined  objectives  and  appropriate  and  verifiable  procedural  rules 
are necessary. 
Fourth,  the  banking  union  has  to  be  neatly  dovetailed  into  a  coherent  overall 
framework for monetary union. 
   Allow  me  to  explain  that  last  point  in  more  detail.  For  this,  we  have  to  change  our 
perspective. The banking union focuses on problems emanating from the banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But what about the dangers to the stability of the banking system that emanate from public 
finances or the economy as a whole? Two lines of defence can be drawn here, too, at the 
interfaces to macroprudential policy and to the fiscal and economic policy framework of EMU. 
It is possible to lower the likelihood of such undesirable developments, particularly in fiscal 
policy, and to limit the effects they have on the banking system. 
To  lower  the  likelihood  of  difficulties  in  public  finances,  the  banking  union  needs  to  be 
accompanied by European-level powers of fiscal policy intervention to be used if a member 
state persistently violates the European rules or the conditions tied to the financial assistance 
programmes.  At  the  same  time,  this  would  reduce  the  danger  that  problems  in  public 
finances could be passed on to the taxpayers of the euro area through the mechanisms of 
the  banking  union. If the  main  purpose  of the  banking  union  were,  ultimately,  to  introduce 
extensive joint liability through the back door, thereby giving the government more leeway to 
incur debt, this would be a disservice to monetary union. Such a danger does exist, and I 
believe we should not take it lightly. 
Along the second line of defence, the banking system needs to be better protected from the 
fallout of public finance problems. The regulatory reforms implemented so far, which likewise 
serve  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient,  already  play  an  important  part  in  this 
respect.  But  over  and  above  that,  banks  need  to  be  more  strongly  reined  back  from  the 
tendency  to  expose  themselves  to  excessive  government  solvency  risks.  To  this  end,  the 
banking union must be accompanied by further regulatory measures. I consider two to be of 
particular importance, and the aim of both, ultimately, is to end the practice of giving claims 
on  the  government  preferential  treatment  over  other  balance  sheet  assets.  First,  an  upper 
limit or a kind of large exposure cap needs to be imposed on individual banks’ exposure to 
sovereign debt. Second, banks need to back government bonds or loans to the government 
with equity capital. 
Backing government bonds with capital would result in a further advantage, namely that price 
signals would be sent out earlier if indications arose of an unsound development in public 
finances  –  giving  rise  to  pressure  to  consolidate.  This  requirement,  paired  with  common 
supervision, would prevent a situation in which governments continue to receive cheap credit 
despite budget difficulties, thereby plunging not just themselves but also the banks into even 
greater budgetary problems. 
The  importance  of  setting  the  barriers  higher  in  this  respect  is  illustrated  by  current 
developments. It’s the done thing nowadays to criticise the close interrelationship between 
public  finances  and  national  banking  systems.  Yet  individual  countries,  despite  being 
financially strapped, are still encouraging domestic banks to buy more and more of their own 
government’s  bonds.  This  is  a  good  example  in  that  it  clearly  illustrates  how  short-term 
attempts to combat the crisis are not compatible with what is needed in the long term. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise. If properly structured, a banking union can be an 
important building block, or even a pillar, of stable monetary union. But is it also the key to 
solving the crisis? No, it is not, and to expect that would be to demand too much of it. The 
banking union is a future-oriented concept whose purpose should be to help prevent future 
risks or at least to help deal with them better. 
However, the present problems affecting the banking system are the result, above all, of past 
undesirable developments at the national level. The risks in the balance sheets arose on the 
watch of national authorities, and the respective member states have to deal with them. This 
is the only way to maintain a balance of liability and control. To communitise these legacy 
burdens through a banking union would run counter to the purpose the banking union was 
established  for:  it  would  then  constitute  a  financial  transfer.  If  policymakers  believe  that 
transfers of this kind are necessary, then they should also refer to them as such. In some 
countries,  national  fiscal  policy  could  certainly  bear  the  balance  sheet  legacy  burdens;  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
other  cases,  the  rescue  mechanisms  would  be  at  the  ready  to  grant  conditional  financial 
assistance. What  is  more,  the  expectation  that  legacy  problems  can  be  passed  on  to  the 
future  banking  union  and,  therefore,  to  the  other  member  states  threatens  to  protract  the 
reform process in the banking system. This is because it could then be worthwhile for those 
affected to put off cleaning up banks’ balance sheets until the banking union is in place. 
But  since  the  banking  union  is  a  concept  for  the  future  and  because  it  cannot,  moreover, 
solve  the  current  crisis,  it  should  be  introduced  quickly  but  not  over-hastily.  From  a 
conceptual perspective, the banking union is a much-needed addition to monetary union, but 
its implementation faces many hurdles and raises a number of questions: 
• 
What  banks  should  be  subjected  to  common  supervision?  Only  the  systemically 
important banks, or all of them? 
How will the banking union include countries that are not part of monetary union but 
are members of the EU and, therefore, of the single market? 
How  will  the  common  resolution  and  restructuring  mechanism  draw  on  taxpayers’ 
money? 
What form will the EU legal framework for the banking union take? 
How  can  we  make  sure  that  the  sovereign  tasks  of  banking  supervision  are 
adequately legitimised and are subject to parliamentary control? 
What  is  the  banking  union’s  position  vis-à-vis  other  policy  areas,  in  particular 
macroprudential policy and monetary policy? 
    Many  of  these  questions  will  be  even  more  pressing  if  the  ECB  is  made  responsible  for 
banking  supervision.  The  banking  union  has  to  ease  the  pressure  on  the  single  monetary 
policy  –  but  in  terms  of  practical  implementation,  conflicts  of  interest  between  banking 
supervision  and  monetary  policy  persist.  That  is  why  both  functions  have  to  be  strictly 
segregated. Though feasible, such segregation would be difficult to realise – difficult from an 
organisational  perspective  as  well  as  legally.  Another  challenge  is  that,  on  the  one  hand, 
supervisory decisions must at least be subject to indirect parliamentary control; but on the 
other  hand,  the  central  banks’  independence  must  not  be  undermined.  And  in  connection 
with  the  legitimisation  of  supervisory  decisions,  there  is  the  question  of  voting  modalities. 
Since decisions of this kind can also entail fiscal costs, the only logical answer would be to 
weight votes, for instance in accordance with capital shares. 
I  am  convinced  that  we  must  answer  these  questions  if  the  banking  union  is  to  prove  a 
success  –  and  it  will  be  possible  to  answer  them.  The  banking  union  is  not  a  remedy  for 
acute problems, but constitutes regulatory policy in the best sense. It offers the opportunity to 
add an important pillar to the monetary union structure, thereby safeguarding monetary union 
as a community of stability. And that should be our prime objective. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
