Axel A Weber: A central banker's interest in Phillips curves  
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Symposium on 
"The  Phillips  Curve  and  the  Natural  Rate  of  Unemployment"  at  the  Kiel  Institute  for  the  World 
Economy, Kiel, 3 June 2007.  
 Introduction  
1 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear Professor Snower  
It  is  both  a  pleasure  and  honour  for  me  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience.  The  organisers 
have  to  be  congratulated  on  bringing  together  an  impressive  number  of  outstanding  researchers  to 
exchange views on one of the most relevant macroeconomic issues. Please let me say right at the 
outset  that  I  shall  be  speaking  about  monetary  policy  and  the  Phillips  curve  in  general  terms.  In 
particular,  owing  to  the  rules  of  the  Governing  Council  which  will  be  meeting  in  Frankfurt  next 
Wednesday, I shall not be dealing with the current stance of monetary policy in the euro area in my 
following remarks.  
The primary objective of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy is to maintain price stability. Only when this 
goal is achieved is there room for monetary policy to support the general economic policies in the euro 
area.  Given  our  focus  on  price  stability,  it  is  clear  that  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  inflation-
generating process and inflation dynamics is of the utmost importance for the Governing Council in 
deciding on short-term interest rates.  
As  the  Phillips  curve  is  the  building  block  of  inflation  dynamics  in  many  macroeconomic  models,  a 
policymaker’s interest in Phillips curves would appear to be self-evident. So, on the one hand, with 
regard to the title of my speech today – “A central banker’s interest in Phillips curves” – one might 
wonder whether such an interest is debatable at all. On the other hand, the Phillips curve concept has 
undergone  massive  shifts  over  the  past  decades.  The  starting  point  was  the  seemingly  stable 
consensus  of  the  1960s  that  there  is  a  lasting  option  for  the  government  authorities  to  increase 
employment by pursuing an inflationary policy. But one should always be suspicious about the stability 
of  a  consensus  reached  in  the  macroeconomists’  profession.  This  was  true  in  this  case  as  well. 
Indeed, economists’ belief in the Phillips curve’s trade-off was soon shaken. In 1976, the year I started 
studying economics at university, Robert Lucas argued that the Phillips curve relationship collapses as 
soon as the government tries to exploit it.  
The Lucas critique constituted a severe blow to the Phillips curve. By then, the concept had already 
been  under  concerted  theoretical  attack  from  the  monetarist  and  New  Classical  camps  for  several 
years. Furthermore, the initially stable empirical support of the trade-off had broken down during the 
stagflation crisis in the 1970s. Accordingly, there were times when the famous dictum of Robert Solow 
that “any time seems to be the right time for reflections on the Phillips curve” was not acknowledged 
by our profession.  
However, in recent years, research on the Phillips curve has experienced a renaissance. About a year 
ago, the Economist wrote that “If haircuts and dress styles can come back into fashion, then so can 
the  Phillips  curve.”  And  this  weekend’s  conference  clearly  proves  that  the  idea  of  A.  W.  Phillips  is 
again of major relevance for macroeconomists and monetary policymakers alike.  
However, developments over the past 30 years have dramatically transformed the economic thinking 
underlying the Phillips curve. Thanks to the Lucas critique and the earlier contributions of Ned Phelps 
and Milton Friedman, we know today that the empirical relationship expressed in the Phillips curve is 
not structural, but (inter alia) influenced by expectations and differences in underlying policy regimes.1 
                                                      
1   To do some justice to history it should be mentioned that even Solow and Samuelson in their 1960 paper, which is widely 
regarded as promoting a crude Phillips curve philosophy, presented their arguments in a more subtle way. Both wrote “We 
must give another caution. All of our discussion has been phrased in short-run terms …..It would be wrong, though, to think 
that our Figure 2 menu [i.e. the Phillips curve] … will maintain its shape in the longer run. It might be that the low pressure 
demand would so act upon wage and other expectations as to shift the curve down in the longer run. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 1
Thus, the current theoretical consensus model is markedly different to the original one. Based on solid 
microfoundations and rational expectations, the New Keynesian Phillips Curve (NKPC) has taken up 
the  fierce  criticism  of  New  Classical  economists.  Emphasising,  however,  stickiness  of  prices  or 
information still delivers Keynesian features and allows for real effects of monetary policy in the short-
run. At the same time, extended versions of the Phillips curve have been the starting point for policy 
analysis:  The  insights  of  the  literature  on  time-inconsistency,  based  on  an  expectations-augmented 
Phillips curve, have been well taken by monetary policy makers. Thus, the famous inflation bias poses 
much  less  of  a  problem  today  than  it  did  back  in  the  1980s  when  Barro  and  Gordon  or  Rogoff 
popularised the idea.  
Being here as the President of the Bundesbank, let me just mention as an aside that there were few 
central banks that followed a stability-oriented monetary policy framework early on and which did not 
fall into the trap of a crude Phillips curve thinking in times when this concept was still in fashion in 
other policy circles. But given that, in the long-run, we are all stability-oriented monetary policymakers, 
it is nonetheless legitimate to ask what the Phillips curve concept has to tell us today. The wide and 
impressive spectrum of issues covered at this conference makes clear that no one single speech can 
hope to find answers to this question. In my following remarks, I would just like to highlight a number of 
aspects that I feel to be of importance in my capacity now as a practitioner of monetary policy in the 
Eurosystem.  
2  
The Phillips curve in monetary policy research  
Monetary policy design and challenges in a low-inflation environment  
2.1  
As a starting point, let me go into slightly more detail concerning the lessons learnt over the past few 
decades.  It  is  indeed  the  case  that  various  institutional  changes  in  monetary  policymaking  can  be 
traced back to research on the Phillips curve. And I would like to argue that, in a period of low and 
stable inflation, these achievements are not merely of historical interest. On the contrary: In my view, 
what is key is the insight that most of the credit for the beneficial inflation climate worldwide is due to 
monetary policy having – sometimes painfully – learnt the lessons of the past, especially those related 
to  the  Phillips  curve.  And,  as  success  breeds  complacency,  it  is  vital  that  these  lessons  are  not 
forgotten.  
This is more than the usual claim of a cautious central banker as, in my view, there is also some risk 
that the current environment of low and stable inflation rates might lead us to some mistaken beliefs 
about policy implications. And such wrong-headed policy advice might be inferred from a too naïve 
belief  in  that  policy  could  exploit  the  relationship  expressed  in  (reduced  form)  Phillips  curves.  The 
contributions  of  Lucas  and  Kydland  and  Prescott  initiated  fruitful  research  on  the  optimal  design  of 
central banks. To name just a few of the subsequent fundamental advances: The key role of inflation 
expectations and therefore the key role of credibility in monetary policy. For these the central issues 
are the overriding importance of central bank independence, the investment in a “good reputation” by 
combating inflation, as well as the potential benefit of legislated monetary policy rules.  
Lucas had raised serious doubts about the validity of the then popular macroeconomic models that 
were  not  based  on  a  firm  microeconomic  underpinning.  His  call  was  answered  by  a  wide  array  of 
research building on microfounded equilibrium models with rational expectations. In academia and in 
central banks, the New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework, which includes 
an  expectations-augmented  Phillips  curve,  now  provides  a  workhorse  model  for  monetary  policy 
analysis. The policy advice offered by this framework stresses the importance of the management of 
private sector expectations even more than the traditional time inconsistency literature. According to 
Woodford (2003), “not only do expectations about policy matter, but ... very little else matters.” Even if 
one  does  not  completely  share  this  view,  inflation  expectations  are  undoubtedly  a  prerequisite  for 
achieving the primary objective of many central banks nowadays: price stability in the medium term 
and  also  undoubtedly  a  crucial  measure  of  a  central  bank’s  performance  and  credibility.  Inflation 
expectations  therefore  closely  link  the  success  of  monetary  policy  to  its  credibility;  and  the  latter  is 
supported if the central bank follows a systematic decision-making process, that is a rule-based policy 
strategy,  and  the  general  public  has  as  clear  an  understanding  of  it  as  possible:  in  other  words, 
monetary policy is transparent and communicated effectively.  
These advances in monetary policy, especially the anchoring of inflation expectations, have been the 
main  driving  forces  for  globally  declining  inflation  rates  over  the  past  few  decades.  A  more  solid 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2007
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  at  lower  levels  than  in  the  past  as  well  as  the  Eurosystem’s 
transparency about its policy objectives has also been crucial for the fall in inflation persistence in the 
euro area which has been documented by the Eurosystem’s Inflation Persistence Network (IPN). The 
empirical  results  of  the  IPN  are  based  on  a  new  dataset  in  which  national  micro  data  were  a  key 
ingredient. By incorporating real wage rigidities into a New Keynesian Phillips curve, the network also 
demonstrates  that  inflation  persistence  in  the  euro  area  (moderate  as  it  is)  is  partly  generated  by 
developments in the labour market. I am therefore looking forward to the research results of the IPN’s 
springoff – the Eurosystem’s Wage Dynamic Network.  
But  back  to  the  original  subject:  The  successful  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  and  the  more 
effective monetary policy response to inflationary shocks will both show up in a flattened Phillips curve 
when it is estimated in reduced form. This is, in fact, an application of Goodhart’s Law: For example, 
once  monetary  policy  is  responding  more  effectively  to  inflationary  pressures  due  to  changes  in 
capacity utilisation, the output gap will empirically lose the information content that has qualified it to 
play the role of a leading indicator. Just as a side remark: When it comes to evaluating ex-post the 
information content of various indicators in forecasting exercises, Goodhart’s law is, of course, not only 
relevant for the real economic indicators, but also for monetary ones.  
The  empirical  evidence  of  a  flatter  Phillips  curve  is  a  phenomenon  that  has  been  documented  for 
several economies, including the United States and the euro area (see, for instance, BIS (2006)). But 
as also stated by Mishkin (2007), the main reason for this is arguably monetary policy having been 
more successful in stabilising both inflation and output. And here is the point where estimated Phillips 
curves may end up in misguided policy advice when the monetary policy reaction and its effects are 
not properly taken into account.  
1) 
The  empirical  result  that  inflation  is  less  responsive  to  economic  shocks  and  that  inflation 
persistence has lowered could lead monetary policy to be too complacent when it comes to 
the appropriate response to economic shocks.  
The  empirical  result  of  a  flatter  Phillips  curve  implies  a  seemingly  higher  sacrifice  ratio. 
Accordingly,  the  impression  that  a  given  reduction  in  inflation  is  more  costly  in  terms  of 
output may lead policymakers to be more reluctant to respond to inflationary pressures.  
2) 
But the important point to take into account is that if the dominant structural factors for a flatter Phillips 
curve lie on the side of a more stability-oriented monetary policy in the past, these policy implications 
may  mistakenly  induce  too  lax  a  monetary  policy  today.  This  opens  up  the  possibility  of  inflation 
expectations becoming less well anchored and, once this scenario materialises the task of monetary 
policy becomes much more difficult.  
Inflation dynamics and globalisation  
2.2 
It is thus of vital importance for policymakers to draw the right conclusions from the empirical fact that 
Phillips curves have changed. I have argued that the main reason is likely to be found in a more stable 
monetary  policy  regime  in  many  countries.  To  be  more  precise,  it  might  be  because  increased 
credibility of central banks has anchored inflation expectations, thereby also reducing the volatility of 
actual inflation. Moreover, lower trend inflation has reduced the frequency of nominal price adjustment. 
Additionally, Goodhart’s Law might have come into play. Apart from this chain of reasoning, though, 
there might be complementary explanations for the decreased cyclical responsiveness of inflation.  
As the flattening of the Phillips curve appears to be a global phenomenon, it is often argued that part 
of the change in inflation dynamics can be ascribed to the surge in international competition. This is 
supported  by  preliminary  Bundesbank  findings  (Gadzinski/Hoffmann  (2007))  suggesting  that  trade 
openness negatively affects the slope of the Phillips curve in most of the G-7 countries.  
Globalisation may enter the traditional Phillips curve by affecting the wage and price-setting behaviour 
of households and firms, the extent and frequency of price shocks and the responsiveness of domestic 
inflation  rather  to  slack  in  the  global  economy  than  to  the  domestic  output  gap.  With  regard  to  the 
labour  market,  one  might  believe  that  globalisation  has  weakened  the  bargaining  power  of  trade 
unions  because  firms  have  easier  access  to  labour  supply  in  low-cost  countries.  The  recent  wage 
policy  moderation  in  Germany  is  a  case  in  point.  Similarly,  it  can  be  argued  that  globalisation  has 
curtailed  the  market  power  of  domestic  firms,  thereby  pushing  down  their  mark-ups.  For  Germany, 
however, this price-setting effect must have been weaker than the wage-setting effect. After all, profit 
margins have been at rather elevated levels in recent years.  
BIS Review 58/2007 
 3
In addition to changes in the price and wage-setting behaviour, globalisation may influence the Phillips 
curve  through  other  channels  as  well.  It  is  frequently  stated  that  global  competition  puts  downward 
pressure on the prices of imported (labour-intensive) goods. But that is just one side of the coin: At the 
same time, globalisation has boosted the prices of other commodities, especially raw materials and 
energy. The overall effect of both channels on inflation is uncertain. But taking the energy and raw 
material markets into the picture makes clear that the popular view of the price-dampening effects of 
globalisation has to be qualified. Moreover, even if the dampening price effects were dominating at the 
moment we should not forget that, in the end, it is monetary policy that determines the trend rate of 
inflation. Globalisation will ultimately only influence relative prices, not absolute price levels.  
Finally,  some  have  proposed  extending  the  domestic  Phillips  curves  by  adding  a  proxy  of  global 
economic slack. A recent BIS study (Borio/Filardo (2007)) finds empirical evidence in support of the 
assumption that economies have become more sensitive to changes in global factors. However, the 
idea  is  still  controversial.  In  particular,  the  robustness  of  the  preliminary  estimates  has  been 
challenged (Bernanke (2007), Ihrig et al (2007)). Irrespective of the empirical underpinning, there are 
serious  practical  problems  with  including  global  economic  slack  in  the  day-to-day  decision-making 
process, not least because the task of finding a meaningful measure of global slack seems daunting.  
In  the  light  of  all  these  arguments,  how  strong  is  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  domestic  inflation 
dynamics – as opposed to that of an improved conduct of monetary policy? To my mind, globalisation 
has  arguably  had  some  visible  effect,  but  its  strength  does  not  live  up  to  popular  expectations. 
Nonetheless, the effects of globalisation are an issue for central bankers be it because of increased 
model,  data  and  parameter  uncertainty,  or,  more  generally,  because  the  flattening  of  the  inflation-
activity trade-off is more of a double-edged sword than a clear-cut blessing. It should suffice to say 
that,  in  the  Eurosystem,  we  understand  that  the  currently  low  inflation  levels  do  not  allow  for 
complacency on our part. Instead, we will continue to do our utmost in order to keep long-run inflation 
expectations solidly anchored.  
New Keynesian models and money  
2.3  
The New Keynesian paradigm at its current stage leaves no role for monetary variables in the inflation 
process. In its standard form, it does not allow for an active role for monetary indicators in monetary 
policymaking, either as an important variable in the monetary transmission process, or as an indicator 
of future inflation.  
Does  that  really  mean  that  money  no  longer  matters  –  and  that  it  should  not  matter  for  monetary 
policy?  No,  clearly  not.  Firstly,  from  an  empirical  point  of  view,  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  that 
monetary  aggregates  contain  valuable  information  about  risks  to  long-run  price  stability  and  the 
monetary  transmission  process.  Our  own  research  (Schumacher/Scharnagl  (2007))  shows  that 
monetary variables help predict future inflation over and above the information content of economic 
factors  included  in  traditional  Phillips  curves.  Additionally,  recent  studies  (Greiber/Setzer  (2007)) 
support  the  assessment  that  the  recent  surge  in  house  prices  and  loose  monetary  conditions  are 
related  phenomena.  Significant  bidirectional  links  between  money  and  housing  can  be  identified  for 
both  the  euro  area  and  the  USA.  This  proves  that  integrating  money  into  our  analytical  framework 
delivers important and indispensable insights for monetary policy.  
Secondly,  from  a  modelling  perspective,  the  diagnosis  of  the  “irrelevance  of  money”  relies  on  a 
number of simplifying assumptions. Relaxing one or more of these assumptions can restore a more 
meaningful role to money even in this model framework. For instance, Christiano, Motto and Rostagno 
(2007) extend the basic New Keynesian model by including various measures of money and credit. 
They  thereby  achieve  a  rather  detailed  and  more  realistic  description  of  financial  markets  and  the 
transmission process. In addition, acknowledging model uncertainty and the quest for a robust policy 
framework,  it  can  be  shown  that  taking  monetary  factors  into  account  may  lead  to  more  desirable 
outcomes  compared  with  a  purely  New  Keynesian  framework  (Kilponen/Leitemo  (2007)).  And  it  is 
exactly the need for a more robust framework in the face of uncertainty that is the main motivation for 
the  Eurosystem’s  two-pillar  approach.  By  the  way:  Even  many  of  those  central  banks  which  would 
label themselves as pure inflation targeters, e.g. the Bank of England, have put monetary indicators 
more to the heart of their monetary policy analysis framework in recent years.  
Integrating monetary and financial factors into the current New Keynesian paradigm is a fairly recent 
development in modelling which have only just begun to be incorporated into the present vintage of 
DSGE models. Progress on these lines would be highly welcome from a policymaker’s point of view. 
But, on the basis of the evidence just mentioned, it would be unwise to discard monetary analysis – 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2007
especially now that we find ourselves in a period in which asset prices and liquidity are at a high level 
and ample on an unprecedented scale worldwide.  
Concluding remarks  
3  
Conferences  like  this  one,  which  bring  together  academics  and  policymakers,  serve  as  a  useful 
reminder that the challenges to our respective professions have not become less. On the contrary, the 
challenges are likely to have increased since monetary policymaking is confronted with many forms of 
uncertainty. Research on the Phillips curve is an excellent example of academic work being of interest 
far beyond academia itself. The findings of Lucas, Kydland, Prescott, Woodford and many others also 
shape  our  every-day  decision-making  process  –  and  we  central  bankers  continuously  seek  such 
advice.  
So, let us continue our cooperation in a mutually beneficial exchange of views for the public good that 
we  aim  to  achieve:  price  stability,  that  is  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  is  admittedly  the  best 
contribution monetary policy can make to fostering long-run sustainable growth and job creation.  
Thank you for your attention.  
References  
Altissimo, F., M. Ehrmann, F. Smets (2006), Inflation persistence and price-setting behaviour in the 
euro area – a summary of the IPN evidence, ECB Occasional Paper No 46.  
Bernanke, B. S. (2007), Globalisation and Monetary Policy, speech delivered at the Fourth Economic 
Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 2.  
Bank for International Settlements (2006), 76th Annual Report.  
Borio, C., and A. Filardo (2007), Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global 
determinants of domestic inflation, BIS Working Paper No 227.  
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007), Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? The EA 
and US After 2001, mimeo, February 2007.  
Gadzinski, G., and M. Hoffmann (2007), Trade Integration and the Phillips Curve, mimeo.  
Greiber,  C.,  and  R.  Setzer  (2007),  Money  and  Housing  –  Evidence  for  the  Euro  Area  and  the  US, 
Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, Series 1: Economic Studies, No 12/2007, forthcoming.  
Ihrig, J., S. B. Kamin, D. Lindner and J. Marquez (2007), Some Simple Tests of the Globalisation and 
Inflation  Hypothesis,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  International  Finance 
Discussion Paper No 2007/891.  
Kilponen,  J.,  and  K.  Leitemo  (2007),  Model  Uncertainty  and  Delegation:  A  Case  for  Friedman’s 
k-percent Money Growth Rule?, February 2007, forthcoming in Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.  
Mishkin, F. S. (2007), Inflation Dynamics, speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, March 23.  
Samuelson,  P.,  and  R.  M.  Solow  (1960),  Analytical  Aspects  of  Anti-Inflation  Policy,  The  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 50 (2), pp. 177-194.  
Scharnagl,  M.,  and  C.  Schumacher  (2007),  Reconsidering  the  role  of  monetary  indicators  for  euro 
area inflation from a Bayesian perspective using group inclusion probabilities, Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper, Series 1: Economic Studies, No 09/2007.  
Woodford,  M.  (2003),  Interest  and  Prices,  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy,  Princeton 
University Press.  
BIS Review 58/2007 
 5
