Njuguna Ndung’u: Innovative products in the banking industry in Kenya 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  KCB 
Biashara Banking Launch, Nairobi, 28 June 2007. 
 Mrs. Susan Mudhune, Chairman of KCB Group 
Directors of the Board of KCB Group, 
Mr. Martin Oduor-Otieno, CEO of the KCB Group 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  indeed  a  great  honour  for  me  to  stand  here  during  this  launch  of  the  KCB  Biashara 
Banking. I feel personally privileged because I am also a long time customer of this bank and 
one that feels proud of innovative products in the banking industry. 
KCB has been a major player in the lives of Kenyans and continues to play a pivotal role in 
the socio-economic development of our nation. KCB as a bank symbolizes the prosperity of 
indigenous  enterprises  and  its  ongoing  success  is  a  major  boost  to  our  confidence  in  the 
Kenyan entrepreneurial spirit. I would like to congratulate the Board and KCB Team for the 
excellent performance that the bank has been reporting in recent years, a reflection that the 
bank continues to be a major financial market player in the country today. 
Allow  me  also  to  commend  the  Board  and  KCB  Team  for  the  excellent  corporate  social 
responsibility  agenda  that  you  have  been  undertaking.  I  am  informed  that  KCB  has 
supported key community initiatives through donations to Operation Smile Kenya, the Kenya 
Red  Cross  Society  and  Ndakaini  Dam  Environmental  Conservation  Organization  among 
other worthy causes. I urge you to continue with your sterling Corporate Citizenship efforts. 
It is now clear that the SME sector is the source of livelihood for majority of Kenyans and 
there is need to nurture it so that it can grow into a huge sector in the Kenyan economy. It is 
however  widely  acknowledged  that  the  sector  faces  constraints  in  accessing  financial 
services. It is in this light, that I must commend KCB for launching the KCB Biashara Banking 
Product that targets this bedrock sector of the economy. I do hope that most entrepreneurs 
will take advantage of this product to grow their businesses to greater heights. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  I  had  earlier  alluded,  the  SME  sector  in  Kenya  has  been 
constrained  in  accessing  credit.  One  of  the  key  factors  responsible  for  this  constraint  has 
been the lack of a “credit history” for these enterprises that can be used by banks in lending 
to them. The KCB on its part is therefore working hard and fast to create credit reference 
bureaus that will work towards improving information flow and solve the risk problems in the 
country. 
Regulations for the licensing and oversight of the bureaus are expected to be gazetted by the 
Minister  of  Finance  in  the  second  half  of  this  year.  Credit  Information  Sharing  when  fully 
developed and implemented will undoubtedly go a long way in facilitating access to finance 
by SMEs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, before I conclude, I would also perhaps warn that with the economic 
vibrancy  around  us  and  innovativeness  of  banks  like  KCB,  there  are  crooks  that  innovate 
very well but negatively. These are likely to rob us this financial sector dynamism from the 
jaws of victory and for us to safeguard against this, we need to take several measures: 
First, conduct due diligence on viable SMEs, they provide growth poles, but only if they are 
viable. 
Second, be aware of pyramid schemes as they thrive on ignorance of the public. 
Do not give them a chance – banks should close their accounts. 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
Third, provide more innovative products that reward depositors and savers that will ultimately 
raise returns to positive in real terms and squeeze the Interest Rate spread. 
With these few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my pleasure to officially launch the 
KCB Biashara Banking. 
Thank you and God bless. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2007
