Martín Redrado: Opening address at the conference “Monetary Policy under 
Uncertainty” 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the  2007 
Money  &  Banking  Conference  "Monetary  Policy  Under  Uncertainty",  hosted  by  the  Central  Bank  of 
Argentina, Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Today  we  are  commemorating  the  72nd  anniversary  of  the  creation  of  our  Central  Bank.  I  would 
therefore like to thank all those who contributed to the building of this key institution for the Argentine 
people.  
I  would  especially  like  to  thank  our  foreign  visitors:  the  Central  Banks  of  Brazil,  Chile,  Uruguay, 
Colombia,  Peru,  Bolivia,  Paraguay,  and  Honduras;  the  monetary  authorities  from  Germany,  Italy, 
Spain,  the  Netherlands,  Finland,  England,  India,  Russia,  Poland,  Greece,  Turkey,  Pakistan,  South 
Africa,  Indonesia  and  Zambia;  the  United  States  Federal  Reserve;  the  European  Central  Bank; 
multilateral  agencies  such  as  the  Central  American  Monetary  Council,  the  Latin  American  Reserve 
Fund,  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  the  IADB,  the  United  Nations,  and  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements; prestigious universities such as Harvard, Chicago, Columbia, UCLA, and Stanford; and 
representatives from the private sector joining us today from all parts of the world. 
This year’s conference seeks to focus on an essential topic for central bank action: the implementation 
of monetary policy under uncertainty.  
Uncertainty is at the very core of monetary policy implementation itself, so the different dimensions of 
how  monetary  policy  works  should  come  into  play  when  designing  the  framework  for  policy 
implementation. 
Both  uncertainty  inherent  to  the  development  processes  of  domestic  economies  and  uncertainty 
associated  with  the  transformations  undergone  by  the  global  economy  especially  due  to  financial 
innovation, together with the greater integration of emerging countries, have led to a new horizon for 
monetary policy design and implementation. We will attempt to approach this horizon in this forum for 
reflection  and  analysis.  Of  course,  we  will  also  try  to  share  experiences  because  the  issue  is  so 
complex  that  it  calls  for  us  not  only  to  consider  the  theoretical  soundness  of  existing  policy  design 
models, but also their practical application. 
Maybe later than expected, the literature has again focused on the evident fact that uncertainty is not 
just  an  important  feature  of  the  monetary  policy  landscape;  it  is  the  defining  characteristic  of  that 
landscape.  
Despite some important precedents such as those set by Brainard in 1967 and Craine in 1979, it was 
only recently that theoretical thinking on monetary policy started to systematically include the specific 
difficulties policymakers face every day in an uncertain and erratic environment.  
In fact, until not long ago, the consensus in academia on monetary policy mostly overlooked the issues 
related  to  structural  change  and  uncertainty  –  as  reflected,  for  example,  in  Lars  Svensson’s 
presentation at the 1999 Jackson Hole Symposium. This literature implicitly assumed that we, central 
banks, were aware of the true economic model, that  we were able to correctly observe all relevant 
variables, and that we accurately knew the nature and sources of the various random forces affecting 
the economic system.  
In this conceptual approach, the only remaining “uncertainty” was actually the effective value of these 
stochastic disturbances. In terms of the Knightian distinction between risk and uncertainty, it was, at 
most, a risk situation where policymakers seemed to know the random distribution within the various 
contingencies.  They  also  seemed  able  to  quantify  the  likelihood  of  the  several  possible  events 
occurring, ultimately assuming that the future would replicate the past. However, in most cases central 
banks evidently face a quite different reality: many risks are essentially not quantifiable because quite 
often not only the likelihood of each individual event is unknown, but also the whole range of possible 
contingencies. 
In short, uncertainty makes monetary policy implementation an extremely hard task, even in industrial 
economies.  In  emerging  countries,  where  institutions  are  still  in  the  process  of  consolidation,  the 
central  banker’s  task  is  even  harder:  the  instruments  have  a  limited  power  and  the  boundaries 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
between the scenarios which require intervention due to market failures and those that belong to the 
usual turbulences in a dynamic market are not so well-defined. This is especially true for countries that 
have  had  a  fixed  exchange  rate  for  decades  and,  for  several  reasons  such  as  fiscal,  financial,  or 
external dominance,  have suffered  from  macroeconomic  instability,  marked  by currency substitution 
and the dollarization of liabilities, which have hampered monetary policy implementation.  
Uncertainty about how the economy really works and about the true value of the parameters together 
with  data  quality  and  timeliness  (and,  consequently,  the  robustness  of  estimates)  is  an  essential 
constraint that not only affects the central bank, but also the private sector. There is huge uncertainty 
about  the  future  behavior  of  the  main  domestic  variables,  especially  in  relation  to  (both  goods  and 
factors) relative price dynamics and that of the various sectors of the economy.  
Another  important  restriction  is  given  by  the  difficulty  in  identifying  the  nature  of  shocks,  especially 
external  shocks.  The  world  continues  to  tread  today  a  path  of  sustained  expansion  in  a  context  of 
stability. This pattern of growth is even healthier than in recent years, because it is better balanced 
due to the relative weakening of the United States and the good performance of the euro area and the 
emerging Asian and Latin American economies. 
The  international  scenario  offers  extraordinary  liquidity,  with  interest  rates  that  continue  to  be 
historically low.  
Risk aversion is at its lowest for every standard (the VIX index, for instance). This is also true for the 
term premium. Every indicator shows excess savings as compared with the demand for capital in a 
world thirsty for attractive investment opportunities.  
In  that  sense,  much  has  been  contributed  by  the  ongoing  financial  innovation  that  is  definitely 
changing traditional financial intermediation. Structured credit and its derivatives (credit default swaps) 
are already surpassing bonds and stocks underwriting. Against this backdrop, players that are highly 
leveraged by hedge funds in particular as a source of liquidity become more relevant.  
The fast introduction of innovative products and the deepening of cross-border placements lead to a 
greater  supply  of  funds  for  a  new  universe  of  investors  in  financial  markets,  enabling  a  greater 
diversification  and  spreading  of  risk  among  asset  holders.  This  risk  transfer  reduces  the  financial 
system’s vulnerability and strengthens its ability to cushion shocks.  
In addition, the weakening of the home bias in investment portfolios and the spread of strategies such 
as the carry trade have helped reduce risk in fixed-income assets in emerging countries. 
In this context, Latin America exhibits the most robust expansion in the past thirty years, based on a 
better  macroeconomic  management  that  includes  fiscal  discipline,  external  sustainability,  and  the 
adoption of flexible exchange rates and consistent monetary policies. This has significantly contributed 
to improving the region’s financial position, as reflected by narrower spreads. 
However, the reasons for today’s narrow spreads are, in my opinion, beyond market changes resulting 
from financial innovation or the emerging countries’ mostly sound fundamentals. 
In  my  view,  many  of  the  reasons  lie  in  the  gradual  adjustment  of  global  imbalances.  A  certain 
deterioration in the productivity of the US economy is associated to an expectation that the US dollar 
will depreciate, leading investors to seek assets in other currencies. This is reflected in a clear trend 
towards  developing  economies’  assets  (mainly  Asia  but  also  Latin  America)  and,  consequently,  in 
narrower  spreads  and  stock  markets  hitting  record  highs  –  in  short,  it  results  in  higher  funding 
opportunities for all the emerging world.  
Such  a  process  –  which  takes  place  gradually  and  is  coupled  with  a  transition  towards  a  more 
diversified  asset  portfolio  for  central  banks  –  offers  great  opportunities  but  also  poses  significant 
challenges for our countries. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  reflected  in  a  foreign capital  inflow  having  several  effects  on our economies 
such as the following: 
1. 
Our region, in spite of its recent achievements, is still very vulnerable to changes in global 
growth,  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices,  and  sudden  changes  in  international  financial 
conditions. Therefore, what in developed countries is a “correction,” in the countries of our 
region – where, besides, there is a higher risk of contagion – may amount to a crisis.  
On  the  other  hand,  our  exchange  rates  tend  to  overreact,  which  may  affect  the  financial 
system, thus hampering stability. 
BIS Review 61/2007
2. 
2 
 3. 
4. 
5. 
Due  to  the  very  nature  of  the  process,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  ex  ante  its  permanent  or 
temporary  nature  in  order  to  make  policy  decisions  accordingly.  Rajan  and  Subramanian 
(2006) have highlighted the difference in treatment according to whether the trend is caused 
by  permanent  or  temporary  factors.  Actually,  this  dilemma  is  not  new  at  all,  and  it  was 
discussed  by  Keynes  and  Ohlin  in  the  1930s,  when  they  analyzed  the  issue  of 
compensations in the Germany of the first postwar. In my view, it would be preferable to take 
every positive shock as temporary. 
It  is  also  important  to  recognize  that,  depending  on  the  level  of  emerging  countries’ 
development (depth and recurrence of crises in the past, timing as regards the end of the 
crisis,  degree  of  economic  normalization,  institutional  development,  etc.),  neither  our 
financial markets nor our currencies are always ready to channel such capital flows (nor their 
inherent volatility). The financial systems continue to be small, debt markets in local currency 
are still in their infancy, and secondary markets are not liquid enough. In fact, Prasan, Rajan 
and  Subramanian  (2006)  conclude  that,  in  contrast  with  predictions  from  standard  models 
usually calibrated for developed countries, emerging countries that committed themselves to 
external savings have not grown faster in the long term. This difference is attributable to the 
local financial systems’ inability to efficiently allocate foreign capital.  
Finally, the search for other currencies introduces an “imported volatility” that distorts relative 
price  signals  for  consumption,  savings  and  investment  decisions  in  our  economies,  small 
economies with inherent sources of instability where it is difficult to know the equilibrium level 
of real variables. 
In this context, we see that all emerging markets are taking the necessary precautions (to a greater or 
lesser extent and according to their needs). Some of them have established capital inflow controls; 
others,  like  Argentina,  seek  to  mitigate  exchange  volatility,  accumulating  international  reserves  at  a 
time  when  our  balance  sheet  situation allows  us  to  do  so.  Chile  and  Mexico,  for  instance,  take  the 
opportunity  to  build-up  fiscal  resources  through  the operations  of  state-owned  exporting enterprises 
and the Treasury.  
For an economy, which have suffered a severe institutional crisis and is still in transition towards its 
long-term  cruising  speed,  a  managed-floating  regime  emerges  as  a  useful  tool  to  mitigate  these 
effects while advancing in the development of an adequate financial infrastructure to create conditions 
for  resources  to  be  efficiently  channeled  towards  the  funding  of  worthy  investment  projects  and,  in 
turn, strengthen traditional monetary policy instruments. 
While  there  were  some  turbulences  in  the  recent  past  with  no  significant  effects,  this  adjustment 
process  towards  equilibrium  has  not  yet  been  tested.  This  requires  us  to  implement  sound  and 
consistent policies to comprehensively protect our economies against external misalignments.  
In the case of Argentina, this implies, for instance, providing monetary and financial policy with long-
term sustainability on the basis of four main pillars – a consistent monetary policy that ensures money 
market  equilibrium;  a  countercyclical  prudential  approach;  a  system  that  is  independent  from  public 
sector needs; and a policy framework that boosts credit to firms and households. 
The first of these pillars is largely determined by our recent history: in Argentina, monetary regimes 
have  unsuccessfully  shifted  from  one  extreme  to  the  other.  While  in  the  1980s  money  supply  was 
rising uncontrollably in line with the monetization of the fiscal deficit, in the past decade the strictures 
of  the  convertibility  regime  were  neither  consistent  with  the  economy’s  flexibility  nor  with  the  fiscal 
behavior. What mattered was not the label of the regime, but the internal consistency of its policies.  
In  an  economy  where  macroeconomic  variables  are  still  seeking  a  long-term  stability  path  and 
transmission  mechanisms  through  credit  are  still  limited,  the  current  monetary  policy  helps  us  to 
ensure the strict and ongoing money market equilibrium.  
In order to preserve this equilibrium, the Central Bank applies a deep monetary absorption strategy 
coupled with foreign exchange purchases for prudential purposes. Thus, it has absorbed some ARS 
80  billion  since  2005.  Such  a  strategy  has  been  implemented  through  various  mechanisms  that 
comprise  the  issuance  of  bills  and  notes,  repo  operations,  the  pre-payment  of  liquidity  assistance 
provided to banks during the crisis, and the minimum reserve requirement policy.  
For example, let us take rediscount lines, which have historically represented as asset with a high risk 
of  recovery  for  the  Central  Bank.  Banks’  settlements  on  the  basis  of  incentives  by  the  monetary 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 3
authority, both through the payment of monthly installments and through payments made in advance, 
have acted as an extraordinary money absorption mechanism in recent years.  
In  turn,  through  weekly  auctions  of  bills  and  notes,  we  have  sterilized  around  ARS  32  billion  since 
2005, thus increasing the diversity of instruments and the portfolio’s average duration.  
Furthermore,  we  are  developing  the  repo  market,  in  order  to  turn  the  interest  rate  into  an  effective 
monetary policy tool, widening the modality of authorized operations so as to enhance the efficiency of 
banks’ liquidity management. 
In short, the monetary policy adopted by the Central Bank has made it possible to keep the growth of 
means of payment under control, within the self-imposed targets set year after year. In this way, the 
growth of the means of payment was, for the first time since the end of the crisis, below nominal GDP 
growth, reflecting the prudential bias in our approach.  
Uncertainty about the potential power of transmission mechanisms requires the monetary prudential 
stance to be gradual but persistent. Thus – given that the current inflationary phenomenon has many 
causes and is derived from an economy in transition that has undergone an unprecedented crisis, with 
formidable structural changes (including the destruction of the financial system and many economic 
institutions), and where monetary policy transmission channels are still under recovery – , prudence 
and gradualism positively contribute to achieve intertemporal stability. 
In  turn,  and  just  as  most  emerging  countries  have  been  doing,  the  Central  Bank  continues  to 
implement a prudential international reserve accumulation policy. The current stock of over USD 40 
billion is a record high figure and more than triples the lowest amount in early 2003. Thus, the Central 
Bank generates a true insurance against crises that reduces external vulnerability, lends certainty to 
public  and  private  investment  and  develops  a  domestic  capital  market  in  local  currency,  ensuring 
macroeconomic equilibrium. 
International  reserves  are  an  indispensable  pillar  for  Central  Bank  monetary  and  financial  policy. 
Therefore,  they  are  also  the  basis  for  monetary  regulation  operations  to  strictly  control  the  balance 
between supply and demand in the monetary market.  
With a growing stock of foreign currency, the requirements for an adequate management are greater. 
Thus, during 2006 and so far this year, we got the highest return (around 6.5 percent y.o.y.) from the 
investment of international reserves since the end of the crisis.  
A third state policy claimed by society relates to the monetary-financial system’s exposure to the public 
sector. In this sense, we are gradually minimizing the likelihood of the financial system becoming a 
source  of  instability,  reducing  currency  mismatches,  decreasing  exposure  to  the  public  sector,  and 
enhancing solvency. 
In  the  past,  the  Central  Bank  and  the  financial  system  ended  up  being  mere  instruments  of  an 
unsustainable  macroeconomic  policy.  In  the  1980s,  the  Central  Bank  provided  indiscriminate 
assistance to the Treasury and the financial system in the framework of a hardly competitive economy 
and  a  growing  fiscal  deficit,  which  resulted  in  hyperinflation.  In  the  1990s,  although  inflation  was 
subdued,  the  growing  fiscal  and  external  deficits  were  inconsistent  with  the  current  exchange  rate 
system.  The  Central  Bank  issued  regulations  that  favored  unlimited  financing  to  the  government, 
discouraging credit to the private sector.  
The  monetary  authority  has  set  strict  guidelines  to  reduce  exposure  to  the  national,  provincial  and 
municipal public sector. On the one hand, caps have been set based on the capital of each institution 
and on the relevant jurisdiction. On the other, an overall maximum restriction was set at 40 percent of 
the bank’s total assets, effective since January 2006 and which by July 2007 will be reduced to 35 
percent. These measures are producing a structural change in our history: a monetary and financial 
system that is independent from the public sector.  
In the past two years, the share of credit to the government in total assets was significantly reduced, 
and bank actions are focused today on credit to households and businesses.  
The fourth pillar of this architecture is to place banks back to its traditional role: credit should focus on 
facilitating consumption and investment decisions by businesses and households. The Central Bank’s 
policy has thus created market incentives for the recovery of credit to the private sector from a set of 
specific measures that have stimulated financing and widened the base of potential borrowers.  
In  particular,  credit  to  small  and  medium  enterprises  reached  above-average  levels,  extending  the 
universe of borrowers to almost half a million. As a consequence, there is a widespread expansion in 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2007
all credit lines to the private sector and non-performing loans hit a historical low that is currently below 
the average for Latin America as well.  
In short, we must deepen those policies that enable us to face changes in the external context and, in 
turn, to develop our economic institutions so as to better channel benign scenarios and improve the 
power of our monetary policy instruments, with the aim of being fully responsible for the achievement 
of the objectives set and, thus, being able to set more ambitious goals. 
The  challenge  is  to  crystallize  these  actions  into  long-term  and  persistent  policies.  Otherwise,  all 
efforts will be vain and we will fall in the classical Argentine pendulum, going from one extreme of the 
range of possible policies to the other with no continuity whatsoever. It is, in fact, a two-fold challenge; 
not  a  sequential  but  a  synchronic  one:  making  progress  in  the  achievement  of  our  objectives  and 
building institutions at the same time. To that end, consistency and gradualism prove essential and 
are,  in  my  view,  the  only  possible  way  to  ensure  policy  effectiveness  for  the  benefit  of  future 
generations. 
Welcome and thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 5
