Glenn Stevens: Asia, Australia and financial markets1
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Asia 
Society AustralAsia Centre CEO Asia Update luncheon, Sydney, 18 September 2007. 
 As  you  would  all  be  aware,  2007  is  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Asian financial  crisis.  The 
crisis is usually dated as having begun with the float of the Thai baht in July 1997, though the 
problems  had  been  building  for  some  time  before  that.  The  events  of  1997  and  1998 
profoundly affected the region’s economic growth. 
In a speech earlier this year, I reviewed the key events of the crisis.2 Rather than go over 
that ground again today in detail, I will address the question of how Asia is coping with the 
recent  distinct  change  in  global  financial  market  conditions,  before  talking  about  how  the 
same  events  are  affecting  Australia.  I  want,  then,  to  turn  to  issues  for  the  future  and,  in 
particular, what interests the Asia-Pacific region has in the ongoing efforts to renovate the 
post-war official architecture of the international financial system.  
Recent financial events 
For a number of years now, many commentators have expressed concerns about the under 
pricing of risk in financial markets, with investors increasingly willing to purchase risky assets 
at high prices and often with considerable leverage. Easy credit conditions accommodated 
and encouraged these trends. 
Over  the  past  couple  of  months,  we  have  witnessed  something  of  a  reversal.  The  initial 
trigger was the deterioration in the US sub-prime mortgage sector, itself a result of declining 
credit standards and a slowing US housing market. Since the exposures to these risks had 
been spread via securitisation into global financial markets, losses are being borne in most 
parts of the world, including in Australia and some countries in Asia. 
Those losses have been coming to light only slowly, however, in part because the complex 
and opaque nature of some of the financial instruments in use makes valuation difficult, or 
even impossible under adverse conditions. In some cases, there simply is no market for, and 
hence no way of providing an objective valuation of, the claims in question. 
In the ensuing climate of uncertainty, investors rapidly have become quite risk averse, and 
some parts of the global capital market have suffered severe dislocation. In turn, institutions 
that  rely  heavily  on  wholesale  capital  markets,  either  for  balance  sheet  funding  or  to 
securitise  assets  they  have  originated,  have  experienced  difficulties.  So-called  conduits, 
credit arbitrage funds and various other vehicles often issued short-term commercial paper to 
fund  their  assets.  This  strategy,  which  was  in  some  cases  designed  to  avoid  capital 
requirements  for  loans  held  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  can  carry  significant  maturity 
mismatch and hence funding risk. When investor attitudes changed abruptly in early August, 
asset-backed  commercial  paper  markets  around  the  world  virtually  came  to  a  standstill, 
forcing many of these vehicles to tap lines of credit they had with banks. 
This, of course, transferred the funding pressures to the banks. Since there is a great deal of 
uncertainty  about  the  likely  demand  on  their  own  liquidity,  banks  have  been  conserving 
liquidity and have been reluctant to commit to lending to others for anything beyond a very 
                                                 
1  
2   See  “The  Asian  Crisis:  A  Retrospective”,  address  to  The  Anika  Foundation,  18  July  2007.  Available  at 
I thank Vanessa Rayner for assistance in preparing this address. 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2007/index.html. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 1
short horizon. Institutional investors, which are now in a much more powerful position than a 
few months ago, have behaved cautiously and are demanding higher yields to accept bank 
paper. Hence, short-term funding rates have moved higher in a number of countries. In some 
cases, even overnight rates spiked sharply higher.  
Changes  in  attitude  to  risk  also  spilled  over  to  other  markets.  The  difficulties  have  spread 
beyond  sub-prime  mortgages  per  se  to  include  the  broader  range  of  instruments 
euphemistically labelled “structured products”. As investors have looked for more secure and 
liquid  assets,  yields  on  government  securities have  declined,  share  prices  have  fallen  and 
there has been some significant readjustment of exchange rates. Volatility across a range of 
markets has increased significantly.  
So risk is being re-priced, and strategies that looked like easy ways of making money in good 
times are being tested. The episode is also a reminder of the key role still played by the core 
banking system, despite the growth of capital markets. Banks were the first line of liquidity 
support when capital markets stumbled. For the time being at least, more of the flow of new 
credit needs to be done on, and to remain on, the balance sheets of the core intermediaries 
than has typically been the case over recent years. It is helpful, then, that in most countries, 
those  core  institutions  are  profitable  and  well  capitalised,  since  there  may  be  quite  a 
considerable process of re-intermediation to be undertaken over the months ahead. 
Effects of recent developments on Asia 
There are several potential channels through which these events could have an impact on 
east  Asia.  Asian  investors  could  be  exposed  to  the  underlying  problem  assets;  Asian 
institutions and markets could be affected by the backwash of liquidity and funding issues in 
the  major  markets;  and  Asian  economies  could  be  affected  by  broader  macroeconomic 
effects. Let’s consider a few of these channels. 
At  this  point,  disclosed  exposures  of  Asian  financial  institutions  to  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage market per se have been limited and look small relative to the total assets of the 
institutions concerned. 
Actually,  to  digress  for  a  moment,  for  most  holders  of  such  exposures,  losses  should  be 
sufficiently small as not to fatally undermine the solvency of the holder, unless the holder is 
leveraged. The biggest problem thus far has not been that exposures are large, but that they 
are not transparent. The sooner they are all on the table, the sooner the uncertainty will be 
lessened  and  the  sooner  market  participants  can  discriminate  sensibly  among  their 
counterparts. This is not easy to achieve given the pricing issues, but at the moment, there is 
widespread suspicion in the absence of clear information. It would be very damaging for that 
lack  of  information  to  lead  to  a  lengthy  period  of  severely  reduced  credit  flow  to  perfectly 
good  borrowers  simply  because  investors  cannot  tell  who  is  sound  and  who  is  not.  More 
information is needed. 
Against  a  backdrop  of  rising  global  risk  aversion  and  increased  demand  for  liquidity, 
investors sold off emerging Asian equity holdings in late July, resulting in noticeable falls in 
share  prices.  Asian  currencies  fell.  These  movements  were  not  especially  large,  however, 
compared with numerous others seen over the past couple of decades. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2007
Graph 1 
Graph 2 
   
Asian  sovereign  debt  spreads  to  US  Treasuries  have  risen  over  recent  weeks,  though  by 
less than the spreads on low-rated American corporate debt. Indeed, the absolute level of 
sovereign bond yields in Asia has changed little. 
 BIS Review 101/2007 
 3
Graph 3  
 The sharp increases in short-term money market rates in developed countries do not seem, 
as yet, to have been a widespread feature of emerging Asian markets. There are a couple of 
reasons  for  this.  Mortgage  lending  via  securitisation  plays  a  relatively  small  role  in  most 
Asian housing finance markets, which means that the region’s banks have not had to fund 
warehousing of loans.3 This, along with the fact that most banks in east Asia tend to rely less 
on  offshore  or  wholesale  sources  of  funding  than  many  of  their  developed  country 
counterparts, means that it is unlikely these banks have been under much additional funding 
pressure  as  a  result  of  tighter  global  credit  conditions.  In  fact,  foreign  bank  claims  on  the 
1997  crisis  countries  in  total,  as  a  ratio  to  GDP,  have  declined  substantially  over  the  past 
decade. 
                                                 
3   See  Chan,  E.,  M.  Davies  and  J.  Gyntelberg  (2006),  “The  role  of  government-supported  housing  finance 
at 
December. 
Quarterly 
Available 
Review, 
BIS 
agencies 
http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0612h.htm. 
Asia”, 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2007
Graph 4  
  The  rapid  growth  that  we  have  witnessed  in  east  Asian  equity  markets  may  pose  a  risk. 
Despite the Asian region being a net creditor, net private capital inflows have been positive 
over the past few years, partly reflecting strong equity inflows. If conditions in global financial 
markets deteriorate further and risk aversion becomes more entrenched, there is always a 
possibility that equity capital could flow out of the region reasonably quickly. But Asian equity 
market  valuations  are  generally  not  that  high,  with  solid  corporate  earnings  keeping  P/E 
ratios down despite the sharp rise in equity prices recorded in recent years. 
More  generally,  in  my  judgement,  structural  changes  and  reforms  to  Asia’s  banking  and 
corporate sectors over the past decade leave the region in better shape than it was a decade 
ago to cope with any potential problems which may occur.4 Bank balance sheets are typically 
stronger,  a  result  of  improvements  to  the  quality  of  supervisory  oversight  and  risk 
management  practices,  and  reduced  fragmentation  and  government  ownership  in  the 
banking  sector.  A  range  of  indicators  also  point  to  a  healthier  corporate  sector  in  Asia.54 
There  is  also  generally  more  flexibility  in  exchange  rates  today.  That,  combined  with  the 
large build-up in foreign exchange reserves, means that capital outflows, were they to occur, 
could now be handled more effectively than in the past. 
Of course, the region could still be affected by international events through the trade channel. 
The ratio of exports to GDP has increased for all Asian countries over the past decade. While 
it  is  true  that  intra-regional  trade  has  expanded  a  great  deal,  it  remains  the  case  that  a 
considerable part of this activity is ultimately aimed at delivering goods to outside the region. 
So a major slowdown in the US economy would still be important for east Asia, the more so if 
the slowdown also extended to Europe. China is growing strongly, which will help the region 
to expand even in the face of weaker conditions elsewhere. But, the Chinese authorities are 
trying to slow their own economy to avoid overheating. So, Asian nations will need to assess 
the overall economic fall-out from the current episode in formulating their own policies. 
                                                 
4   For  a  discussion  of  banking  systems  in  east  Asia  since  the  crisis,  see  Turner,  P.  (2007),  “Are  Banking 
Systems in East Asia Stronger?”, Asian Economic Policy Review, 2, pp. 75-95. 
5   See Pomerleano, M. (2007), “Corporate Financial Restructuring in Asia: Implications for Financial Stability”, 
BIS Quarterly Review, September. Available at http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0709i.pdf. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 5
In summary, the impact of the recent tightening in global credit conditions on Asian financial 
markets  has,  so  far,  been  reasonably  well  contained.  In  comparison  with  the  extreme 
volatility experienced in financial markets during the Asian crisis, recent market movements 
are minor. 
This is not surprising, really, given that the nature of the shock we are experiencing today is 
very different from that of a decade ago. In 1997, the epicentre was in Asia, with inability to 
distinguish between countries resulting in regional contagion. In contrast, the shock we are 
experiencing today originated in the developed world, with events in the US housing market 
the catalyst. The relatively lesser degree of international integration of Asian capital markets 
with the global system has, in this instance, probably been a blessing. 
It would appear from this analysis that the main risk to most of the east Asian economies lies 
not  so  much  in  the  area  of  direct  financial  contagion,  as  in  the  ordinary  macroeconomic 
impacts of, potentially, a slower US and world economy. 
Effects of recent events on Australia 
Australian  financial  markets  are  part  of  the  global  financial  system,  and  have  become 
progressively more integrated over time. This has had many benefits, not least of which has 
been improved access to global capital markets for Australian investors and borrowers. By 
the  same  token,  when  there  are  major  events  in  global  markets,  Australian  markets  can 
expect to be affected. Recent weeks have offered a clear demonstration of that fact. 
As I noted earlier, international commercial paper markets have had a very difficult time over 
the past month. For some weeks, outstanding paper was not able to be rolled over, and it 
was  almost  impossible  for  many  entities  to  issue  new  paper.  The  same  was  true  for 
residential  mortgage-backed  securities.  Some  Australian  entities  have  been  significantly 
affected by these disruptions. 
The underlying asset quality in Australia is clearly sound. Loans that could be called “sub-
prime”  in  Australia  are  about  1  per  cent  of  the  stock  of  total  mortgages,  compared  with 
around 15 per cent in the US, and arrears rates on these loans are considerably less than 
those  on  US  sub-prime  loans.  The  securities  backing  these  Australian  loans  continue  to 
perform. For the housing loan portfolio as a whole, arrears rates remain exceptionally low by 
global standards; and for securitised loans in particular, arrears rates have been steady, at 
about 0.4 per cent, for about the past year and a half. 
But  at  times  like  this,  investors  are  often  unable,  or  unwilling,  to  discriminate  between 
different  underlying  credit  risks.  In  such  a  climate,  issuers  have  understandably  been 
cautious about offering new paper because of the likely higher cost involved. In other words, 
uncertainty on both sides led to a drying up of the flow of funds in capital markets for several 
weeks. 
In  recent  days,  there  have  been  some  encouraging  signs  of  new  credit  beginning  to  flow 
again. But conditions are still difficult and this may remain the case for a while yet. 
In  the  meantime,  the  same  sorts  of  pressures  on  term  funding  costs  for  financial 
intermediaries observed elsewhere have been seen in Australia. International interbank rates 
for three month A$ loans have recently been about 50-60 basis points above the overnight 
index swap (OIS) rate (a measure of the expected cash rate). The normal margin is around 
10 basis points. Bank bill rates in Australia have been as much as 40-50 basis points above 
OIS, compared with 5-10 basis points normally. These gaps are smaller than seen in other 
comparable countries but are nonetheless significant.  
6 
 BIS Review 101/2007
Graph 5  
  
It is important to note that this is not due to a shortage of overnight liquidity. The system is 
amply supplied and settlement balances are, in fact, much higher than normal. The RBA has 
supplied as much cash as the market requires for the cash rate to remain at the level set by 
the Board, and that rate has indeed remained within a couple of basis points of the target 
throughout.  
Other  rates  are  determined,  as  they  always  have  been,  by  market  conditions  based  on 
participants’ expectations about how the cash rate might move as well as term, liquidity and 
credit  premia.  Sometimes,  as  now,  those  premia  have  been  known  to  move.  It  should  go 
without  saying  that  loan  rates  are  decided  by  the  intermediaries  making  the  loans  on  the 
basis of their costs, risk assessments and competitive considerations. The RBA does not set 
these rates, though we can and do take account of how the margin between these rates and 
the cash rate alters. 
As  markets  work  to  re-price  risk  and  individual  participants  grapple  with  uncertainty  about 
their own possible future liquidity needs, lending and borrowing have been kept very short 
term. The RBA has acted to assist market functioning by extending the pool of acceptable 
securities for repurchase agreements. The intention of this is to give market players some 
additional confidence that quality assets can be turned into cash if needed, so they can get 
on with the job of re-pricing risk. From our point of view, this means accepting a little more 
private credit risk in our operations, but we have been moving in that direction anyway for 
years,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  there  is  no  longer  a  sufficiently  large  stock  of 
government  securities  on  issue  in  which  we  and  market  participants  could  transact  in 
volume.  Provided  the  transactions  are  conducted  on  proper  commercial  terms  with 
appropriate margins, we judge these credit risks to be manageable. 
Helping financial markets to function as they undergo a re-pricing is, of course, one role of a 
central bank. But it is also important that we do not lose sight of our other role, of making 
monetary policy in pursuit of sustainable growth with price stability. From that perspective, 
we  observe  that  funding  costs  for  intermediaries  have  risen  beyond  the  adjustments 
associated with the rise in the cash rate on 8 August. Some borrowers are being asked to 
recognise this higher cost in the rates they pay for their loans, a trend that will continue if the 
higher  funding  costs  persist.  Hence  it  appears,  at  this  stage  at  least,  that  we  may  well 
observe a further tightening of financial conditions in the Australian economy in the months 
ahead. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 7
In assessing that prospect, the Bank will need to take note of two forces. The first is that, 
going into this episode, the economy was travelling very strongly, with the outlook for growth 
and inflation being revised higher over recent months. The data since the August decision to 
lift the cash rate indicate an economy at least as strong as the Board’s assessment at that 
time, with few signs of that momentum slowing. 
The  second  factor  is  that  the  outlook  for  the  US  economy  has  been  weakening  and  will 
presumably  be  affected  to  some  extent  by  the  credit  market  events  themselves.  It  is 
conceivable  that  some  European  economies  could  be  affected  as  well,  given  the  credit 
difficulties in those markets. To this extent, global growth, which has continually surprised by 
its  strength  in  recent  years,  could,  other  things  equal,  turn  out  to  be  a  bit  weaker  than 
expected a few months ago. 
Given  the  macroeconomic  situation  of  the  Australian  economy  thus  far,  some  additional 
restraint would perhaps not be unwelcome. But just how much such restraint will occur as a 
result of a market tightening in credit conditions is not yet clear. Assessments of how much is 
warranted  could  be  affected  by  changes  in  the  international  environment  as  well  as  by 
developments in the domestic economy. These are matters the Board will need to grapple 
with over the period ahead. 
Asia-Pacific in the international financial system 
I turn now away from recent events, as absorbing as they are, to offer a few observations 
about the Asia-Pacific region in the international financial system over the longer run. 
It is commonly observed that the “centre of gravity” of the global economy is shifting east, 
away  from  the  Atlantic  and  towards  Asia  –  which,  for  this  purpose,  should  be  defined  to 
include  India.  There  is  naturally  a  discussion  about  how  best  to  recognise  this  greater 
importance  of  Asia  in  the  “architecture”  of  the international  system,  including  in  the  official 
institutions. 
Some initial progress was made in the small increases in quota allocations in the IMF to four 
emerging countries, two of which were in Asia, late last year. The much harder task of finding 
agreement for more far-reaching changes over a longer timeframe is now under way. That is 
very important work. 
But the point I would like to offer here is the following. In parallel with the efforts to reform 
governance of the international institutions, there will need to be efforts to find agreement on 
mandate questions – that is, about what it is we want the IMF and other bodies actually to 
do, and not do. It will not suffice for Asia (or other regions in the emerging world) to expect 
more say in how the institutions are governed without being part of a clear consensus as to 
how they will use that increased influence. What is their vision of the IMF’s role? What are 
the limits to that role? Those who will ultimately have to cede some of their current influence 
to  accommodate  the  developing  countries  will  surely  be  reluctant  to  do  so  unless  there  is 
clearer mutual understanding on those sorts of questions. 
Asia must be prepared to contribute to this discussion. This requires meaningful engagement 
on the key issues such as: 
• 
how can different national policies, including exchange rate regimes, be made to co-
exist within the international system?  
what  are  the  respective  responsibilities  of  the  various  nations  to  foster  that 
compatibility?  
what  is  the  proper  role  for  the  IMF  and  other  supra-national  bodies,  not  just  as 
occasional  lenders  to  individual  nations,  but  as  custodians  of  the  international 
system all the time?  
BIS Review 101/2007
  8 
 The  recent  “review”  of  the  “1977  Exchange  Rate  Decision”  by  the  IMF  is  a  start  on  this 
discussion. It revises an agreed set of words from 30 years ago to form a more up-to-date 
basis for guidance to IMF members about exchange rate policies, and provides a framework 
for surveillance by the IMF membership of those policies. 
This  is  a  good  start,  but  only  a  start.  The  key  will  be  the  way  the  surveillance  is  actually 
implemented. That is in the hands not just of the IMF’s staff and management but also its 
membership. The membership from this region will need to be ready to play its part. By this I 
mean that the countries of Asia will need to be ready to defend their policies robustly, but 
also to work with others in understanding and mitigating unintended consequences of their 
policy choices. Asian countries should, of course, expect the same from other regions. 
It is worth adding that, in other fora, Asian countries have a potentially strong voice if they 
can coalesce. In the G-20, for example, China, India, Indonesia, Japan and Korea are all at 
the table, as is Australia. If that group of countries could speak in a united way on issues of 
key mutual interest, it would be a powerful force in a globally significant group. It is not easy 
to find a common position, of course, and it will not be possible on some issues. We need 
only to look to Europe – a continent that has been working at this for a long time – to see 
how national differences frequently limit collective regional influence. But to the extent that 
Asian countries can agree on some things, they have the potential to be quite influential. 
Conclusion 
Recent events are putting financial systems to the test around the world. For years people 
have  worried  about  the  so-called  “global  imbalances”  leading  to  trouble  because  Asian 
investors might refuse to buy dollars. Others have feared some sort of repeat of the 1997-
style  “sudden  stop”  crisis  in  the  emerging  world.  But,  in  fact,  it  has  been  a  domestically 
generated  credit  event  in  the  world’s  most  sophisticated  economy,  the  United  States,  that 
has triggered the recent reappraisal of risk. The resulting financial strains have been most 
acute in the developed, rather than the developing world. 
This episode may have some time to run. But the sooner the exposures to problem assets 
are accounted for and disclosed, the sooner markets can get back to pricing risk prudently 
and providing credit on sensible commercial terms. At present, without enough information, 
they  are  operating  on  an  impossibly  short  timeframe,  out  of  fear  of  what  tomorrow  might 
bring. 
Asian countries appear, to date, to be weathering the storm fairly well, as is Australia in my 
view. But the episode reminds us all of the importance of working to improve the resilience of 
our  own  domestic  financial  systems  and  policy  frameworks,  and  of  the  task,  as  yet 
uncompleted, of building better international arrangements for the future. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 9
