Jean-Pierre Roth: Highly leveraged institutions and financial stability – a case 
for regulation? 
Address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Second 
Conference  on  Law  and  Economics  of  Risk  in  Finance,  University  of  St.  Gallen,  St.  Gallen, 
29 June 2007. 
The author thanks Ms Jeanette Henggeler-Müller, Financial Stability Unit of the Swiss National Bank for the first draft of this 
paper. 
 Highly leveraged institutions (HLIs), or hedge funds, are currently a hot topic. No day passes without a 
warning about HLIs in the financial press, and HLIs are on the agenda of politicians, supervisors and 
central bankers in many countries. The German presidency of the EU and the G8 have declared HLIs 
to be a high priority agenda item. 
After the collapse of LTCM, the then chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank said that "had the failure 
of LTCM triggered the seizing up of markets, substantial damage could have been inflicted on many 
market  participants,  including  some  not  directly  involved  with  the  firm,  and  could  have  potentially 
impaired the economies of many nations, including our own"1. And in the newspaper Bild am Sonntag 
of  17  April  2005,  the  German  Bundesminister  für  Arbeit  und  Soziales  accused  HLIs  of  "remaining 
anonymous, having no face, pouncing on firms like locusts, grazing them and moving on." 
Why is there such distrust of HLIs? There are several reasons: HLIs are perceived as a highly risky 
industry which is not subject to supervision. HLIs are perceived as non-transparent and opaque. HLIs 
use complex financial instruments and employ non-traditional investment strategies, partially based on 
complex  mathematical  models.  HLIs  are  active  shareholders,  as  the  recent  example  of  ABN  Amro 
showed. HLIs are part of the glamorous world of high-net-worth investors and high-salary investment 
managers.  And,  probably  most  important,  in  recent  years,  the  importance  of  HLIs  has  grown 
tremendously. 
Why is the risk they pose to financial stability perceived as being so high? HLIs account not only for a 
significant share of trading volume in some market segments, especially complex ones, they are also 
important  counterparties  and  clients  which  provide  a  significant  source  of  revenue  for  large 
international banks. 
This raises the question of whether HLIs are indeed a threat to financial stability and, if so, whether 
there is a need for regulation. These are the two questions we will try to answer in this paper. 
To  begin  with,  let  me  point  out  what  central  banks  understand  by  financial  stability  and  why  we 
consider financial stability to be important. 
In our view, a financial system should be able to absorb shocks affecting financial institutions (e.g., 
banks)  and/or  links  between  institutions  (e.g.,  payment  systems)  without  jeopardising  the  system’s 
vital  functions  such  as  financial  intermediation,  i.e.  the  transfer  of  funds  from  savers  to  investors, 
monitoring debtors and transporting payments between economic agents. Financial stability does not 
mean that bank insolvencies should be excluded or that stock markets should develop smoothly. 
We  are  concerned  about  financial  stability  because  of  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  financial 
turmoil. First, financial stability is a prerequisite for the successful implementation of monetary policy. 
Second, a stable financial sector is necessary for the smooth functioning of the economy as a whole. 
Third,  central  banks  have  an  interest  in  financial  stability  because  they  know  that  in  the  event  of 
financial  crisis  their  role  as  ultimate  liquidity  provider  could  interfere  severely  with  their  traditional 
objective of price stability. 
                                                      
1   Greenspan, 1998. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
The HLI industry 
1. 
In order to assess whether HLIs constitute a major risk to financial stability, it may be helpful to discuss 
the exact meaning of the terms “highly leveraged institution” and “hedge fund”. Legal – or any other 
generally accepted – definitions do not exist yet. However, there are several characteristics that such 
institutions have in common. They are privately offered investment vehicles that pool the investments 
of high-net-worth individuals and family businesses, the HLI managers themselves and, increasingly, 
institutional investors. Often there are minimum investment requirements that restrict access to HLIs. 
Thus retail investors are mainly indirectly exposed to HLIs: actively through investments in funds of 
funds or passively through pension funds. HLIs deploy active investment strategies to pursue superior 
absolute return. Usually HLIs also employ leverage. HLIs are only lightly regulated and are not subject 
to supervision. They are largely exempt from reporting and disclosure requirements and there are no 
restrictions with regard to investment strategies, financial instruments or leverage. 
The term “hedge fund” goes back to the 1950s, when the first hedge funds were established. These 
funds were designed to be neutral to general market movements. Their investment strategy was to 
combine  short  and  long  positions  to  hedge  some  of  the  market  risk  and  thus  to  achieve  absolute 
returns in different market conditions. Nowadays, they no longer just “hedge” since they apply a wide 
range  of  investment  strategies.  They  make  intensive  use  of  short  selling  and  of  complex  financial 
instruments such as derivatives. 
The  term  “highly  leveraged  institution”  is  also  of  limited  value  in  terms  of  defining  the  entity  it 
designates.2  At  a  rough  estimate,  HLIs  have  an  average  leverage  of  1.4.3  This  is  indeed  a  much 
higher  leverage  than  traditional  investment  funds  have,  for  which  there  are  strict  restrictions  on 
indebtedness.  In  Switzerland,  for  instance,  traditional  investment  funds  are  only  allowed  to  have  a 
leverage of up to 0.1, and this only on a temporary basis. However, a leverage of 1.4 is low compared 
to large international banks which have a leverage of ten to fifty. 
In terms of market share, the role of HLIs is less important than is generally believed although, in the 
last few years, their activity has grown tremendously. Since 1999, HLI assets under management have 
increased  by  a  factor  of  five.  An  important  driving  factor  has  been  the  increased  inflows  from 
institutional investors. Currently there are some 9,000 HLIs with assets under management of about 
USD  1,600  billion.4  Despite  these  impressive  figures,  the  HLI  industry  remains  modest  in  relative 
terms.  HLIs  have  a  market  share  which  is  smaller  than  the  trading  books  of  the  five  largest 
international banks and they represent only a fragment of the total debt securities (USD 65,000 billion) 
and credit default swaps outstanding (USD 25,000 billion). However, more important is the activity of 
HLIs in some market segments, especially in the more complex ones. In the markets for credit default 
swaps, distressed debt and emerging market bonds, for instance, roughly half of the trading volume 
can be attributed to HLIs. In the more traditional markets for interest rate derivatives and mortgage-
backed securities, their share drops to only 10% again.5
The benefits of HLIs 
2. 
HLIs  have  undoubtedly  been  a  source  of  innovation  in  the  global  asset  management  industry, 
especially  with  regard  to  traded  credit  products.  Moreover,  through  their  flexible  and  largely 
unconstrained  investment  approaches  as  well  as  through  their  extensive  use of  innovative  financial 
instruments, they have contributed to improving the efficiency of price discovery in financial markets. 
By buying assets that are perceived to be undervalued and by selling assets that are perceived to be 
overvalued, HLIs help to move mispriced assets toward their fundamental values. 
HLIs  play  an  important  role  in  trading  and  distributing  risk.  Thus,  they  enhance  market  liquidity, 
perhaps even in periods of stress, when nobody else is willing to take risks. Moreover, by helping to 
spread market and credit risks more widely, they may increase the resilience of large banks. 
                                                      
2   Unlike  regulated  investment  funds,  HLIs  can  use  leverage  without  any  restrictions;  in  other  words,  they  can  borrow  to 
increase the capital available for investment. If a HLI had capital of USD 1 and borrowed a further USD 1, it could invest a 
total of USD 2. In this example, leverage would be 1. In other words, leverage is the ratio of debt to equity capital. 
3   McCarthy, 2006. 
4   Financial Stability Forum, 2007. 
5   De Nederlandsche Bank, 2007, table 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
HLIs have proved to be quite robust to stock market drops. In stress situations in the last decade, the 
HLI industry incurred less losses than stock indices. The exception was the Russian crisis in 1998 with 
the collapse of LTCM. 
Are HLIs a threat to financial stability? 
3.  
In  this  section  I  analyse  first,  whether  HLIs  represent  a  direct  risk  to  financial  stability  and  second, 
whether  there  are  transmission  channels  through  which  HLIs  could  indirectly  weaken  either 
systemically important banks or the banking sector as a whole. 
As already mentioned, the size of the HLI industry is comparatively small, from both an individual and 
an aggregate point of view. Moreover, the HLI industry is highly segmented and there is a broad range 
of different investment strategies. And, even more important, HLIs play no role in traditional financial 
intermediation, i.e., they are not involved in the savings and loans business. Hence, the failure of one 
or more important HLIs would not directly encumber the real economy. HLIs do not represent a direct 
threat to financial stability. 
The main concern with regard to financial stability is that the failures of one or more large HLIs could 
have a severe impact on systemically important banks and, as such, constitute an indirect threat to the 
financial  system.  We  see  two  channels  through  which  such  a  shock  could  be  transmitted  to  the 
banking sector.6
First transmission channel: banks as counterparties and creditors 
By providing leverage, acting as counterparty or serving as prime brokers, large international banks 
are directly exposed vis-à-vis HLIs. When a HLI incurs losses, this has a direct impact on the bank. 
Depending on the size of the open position vis-à-vis the HLI, this might threaten the bank's solvency in 
an  extreme  case.  The  effective  risk  emanating  from  HLIs  depends  primarily  on  the  margin  and 
collateral  requirements  set  by  the  banks.  These  requirements  help  not  only  to  constrain  losses  but 
also  to  determine  the  amount  of  leverage  HLIs  are  allowed  to  use.  Moreover,  banks  can  partially 
hedge  their  risk  and  diversify  their  exposures.  In  general,  we  do  not  see  a  substantial  difference 
between banks’ exposures to HLIs and other risky exposures, such as, for instance, derivatives. Both 
make  high  demands  on  banks’  risk  management  and  their  value  may  react  sharply  to  market 
movements because of leverage. Investments in HLIs are thus comparable to other risky investments. 
Let us now have a look at the collapse of LTCM – by far the largest hedge fund to date – in order to 
obtain  some  idea  of  the  potential  disruptive  capacity  of  HLIs.  Almost  all  of  the  fund's  capital  was 
destroyed in the collapse. Losses amounted to USD 4.4 billion, of which USD 1.9 billion were incurred 
by the manager of the hedge fund, USD 0.7 billion by UBS and USD 1.8 billion by other investors. 
Moreover,  if  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  had  not  intervened  to  organise  a  bailout,  the 
hedge fund's counterparties would have incurred estimated losses of about USD 5 billion.7 Although 
these amounts seem high, they are in fact modest in relation to the involved banks' capital and to the 
size of the financial markets. 
Second transmission channel: banks as price takers on financial markets 
HLIs  act  as  buyers  and  sellers  on  the  financial  markets.  Their  actions  have  an  impact  on  prices, 
liquidity and volatility in just the same way as any other market participant's action. However, there are 
two reasons why the impact of HLI trading could be stronger. First, in certain market segments they 
have  an  above-average  share  in  trading  volume.  Second,  margin  calls  can  force  HLIs  with  a  high 
leverage  and  a  focus  on  derivatives  to  liquidate  large  positions  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  In 
stressful  market  conditions,  both  of  these  phenomena  could  further  depress  market  prices,  reduce 
market liquidity and increase volatility.  This is the second transmission channel through which HLIs 
may amplify shocks and spread negative effects in the banking sector. 
                                                      
6   See also Hildebrand, 2007. 
7   The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, 1999, page 17. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 3
Let us again have a look at the LTCM case in order to assess the disruptive capacity of HLIs through 
this  second  transmission  channel.  The  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  concluded, 
«nor  were  LTCM's  exchange  positions  of  such  magnitude  that  a  default  by  it  would  have  caused 
significant  disruptions  of  the  U.S.  exchange-traded  futures  market.»8  For  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
traded  products  there  are  no  reliable  numbers.  It  is,  however,  known  that  the  majority  of  OTC 
contracts  were  collateralised.9  An  upper  bound  for  the  non-collateralised  positions  is  the  above-
mentioned loss of USD 5 billion, which is presumably too small a number to create a severe crisis in 
other OTC segments. 
Moreover, we should not forget that hundreds of hedge funds are liquidated every year without any 
negative impact. Also, the collapse of a large hedge fund, Amaranth, in autumn 2006 had only a small 
impact on the financial markets.  
To summarise, HLIs themselves cannot be seen as direct risk to financial stability, at least not at their 
present stage of development. However, there are two potential transmission channels through which 
shocks on HLIs could spread to large international banks. If these shocks are large and banks are not 
robust enough, then the stability of the financial system could be at risk. However, available data and 
experience with failures of larger HLIs in the past suggest that the disruptive capacity of HLIs is rather 
limited. 
Should HLIs be regulated? 
4. 
As  we  discussed  earlier,  the  HLI  industry  itself  does  not  appear  to  be  a  threat  to  financial  stability. 
However,  the  failure  of  one  or  more  large  HLIs  could  –  primarily  via  credit  exposures  –  weaken  a 
systemically  important  bank  which,  in  turn,  could  weaken  the  financial  system.  This  potential  chain 
reaction, however, does not in itself prove the need for regulation. This challenge can be met by other 
initiatives. 
First  of  all,  there  is  market  discipline.  Market  discipline  can  compensate  for  a  lack  of  regulation.  I 
assume market discipline to be more effective in the case of HLIs than in the case of banks for three 
reasons: (a) Investors in HLIs are generally well informed and relatively “sophisticated”, (b) the number 
of investors is small and (c) HLIs do not constitute an industry regarded as worth being rescued in 
terms of the public interest. However, we should make sure that market discipline works. This requires 
that creditors and investors receive sufficient and timely information from HLIs and that they act upon 
this information. It is up to the prime brokers, for instance, to make collateral and margin requirements 
dependant on the transparency and risk profile of their HLI counterparties. 
Second,  the  private  and  official  sector  can  make  a  contribution  to  regulation  by  developing  best 
practice  guidelines  –  or  recommendations  –  for  HLIs  and  large  international  banks  acting  as 
counterparties.  A  good  example  of  recommendations  for  and  by  the  HLI  industry  are  the  “Sound 
Practices  for  Hedge  Fund  Managers”,  developed  by  the  Managed  Fund  Association10.  This  is  a 
promising  approach,  and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)11  thus  encourages  "the  global  hedge 
fund industry (to) review and enhance existing sound practice benchmarks for hedge fund managers 
in  the  light  of  expectations  for  improved  practices  set  out  by  the  official  and  private  sectors".  12  A 
further private sector initiative, even if it is not focussed specifically on HLIs, is the extensive report of 
the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II13 with guiding principles on risk management, risk 
monitoring and enhanced transparency for financial institutions. 
                                                      
8   The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, 1999, page C-12. 
9   The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, 1999, page 18. 
10   The  Managed  Fund  Association  (MFA)  is  the  U.S.-based  trade  association  representing  the  interests  of  the  alternative 
investment industry such as hedge funds and fund of funds. 
11   The FSF was established by the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors in 1999 to promote international financial 
stability  through  enhanced  information  exchange  and  international  cooperation  in  financial  market  supervision  and 
surveillance. 
12   Financial Stability Forum, 2007. 
13   The  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  II  (CRMPG)  is  comprised  of  senior  officials  from  major  financial 
institutions. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2007
As mentioned above, I do not see HLIs as a direct threat to financial stability. The Achilles heel of the 
system  is  the  link  between  HLIs  and  banks  of  systemic  importance.  Thus,  the  systemic  risks 
originating  from  HLIs  are  better  addressed  through  indirect  measures  aimed  at  the  HLIs' 
counterparties and creditors, which are mostly large international banks. This has the advantage that 
best  practice  guidelines  are  focussed  directly  on  the  transmission  channels  through  which  the  risk 
would  be  propagated  and  on  the  institutions  which  are  cornerstones  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective. 
An example of guidelines for the counterparties and creditors of HLIs is the May 2007 report by the 
FSF. The FSF published recommendations to address potential financial system risks relating to HLIs. 
The focus of the report is clearly placed on systemic risks. Investor protection issues associated with 
institutional or retail investments in HLIs are not addressed. 
The  aim  of  the  two  most  important  FSF  recommendations  (no.  1  and  no.  2)  is  to  mitigate  the  two 
transmission  channels  discussed  above:  First,  core  intermediaries  –  i.e.  large  international  banks  – 
should strengthen counterparty risk management practices as they are directly exposed to HLIs (first 
transmission channel). Second, core intermediaries should improve their robustness to the potential 
erosion  of  market  liquidity  (second  transmission  channel).  Moreover,  the  FSF  suggests  that 
supervisors evaluate whether the link between HLIs and banks should be better monitored. The UK 
Financial  Services  Authority,  for  instance,  conducts  a  six-monthly  survey  of  prime  broker  dealers' 
exposure  to  hedge  funds.  Finally,  the  FSF  encourages  counterparties  and  investors  to  demand 
accurate and timely portfolio valuations and risk information from HLIs in order to strengthen market 
discipline. At present, HLIs disclose information to their investors and counterparties, but the level of 
disclosure varies considerably. The best practice guidelines issued by the Managed Fund Association 
aim at guaranteeing a minimum level of transparency. It is evident, however, that there are also limits 
to disclosure. A detailed disclosure of all portfolio positions in good time might be neither feasible nor 
desirable  as  it  would  force  HLIs  to  give  away  proprietary  information  which  is  essential  for  their 
business. 
The recommendations by the FSF are an important contribution to the international debate on how to 
deal  with  HLIs.  The  correct  measurement  and  proper  management  of  the  risk  inherent  in  HLIs  is 
crucial. Counterparties and creditors of HLIs are thus firmly requested to carry out regular stress tests 
designed to simulate risk exposures and liquidity during periods of stress. In assessing these risks, 
particular attention should be given to the liquidity profile of hedge funds and how margins are agreed 
upon and – in the event of market turbulence – how they are adjusted. Such stress tests could help to 
assess the risks of disorderly unwinding in adverse market situations, and enhance the understanding 
of how third parties impact market prices and liquidity. 
There  may  be  situations  in  which  intervention  by  a  regulator  is  justified.  The  protection  of  less 
sophisticated retail “investors” who are indirectly – through pension funds – exposed to HLIs might be 
a legitimate concern. However, regulations are better implemented on the pension fund side by the 
relevant regulator than by directly regulating HLIs themselves.14
A realistic assessment of the systemic importance and the disruptive capacity of HLIs leads us to the 
conclusion that direct prudential regulation would be difficult to justify. There is no market failure which 
needs to be addressed through regulatory measures. Thus the apparent benefits to be delivered by 
regulation  appear  not  to  justify  the  related  costs,  such  as  reduced  market  efficiency  and  slower 
financial  innovation.  Furthermore,  the  HLI  industry  is  very  heterogeneous  and  many  funds  are 
registered  in  exotic  off-shore  locations  and,  hence,  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  main  regulators. 
Therefore,  we  doubt  that  direct  regulation  is  feasible  and  superior  to  market  discipline  or  to  a  best 
practice approach. 
Conclusions 
5. 
The  HLI  industry  has  become  increasingly  important  in  recent  years.  In  some  market  segments, 
especially  in  more  complex  ones,  a  large  share  of  trading  volume  is  attributed  to  HLIs.  However, 
measured  by  assets  under  management,  the  HLI  industry  is  still  small  compared  to  traditional 
investment funds and the trading books of large international banks. Because of its modest size, its 
                                                      
14   See also The President's Working Group on Financial Markets, 2007, recommendation 5. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 5
heterogeneity and its absence from the field of financial intermediation, the HLI industry is no direct 
threat to financial stability. Nevertheless, there are two channels through which a shock occuring in the 
HLI industry could be transmitted to systemically relevant banks. First, banks are exposed to HLIs in 
their role as counterparties and creditors. Second, in periods of stress, banks may suffer from a lack of 
market  liquidity  and  a  decline  in  prices,  and  this  may  be  aggravated  by  HLIs.  Potential  regulatory 
measures should therefore focus on the link between the HLI and the banking industry. Of particular 
importance is that banks simulate their risk exposures to HLIs and the liquidity situation in periods of 
stress. We encourage the private sector to take the initiative and come up with measures which will 
enhance market discipline and strengthen banks' resilience to losses from HLIs and adverse market 
situations. At present, we do not see a need for direct regulation of HLIs. However, central banks and 
regulatory authorities will closely follow developments in the HLI industry, in particular the initiatives 
taken by market participants to mitigate spillovers to the banking industry. 
References 
Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group (2005),  "Toward Greater  Financial  Stability:  A  Private 
Sector Perspective," The Report of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II. 
De Nederlandsche Bank (2007), "Overview of Financial Stability in the Netherlands." 
Financial Stability Forum (2007), "Update of the FSF Report on Highly Leveraged Institutions". 
Greenspan,  Alan  (1998),  "Private-sector  refinancing  of  the  large  hedge  fund,  Long-Term  Capital 
Management,"  Testimony  of  chairman  Alan  Greenspan  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and 
Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, October 1, 1998. 
Hildebrand,  Philipp  (2007),  "Hedge  funds  and  prime  broker  dealers:  step  towards  a  ’best  practice 
proposal’," Banque de France, Financial Stability Review – Special issue on hedge funds, No. 10. 
Managed Fund Association (2005), "MFA's 2005 Sound Practices for Hedge Fund Managers." 
McCarthy, Callum (2006), "Hedge Funds: what should be the regulatory response," speech at SUERF 
(European Money & Finance Forum). 
The  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (1999),  "Hedge  Funds,  Leverage,  and  the 
Lessons of the Long-Term Capital Management." 
The  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2007),  "Agreement  among  PWG  and  US 
Agency principals on principles and guidelines regarding private pools of capital." 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2007
