Burhanuddin Abdullah: Reflections on the changes in the region a decade after 
the Asian crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  International  Symposium 
“Ten Years After the Asian Currency Crisis: Future Challenges for the Asian Economies and Financial 
Markets”, hosted by the Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia (CeMCoA), Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 
22 January 2007. 
 Honorable Governor of Bank of Japan, Mr. Toshihiko Fukui, Honorable Managing Director of the IMF, 
Mr. Rodrigo de Rato, Fellow Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good morning.  
First I wish to join others to express our appreciation to thank the Bank of Japan for organizing this 
important event. It is indeed an opportune time to reflect on the recent developments and progress 
that we have achieved following the crisis. I believe that through a frank and candid discussion we can 
share from each others’ experience during this symposium in the spirit of cooperation especially on 
how  we  have  fared  through  the  turbulence  period  of  unprecedented  economic  crisis  of  the  late 
nineties. We expect that we can capitalize on the recent progress and cope with the future challenges 
for the benefit of our economies.  
In this session, allow me to briefly express my reflection on the changes in the region a decade after 
the Asian crisis to identify factors that would influence the economic dynamism and prospects of East 
Asia in general and ASEAN in particular.  
Fellow Governors,  
In my observation, I notice that a number of remarkable changes have occurred in the region.  
First  is  the  heightened  regional  cooperation  with  the  objective  of  establishing  a  regional  self-help. 
Unlike most of their counterparts in other parts of the world, the latest financial crisis, among other 
factors, provides strong impetus for the monetary and financial cooperation in East Asia. The initiative 
to  create  a  set  of  Bilateral  Swap  Arrangement,  to  develop  Asian  bond  markets,  and  to  conduct 
regional surveillance are our collective means to maintaining greater stability in the region, particularly 
in  the  face  of  highly  volatile  flows.  I  surely  hope  that  this  kind  of  cooperation  will  continue  and  be 
widened in the future so as to positively affect the economic dynamism in East Asia.  
Second, in the aftermath of the Asian crisis, countries in East Asia have become more conscious in 
protecting  their  own  national  interests  and  of  strengthening  their  sense  of  security  amidst  greater 
global economic uncertainties. This is shown by the fact that countries in East Asia have accumulated 
the bulk of the world's foreign-exchange reserves. In the past year China added more than $250 billion 
to its stash, breaking the USD1 trillion record level. By November last year, ten East-Asian countries 
plus India have amassed some USD3 trillion of foreign-exchange reserve. Such a huge accumulation 
of international reserves certainly entails opportunity cost and exchange rate risk especially amid the 
looming global imbalances. However, the build-up of these reserves in a way also provides cushion 
against unanticipated reversal of capital flows given the openness of the foreign exchange regime and 
financial  market  the  integration.  In  connection  to  this,  more  and  more  countries  have  settled  their 
obligations to the Fund. Indonesia, one of the crisis-hit-countries, closed the final chapter of the Asian 
crisis following the last prepayment of its obligation in October last year. Such a prepayment reflects 
the strength of economic recovery and the balance of payments positions of the crisis hit countries, 
which  in  a  way  provide  an  evidence  of  the  Fund’s  success  in  Asia.  Yet  it  may  also  suggest  that 
countries  tend  to  prefer  executing  their  own  self-formulated  programs  when  conducting  reforms.  In 
addition, Indonesia’s recent experience with the Fund during the crisis suggests that turning back to 
the Fund in case of another crisis will be politically much more difficult than in the past.  
Third,  while  Asian  economies  have  fully  recovered  from  crisis,  investments  as  percentage  of  GDP 
have  been  well  below  the  pre-crisis  level.  Other  non-crisis  Asian  economies  except  China  also 
exhibited a slowdown in the growth of their investments. After showing a slight recovery in 2004, the 
ratios  moderated  in  2005.  The  slump  in  investment  in  Asia  mainly  reflected  a  sharp  fall  in  private 
investment. Many economists shared the view that the low level of investment cannot be explained by 
changes in fundamentals. With the exception of China, aggregate saving has been stable over more 
than  10  years.  Among  key  factors  responsible  for  the  slump  include  investor’s  perceptions  that  the 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 1
investment  environment  is  riskier.  I  would  appreciate  it  if  fellow  Governors  would  share  their 
experience on this issue.  
Finally, many emerging countries in Asia were forced to abandon their traditional dollar-peg system 
and to allow their exchange rates to float in the summer of 1997 amidst intense currency attacks by 
speculators.  After  a  period  of  sharp  depreciation  accompanied  by  high  volatility,  exchange  rates  in 
these  countries  bottomed  out  against  the  US  dollar  in  the  autumn  of  1998,  thanks  to  a  return  of 
confidence in the economic prospects of these countries. However, simply turning to flexible exchange 
rate  regime  and  more  liberal  capital  account  policies  do  not  solve  all  the  exchange  rate  problems. 
Despite the sound policies in place, we frequently witness sharp volatility which is due to speculative 
capital flows and not justified by its fundamentals. At the same time we have progressed quite liberally 
in terms of our capital and current account policies. The adoption of these policies was endorsed by 
multilateral agencies, including the IMF, during the height of the Asian crisis. It is therefore my hope 
that all of us in this symposium come up with a set of viable policy options to address this issue of 
speculative flows in Asia. In particular, I would appreciate views from the IMF.  
Fellow Governors,  
On that final note I would like to end my speech. Those developments in the aftermath of the crisis that 
I  have  mentioned  will  certainly  influence  the  economic  dynamism  and  prospects  of  East  Asia  in 
general and ASEAN in particular. I am looking forward to fruitful discussions in this symposium. Going 
forward, it is my hope that we can engage in greater policy cooperation and coordination in East Asia.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2007
