Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Potential role of Islamic finance in strengthening the New Silk 
Road  
Special address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at GIFF Investors & 
Issuers Forum: "Islamic Finance: The New Silk Road", Kuala Lumpur, 28 March 2007. 
 Up until the 14th century, the Silk Road served as a major global conduit between ancient civilizations 
in  the  East  and  West.  It  created  mutual  prosperity,  encouraged  knowledge  transfer  and  enhanced 
understanding  between  civilisations  through  trade,  cultural  and  technological  exchange.  Now  in  the 
21st  century,  globalisation  and  liberalisation,  and  the  emergence  of  new  financial  centres  and  their 
increased integration have created an environment of flourishing activity reminiscent of the Old Silk 
Road.  
Indeed, it suggests that a New Silk Road has emerged. This new route not only carries flows of oil, 
manufactured  goods,  and  technological  innovation,  but  also  flows  of  direct  investment,  portfolio 
capital, private equity and human capital. Previously, silk was one of the main commodities traded on 
this  route.  Now,  the  emergence  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  has  brought  together 
financial services providers across continents to trade on this new route. The emergence of the New 
Silk Road reflects the increasing and evolving economic and financial relationships and inter-linkages, 
with  Islamic  finance  well  positioned  to  further  facilitate  these  linkages  to  offer  mutually-reinforcing 
benefits to those who participate in it. Indeed, the New Silk Road opens up the prospect of exciting 
opportunities for economic progress and prosperity for us all.  
I  first  made  reference  to  the  New  Silk  Road  at  the  2nd  World  Islamic  Economic  Forum  (WIEF)  on 
"Unleashing the Potential of Emerging Markets" in Islamabad, Pakistan in November 2006.  
It is my pleasure today to share some thoughts on the potential role of Islamic finance in strengthening 
the New Silk Road. My remarks will focus on four areas that is the emergence of the New Silk Road; 
how  the  linkages  on  the New  Silk Road  have built  on  the comparative  advantages  of  Asia and  the 
Middle East; how Islamic finance is able to foster the linkages along the New Silk Road; and finally, 
how we can extend the New Silk Road to the rest of the world to advance global economic stability 
and prosperity. 
The emergence of a New Silk Road 
Today, signs that a New Silk Road is flourishing are abundant. The economic and financial linkages 
between Asia and the Middle East are growing. While the world trade has on the average expanded 
by 10% over the period 2001-2005, Asia's trade with the Middle East has increased on the average by 
24%. More than half of the exports from the Gulf states1 goes to Asia and more than one-fifth of its 
imports  are  from  Asia.  The  Gulf  is  the  major  supplier  of  fuel  to  Asia,  while  Asia  in  turn  supplies 
manufactured goods and food to the Gulf. 
Recent trends in investment activities have been equally significant. Investment projects amounting to 
more than USD160 billion to be financed by the Gulf states in Asia have been announced since 20052. 
In 2006 alone, mega-deals3 involving corporate acquisitions and real estate purchases from the Gulf 
to Asia, are estimated to total more than USD18 billion, including multi-billion dollar IPO purchases in 
financial  institutions  in  China,  large  oil  refineries  and  telecom  companies.  The  value  of  such 
investments are expected to increase to between USD20-30 billion in 2007. 
For  economic  regions  with  high  savings  and  surpluses  such  as  Asia  and  the  Middle  East,  the 
challenge is to recycle part of these surplus funds to productive investments in the region. The supply 
of savings in Asia and the Middle East is by far higher than in any other part of the world. Savings 
rates here in Asia are expected to remain in the region of 30-40% of GDP for some years to come. 
                                                      
1   The Gulf Cooperation Council represents Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain, Qatar, Oman and Kuwait 
2    "A route to riches on the new Silk Road", Financial Times, 21 Dec 2006 
3   Worth more than USD1 billion 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
Similarly, savings in the Middle East economies have been rising in the recent decade and is expected 
to  average  about  30-35%  of  GDP  in  the  coming  years.  In  2006,  the  current  account  surpluses  as 
percentage of GDP for Asia and the Middle East were about 5% and 23% respectively4. With Asian 
official  foreign  currency  reserves  exceeding  USD2  trillion,  and  Middle  East  oil  revenues  exceeding 
USD1 trillion since 2000, the management of surplus savings and reserves in both regions will offer 
significant investment opportunities. 
Besides the institutional pool of wealth, the rapidly expanding middle class in both regions is a further 
trend  sustaining  the  high  savings  rate  and  the  increased  demand  for  more  sophisticated  including 
consumer finance and wealth management. In Asia alone, we now have more than 2.4 million high net 
worth individuals5, not far behind the US with 2.9 million and Europe with 2.8 million, and these Asian 
individuals control an estimated amount of USD7.2 trillion financial assets. The size of this group in 
Asia is estimated to be increasing at 7% per year, second only to those in the Middle East, numbering 
300,000 and growing at 9% per year. Traditionally, investors in Asia and the Middle East have looked 
to  the  developed  Western  markets  to  meet  their  investment  needs,  in  view  of  the  more  developed 
financial markets and the range of asset classes. Increasingly however, there is growing interest and 
search  for  improved  returns  on  investment  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  This  has  been  a  global 
phenomenon for some years now, characterised by excess liquidity and low yields in the traditional 
markets.  
The New Silk Road creates linkages that build on the comparative advantages between Asia 
and the Middle East 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Historically,  trade  and  investment  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  has  been  linked  to  the  developed 
economies.  However,  it  is  now  increasingly  recognised  that  there  are  significant  complementarities 
between our two dynamic regions. These complementarities provide a platform for two-way flows that 
enhances  income  and  wealth  creation.  The  different  demand  patterns  of  each  respective  region 
reinforces the significance of the complementarities.  
The  Middle  East  investors  have  a  greater  need  for  diversification,  both  in  terms  of  geographical 
allocation and asset classes, beyond the traditional investments in the US and Europe. Asia in turn, 
the  home  to  some  of  the  fastest  growing  economies  in  the  world,  offers  highly  diverse  investment 
opportunities,  ranging  from  in  Vietnam  to  Japan,  and  in  a  broad  scope  of  industries,  ranging  from 
natural resource producers to established high-tech brands. Such investment opportunities continue to 
support the growth momentum in the region. At the same time, Middle East domestic infrastructure 
requirements are estimated to total USD500 billion for the next five years, and Asian companies have 
demonstrated  the  capacity  to  provide  the  technology,  expertise  and  human  capital  to  meet  these 
infrastructure demands. 
Asia's  relentless  march  towards  development  offers  new  opportunities  for  the  Middle  East.  Asia's 
continued  need  for  productive  capital  and  uninterrupted  energy  supply  to  sustain  its  high  growth 
matches the Middle East's resource endowments. It is estimated that Asia needs USD 1 trillion worth 
of infrastructure investment over the next five years, and is in search of new partnerships and strategic 
investors to co-invest in these undertakings. 
In  focussing  on  the  respective  comparative  advantages  and  connecting  via  the  New  Silk  Road,  it 
contributes to expanding the opportunities in both the regions. Essentially, this extends the production 
possibility frontiers to create new areas of growth. The participation of a wider pool of investors also 
enables better risk sharing and consequently, increases the viability of projects as well as the returns 
to  the  investment.  New  value  is  also  created  is  in  mutually  beneficial  collaborations,  such  as  in 
downstream energy activities. Products resulting from hybrid ideas are also evident in innovations in 
several areas, including in Islamic finance, with the early global sukuks being issued from Asia and the 
Middle East economies.  
                                                      
4   Refers to IMF data 
5   Refers to individuals with at least USD1 million in financial assets. Sourced from Merrill Lynch - Capgemini World Wealth 
Report 2006 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
Islamic Finance: strengthening the financial linkages between Asia and the Middle East 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Islamic finance has demonstrated its viability and competitiveness in a more liberalised and globalised 
financial  environment  and  has  become  important  in  strengthening  the  linkages  between  the  two 
regions.  While  the  sizeable  Muslim  populations  in  both  regions  have  been  attracted  to  the  unique 
features  of  Islamic  finance,  it  has  also  attracted  interest  and  participation  from  non-Muslims  within 
these  regions.  At  present,  there  are  more  than  1006  Islamic  banks  in  both  regions,  while  Islamic 
financial transactions involving sovereigns and corporations have amounted to USD 35 billion during 
the period 2004 and 20067.  
Several factors have supported this trend. The orientation of Islamic finance towards real underlying 
assets  is  aligned  to  the  nature  of  the  investment  opportunities  in  both  regions.  Infrastructure  and 
project finance in both regions are particularly suited for Islamic finance.  
The emphasis in Islamic finance on risk-sharing and the equity-oriented nature of such financing also 
suits the requirements. The Islamic financial structures clearly distinguish the roles and responsibilities 
as well as risk and profit-sharing profiles of the parties involved. This clear delineation of the roles also 
promotes  greater  transparency  and  the  appropriate  governance.  The  nature  of  the  structures  also 
enables the risks to be transferred to those more able to contribute towards value creation.  
In  addition,  the  use  of  Islamic  finance  promotes  stability  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  financing 
flows, which is important for emerging market economies such as those in Asia and the Middle East. 
In Islamic finance, strategies to minimize and manage the risks involve integrating with the risk in the 
real activities. The real activities therefore needs to generate sufficient wealth to compensate for such 
risks. In contrast, conventional instruments generally separate the risks from the underlying assets. As 
a  result,  risk  management  and  wealth  creation  may  at  times  move  in  different  or  even  opposite 
directions. Conventional financial instruments also allow for the commoditisation of risks, leading to its 
proliferation through multiple layers of leveraging and disproportionate distribution. These could result 
in higher systemic risks, increasing the potential for instability and inequitable concentration of wealth. 
The adoption of Islamic financial principles encourages financing to be primarily adopted as a means 
to facilitate real underlying economic transactions and not for speculative purposes. 
There  are  also  clear  value  propositions  in  Islamic  finance  for  both  investors  and  issuers  from  both 
regions.  For  investors,  Islamic  financial  products  offer  portfolio  diversification  and  new  investment 
opportunities as they avail themselves to a new asset class. They also encourage risk management 
and provides confidence through explicit disclosure and transparency of the roles and responsibilities 
defined  in  the  contract.  For  issuers,  Islamic  finance  allows  access  to  a  new  source  of  funds  and 
liquidity besides providing, new risk management options and new mechanisms for price discovery. 
Islamic finance is well positioned to be a vehicle on the New Silk Road, as the enabling supporting 
infrastructure  is  already  in  place.  The  required  regulatory  and  legal  frameworks  for  Islamic  finance 
have  been  established,  not  only  in  a  growing  number  of  countries  in  both  regions  but  also  at  the 
international level through standard-setting bodies such as the International Financial Services Board 
and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI).  Efforts 
towards the harmonisation of Shariah interpretations and issues concerning mutual recognition are at 
an  advanced  stage.  The  platforms  for  extending  regional  linkages  and  cross-border  initiatives, 
including  to  the  Middle  East,  are  already  in  place  within  Asia,  where  there  has  been  a  significant 
degree of regional financial and economic integration.  
Malaysia as an intermediary destination along the New Silk Road 
Malaysia is committed to and extensively engaged in strengthening linkages through Islamic finance. 
In  collaboration  with  the  participation  of  the  industry  representing  the  banking,  takaful  and  capital 
markets in Malaysia, the regulators have worked towards enhancing the inter-linkages with the global 
                                                      
6   Estimates based on the listing of Islamic financial institutions provided by the Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance, 
London. 
7   Data sourced from Islamic Finance Information Service website. The Islamic financial deals mostly based on Murabahah, 
Ijarah, Mudharabah, Istisna principles. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
Islamic financial markets, not only by the further development of the Islamic financial infrastructure but 
also  through  increased  liberalisation  and  through  the  implementation  of  measures  to  increase 
competitiveness of the financial services sector. This has included further liberalisation of the capital 
account  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  the  implementation  of  tax  neutrality  measures.  Just  as 
historical Malacca was a key port along the ancient trade routes between Asia and the Middle East, it 
is envisaged that Malaysia would serve as a key destination along the New Silk Road. 
Today,  as  part  of  Malaysia's  efforts  to  further  spur  the  infrastructure  development  of  the  Islamic 
financial  system,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  announce  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  Securities 
Commission, Bursa Malaysia and industry players have worked collaboratively towards establishing a 
mechanism referred to as the Commodity Murabahah House. This mechanism which uses crude palm 
oil as the underlying commodity will facilitate Islamic financing applying the concept of murabahah or 
tawarruq. 
BNM commodity murabahah acceptance 
As part of these efforts to promote development of products to meet the diversified requirements of 
investors, Bank Negara Malaysia is pleased to announce the introduction of a new Islamic monetary 
instrument,  Commodity  Murabahah  Programme  (CMP)  as  part  of  its  diverse  range  of  policy 
instruments  in  managing  the  short-term  liquidity  in  the  Malaysian  Islamic  inter-bank  money  market. 
Unique to Malaysia is that the CMP is designed to be the first ever commodity-based transaction that 
utilises  the  Crude  Palm  Oil  based  contracts  as  its  underlying  asset.  The  Bank  has  executed  CMP 
master  agreements  with  the  eight  Islamic  banking  institutions  including  the  three  foreign  owned 
banking  institutions  to  promote  the  use  of  the  instrument  for  liquidity  management.  Several  CMP 
transactions have now been conducted between the Central Bank and the respective Islamic Banks.  
As commodity murabahah is widely used in other Islamic centres, it is envisaged that this CMP will 
promote increased linkages between Malaysia and these centres.  
BNM Sukuk Murabahah/tawaruq short-term securities  
The Central Bank also intends to diversify the issuance concept of the existing Islamic monetary notes 
from being based on Bai Inah and Ijarah into murabahah. Currently, the outstanding amount of the 
respective  notes  is  RM  8  billion.  This  initiative  is  the  continuation  from  the  commodity  murabahah 
acceptance initiative as the issuance involves the securitisation of the acceptance facility. There are 
several  key  benefits  of  issuing  the  Islamic  Monetary  Notes  under  this  structure.  It  provides  Islamic 
financial institutions an additional instrument to manage liquidity risk on a short-term basis. It is also a 
financial instrument whose structure has been widely used for retail banking and syndication products 
in the Middle East. Finally, it provides an opportunity for new investors to invest in Islamic financial 
papers in the Malaysian market, thus diversifying the investor base.  
As  part  of  the  initiative  to  be  linked  to  the  global  Islamic  financial  markets,  this  instrument  will  be 
promoted to the international financial market. 
Islamic Derivative Master Agreement (IDMA) 
Recognising  the  importance  to  develop  Islamic  hedging  products  for  Islamic  financial  market  to 
mitigate investment risks, Malaysia has introduced the first global Islamic Derivative master agreement 
to document Islamic derivative transactions. The effort is initiated by Bank Negara Malaysia and driven 
by the financial industry via the Persatuan Pasaran Kewangan Malaysia. The implementation of the 
agreement  is  expected  to  improve  the  risk  management  practices,  balance  sheet  management, 
increase fund mobilisation efficiency and enhance their investment banking capability of the Islamic 
banking institutions. With the introduction of IDMA, the rights and obligations of contracting parties are 
clearly stated, thus creating an environment that is more transparent. As IDMA also incorporates best 
practices  in  market  conduct,  this  document  serves  as  an  important  catalyst  for  the  future  linkages 
between financial markets that offer Islamic financial market instruments. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
Extending the New Silk Road to the world  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While the New Silk Road is enhancing linkages between Asia and the Middle East, both regions have 
always  extended  the  Silk  Road  to  the  rest  of  the  world  to  participate  in  the  these  exciting 
developments  on  this  route.  Indeed,  global  investors  and  the  international  financial  community  are 
already  drawing  the  benefits  from  the  increased  diversification  of  asset  classes  while  riding  on  the 
dynamism of the two regions. As Islamic finance expands further, reinforced by the activities on the 
New  Silk  Road,  there  will  be  greater  convergence  towards  ethical  or  socially  responsible-type  of 
investments  (SRI)  in  the  global  financial  community.  Islamic  investment  guidelines  share  significant 
similarities with the SRI principles. The focus of Islamic investment not only involves the avoidance of 
riba-free activities but also extends to include issues related to ethical values, such as fair trade and 
environmental protection. Furthermore, the prospects of increased stability for financing flows and the 
focus on the role of real sector economic activities have ignited interest in utilising Islamic finance for 
sustainable development. 
This overwhelming gathering of so many issuers and investors here today provides some indication of 
the  growing  interest  in  Islamic  finance,  reinforcing  the  potential  increased  activity  on  the  New  Silk 
Road.  We  all  have  a  part  in  the  making  of  the  New  Silk  Road  into  a  vibrant  source  of  wealth  and 
prosperity in the global economy.  
In  closing,  Malaysia  is committed  to  be  part  of  the  New  Silk Road  to  facilitate  greater cross  border 
economic  and  financial  flows  for  increased  inter-regional  trade  and  investment  transactions.  Insya-
Allah, the greater inter-regional economic and financial linkages would bring greater benefits which will 
be  mutually  reinforcing  and  contribute  towards  raising  the  prospects  for  greater  global  shared 
prosperity.  
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
