Y V Reddy: The growing influence of the emerging world 
Speech  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  2007  Money  &  Banking 
Conference "Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos 
Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman, Governor Redrado, Chairman Ignatiev and distinguished participants, 
I  am  honoured  by  the  kind  invitation  of  Governor  Redrado  to  visit  Argentina  and  participate  in  the 
Annual Money and Banking Seminar at the Central Bank of Argentina with focus on “monetary policy 
under  uncertainty”.  I  must  compliment  Governor  Martin  Redrado  for  assembling  a  galaxy  of  central 
bank  Governors,  leading  market  analysts  and  globally  renowned  academics.  The  assemblage  is  a 
tribute to the charm, popularity, knowledge and wisdom of Governor Redrado. I want to thank all the 
officials of the Central Bank of Argentina for the warm hospitality and excellent arrangements made.  
My presentation is broadly in two parts. In the first part, I address certain general issues relating to the 
EMEs covering (i) the growing importance of the EMEs in the global context; (ii) distinguishing features 
of  both  convergence  and  divergence,  in  these  economies;  and  (iii)  some  current  concerns  of  the 
EMEs. I devote the second part to discuss India’s development and reform experience.  
The growing importance of the Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) 
I.  
A group of economies having some distinct market features was reportedly perceived and termed as 
“emerging markets” in 1981 by Antoine W. van Agtmael of the International Finance Corporation, the 
affiliate of the World Bank. Broadly, an EME is described as an economy with low-to-middle per capita 
income levels, characterised as transitional, i.e., in the process of moving from a closed to an open-
market economy and embarking on an economic reform program that leads it to a stronger and more 
competitive  economic  performance,  and  simultaneously,  to  higher  levels  of  transparency  and 
efficiency in the functioning of the factor markets, including the financial markets. More generally, it 
can  be  held  that  what  is  and  what  is  not  an  "emerging  market"  depends  on  the  maturity  of  its 
institutions,  that  is,  the  rules  of  the  economic  market  game  –  the  law  and  the  culture  –  and  the 
institutions enforcing adherence to these rules (Kolodko, 2003). From an operational point of view, the 
EMEs may be considered to be the fast-growing economies, gradually transiting from the developing 
to  the  developed  status.  In  the  view  of  market-participants,  the  EMEs  are  the  countries  that  are 
restructuring  their  economies  towards  greater  market  orientation  and  thus,  offering  a  wealth  of 
opportunities in trade, technology transfers and investment.  
While the fast-growing economies are operationally grouped together as emerging market economies 
(EMEs),  the  group  of  countries  constituting  EMEs  has  not  been  clearly  defined  and  hence,  a 
discussion about the EMEs as a group, at times, becomes difficult. Nevertheless, the major countries 
amongst the EMEs are very well-recognised and an increased focus has been placed upon monitoring 
the performance and market conditions of the EMEs by the international financial institutions, leading 
economic  intelligence  agencies,  credit  rating  agencies,  leading  multinational  securities  firms  and 
financial  journals.  Academic  and  policy  research  on  EMEs  have  also  mushroomed,  focusing 
particularly  upon  the  monetary,  financial  and  regulatory  policies  and  the  issues  relating  to  trade, 
financial integration and liberalisation of capital accounts. 
The EMEs represent the fast-growing group of countries and their share in world output is increasing. 
They are geographically spread across the world encompassing diverse cultures – Asia, Middle East, 
Europe, Africa and Latin America. On account of increasing trade flows, intra-EMEs as well as with the 
rest of the world, they play a critical role in determining the course of bilateral, regional and multilateral 
trade  policies  and  developments.  They  have  become  the  destinations  for  large  movements  of 
international private capital, attracted by high-return possibilities, dwarfing the official flows, including 
those from multilateral financial institutions.  
Today,  the  EMEs  as a  group  are  reported  to  constitute  about  80  per  cent  of  the  global  population, 
representing  about  20  per  cent  of  the  world's  output.  The  share  of  the  EMEs  in  the  global  GDP  is 
increasing  and  is  also  a  tribute  to  their  sound  macroeconomic  policies,  improving  fiscal  positions, 
stronger external sectors, increasing productivity, etc. According to some recent estimates, the EMEs 
will soon account for more than half of the world’s PPP-based GDP.  
The  EMEs  are  also  becoming  crucial  to  the  supply-demand  dynamics  of  oil  and  food  apart  from 
services and manufacturing products, as also for improving environmental cooperation.  
The rise of the EMEs, in general, has thus, made the globalisation a two-way process in which the 
emerging economies are changing from passive recipients to being part of active participants in global 
economy.  
It is useful to recognise that some of the EMEs are becoming hubs of regional economic activity with 
sizeable populations, large resource bases, and huge markets. Their economic success is considered 
to have positive externalities for the neighboring countries and spurs their development process.  
From  the  perspective  of  public  policy,  managing  the  transition  of  the  EMEs  to  the  mature  market 
economies  is  a  challenging  task.  Compared  to  the  transition-path  traversed  by  the  currently 
industrialised  economies,  the  policy-makers  in  the  EMEs  face  several  pressures  –  in  terms  of 
compressed time frame for transition, technological compulsions towards more openness, the socio-
political pressures, etc.  
It is useful to note that implicit in the word “emerging” in the very title given to the EMEs as a group, is 
the notion that they are undergoing a rapid change or transition. We must recognise that the transition 
embraces  demographics,  political  institutions,  social  dimensions  and  related  attitudes.  These  all-
encompassing changes have an in-built potential for uncertainties, possibly some volatility, but it gets 
exacerbated by the international capital flows, particularly when the changes in such flows happen to 
be unrelated to domestic fundamentals. In such a situation, managing the transition turns out to be a 
critical challenge for policy-making, and the management requires a more difficult and dynamic trade-
off  between  commitment  and  flexibility  in  policy.  In  fact,  several  unprecedented  policy  initiatives 
amongst many EMEs in the recent months in managing capital flows should be viewed in the context 
of the compulsions of dynamic trade-off between commitment and flexibility of policies in the external 
sector of the EMEs. 
Some distinguishing features of the EMEs 
II.  
The emerging markets and developing economies grew by 5.8 per cent during the past ten years as 
against  2.7  per  cent  growth  in  the  advanced  economies.  This  phenomenon  is  currently  lending 
credence to the argument that growth in the emerging countries can perhaps help, to some extent, 
offset an economic slowdown in the US.  
Second, in recent years, the inflation environment in the EMEs remained benign despite a significant 
rise  in  commodity  prices.  Average  inflation  in  the  EMEs  has  declined  dramatically  since  the  early 
1990s,  in  many  cases  from  double-  and  triple-digit  levels,  to  about  five  per  cent  at  present.  This 
decline in inflation in the EMEs, now sustained for more than half a decade, is impressive.  
Third, the EMEs have grown faster than the advanced economies in terms of volume of trade as well. 
Thus, the volume of exports from the emerging and developing economies had grown at an average 
rate of 8.9 per cent during 1998-2006 as against 5.5 per cent growth in the advanced economies.  
Fourth, the EMEs attract significant capital flows. The net inflows of foreign private capital to the EMEs 
reached a level of US$ 256 billion in 2006. Foreign-investor demand for emerging market assets is 
reflected  in  a  broad-based  rise  in  inflows  into  dedicated  bond  and  equity  markets  of  the  EMEs. 
Emerging-market corporate bond issuance in international bond markets rose to a record level of US$ 
125 billion in 2006.  
Fifth,  as  a  result  of  persistently  rising  capital  flows,  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  EMEs  have 
increased significantly. Consequently, seven of the EMEs hold more than double the foreign exchange 
reserves of the G-7 group and account for 43.7 per cent of the global foreign exchange reserves, while 
the G-7 group of countries account for 21.1 per cent of the total. Similarly, while seven of the EMEs' 
foreign exchange reserves amount to about 38 per cent of their aggregate GDP, reserves held by the 
G-7 group are four per cent of their total GDP.  
Sixth, along with the accretion of foreign exchange reserves from exports and capital account, most, 
though not all, of the EMEs also have high savings rates, which are further increasing steadily in many 
Asian  and  other  emerging  market  economies.  In  these  countries,  savings  are  rising  faster  than 
investment.  
Seventh,  the  considerable  surge  in  market  financing  has  been  buttressed  by  substantial  efforts  to 
modernise  the  financial  sector,  enabling  the  EMEs  to  offer  investors  an  increasingly  wide  and 
sophisticated range of financial instruments and, thus, to attract new types of investors. Overall, the 
EMEs are tending to put in place financial structures similar to those in the advanced countries. 
Although the EMEs as a group have these common characteristics, they are also quite distinct from 
each other in certain respects. The overall improvement in the fundamentals of the EMEs masks a 
significant  dispersion  in  most  of  the  benchmark  indicators,  viz.,  GDP  growth,  inflation,  balance  of 
payments, foreign currency reserves and public finances. Therefore, let me now enumerate some of 
the divergent features of the EMEs.  
First,  some  of  the  countries  are  growing  at  a  robust  pace  while  growth  in  some  others  has  been 
relatively slower in some of the recent years. Similarly, sources of growth are quite dissimilar across 
the EMEs. 
Second, as reflected in the export-GDP ratio, external demand has been a more dominant driver of 
growth in recent years for some of the EMEs while some of the EMEs seem to be more domestic-
demand-driven economies.  
Third,  there  is  a  divergence  in  the  external  sector  performance  of  the  EMEs,  as  reflected  in 
parameters  like  current  account  balances,  level  of  external  debt,  etc.  The  EMEs  including  China, 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Russia have been maintaining current account surpluses since 1998 while 
some others have maintained current account deficits. External debt reductions have been particularly 
significant in Indonesia, Russia, Brazil, and also in Argentina following the 2005 debt exchange.  
Fourth, the EMEs have a wide variety of exchange rate arrangements. Such diversity is only expected 
in  view  of  the  wide  differences  amongst  these  countries  in  economic  and  financial  circumstances. 
However,  as  these  countries  have  adapted  to  the  expanding  opportunities  arising  from  deeper 
involvement in an increasingly integrated global economy and to the changes in their own economic 
environments, there has been a gradual movement towards greater flexibility in some of them.  
Fifth,  there  are  variations  in  terms  of  economic  endowments  such  as  rich  natural  resources  and 
human capital. 
Sixth,  institution  building  plays  an  important  role  in  sustained  development.  Since  the  major  EMEs 
have adopted the path of reforms at different points in time under different historical circumstances, 
their institutional strengths vary. For example, both China and Russia are transiting from a centrally-
planned economy to a more open-market economy but their approach to reforms has been different 
and, thus, the level of institutional strength also differs. A contrasting level of institutional development 
is also evident from the fact that while some of the emerging markets witnessed financial crises in the 
1990s, some others, like China and India, could avoid the contagion effect.  
Seventh, another contrast within the group of the EMEs is that not all of them are equally exposed to 
similar shocks. For instance, if we look at oil trade of the EMEs, some of them are net exporters of oil 
and are benefiting from oil price spikes, while some others are net importers of oil. Hence, the EMEs, 
which are oil-importing consumers, face greater energy-security concerns in financing their long-term 
growth, while others are relatively better off to tackle the growing energy needs. 
The EMEs exhibit very diverse characteristics to investors, whether in terms of country size, the size of 
financial  markets,  energy  dependence, 
forex  reserves  and,  more  generally, 
macroeconomic  performance,  Thus,  not  all  the  EMEs  are  equally  impacted  by  the  ongoing 
developments  in  the  global  economy  and  investors  appear  to  differentiate  between  them.  The 
advantage  of  such  diversity  is  that  the  possibility  of  any  synchronised  behaviour  or  a  potential  for 
contagion amongst the EMEs is to some extent moderated. However, Governor Draghi of Bank of Italy 
explained  in  his  address  earlier  today  that  there  are  new  financial  intermediaries,  new  financial 
instruments and new dispersed risks. Hence, the risk of contagion to the EMEs, through the financial 
markets,  which  appear  to  be  even  more  integrated  now,  seems  to  have  heightened,  and  the  real 
sector in the EMEs might not remain immune to its consequences. 
level  of 
the 
Current concerns of the EMEs  
III. 
In the emerging market economies, growth has continued to be firm on account of adoption of sound 
macro  policies  and  structural  reforms.  These  were  complemented  by  global  factors  such  as  strong 
commodity  prices  and  abundant  global  liquidity.  Concerns  have,  however,  arisen  regarding  the 
sustainability  of  some  of  these  factors.  High  investment  growth,  excessive  lending,  overhang  of 
liquidity, strengthening retail demand and imbalances in trade and international payments are some of 
the factors causing concern in some of the EMEs.  
In addition, there are a number of downside risks emanating from the behaviour of oil prices, adverse 
developments in the US housing market, persistence of global imbalances, large leveraged positions 
in financial markets and possible emergence of inflationary pressures. It is important to recognise the 
risk of an abrupt and disorderly adjustment of global payments imbalances. The exposure of emerging 
markets to risky financial assets of the mature markets has increased, and therefore, the overall global 
financial  risks  have  increased.  In  the  event  of  loss  of  or  moderation  in  the  risk  appetite  and  the 
consequent unwinding of leveraged positions, there could be serious adverse impact on the emerging 
markets. 
Global  equity  markets  are  also  getting  integrated  irrespective  of  the  stage  of  development  of  the 
markets. Volatility in international financial markets has increased in recent months with deterioration 
in  the  sub-prime  segment  of  the  US  mortgage  market  in  early  2007.  Concerns  over  the  systemic 
implications of hedge-fund failures and the wide diffusion of risks through derivative markets have also 
increased in recent years. Consequently, monitoring of risks has become much more complex than 
before.  There  are,  therefore,  serious  concerns  that  financial  markets/investors  may  be  assigning 
insufficient weight to the downside risks. 
The  integration  of  the  EMEs  into  the  global  markets  has  resulted  in  a  wider  diversity  of  financial 
institutions  operating  in  the  EMEs  and  a  broader  range  of  business  strategies.  With  financial 
institutions in the advanced economies increasingly searching for profit opportunities at the customer 
and product level, foreign direct investment from the financial sector provides a route for accessing the 
EMEs, which offer attractive strategic business opportunities to expand. The growing involvement of 
foreign firms in the financial systems of the EMEs has given rise to certain concerns.  
Finally,  the  recent  rise  in  agriculture  prices  could  potentially  represent  the  beginning  of  a  structural 
increase in prices. Impressive growth performance and consequent increase in food-demand of large 
populations,  particularly  in  India  and  China,  on  an  unprecedented  scale  in  a  short  time  span, 
generates huge demand pressures on food items, including edible oil. The growing demand for animal 
proteins  could  further  accentuate  the  demand  for  agricultural  products.  The  supply-side  is  also 
affected by diversion of corn and oil-seeds to produce bio-fuel as energy-substitute; mandated by law 
in some countries. The tendencies towards global-warming are adding to uncertainties on the supply 
side. The resultant mismatch between supply and demand could potentially have impact on prices of 
food  articles.  The  consequent  impact  on  inflation-perceptions  and  hence,  on  inflation  expectations 
could  be  disproportionately  large,  perhaps  even  in  the  industrialised  economies.  At  the  same  time, 
there are several challenges to public policy in managing the problem of food prices.  
First,  there  are  invariably  strong  domestic  political-economy  considerations  in  managing  food-
production and ensuring food security. 
Second, the increasing global financialisation of commodities evident now could help, but it could also 
potentially  add  to  volatility  –  since  in  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  growing  presence  of  financial 
investors in the markets for commodities-based financial instruments.  
Third,  the  weight  of  food  items  in  price  indices  is  large  in  many  EMEs  and  hence,  it  would  pose 
dilemmas for monetary management. 
Fourth,  in such a situation,  in any comparison  of  inflation  between  the  EMEs  and  the  industrialised 
economies, some of the EMEs might emerge worse off, owing to higher weight for food items in their 
price indices.  
Finally, those EMEs, which are coping with second order effects of recent oil-price increases, may find 
any  possible shock  on  food  prices,  somewhat  burdensome.  In  case,  adverse  developments  on  this 
account occur and happen at a time when global liquidity is withdrawn or risk-premia increase sharply, 
there could be policy dilemmas for the EMEs, even after accounting for upside risks, both in terms of 
efficiency and resilience.  
It  is,  however,  gratifying  to  note  that  in  India,  the  government  has  taken  measures  for  immediate 
supply-side  management  of  food  items,  which  should  mitigate,  to  an  extent,  the  concerns  in  this 
regard. The National Development Council, the highest policy-making body in India, met last week and 
finalised a vigourous programme for enhancing production and productivity in Agriculture.  
India: development and reform experience 
IV.  
India  is  the  second  most  populous  country,  but  is  amongst  those  which  have  the  youngest 
demographic profile in the world. The “demographic dividend” is expected to extend over the next few 
decades of this millennium. India is unique in pluralism in terms of languages, religions, ideologies and 
traditions spread over twenty-eight provinces and seven federally governed union territories, each with 
its distinct identity and socio-cultural ethos. The Constitution of India recognises 22 languages as the 
official languages. India is well endowed with natural resources, human resources and varied climatic 
regions. The institutional architecture is unique with flexible federalism, democracy with universal adult 
suffrage, and coexistence of public and private sector.  
Growth  
The average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 has been 
about 6.0 per cent – a significant improvement over the annual growth rate of 3.5 per cent over the 
previous three decades from 1950-51 to 1979-80. In the more recent period, the Indian economy has 
entered a high-growth phase with the growth rate averaging 8.6 per cent in the last four years and 
over nine per cent per annum during the last two years. The growth rate is expected to be about 8.5 
per cent for 2007-08.  
Over  the  years, while  the GDP  growth has accelerated,  the  population  growth rate  has moderated, 
giving a sharp impetus to the growth in per capita income. Since the 1990s, per capita income has 
been growing at an average rate of around 4.0 per cent, implying that a person’s income will double in 
nearly 18 years. A person with a life expectancy of, say, 72 years could thus see his income doubling 
at least three times in his adult life. If the current GDP growth rate of around 9 per cent is maintained, 
a person can hope to see the standard of living multiplying by almost five times in his lifetime.  
The industrial sector constituted 19.6 per cent of GDP in 2006-07. Indian industry has emerged from a 
period of restructuring and organisational change during 1996-2003. In the subsequent years, there is 
a growing realisation of productivity and efficiency gains and is increasingly becoming internationally 
competitive.  
The main driver of the Indian economy currently is the services sector, which constitutes 61.9 per cent 
of GDP in 2006-07 and contributed two-thirds of average real GDP growth for the period 2002-07.  
The  strengthening  of  economic  activity  has  been  supported  by  persistent  increase  in  domestic 
investment  rate  from  22.9  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2001-02  to  33.8  per  cent  2005-06  coupled  with  an 
efficient use of capital. It must also be noted that over 95 per cent of investment during this period was 
financed by the domestic savings only. Domestic saving rate has also improved from 23.5 per cent to 
32.4 per cent over the same period. The contribution to improvement in savings has come both from 
private corporate sector and public sector.  
Inflation  
While growth has picked up, over the years, inflation rate has been moderated to lower levels ensuring 
price stability. Initially, the inflation rate accelerated steadily from an annual average of 1.7 per cent 
during  the  1950s  to  6.4  per  cent  during  the  1960s  and  further  to  9.0  per  cent  in  the  1970s  before 
easing marginally to 8.0 per cent in the 1980s. The inflation rate declined from an average of 11.0 cent 
during 1990-95 to 5.3 per cent during the second half of the 1990s.  
In the recent years, inflation rate has averaged around 5 per cent. In recognition of India's evolving 
integration  with  the  global  economy  and  societal  preferences,  the  resolve,  going  forward,  is  to 
condition policy and expectations in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent in the medium term. It may be of 
interest to note that, since independence, the Wholesale Price Inflation on average basis was above 
15 per cent in only five out of fifty years. In thirty six out of fifty years, inflation was in single digit and 
on most occasions high inflation was due to shocks – food or oil.  
Stability 
An important characteristic of the growth phase of over a quarter of century is the country's resilience 
to  shocks  and  during  this  period,  we  have  witnessed  only  one  serious  balance  of  payments  crisis 
triggered  largely  by  the  Gulf  war  in  the  early  1990s.  The  Indian  economy  in  later  years,  could 
successfully avoid any adverse contagion impact of shocks from the East Asian crisis, the Russian 
crisis during 1997-98, sanction like situation in post-Pokhran scenario, and border conflict during May-
June 1999. Seen in this context, this robust macroeconomic performance, in the face of recent oil as 
well as food shocks, demonstrates the vibrancy and resilience of the Indian economy.  
External sector  
The  Indian  economy  has  evolved  from  a  virtually  closed  economy  until  early  1980s  to  one  that  is 
opening up and rapidly integrating into the global economy since the commencement of major reforms 
in early 1990s. In terms of a traditional measure of openness, the ratio of exports and imports (both 
goods and invisibles) to GDP has risen steadily from 21.1 per cent in 1991-92 to over 50 per cent in 
2005-06  and  is  expected to  have  gone  up  further  in  2006-07.  Both  exports  and  imports have  been 
rising above long-term trend in recent years. The merchandise trade deficit is currently close to 7 per 
cent  of  GDP;  however,  the  current  account  deficit  is  under  1.5  per cent  of  GDP,  mainly  due  to  the 
knowledge and competitive advantage we have in services and the steady support from remittances 
from Indians working abroad.  
The liberalisation of the current account took place in the early part of the reforms and we attained 
current account convertibility in August 1994. In India, capital account liberalisation is sequenced in 
response  to  domestic  developments,  especially  in  real  and  fiscal  sectors,  and  the  evolving 
international financial architecture.  
Fiscal federalism  
Under  India’s  federal  system  of  government,  the  Constitution  allocates  the  revenue  powers  and 
expenditure functions between the Central and State Governments. The borrowing by the sub-national 
governments  is  in  effect  subordinated  to  prior  approval  by  the  national  government.  Furthermore, 
State Governments are not permitted to directly borrow externally.  
The fiscal management in the country has significantly improved, specially, after the adoption of the 
Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act,  2003  by  the  Central  Government.  The  State 
Governments  are  also  adopting  similar  Acts  and  have  made  consistent  efforts  to  improve  fiscal 
management.  The  fiscal  consolidation,  in  terms  of  reduction  in  fiscal  deficit,  is  taking  place  in  the 
finances of both the Central and State Governments.  
The  fiscal-management  of  Central  Government  is  broadly  in  the  direction  of  achieving  the  targeted 
ratio  of  gross  fiscal  deficit  (GFD)  to  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  to  three  per  cent  and  eliminate 
revenue deficit (RD) by 2008-09. It may be noted that the GFD / GDP and RD / GDP ratios are already 
budgeted to reduce to 3.3 per cent and 1.5 per cent in 2007-08. In the recent years, there has been a 
significant improvement in State level finances also. The GFD of all States declined from 4.7 per cent 
of GDP in 1999-2000 to 2.7 per cent of GDP in 2006-07, while the RD came down from 2.8 per cent of 
GDP  to  0.1  per  cent  of  GDP.  Most  States  have  also  enacted  fiscal  responsibility  legislations.  As  a 
result, the combined fiscal deficit of the Central and State governments has declined to around 6.6 per 
cent of GDP in 2006-07 from around 10 per cent in the early 2000s.  
The Reserve Bank plays two crucial roles in relation to the Indian fiscal system, namely as banker to 
and debt manager of both the Central and State Governments. While undertaking the role of banker 
for,  both  the Central  and State  Governments,  the RBI  also  provides  temporary  support  to tide  over 
mismatches in their receipts and payments in the form of short-term advances. 
The  Reserve  Bank  plays a  significant role  as  Advisor  to  Central  and  State  governments on  federal 
fiscal relations. The Reserve Bank sensitizes the State Government on important fiscal issues. Since 
1997, the Reserve Bank has been organizing a biannual Conference of Finance Secretaries of State 
Governments.  This  Conference,  right  from  its  inception,  has  provided  a  very  useful  forum  for 
interaction  among  all  the  stakeholders  (State  Governments,  Central  Government  and  the  Reserve 
Bank) on matters related to State finances and arriving at consensual solutions of issues of policy and 
operational significance. 
Public debt  
The Reserve Bank manages the market loans, which constitute around 50 per cent of public debt of 
the Centre and States. In the pre-reforms period, i.e., before 1991, the primary objective of the debt 
management was to minimize costs of borrowing. This, however, resulted in repression of the financial 
sector  on  account  of  statutory  provisions  requiring  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  invest  in 
government  securities  at  pre-determined  rates.  Recognising  the  criticality  of  the  impact  of  such  a 
system on financial sector development, the Reserve Bank has undertaken a series of measures since 
the  early  1990s  to  move  to  a  market  determined  interest  rate  from  the  administered  interest  rate 
regime. The automatic monetisation of budget deficits of Central Government by the Reserve Bank 
was discontinued since 1997-98, and currently, the Reserve bank does not participate in the primary 
issuance of the government paper.  
It is true that the aggregate stock of public debt of the Centre and States as a percentage of GDP is 
high, currently at around seventy five per cent. It is also useful to note that there are several unique 
features  of  management  of  public  debt  in  India,  which  imparts  overall  stability  to  macro-economy. 
First, States have no direct exposure to external debt. Second, almost the whole of public debt is local 
currency  denominated  and  held  almost  wholly  by  residents.  Third,  public  debt,  of  both  Centre  and 
States is actively and prudently managed by the Reserve Bank of India ensuring comfort to financial 
markets  without  any  undue  volatility.  Fourth,  the  government  securities  market  has  developed 
significantly  in  recent  years  in  terms  of  turnover,  depth  and  participants,  and  significant  further 
improvements are underway. Fifth, most debt carry fixed coupons and not indexed to inflation. Sixth, 
the Government has not ventured into sovereign marketable debt issues in foreign currency. Seventh, 
contractual  savings  supplement  marketable  debt  in  financing  the  deficits.  Finally,  direct  monetary 
financing of primary issues of debt has been discontinued since April 2006. Hence, the high stock of 
public  debt  relative  to  GDP  as  also  the  relatively  higher  fiscal  deficits  in  the  past  have  not  been  a 
matter  of  concern  as  far  as  stability  is  concerned.  However,  it  is  recognised  that  the  long-term 
sustainability  as  well  as  further  liberalisation  of  the  external  and  financial  sectors,  to  foster  growth 
momentum, would call for further reduction of both debt and deficits to prudent levels. 
Financial sector reforms  
The Indian financial system of the pre-reform period, before 1991, essentially catered to the needs of 
planned  development  in  a  mixed-economy  framework,  where  the  Government  sector  had  a 
predominant role in economic activity. Interest rates on Government securities were artificially pegged 
at low levels, which were unrelated to the market conditions. The system of administered interest rates 
was characterised by detailed prescriptions on the lending and the deposit side, leading to multiplicity 
and complexity of interest rates. As would be expected, the environment in the financial sector in those 
years was characterised by segmented and underdeveloped financial markets coupled with paucity of 
financial instruments. Consequently, by the end of the eighties, directed and concessional availability 
of  bank credit  to  certain sectors  adversely  affected  the  viability  and  profitability  of  banks.  Thus,  the 
transactions between the de facto joint balance sheet of the Government, the Reserve Bank and the 
commercial  banks  were  governed  by  fiscal  priorities  rather  than  sound  principles  of  financial 
management and commercial viability. It was then recognised that this approach, which, conceptually, 
sought to enhance efficiency through a co-ordinated approach, actually led to loss of transparency, 
accountability and incentive to seek efficiency.  
Banking 
The banking system in India has undergone significant changes during last 16 years. There have been 
new banks, new instruments, new windows, new opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. 
While  deregulation  has  opened  up  new  vistas  for  banks  to  augment  incomes,  it  has  also  entailed 
greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks.  India  adopted  prudential  measures  aimed  at 
imparting  strength  to  the  banking  system  and  ensuring  its  safety  and  soundness,  through  greater 
transparency, accountability and public credibility. The capital adequacy ratio has increased to 12.4 
per  cent  for  scheduled  commercial  banks  as  at  end  March  2006,  which  is  much  above  the 
international norm. Commercial banks’ net profits remained at 0.9 per cent of total assets during 2004-
05  and  2005-06,  up  from  0.16  per  cent  in  1995-96.  The  ratio  of  NPLs  to  total  loans  of  scheduled 
commercial banks, which was as high as 15.7 per cent at end-March 1997, declined steadily to 3.3 per 
cent  by  end-March  2006.  The  net  non-performing  assets  declined  to  1.2  per  cent  of  net  advances 
during 2005-06 from 2.0 per cent in 2004-05. According to the preliminary financial results available for 
most of the banks for the year 2006-07, the financial soundness has improved further. 
Our  banking  sector  reform  has  been  unique  in  the  world  in  that  it  combines  a  comprehensive 
reorientation of competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. 
Indeed our banking reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the 
overhang problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign private 
sectors to compete and expand. There has been no banking crisis in India.  
The  Government  took  steps  to  reduce  its  ownership  in  nationalised  banks  and  inducted  private 
ownership but without altering their public sector character. The underlying rationale of this approach 
is  to  assure  that  the  salutary  features  of  public  sector  banking  were  not  lost  in  the  transformation 
process. On account of healthy market value of the banks’ shares, the capital infusion into the banks 
by the Government has turned out to be profitable for the Government.  
An independent Banking Codes and Standards Board of India was set up on the model of the UK in 
order to ensure that comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is evolved and 
adhered to. With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, since November 2005, all banks need 
to make available a basic banking “no frills” account either with “nil” or very low minimum balances as 
well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of population. Banks were 
urged to review their existing practices to align them with the objective of “financial inclusion”. 
There is a scheme of Ombudsman, located in fifteen cities to provide redressal to grievances of the 
bank  customers.  Customer-service  is  accorded  high  priority  in  the  supervisory  evaluation  and 
according regulatory comfort to the Reserve Bank. 
With  a  view  to  strengthening  the  supervisory  framework  within  the  RBI,  a  Board  for  Financial 
Supervision (BFS) was constituted in 1994, comprising select members of the Reserve Bank’s Central 
Board  with  a  variety  of  professional  expertise  to  exercise  “undivided  attention  to  supervision”  and 
ensure  an  integrated  approach  to  supervision  of  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The 
Reserve Bank has also instituted Off-site Monitoring and Surveillance system for banks in 1995, which 
provides for Early Warning System as also a trigger for on-site inspections of vulnerable institutions.  
Development of financial markets 
Financial markets in India in the period before the early 1990s were marked by administered interest 
rates,  quantitative  ceilings,  statutory  pre-emotions,  captive  market  for  government  securities, 
excessive reliance on central bank financing, pegged exchange rate, and current and capital account 
restrictions.  As  a  result  of  various  reforms,  the  financial  markets  have  now  transited  to  a  regime 
characterised  by  market-determined  interest  and  exchange  rates,  price-based  instruments  of 
monetary policy, current account convertibility, phased capital account liberalisation and auction-based 
system in the government securities market. A noteworthy feature is that the government securities 
and corporate debt market are essentially domestically driven since FII and non-resident participation 
in these markets are limited and subjected to prudential ceilings. 
The Reserve Bank has taken a proactive role in the development of financial markets. Development of 
these  markets  has  been  done  in  a  calibrated,  sequenced  and  careful  manner  such  that  these 
developments are in step with those in other markets in the real sector. The sequencing has also been 
informed  by  the  need  to  develop  market  infrastructure,  technology  and  capabilities  of  market 
participants and financial institutions in a consistent manner.  
The Reserve Bank has accorded priority to the development of the money market as it is the key link 
in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to  financial  markets  and  finally,  to  the  real 
economy. The Reserve Bank has special interest in the development of government securities market 
as it also plays a key role in the effective transmission of monetary policy impulses in a deregulated 
environment.  
A  qualitative  change  was  brought  about  in  the  legal  framework  by  the  enactment  of  the  Foreign 
Exchange  Management  Act  (FEMA)  in  June  2000  by  which  the  objectives  of  regulation  have  been 
redefined as facilitating trade and payments as well as orderly development and functioning of foreign 
exchange  market  in  India.  The  legal  framework  envisages  both  the  developmental  dimension  and 
orderliness or stability. The legislation provides power to the government to re-impose controls if public 
interest warrants it. The RBI has undertaken various measures towards development of spot as well 
as forward segments of foreign exchange market. Market participants have also been provided with 
greater flexibility to undertake foreign exchange operations and manage their risks.  
Linkage between the money, government securities and forex markets has been established and is 
growing.  The  price  discovery  in  the  primary  market  is  more  credible  than  before  and  secondary 
markets have acquired greater depth and liquidity. The number of instruments and participants has 
increased  in  all  the  markets,  the  most  impressive  being  the  government  securities  market.  The 
institutional  and  technological  infrastructure  has  been  created  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  enable 
transparency in operations and to provide secured payment and settlement systems. 
Monetary policy 
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 sets out in a way broadly the tone of Reserve 
Bank’s monetary policy objectives: “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves 
with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit 
system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage”.  Thus,  unlike  the  current  trend  in  many  advanced  and 
emerging countries, there is no explicit mandate for price stability or formal inflation targeting in India.  
The broad objectives of monetary policy in India have been to maintain a reasonable degree of price 
stability  and  ensuring  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  help  accelerate  the  rate  of  economic  growth.  The 
relative  emphasis  placed  on  price  stability  and  economic  growth  is  modulated  according  to  the 
prevalent  circumstances  in  the  economy.  Of  late,  considerations  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  have  assumed  an  added  importance  in  view  of  the  increasing  openness  of  the  Indian 
economy.  
The recognition of change in the financial market dynamics in the wake of financial market reforms 
also  prompted  a  change  in  the  operating  procedures  of  the  monetary  policy.  The  framework  of 
monetary  policy  has  been  accorded  greater  flexibility  with  the  adoption  of  the  multiple  indicator 
approach since 1998-99 moving away from a monetary targeting framework.  
In the new operating environment, the Reserve Bank has been increasingly relying on a mix of market-
based  instruments  and  changes  in  reserve  requirements,  when  necessary,  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Reliance on direct instruments has generally been reduced and a policy preference 
for indirect instruments has become the cornerstone of current monetary policy operations. However, 
there is no hesitation in using direct instruments whenever appropriate. The Reserve Bank currently 
uses multiple instruments to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained in the system, consistent 
with the objective of price stability, so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met. Towards this 
end,  the  Reserve  Bank  pursues,  inter alia,  a  policy  of  active  management  of  liquidity  through  open 
market operations including liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), market stabilisation scheme and cash 
reserve ratio, and deploys the policy instruments at its disposal, flexibly, as warranted by the situation. 
Changes in fixed reverse repo/repo rates set by the Reserve Bank from time to time for the conduct of 
its  LAF,  under  which  the  central  bank  conducts  daily  auctions  for  the  banks,  have  emerged  as  the 
main instruments for interest rate signaling in the Indian economy. Institutional mechanisms have been 
evolved  in  parallel  to  improve  transparency  and  communication  of  monetary  policy.  Governor 
Redrado, who spoke earlier, referred to several issues including difficulties in transmission channel in 
the EMEs, and I agree with him.  
Traditionally, four key channels of monetary policy transmission are identified, viz., interest rate, credit 
aggregates,  asset  prices  and  exchange  rate  channels.  The  interest  rate  channel  emerges  as  the 
dominant  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  it  is  fair  to  regard  the  credit 
channel as running alongside the interest rate channel to produce monetary effects on real activity. 
Changes  in  interest  rates  by  the  monetary  authorities  also  induce  movements  in  asset  prices  to 
generate wealth effects in terms of market valuations of financial assets and liabilities. The exchange 
rate  channel  is  relatively  less  important  in  the  Indian  context,  though  its  relevance  is  gradually 
increasing.  In  the  recent  period,  a  fifth  channel  –  expectations  –  has  assumed  prominence  in  the 
conduct of forward-looking monetary policy in view of its influence on the traditional four channels.  
Current challenges  
Before concluding, I would like to share with you some of the challenges for the medium term. 
First, the most complex and challenging issue relates to development of agriculture. While over 60 per 
cent of the workforce is dependent on agriculture, the sector accounts for barely 20 per cent of the 
GDP. Further, the GDP growth generated from agriculture is only marginally above the rate of growth 
of  the  population,  which  is  not  adequate  to  ensure  rapid  poverty  reduction.  On  May  29,  2007,  our 
Honourable Prime Minister announced a major scheme to double the growth rate of agriculture to 4.0 
per  cent  over  the  11th  Plan  period.  The  Government  would  provide  Rs.  250  billion  for  new  farm 
initiatives launched by States. A time-bound Food Security Mission was also announced to counter 
rising prices of food products and to ensure visible changes in their availability over three years.  
raising 
improve 
real  wages  and 
rural  employment  conditions,  by 
Second, the growth story in any developing country can not be complete without assessing its impact 
on the poverty and employment situation. The Planning Commission has stressed that India should 
strive for “more inclusive growth”. The number of people living below the poverty line has decreased 
from 36 per cent in 1993-94 to 22.0 per cent in 2004-05. Again, the issue is to bring more and more 
people  out  of  poverty  by  providing  them  the  productive  employment  opportunities.  The  Approach 
Paper to 11th Five Year Plan suggests that doubling the growth of agricultural GDP to 4 per cent per 
annum  will 
reducing 
underemployment.  However,  even  if  this  is  attained,  an  overall  growth  of  9  per  cent  will  further 
increase  income  disparity  between  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  households,  unless  around  10 
million  workers currently  in  agriculture find  remunerative  non-agricultural  employment.  This  poses  a 
major challenge not only in terms of generating non-agricultural employment but also in matching its 
required location and type.  
Third,  delivery  of  essential  public  services  such  as  education  and  health  to  large  parts  of  our 
population is a major institutional challenge. It is strongly felt that education will empower the poor to 
participate in the growth process and the large gaps in availability of health care, in terms of minimum 
access to the poor, need to be filled.  
Fourth,  a  critical  constraint  to  economic  growth  in  India  in  recent  years  has  been  the  infrastructure 
deficit. The Approach Paper to the 11th Five Year Plan has estimated that for accelerating the GDP 
growth  from  7  to  9  per  cent,  there  is  a  need  for  accelerating  the  current  level  of  investment  in 
infrastructure from 4.6 per cent of GDP to 8 per cent during the Plan period. The issue of providing 
adequate and quality infrastructure has already attracted attention of policy makers at all levels. The 
most important issues here are regulatory framework and overall investment climate, which are being 
addressed  by  the  Government.  Apart  from  higher  levels  of  investment,  issues  of  governance  and 
management including policies relating to appropriate pricing and user charges are being addressed 
to achieve satisfactory results. 
Summing up 
V.  
Let me conclude by expressing my deep appreciation and thanks for the courtesies extended by the 
Central Bank of Argentina and personally by Governor Redrado. 
