Anselmo L S Teng: Anti-money laundering in financial supervision 
Opening speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the Financial Sector AML/CFT Seminar, Macao, 19 July 2007. 
 Dear Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today, we  are holding a Macao financial sector AML/CFT  seminar which carries the main 
theme “AML in Financial Supervision”. On behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao, I wish 
to  extend  my  heartfelt  welcome  to  all  guest  speakers,  particularly,  Acting  Assistant 
Commissioner  of  Insurance  Ms.  Carol  Hui,  Superintendent  Mr.  Ma  Ping-yiu  of  Hong  Kong 
Police,  Nacrotics  Bureau,  Senior  Manager  of  Securities  and  Futures  Commission  of  Hong 
Kong, Ms Linda Yiu. At the same time, I sincerely welcome our honoured guests, particularly 
Mr.  Ip  who  represents  the  president  of  Macao  Association  of  Banks,  Mr.  Si  chairman  of 
Macao  Insurers’  Association,  Mr.  Lam  the  vice-chairman  of  Macao  Money  Changers 
Association, Mr. Tou chairman of Macau Insurance Agents and Brokers Association, Mr. Ip 
chairman of Federation of Macau Professional Insurance Intermediaries, Mr. Ng chairman of 
Association  of  Macau  Financial  Employees,  and  representatives  from  financial  sector  and 
colleagues from related agencies of the SAR Government! 
In tandem with global economic and social development and the increasing openness and 
communication  between  countries  and  territories,  money  laundering  has  become  an 
important  channel  for  income  reaped  by  perpetrators  of  crimes  involving  drug  trafficking, 
smuggling,  graft  and  fraud.  On  the  other  hand,  the  burgeoning  terrorism  is  posing  serious 
threat to peace, security and social order. At the moment, money laundering and financing 
terrorism  activities  have  become  a  pandemic  which  threatens  the  integrity  of  the  civilized 
world.  How  efficiently  and  effectively  can  we  proceed  with  our  AML/CFT  work?  It  has 
become a deciding factor universally when comes to securing the steady development of our 
community and global economy. 
As  we  are  all  aware,  Macao  is  a  highly  open  economic  system  in  Asia-Pacific.  The  rapid 
growth  in  overall  economy  and  financial  industry  has  accelerated  its  linkage  with  other 
economic and financial systems in a more extensive and intimate manner. Such stimulation 
prompted further local economic growth but at the same time increase our exposure to more 
risks arising from new money laundering and financing of terrorism activities. In the face of 
the  threats,  the  SAR  Government  relentlessly  adopts  preventive  and  punitive  measures  to 
effectively curb and combat these activities. 
The measures adopted by Macao in AML can be traced back to 1991 in which Decree-Law 
No.  5/91/M  was  promulgated  to  enable  the  Government  to  confiscate  assets  derived  from 
drug  trafficking.  The  1995  Penal  Code  unequivocally  stipulates  that  all  assets  or  gains 
through  criminal  activities  shall  be  confiscated.  The  law  on  Organized  Crime,  Decree-Law 
No.  6/97/M  in  1997,  goes  further  to  deal  with  crimes  relating  to  conversion,  transfer  or 
dissimulation of illicit assets or gains arising from criminal activities. Decree-Law No. 24/98/M 
promulgated  in  1998  implements  mandatory  reporting  of  suspicious  activities,  the  entities 
under  the  supervision  of  AMCM  are  especially  obliged  to do  so.  In  2002,  Law  No.  4/2002 
was passed to implement measures under international conventions signed and ratified by 
the Central Government and applicable to the MSAR. Specifically, it enables the anti-terrorist 
measures under Resolution no. 1373 of the United Nations Security Council to be applied to 
Macao. 
In  April,  2006,  the  SAR  Government  promulgated  Law  No.  2/2006  on  “Prevention  and 
Repression of Money Laundering Related Crimes” and Law No. 3/2006 on “Prevention and 
Repression  of  Terrorism  Related  Crimes”.  These  two  legislations  clearly  define  activities 
relating to money laundering and terrorism. They also provide that all persons including legal 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
entities bear criminal liability to activities relating to money laundering and terrorism, heavier 
penalty shall apply, reporting entities shall be protected and reporting entities are forbidden 
to  divulge  reporting  information  to  third  parties.  In  May  and  August  of  the  same  year,  the 
SAR Government promulgated Administrative Regulation No. 7/2006 and Executive Order of 
the Chief Executive No. 227/2006 which require all financial institutions, casinos, off-shore 
companies, auditors, accountants, tax consultants, notaries, pawn shops, real estate agents 
and entities selling articles of high value to report suspicious activities to the newly set up 
Financial Intelligence Office which will collect and analyze such information. 
As  far  as  financial  system  is  concerned,  AMCM  has  been  putting  its  utmost  efforts  in 
promoting the implementation of AML/CFT measures by financial institutions. The “Financial 
System  Act”  promulgated  in  1993  requires,  based  on  the  standards  set  by  the  Basel 
Committee, all credit institutions to identify their customers and keep records of transactions 
in  addition  to  scrutinizing  the  properness  and  qualification  of  the  shareholders  and  senior 
management. In 1996, AMCM issued guidelines relating to AML to be complied by all credit 
institutions.  These  guidelines  were  revised  in  2002  whereby  they  were  edited  into  two 
sections.  The  scope  of  application  was  extended  to  include  financial  companies,  financial 
intermediaries,  money  changers  and  cash  remittance  companies.  Meanwhile,  AML 
guidelines applicable to insurance industry were issued in 2001. 
As the modes of crimes relating to money laundering and financing of terrorism are evolving 
all  the  time,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  Money  Laundering  (FATF)  modified  the 
original text into 40+8 Recommendations in 2003. One more was added in 2004 making it 
40+9 which became the benchmark for AML/CFT applicable to the international community. 
Last year, in order to fully synchronize with the AML/CFT legislations passed in 2006, AMCM 
revised again its guidelines by taking into account the new international standards and the 
practical  situation  of  Macao  in  addition  to  in-depth  review  and  consultation  with  industry 
practitioners. Three sets of new guidelines were issued, “AML/CFT Guidelines for Financial 
Institutions”,  “AML/CFT  Guidelines  on  Large  Cash  Transactions”  and  “Guidelines  on 
AML/CFT in Insurance”. In the process, AMCM invited the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
to provide technical assistance. Experts from the IMF came to Macao in 2004 and 2006 and 
provided expertise advice on our revised guidelines and on-site inspection which perfected 
our effort in supervision. 
Simultaneously,  AMCM  committed  more  resources  internally  for  such  purpose  which 
included  an  internal  AML/CFT  co-ordination  working  unit  to  strengthen  co-ordination  and 
planning of AML work. Besides our continued effort to improve our capacity in this respect, 
AMCM  also  provides  training  for  the  industry  and  relevant  agencies  in  co-ordination  and 
organization in order to enrich AML knowledge of the community and to impart the concept of 
prevention  to  the  general  public.  On  the  other  hand  AMCM  proactively  participates  in  the 
work  of  the  trans-departmental  AML  working  unit  which  was  founded  in  2001.  Before  the 
inauguration  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  Office,  AMCM  was  responsible  for  general  co-
ordination  with  other  government  agencies  including  Public  Prosecutions  Office,  Unitary 
Police  Service,  Commission  Against  Corruption,  Legal  Affairs  Bureau,  International  Law 
Office,  Judicial  Police,  Macao  Customs  Service,  Economics  Services  Bureau,  Finance 
Services Bureau, Gaming Inspection and Coordination Bureau, Macao Trade and Investment 
Promotion Institute, Macao Lawyers Association, Independent Commission for the Exercise 
of  Disciplinary  Power  Over  Solicitors  and  Macao  Gaming  Commission,  with  a  view  to 
enhancing  AML  efforts  of 
improved  planning,  organizing  and 
implementation. Such responsibility was shifted to the Financial Intelligence Office with effect 
from November last year. 
In the whole process, we not only assiduously supervise AML/CFT work of the industry, we 
attach  a  lot  of  weight  to  co-operation  with  other  regulatory  authorities  and  international 
organizations.  In  this  respect,  AMCM  has  concluded  co-operation  agreements  and 
memoranda  of  understanding  with  other  regulators  such  as  the  People’s  Bank  of  China, 
China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission,  China  Insurance  Regulatory  Commission,  Hong 
the  SAR 
through 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Hong  Kong  Securities  and  Futures  Commission,  Hong  Kong 
Insurance  bureau,  Bank  of  Portugal  and  Institute  of  Insurance  Supervision  of  Portugal  to 
enhance cross border supervision and exchange of information. 
On the other hand, AMCM is doing its utmost to fulfil the duties of AML/CFT of the MSAR 
accountable  to  the  Offshore  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  (OGBS),  Offshore  Group  of 
Insurance Supervisors (OGIS) and the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG). As 
early  as  2001,  Macao  invited  representatives  from  the  OGBS  and  APG  to  conduct  a  first 
round joint appraisal on the AML/CFT efforts of Macao. In the same year, we invited IMF to 
conduct a comprehensive appraisal on the financial system of Macao. We secured positive 
comments  in  these  two  appraisals.  Suggestions  for  improvement  were  raised  at  the  same 
time.  These  suggestions,  particularly  those  related  to  financial  field,  were  implemented 
through the guidelines we mentioned above and supervisory work. 
In  December  2006,  the  SAR  Government  again  invited  the  OGBS  and  APG  to  conduct  a 
second round AML/CFT appraisal. The appraisal report is yet to be finalized and approved 
by the organizations, but the appraisal working unit has passed a positive judgment on the 
AML/CFT efforts displayed by the SAR Government in the past few years. 
After the promulgation of the AML/CFT legislations, the relevant implementation has started. 
From  formulation  or  revision  of  supervisory  guidelines  to  their  actual  implementation,  from 
staff  training  to  enhancement  of  public  awareness,  from  the  formation  of  responsible 
organization  or  confirmation  of  responsible  personnel  to  supplement  and  finalization  of 
internal system, from trans-department, trans-organizational co-ordination and co-operation 
to  deepening  of  external  communication,  every  facet  is  proceeding  according  to  schedule. 
Past experience tells us that this is a ever deepening process which entails our relentless 
efforts. At the same time it is a process which calls for cross reflection. We need to develop 
communication and co-operation. That is why we are here today for this seminar. I am glad 
to  have  experts  from  Hong  Kong  judiciary  and  supervisory  authorities  and  local  financial 
organizations here. They will present specific speeches from the angles of the supervising 
and  the  supervised.  They  will  introduce  to  and  share  with  us  their  invaluable  experience 
obtained from their down-to-earth AML/CFT work. Because of this, I should say this is a rare 
chance for our financial employees to learn and exchange their experience. One can always 
benefit from observing what other people have done. I hope the experts and delegates will 
fully  make  use  of  this  seminar  to  broaden  their  line  of  thinking  through  uninterrupted 
communication. 
Finally, I wish the seminar a tremendous success. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 3
