Randall S Kroszner: Recent innovations in credit markets  
Remarks by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, to the 2007 Credit Markets Symposium at the Charlotte Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond, Charlotte, North Carolina, 22 March 2007. 
 I am delighted to be the opening speaker at this Credit Markets Symposium. The time certainly is ripe 
for an open dialogue among market participants, risk-management professionals, and policymakers. 
Credit markets have been evolving very rapidly in recent years. New instruments for transferring credit 
risk have been introduced and loan markets have become more liquid. Asset managers have become 
an  important  force  in  a  wider  range  of  credit  markets.  Taken  together,  these  changes  have 
transformed  the  process  through  which  credit  demands  are  met  and  credit  risks  are  allocated  and 
managed. 
As I will discuss, I believe these developments generally have enhanced the efficiency and the stability 
of the credit markets and the broader financial system by making credit markets more transparent and 
liquid, by creating new instruments for unbundling and managing credit risks, and by dispersing credit 
risks  more  broadly.  Interestingly,  this  is  not  the  first  time  that  we  have  witnessed  innovations  in 
derivatives  markets  that  have  led  to  these  types  of  benefits.  Later,  I  will  very  briefly  draw  some 
parallels  between  recent  developments  in  credit  derivatives  and  the  development  of  agricultural 
futures in the mid-nineteenth century. 
For  all  their  benefits,  these  developments  have  posed  some  significant  challenges  to  market 
participants.  The  complexity  of  some  instruments  creates  difficulties  with  respect  to  valuation,  risk 
measurement,  and  risk  management.  Also,  the  trading  of  certain  instruments  has  at  times  run  well 
ahead of developments in the infrastructure necessary for clearing and settling those trades. Although 
impressive  progress  is  being  made  toward  addressing  these  challenges,  I  believe  they  need 
continuing attention from market participants and policymakers. 
Recent developments 
The  evolution  of  the  credit  markets  has  been  spurred  by  the  astonishing  growth  of  new  credit 
instruments, particularly credit derivatives. The notional amount of credit derivatives outstanding has 
doubled each year for the past five years; it totaled $20 trillion at the end of June 2006, according to 
statistics compiled by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).  
The bulk of credit derivatives outstanding consist of single-name credit default swaps, or single-name 
CDS, which reference the obligations of a single obligor.1 Derivatives are sometimes faulted for their 
complexity,  but  that  charge  cannot be  leveled  against  single-name  CDS:  The risk  of  a  single-name 
CDS is essentially that of simply buying or selling short a bond. Single-name CDS make up 70 percent 
of  all  credit  derivatives,  according  to  the  BIS.  The  bulk  of  CDS  trading  is  in  the  investment-grade 
segment of the corporate credit market, although  CDS trading involving high-yield names has been 
expanding  quickly.  Most  recently,  CDS  that  reference  asset-backed  securities  have  been  a  high-
growth part of the market. 
Single-name CDS can be used as building blocks to construct credit derivatives referencing portfolios 
of issuers. These so-called multiname CDS make up the remaining 30 percent of credit derivatives, 
according to the BIS. Some multiname CDS are quite straightforward, such as an index of actively-
traded names in a particular market segment. Some, however, are indeed quite complex; they include 
certain structured credit derivatives that unbundle the risk of a portfolio of names into tranches with 
different seniorities and dramatically different risks.  
Credit derivative indexes are currently the fastest-growing and most liquid area of the credit markets. 
They were created first in the most actively traded market segments: investment-grade and high-yield 
                                                      
1   A  CDS  provides  the  purchaser  with  protection  against  the  cost  of  defaults  or  other  credit  events  that  reduce  the  market 
value  of  underlying  reference  obligations  (usually  bonds  or  loans).  Reference  obligations  and  obligors  are  known  as 
“names.” 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 1
names in both North America and Europe. Recently, newer indexes have been created in other market 
segments, including securities backed by commercial mortgages, subprime residential mortgages, and 
European leveraged loans.2  
Among  the  more  complex  credit  derivatives,  the  credit  index  tranches  stand  out  as  an  important 
development.  A  credit  index  tranche  exposes  an  investor  to  a  particular  slice  of  the  losses  due  to 
defaults among names in one of the credit derivative indexes. The so-called equity tranche bears a 
disproportionate share of the total credit risk of the underlying index. For example, an equity tranche 
might  be  exposed  to  the  first  3  percent  of  losses.  Other  tranches  would  cover  the  remaining 
percentiles of loss, and the sum of all tranches reproduces the exposure of the entire index. As I will 
discuss  in a few  minutes,  one  factor  behind  the complexity  of  credit  index  tranches  is  that  the  loss 
exposure  depends  not  only  on  the  level  of  defaults  but  also  on  the  correlation  of  defaults  across 
issuers. 
Another instrument in the credit markets, similar to a credit index tranche, is the collateralized debt 
obligation, or CDO. A CDO pools a portfolio of fixed-income assets into a tranched liability structure 
that is familiar from other securitization markets. For example, banks have long used a similar liability 
structure to fund their credit card loans to consumers. The most common types of collateral for CDOs 
are asset-backed and corporate securities and syndicated loans. CDOs backed by loans are referred 
to as collateralized loan obligations, or CLOs. 
The  growth  of  CLOs  has  certainly  had  an  effect  on  the  market  for  syndicated  loans.  Of  course, 
syndicated loans are not a new instrument. They have been around since the 1970s. But recently, the 
secondary-market  liquidity  of  syndicated  loans  has  improved  dramatically,  in  part  because  of  the 
demand  for  loans  by  CLOs.  This  improved  liquidity  has  transformed  loans  from  buy-and-hold 
investments into traded assets. Market participants are now working to standardize documentation for 
trading credit default swaps referencing loans. These so-called loan CDS have already started to trade 
in small amounts. 
The development of these new instruments and markets has been facilitated by nonbank institutional 
investors and has in turn helped such investors expand their participation in credit markets. Data on 
participation by nonbank institutional investors are difficult to come by, but such data are available for 
the  syndicated  loan  markets.3  Historically,  loan  syndications,  which  include  both  loan  commitments 
and term loans, were predominantly funded by banks. But in the period from 2001 through 2006, when 
the amount of term loans to U.S. nonfinancial corporations rose from $100 billion to more than $350 
billion, the nonbank share of such lending rose from less than one-half to roughly two-thirds. 
The institutional investors in these loans include mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, 
and hedge funds. In the mid-1990s, mutual funds were the most important type of institutional investor 
in these markets. More recently, identifying the ultimate sources of institutional demand has become 
more difficult. For example, from 2001 through 2006, about two-thirds of institutional term loans were 
purchased as collateral for the issuance of CLOs. Although institutional investors undoubtedly are the 
predominant investors in CLOs, little is known about the holdings of the various types of institutions. 
Also, while much is being made of the increasingly important role of hedge funds in credit markets, 
hedge funds, in turn, are increasingly managing assets on behalf of endowments, pension funds, and 
other institutional investors.4  
Asset managers are clearly playing an increasingly important role in credit markets, whether they are 
managing  mutual  funds,  CLOs,  or  hedge  funds.  The  decisions  of  those  asset  managers  are 
increasingly being driven by the preferences of institutional investors. And the decisions of the asset 
managers  have  a  large  influence  on  the  pricing  of  credit,  even  for  types  of  credit  whose  pricing 
historically was driven by the decisions of banks. 
                                                      
2   A leveraged loan is commonly defined as a syndicated loan, typically to a riskier borrower, with an interest rate of at least 
libor plus 125 basis points. 
3   Standard and Poor’s Leveraged Commentary and Data, “Leveraged Lending Review,” 2006:Q3. 
4   One industry survey forecasts that institutions will account for roughly half of hedge fund inflows in 2007, up from virtually 
zero in 2000 (“Hedge Funds,” International Financial Services, London, March 2006, p. 3, chart 7). 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2007
Benefits of recent developments 
The new instruments, markets, and participants I just described have brought some important benefits 
to  credit  markets.  I  will  touch  on  three  of  these  benefits:  enhanced  liquidity  and  transparency,  the 
availability of new tools for managing credit risk, and a greater dispersion of credit risk.  
In listing these benefits, I am struck by the strong resemblance of what is happening right now in credit 
markets  to  what  happened  historically  in  other  markets  when  derivatives  were  introduced.  For 
example, the markets for agricultural commodities in the United States reaped some of these benefits 
when standardized futures contracts for wheat and other commodities were introduced in the middle of 
the nineteenth century.5  
Historically,  the  secondary  markets  for  corporate  bonds,  loans,  and  asset-backed  securities  were 
illiquid and not transparent. Liquidity in these [msg1] markets has improved over time but is still quite 
poor.  For  example,  half  of  outstanding  corporate  bonds  did  not  even  trade  once  in  the  first  three 
months of 2006.6 Individual bonds tend to be somewhat liquid immediately after they are issued, but 
trading activity declines quickly thereafter as investors put the bonds into buy-and-hold portfolios. Also, 
shorting corporate bonds is very difficult. 
The dramatic improvement in credit market liquidity has been spurred by credit derivatives. One way 
to measure the improvement in liquidity is with bid-ask spreads. For investment-grade corporate bonds 
– a relatively liquid part of the bond market – the bid-ask spread averaged 64 basis points last year.7 
The  bid-ask  spreads  for  single-name  investment-grade  CDS,  however,  are  typically  only  10  basis 
points or less, and the usual bid-ask spread for investment-grade credit indexes is just 2 basis points. 
The  liquidity  of  the  secondary  market  for  loans  has  also  improved  in  recent  years.  Trading  volume 
totaled  $239 billion  in  2006,  up  from $102  billion  in  2000.8  A  key  factor  driving  the  improvement  in 
secondary-market  liquidity  is  the  expanded  participation  of  nonbank  institutional  investors.  These 
investors are active managers of credit risk, and consequently they appear to place a higher value on 
liquidity.  
Along  with  liquidity,  transparency  in  credit  markets  has  also  improved  over  time.  Corporate  bond 
markets are more transparent thanks to a regulatory change that took effect in 2002. Dealers must 
now  report  nearly  all  corporate  bond  trades  to  the  NASD  within  fifteen  minutes,  and  the  NASD 
immediately  reports  the  trade  data  to  the  market.  For  asset-backed  securities  and  loans,  price 
transparency is available from specialist vendors who aggregate and disseminate dealers’ prices. For 
example, in the syndicated loan market, one vendor currently aggregates data from more than seventy 
traders to price nearly 6,000 loans daily. Prices of many credit derivatives, including single-name CDS, 
credit  derivative  indexes,  and  credit  index  tranches,  are  widely  available  on  services  such  as 
Bloomberg or Reuters. Complex credit derivatives such as CDO tranches are an exception to all this: 
They remain largely illiquid and nontransparent. 
Enhanced liquidity and transparency should promote better risk management by market participants 
and facilitate broader participation in credit markets. Liquid markets make it easier to access historical 
price data and thus permit better measurement of credit risks. Measuring a risk more accurately allows 
it to be priced more accurately. A more transparent market with more accurate pricing is attractive to a 
wider array of investors. In effect, better liquidity and transparency have lowered the cost of entry into 
the credit markets. 
In  addition  to  enhanced  liquidity  and  transparency,  the  recent  developments  in  credit  markets  have 
equipped market participants with new tools for taking on, hedging, and managing credit risk. These 
new  tools  allow  investors  to  more  easily  customize  their  credit  risk  portfolios.  Investors  can  now 
construct a diverse portfolio at much lower transaction costs compared with purchasing a portfolio of 
corporate  bonds  or  even  single-name  CDS.  As  derivatives,  indexes  can  readily  be  used  either  to 
                                                      
5   See  Randall  S.  Kroszner  (1999),  “Can  the  Financial  Markets  Privately  Regulate  Risk?  The  Development  of  Derivatives 
Clearinghouses and Recent Over-the-Counter Innovations,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 31 (August, part 2), 
pp. 596-618.  
6   Calculated from NASD, TRACE Corporate Bond Data. 
7   Calculated from NASD, TRACE Corporate Bond Data. 
8   Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation, www.loanpricing.com/analytics/pricing_service_volume1.htm . 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 3
reduce or to take on more credit risk. In contrast, for corporate bonds, the lack of a well-developed 
securities lending market makes it difficult to shed credit risk by short selling.  
The enhanced transparency and liquidity of credit markets and the development of new instruments 
for customizing the risk characteristics of credit exposures have resulted in a wider dispersion of credit 
risk. Although significant participation by nonbank institutional investors has long been a hallmark of 
U.S.  credit  markets,  these  developments  have  facilitated  greater  risk-bearing  by  entities  other  than 
banks and other highly regulated depository institutions. On its face, a wider dispersion of credit risk 
would  seem  to  enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  by  reducing  the  likelihood  that  credit 
defaults will weaken any one financial institution or class of financial institutions.  
Some  have  expressed  concern  about  the  transfer  of  risk  by  banks  and  other  heavily  regulated 
depository  institutions  to  more  lightly  regulated  or  unregulated  entities.  Some  specific  concerns  are 
quite legitimate. For example, as I will discuss in a few moments, if banks transfer credit risk to other 
entities through mechanisms that expose the banks to counterparty risks to those entities, the transfer 
is fully effective only if the banks manage those counterparty risks prudently.  
However, some other concerns about the transfer of credit risk outside the banking system seem to be 
based  on  questionable  assumptions.  For  example,  some  observers  believe  that  credit  risks  will  be 
managed  more  effectively  by  banks  because  they  generally  are  more  heavily  regulated  than  the 
entities  to  which  they  are  transferring  credit  risk.  But  those  unregulated  or  less  regulated  entities 
should in principle be subject to more-effective market discipline than banks because, without a safety 
net supporting them, their creditors have stronger incentives to monitor and limit their risk-taking. In 
fact,  while  many  focus  on  the  dangers  of  risk  transfer  to  highly  leveraged  entities  that  might  be 
vulnerable  to  a  sharp  widening  of  credit  spreads,  a  significant  portion  of  the  risks  that  are  being 
transferred outside the banking system are being transferred to institutional investors that are far less 
leveraged than banks.  
Challenges associated with recent developments 
The benefits from the development of new instruments and markets that I have described will be fully 
realized only if market participants address various risk-management challenges posed by the use of 
these  instruments.  I  will  discuss  three  challenges:  limiting  counterparty  credit  risk,  modeling  default 
correlation, and improving the infrastructure for clearing and settling credit derivative trades. 
But before I discuss the risk-management challenges, I want to emphasize that the fundamental risks 
in credit markets have not been changed by the new instruments that are now being traded. Credit 
risks may be traded among market participants, but that does not eliminate the risk. Investors in credit 
markets are still exposed to the risk that issuers may default on their obligations. And in the event of 
default, investors are still exposed to the further risk that the recovery rate will be lower than expected. 
The  management  of  default  and  recovery  risks  presents  nothing  fundamentally  new  to  investors. 
Instruments  like  single-name  CDS  and  credit  derivative  indexes  simply  replicate  the  sort  of  credit 
exposures that have always existed. 
From  the  perspective  of  financial  stability,  I  believe  that  the  most  important  risk-management 
challenge  in  credit  markets  is  the  management  of  counterparty  credit  risk.  I  mentioned  earlier  that 
institutional investors, including hedge funds, are now more active in credit markets. I also noted that 
when  banks  trade  credit  risk  using  new  instruments  such  as  credit  derivatives  or  CDOs,  they  must 
take care to limit any counterparty credit risk that might result.  
Banks commonly rely on collateral to mitigate counterparty credit risk on over-the-counter derivatives. 
Credit derivatives are no exception. Also, banks universally require their hedge fund counterparties to 
post  collateral  to  cover  current  exposures  and,  with  some  exceptions,  to  cover  potential  exposures 
from  future  market  movements.  But  given  the  growing  role  of  hedge  funds  in  credit  markets,  it  is 
appropriate  to  ask  whether  dealer  banks  have  enough  collateral  to  protect  them  against  a  stress 
scenario that goes well beyond the recent benign experience in credit markets.  
Default correlation is a distinctly new aspect of credit risk. The value of credit index tranches and CDO 
tranches  is  sensitive  not  only  to  the  number  of  defaults  among  a  set  of  issuers  but  also  to  the 
correlation of defaults. The more senior tranches suffer losses only in a scenario with many correlated 
defaults. The value of these senior tranches falls when default correlation rises. The value of a first-
loss tranche rises when default correlation rises. And somewhere in the middle of the capital structure 
is a tranche whose value is roughly insensitive to correlation. The mathematical relationship between 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2007
tranche value and correlation depends on the particular model that is used to forecast defaults. This 
dependency exposes dealers and investors to so-called correlation risk if their models or forecasts of 
default correlation turn out to be incorrect.  
Correlation risk is challenging to measure and manage, and fairly recently some market participants 
learned a hard lesson about those challenges. In May 2005, a widening of credit spreads for several 
automotive companies led to sharp movements in the prices of credit index tranches that seemed to 
catch market participants by surprise. Their models of correlation risk seemed to have lagged behind 
the development of the new tranched credit products. Since then, much energy has been devoted to 
building better models of correlation risk, but I believe it is fair to say that much work remains to be 
done before this risk can be considered to be fully understood. 
These  risk-management challenges have  not  gone unnoticed  by  market  participants  themselves.  In 
2005,  a  private-sector  group,  the  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  II,  or  CRMPG  II, 
chaired by E. Gerald Corrigan, produced a report highlighting many of these issues.9 That report also 
made a number of useful recommendations to market participants on how they could address some of 
the challenges I have mentioned here. It is encouraging to find market participants taking a leading 
role in making the improvements in risk management that will be needed to fully reap the benefits of 
innovations in credit markets. 
The third and final challenge I will discuss is that of infrastructure. The very rapid growth of trading 
credit derivatives had until recently outpaced the development of the infrastructure necessary to clear 
and settle those trades. Post-trade processes were largely manual, with attendant inefficiencies and 
risks. By early 2005, credit derivatives dealers had huge backlogs of unconfirmed trades, even though 
they had greatly increased their back-office resources. Unconfirmed trades increase the potential for 
material  inaccuracies  in  trade  records,  which  can  cause  mismeasurement  and  mismanagement  of 
market risks and counterparty credit risks. 
Market infrastructures can be improved only through collective actions by market participants. In 2005, 
some stimulus for the necessary collective actions was provided by both the private sector and the 
public  sector.  CRMPG  II  called  attention  to  the  growing  backlogs  and  the  risks  that  they  posed  to 
market  participants  and  called  for  the  convening  of  an  industry  roundtable  to  address  them.10 
Prudential supervisors then took the lead. In September 2005 they called fourteen leading dealers to 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, where the supervisors collectively made clear their concerns 
about the risks posed by the growing backlogs. 
The  supervisors  wisely  avoided  any  temptation  to  design  their  own  improvements  to  the  market 
infrastructure. Instead, they simply insisted that the backlogs be reduced and left it to the dealers who 
had  been  at  the  meeting  (and  who  became  known  as  the  Fed  14)  to  figure  out  with  other  market 
participants  how best  to  achieve  that  objective.  The  market participants recognized  that  automation 
was the key; manual processes simply are not scalable. Both dealers and asset managers embraced 
use of the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation’s Deriv/Serv electronic confirmation service. The 
results  have  been  dramatic.  Between  September  2005  and  December  2006,  aggregate  credit 
derivatives confirmations outstanding thirty days or more at the fourteen dealers declined 92 percent 
despite  continued  rapid  growth  in  trading  volumes.  With  the  encouragement  and  support  of 
supervisors,  a  larger  group  of  dealers  and  asset  managers  are  now  turning  their  attention  to 
addressing backlogs in the equity derivatives markets. 
Conclusions 
Credit markets undoubtedly will continue to evolve in the years to come. In the short run, rapid change 
can pose significant challenges to market participants. Cooperative initiatives, such as CRMPG II and 
the Fed 14, can contribute greatly to ensuring that those challenges are met successfully by identifying 
effective risk-management practices and by stimulating collective action when it is necessary, notably 
in  achieving  improvements  in  market  infrastructures.  The  recent  success  of  such  initiatives 
                                                      
9   Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005), Toward Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective, 
July 27, www.crmpolicygroup.org .  
10   Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II, Toward Greater Financial Stability, p. 19. 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 5
strengthens  my  confidence  that  future  innovations  in  the  market  will  serve  to  enhance  market 
efficiency and stability, notwithstanding the challenges that inevitably accompany change.  
6 
 BIS Review 28/2007
