Nigel Jenkinson: Developing a framework for stress testing of financial 
stability risks  
Comments by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at the ECB High Level Conference on “Simulating Financial Instability”, Frankfurt am Main, 
12-13 July 2007. 
I  am  very  grateful  to  Adrian  Penalver,  Prasanna  Gai,  Geoff  Coppins  and  Piergiorgio  Alessandri  for  input  and 
helpful comments. 
 1  Developing  a  rigorous,  coherent  and  robust  framework  to  analyse  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system  to  withstand  strain  presents  many  well-known  and  formidable  challenges. 
Financial system behaviour is very difficult to model, particularly under stressed conditions 
when strategic interactions between participants and risks of spillover and contagion come to 
the fore. And, thankfully, episodes of stress are rare, so history offers only limited assistance. 
2  We  are  currently  witnessing  a  period  of  major  change  in  financial  markets.  The  global 
financial  system  is  evolving  at  a  tremendous  pace,  fuelled  by  rapid  innovation  and 
crossborder  integration,  and  supported  by  lower  macroeconomic  volatility.  Innovation  and 
integration  may  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  behaviour  of  the  financial  system  under 
pressure.  In  particular,  risks  may  have  been  dispersed  more  broadly  through  credit  risk 
transfer and increased participation in capital markets. The resulting reduction in credit risk 
concentration  may  have  strengthened  the  robustness  of  the  financial  system  to  withstand 
small to medium shocks. But equally, greater market integration has strengthened the ties 
between  financial  firms  within  and  across  borders,  both  through  direct  exposures  and 
through  common  exposures  to  asset  markets.  If  a  shock  is  sufficiently  large,  the  financial 
network may consequently act as a conduit for transmitting rather than absorbing risk. So the 
flip side of greater integration is that it may have lowered the frequency but increased the 
magnitude of potential financial crises.1
3 Improving the toolkit for financial stability analysis is consequently a very high priority for 
public authorities and for major financial institutions. Enhancing the capability to model the 
financial system under stress is the key challenge. 
4  In  recent  years,  many  central  banks  and  supervisory  agencies,  charged  with  the  public 
policy goal of supporting the maintenance of financial stability, have sought to develop a so-
called “top down” or “macro” stress-testing capability. Utilising information on balance sheet 
exposures, the authorities draw on macroeconomic and financial models to try to assess the 
impact of adverse shocks on the financial system. Several inter-related high level objectives 
can perhaps be set for an “ideal” stress test: 
• 
• 
To assess the vulnerability of the financial system to extreme but plausible shocks 
To  improve  the  understanding  of  the  transmission  of  shocks  through  the  financial 
system (and, in a worst case, the potential propagation of financial crises) 
To identify “weak spots” in the financial system, to guide risk reduction priorities and 
crisis management planning 
                                                  
1   Systemic risk in modern financial systems: analytics and policy design by Prasanna Gai, Nigel Jenkinson and 
Sujit  Kapadia,  Journal  of  Risk  Finance  Vol8,  No2,  2007.  Financial  System  Risks  in  the  UK  –  Issues  and 
Challenges (John Gieve) (July 2006) www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech280.pdf . 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
To  deliver  these  objectives  effectively,  the  aim  is  also  to  use  a  rigorous  and  consistent 
analytical  framework  which  integrates  behavioural  responses,  interactions  and  feedback 
effects, to ensure that the system-wide implications are fully captured 
5 So where is current practice against that ideal? A typical or traditional “macro” stress test 
has the stylised form set out in Chart A. The first stage is to put together a coherent stress 
scenario,  typically  using  a  macro-econometric  model  (which  may  include  some  assumed 
endogenous policy response). By mapping important propagation channels, an estimate of 
likely financial sector credit losses is produced; for example, by modelling the impact of the 
macro  stress  on  corporate  and  household  balance  sheets  and  gauging  the  consequent 
impact  on  the  probability  of  default  and  likely  recovery  rate  on  banks’  credit  exposures. 
Market  losses  are  estimated  by  judging  the  impact  of  the  macro  stress  on  different  asset 
classes. Total bank losses are calculated by aggregating credit and market losses, perhaps 
including an additional allowance for the impact of the stress scenario on net interest income 
and on funding costs. Expected losses are then compared to the buffers of profits and capital 
(perhaps  with  an  adjustment  for  whether  the  scenario  is  likely  to  be  “slow  burn”  wherein 
potential  future  profits  might  absorb  some  of  the  loss,  or  “fast  burn”  where  pressure  falls 
more  immediately  on  capital)  to  guide  the  judgement  on  the  overall  impact  of  the  stress 
scenario on the banking system (and/or on the financial system more broadly). 
 
6 We have utilised this broad approach within the Bank of England to assess the risks to the 
major  UK  banks  from  sources  of  potential  major  vulnerability  –  both  individually  and  in 
combination.  Results  have  been  published  in  recent  Financial  Stability  Reports  (see  Chart 
B).2
                                                 
2   Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Report  June  2006  and  April  2007.  The  description  above  applies 
particularly for the corporate, household and global imbalances stress. See A new approach to assessing risks 
to financial stability  by Andrew  Haldane, Simon Hall and  Silvia Pezzini,  Bank  of England Financial Stability 
Paper No 2 April 2007 for a fuller discussion. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2007
 
7  This  approach  has  a  number  of  strengths.  First,  it  draws  on  a  fully  consistent 
macroeconomic  scenario  and  on  statistical  estimates  of  the  impact  of  adverse  economic 
conditions on credit and market exposures. Second, building formal “maps” of transmission 
of economic shocks onto the financial system facilitates greater analytical consistency and 
provides enhanced clarity on which channels are important. This aids the understanding of 
risks. It also highlights which channels are explicitly included in the stress tests and which 
are not, and are consequently priorities for future work. Third, sensitivity analysis can easily 
be carried out to assess the impact of altering behavioural assumptions – for example, what 
would happen if write-off rates on corporate exposures were higher than expected? Fourth, 
the results can be compared to “bottom-up” stress tests calculated by individual firms, which 
have  developed  rapidly  in  recent  years,  but  which  may  be  less  focussed  on  capturing 
macroeconomic and financial sector feedbacks. 
8 The traditional approach to stress testing, nonetheless, suffers from some major limitations. 
Most  strikingly,  the  current  treatment  of  key  financial  system  interactions  and  feedback 
effects is often rudimentary. Given that such effects are crucial in assessing the vulnerability 
to  contagion  and  system-wide  stress,  that  is  a  significant  drawback.  Take  the  illustrative 
severe  stress  scenarios  published  in  the  Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Report  and 
shown above in Chart B as a guide. These scenarios are constructed from risk transmission 
maps for each scenario based on the stylised model in Chart C. In practice, however, there 
are  important  gaps,  as  can  be  seen  from  Table  1,  where  the  channels  which  have  been 
explicitly quantified in the stress scenarios are shown. In particular, the potential amplification 
of  the  shock  within  the  financial  system  through  channels  such  as  an  endogenous  fall  in 
market  liquidity  as  firms  simultaneously  seek  to  lower  risk  exposures;  dynamic  hedging 
behaviour  (particularly  of  “unbalanced”  options  positions)3;  and  restrictions  on  lending  (a 
                                                 
3   Bank of England Financial Stability Report July 2006 Box 5, Page 33. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 3
“credit  crunch”  or  “financial  accelerator”  effect),  are  not  yet  built  in  empirically.  And  the 
framework does not yet incorporate the potential contagion and spillover effects which would 
result from severe strain at, or the default of, a major bank or financial institution. 
 4 
 BIS Review 81/2007
 9  At  present,  the  results  from  the  top-down  stress  tests consequently  tend  to  be  relatively 
“linear”; that is an “extreme” scenario is a “scaled-up” version of a more “moderate” scenario. 
As financial instability is by nature inherently non-linear, given the central focus on default, 
contagion  and  spillover,  this  is  an  important  failing.  Moreover,  the  stress-tests  typically 
concentrate  on  the  impact  of  particular  adverse  scenarios,  which  individually  have  a  near-
zero probability of occurring in practice. There is generally no attempt to derive a distribution 
of possible outcomes. 
10  Addressing  these  limitations  is  an  important  priority  for  financial  stability  authorities,  so 
that “practical” stress-testing meets the “ideal” objectives set out above. Within the Bank of 
England, we are building a suite of models that allow the transmission channels for potential 
financial system stress to be mapped out accurately and comprehensively, including in the 
form of loss distributions. The outputs can also be compared to measures of financial system 
buffers, such as profits, to provide summary statistics of systemic vulnerability.4 Others too 
have been pursuing a similar course. For example, the Austrian central bank has developed 
a Systemic Risk Monitor to characterise the interaction between shocks and the structure of 
the banking system and inform the internal policy debate.5
11 A schematic for the planned suite of models is set out in Chart D and will be described 
more fully in future papers. The left-hand side of the diagram emphasises the transmission of 
shocks to the system through conventional channels of credit and market risk. On the right-
hand  side,  asset-pricing  models  can  be  used  to  facilitate  inferences  about  banks’  balance 
sheet  positions  and  vulnerability  to  default  from  market  price  data  (such  as  equity  prices). 
Given  the  limitations  of  balance  sheet  data  and  the  difficulty  of  identifying  new  types  of 
                                                 
4   A new approach to assessing risks to financial stability by Andrew Haldane, Simon Hall and Silvia Pezzini, 
Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No 2 April 2007 for a fuller discussion. 
5   Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (2006),  "Systemic  Risk  Monitor:  A  Model  for  Systemic  Risk  Analysis  and 
Stress  Testing  of  Banking  Systems",  Financial  Stability  Report  11,  by  Michael  Boss,  Gerald  Krenn,  Claus 
Puhr, Martin Summer. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 5
assets  and  off-balance  sheet  exposures,  the  asset  price  approach  can  serve  as  a  useful 
cross-check to the outputs of the more structural model. 
 
12  The  distinguishing  feature  of  the  model  suite  is  the  emphasis  placed  on  the  feedback 
effects  induced  by  market  liquidity  risk  and  funding  liquidity  risk  and  their  interactions  in  a 
network  context.  In  addition,  the  potential  feedback  to  the  macro  economy  from  the 
behavioural responses of banks individually and collectively to an impairment of their balance 
sheet position (eg, through a “financial accelerator” effect) will be incorporated explicitly. The 
development  of  the  suite  is  at  an  early  stage  but  preliminary  results  from  prototype  work 
seem to promise some useful insights. Chart E shows an illustrative distribution of future UK 
bank system assets from the prototype model (the right-hand panel expands the lower tail of 
the distribution). Notice that the distribution is explicitly bi-modal – as one might expect of a 
system  where  losses  on  interbank  exposures,  and  pressures  on  asset  prices  and  market 
liquidity from failing firms, may be transmitted through the financial network and may trigger a 
cascade of defaults. Our suspicion is that the firesale of assets by institutions facing default 
is the source of much of the action here, but more research is needed to be properly certain 
and before we can ascribe quantitative meaning to the distribution. 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2007
 
13 Chart F illustrates how such distributions might also be tracked over time and compared 
in  successive  Financial Stability  Reports.  When  operational,  such  distributions  should  help 
guide judgements on how overall financial system vulnerability is changing. But the approach 
should also provide considerable additional information on pressure points within the system 
and on the channels of transmission and potential contagion. 
 
14 I believe that this broad approach offers an important step forwards in the development of 
an  analytically  and  empirically  robust  framework  for  financial  stability  work.  Of  course  it  is 
analytically hugely challenging – modelling non-linear tail events with endogenous strategic 
interactions  is  always  going  to  be  tough!  The  results  will  inevitably  be  subject  to  major 
uncertainty.  But  the  approach  does  start  to  provide  a  consistent  and  coherent  framework 
which should substantially improve the value of top-down stress tests and of risk assessment 
work. 
15  A  particular  “operational”  aim  is  to  use  the  results  to  help  improve  the  focus  of  risk 
reduction  work  and  crisis  management  planning,  for  example  through  the  identification  of 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 7
“weak  points”  in  the  financial  system  and  through  improved  assessment  of  the  impact  of 
policy interventions. An important element of risk reduction work is to influence the behaviour 
of financial firms. “Bottom-up” or firm-level stress-testing practices have developed rapidly in 
recent years. But one challenge is that, as for the authorities, it is hard for individual firms to 
gauge the likely “systemic impact” of particular shocks, which takes into account macro and 
financial system interactions and feedback effects. Indeed, in practice, banks often model the 
effect  of  even  severe  macroeconomic  shocks  as  if  they  were  occurring  to  the  bank  in 
isolation. They thus may assume that they have freedom to readjust their balance sheets and 
lending practices in the event of an adverse shock, without considering whether other banks 
may  be  trying  to  do  the  same  thing  and  the  effect  that  these  behavioural  responses  may 
have  cumulatively  on  market  liquidity  and  on  the  economy  as  a  whole.  An  important 
implication is that many firm-level stress tests may consequently underestimate the possible 
impact  of  adverse  shocks.  As  I  have  highlighted,  some  of  the  potentially  missing  effects 
should be captured in the proposed suite of models. But the proposed enhanced “top-down” 
approach outlined above may still benefit from additional insights gained from closer dialogue 
and  interaction  with  major  financial  firms  on  their  likely  reaction  to  episodes  of  stress.  I 
consequently think there is merit in more formal comparison of “top-down” and “bottom-up” 
stress  testing  exercises,  and  of  seeking  ways  of  integrating  the  two  into  more  formal 
“systemic”  stress  tests,  where  the  authorities  present  an  initial  scenario  to  firms  and  then 
modify the scenario in the light of feedback on the potential response by firms in an iterative 
loop. This approach has recently been pioneered by the Dutch central bank.6 It potentially 
offers a useful way of improving knowledge of key system-wide interactions, and thus could 
provide a valuable supplement both to improved “top-down” approaches and to “bottom-up” 
stress  tests  which  are  naturally  targeted  more  closely  at  the  major  risks  facing  individual 
firms given their balance sheets and positions. 
16 To conclude, there is a major programme of inherently difficult and challenging modelling 
work  ahead  for  the  public  authorities  and  for  financial  firms.  But  this  is  very  important. 
Development  of  a  more  coherent  and  consistent  framework  for  the  analysis  of  financial 
stability is a major prize. Ultimately this should improve the understanding and pricing of risk 
and  support  better  targeting  of  public  policy,  focused  more  closely  on  containing  systemic 
risk and on the maintenance of the public good of systemic financial stability. 
                                                 
6   De  Nederlandsche  Bank  (2006),  Financial  Stability:  is  the  Dutch  financial  sector  stress-resistant?  Quarterly 
Bulletin, December. 
8 
 BIS Review 81/2007
