Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Focus on the Central Bank of the Philippines’ core 
mandate of promoting price and financial stability 
Opening statement by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines (FOCAP) 
Forum, Manila, 4 December 2006. 
 I am pleased to address you in this forum organized by the Foreign Correspondents Association of the 
Philippines.  Your  continued  interest  in  the  Philippine  economy  has  greatly  helped  in  shaping  the 
quality of information provided to the international community. Fora such as this offers us an excellent 
opportunity to engage various stakeholders in policy dialogue. 
My short remarks today will focus on the BSP’s core mandate of promoting price stability and financial 
stability and how the institution has responded to the challenges facing it.  
As  Fed  Chairman  Bernanke  aptly  puts  it  “monetary  policy  is  most  effective  when  it  is  coherent, 
consistent, and predictable, while at all times leaving full scope for flexibility and the use of judgment 
as conditions may require”. This highlights the fundamental role of transparency and communication in 
inflation  targeting.  The  more  that  the  public  understands  the  logic  of  our  policy  framework  and 
decisions, the more we are able to better manage inflation expectations and the more their behavior 
will facilitate the achievement of the price stability objective. 
An encouraging development is that inflation has been on a decelerating trend beginning the second 
quarter of this year, much earlier than expected. What is BSP’s view on the inflation outlook? In our 
Third Quarter Inflation Report, released in October, we noted that our short run prognosis points to 
subdued  supply  pressures  and  uneven  demand  conditions.  Subsequently,  on  November  2,  the 
monetary board decided to maintain the BSP’s key policy rates. At the same time, the tiering scheme 
on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RP/RRP and special deposits accounts windows was 
restored. This measure is intended to encourage banks to seek alternatives to placing their excess 
funds with the BSP such as lending to the public. 
Looking ahead, the BSP is fully aware that it still has to contend with the obvious danger to inflation 
posed by oil prices and the potential surge in liquidity growth from strong foreign exchange inflows. As 
risks to inflation are judged to remain tilted on the upside, the BSP will continue to keep a close watch 
on incipient inflationary pressures, especially those emanating from the demand side, and will stand 
ready to undertake the necessary monetary action.  
Addressing  supply-side  risks  also  remains  a  key  policy  priority.  Toward  this  end,  the  BSP  actively 
pursues  stronger  representation  with  relevant  government  agencies  in  support  of  supply-side 
intervention measures that seek to maintain stability of basic food supplies. 
Targeting inflation does not mean being indifferent to exchange rate movements. The exchange rate 
plays an important role in the transmission of monetary policy because of its direct impact on prices of 
traded goods and its indirect impact on aggregate demand. While the BSP leaves the determination of 
the value of the peso to market forces, there is scope for occasional BSP action to dampen excessive 
volatility in the exchange rate that could potentially undermine the price stability objective. 
On  the  external  front,  we  expect  that  the  balance  of  payments  (BOP)  will  remain  strong.  Current 
projections indicate a surplus that will be sustained by continued inflows from OFW remittances and 
strong  exports  of  goods  and  services.  Improving  investor  sentiment  is  also  expected  to  boost  the 
capital and financial accounts.  
Turning now to the Philippine banking system, the system remains fundamentally stable and sound. 
This owes in large part to efforts to enhance financial intermediation and improve risk management by 
banks. We also continue to improve upon the core aspects of banking operations and enhance the 
regulatory  framework  for  the  effective  conduct  of  banking  supervision.  Specifically,  our  focus  is  on 
realigning  local  regulations  with  international  standards,  particularly  those  pertaining  to  corporate 
governance, financial reporting and capital adequacy.  
We are gearing up for Basel II, which calls for the adoption of risk-based capital for banks. As a first 
step towards Basel II, higher risk-weightings on NPLs have been introduced. The upshot of this is that 
banks  are  now  compelled  to  adopt  more  formal  procedures  for  quantifying  risk  and  collecting 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
information. The realignment has affected the BSP as well. We have moved from a compliance-based 
supervision to a risk-based approach to supervision.  
The BSP also continues to advance its reform initiatives to develop the capital market infrastructure. 
Some  important  measures  have  been  taken  to  create  a  better  market  infrastructure,  enhance 
transparency and instill market discipline. The full implementation of the third-party custodian system 
that  ensures  proper  delivery,  accounting  and  monitoring  of  all  securities  sold  was  also  actively 
pursued. 
We  are  also  actively  supporting  various  legislative  initiatives  that  are  intended  to  foster  financial 
market development. Notable among these is the proposed creation of a centralized credit information 
bureau system to improve the quality of financial information available to investors, enhance private 
sector access to credit, and minimize exposure to risks of financial intermediaries. 
I  deliberately  planned  to  keep  my  remarks  short  to  have  a  longer  Q  &  A  session.  I  look  forward 
therefore to a productive, open, and stimulating discussion. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
