Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  QUT  Business 
Leaders’ Forum, Brisbane, 14 June 2007.
Vanessa Rayner provided research assistance for this address. 
 The last time I gave a speech in Brisbane was three years ago, in June 2004. The key themes of that 
address were a world economy growing faster than average, rising oil prices, narrow pricing for risk in 
global  financial  markets,  an  Australian  economy  enjoying  a  long  expansion,  and  a  Queensland 
economy growing faster than the national average. 
You might be forgiven for saying that not much has changed in the interim. The global economy has 
continued to grow faster than its long-run average, oil prices have risen a lot further, compensation for 
risk  in  financial  markets  remains  remarkably  skinny,  Australia’s  economic  expansion  has  continued 
and Queensland is still experiencing stronger economic conditions than the average for Australia. 
But the fact that all those things are still occurring is quite remarkable. The Australian economy is on 
the cusp of the seventeenth year of the expansion which began in the second half of 1991. There is, at 
the moment, moreover, a high degree of confidence about the future, with share prices near record 
highs, property markets firming again and borrowing proceeding apace. 
I  shall  begin  with  some  remarks  about  the  global  economy,  and  then  talk  about  Australia’s  recent 
performance.  I  will  make  some  observations  about  how  the  Reserve  Bank  Board,  responsible  for 
monetary policy, is seeking to manage the risks which we judge the economy faces. 
The global economy 
The most recent outlook released by the IMF in April forecast global GDP growth in 2007, measured 
on a purchasing-power-parity basis, at just under 5 per cent. This is down a little from about 5½ per 
cent in 2006, but that was the fastest growth for over thirty years. The projected 2007 outcome is still 
well above the long-run average growth rate of around 3½ per cent. 
Between  regions,  there  are  some  important  divergences  under  way.  Europe  has  been  enjoying  an 
acceleration  in  economic  activity,  recording  over  the  latest  year  its  strongest  outcomes  since  the 
beginning of this decade. This has been led by Germany, which after some years of rather indifferent 
performance has emerged more efficient, competitive and confident. Growth in Asia remains strong, 
led by the remarkable pace of China. The US economy, on the other hand, has slowed down over the 
past year or so. So one question for the period ahead is whether the slower US growth portends a 
softening elsewhere, or whether other regions are big enough and internally vibrant enough to carry 
on growing reasonably well in the face of the US slowdown. 
To a large extent this will hinge on how widely the slowing extends within the US economy itself, and 
how  long  it  lasts.  To  date,  it  has  been  largely  confined  to  a  reduction,  albeit  a  pretty  large  one,  in 
construction of dwellings, after a period of unusually strong activity in that sector. People have been 
asking  whether  it  will  spread  further,  especially  given  the  recent  travails  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
market,  which  had  at  the  peak  accounted  for  about  15 per  cent  of  mortgage  loans  made  to  US 
households. A decline in credit standards during 2006, as lenders sought to keep business growing in 
the face of the slowing demand for loans and a change in trend in house prices, has since resulted in 
a rise in loan arrears. In turn, this has resulted in a blow-out in spreads on the low-rated tranches of 
the securities issued by some of the US lenders active in this market, and a number of loan originators 
in the sub-prime space went out of business. There was understandably a concern that this sequence 
of  events  could  prompt  a  pulling  back  by  lenders  for  housing  generally,  which  would  deepen  the 
downturn  in  construction.  There  was  also  a  possibility  that  there  would  be  a  more  widespread  re-
assessment  of  risk  and  a  tightening  in  credit  across  the  US  economy,  so  dampening  growth  more 
generally. 
But so far, the US economy and financial system seem to be absorbing the sub-prime problems pretty 
well. There has been a significant tightening in credit standards in the sub-prime area, as there had to 
be, but no widespread withdrawal by lenders more generally. While the US housing sector has yet to 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 1
show  much  convincing  sign  of  a  pick-up  in  construction,  the  softness  in the  US  economy  does  not 
seem to have spread to consumer spending, as incomes have been supported by ongoing gains in 
employment. That does not necessarily mean we have seen the last of concerns about US weakness 
but,  at  the  moment  at  least,  adjustments  to  the  growth  outlook  are  at  the  margin,  rather  than 
amounting to a wholesale re-think of economic prospects. 
It is also noteworthy, and very important from a global perspective, that underlying inflation appears to 
have come down in the US somewhat over the past six months, having drifted higher for the previous 
six  months.  Low  and  stable  inflation  has  been  a  key  underpinning  of  US  and  global  economic 
expansion  for  the  past  decade  and  a  half.  Policy-makers  around  the  world  are  rightly  on  alert  for 
threats  to  that  stability.  If  the  US  authorities  have  managed  to  turn  inflation  back  down,  then  the 
foundations for future growth will have been strengthened. But US policy-makers themselves would 
still say, I think, that such remains to be seen, and we have recently seen some shift in market pricing 
in recognition of the fact that the risk of higher inflation has not yet disappeared. 
Around  Asia,  Japan  is  growing  again, but  the big story  is  of course China.  According  to  the  official 
figures, China’s GDP grew at about 11 per cent over the latest year, even faster than the preceding 
period. Just about every statistic on the Chinese economy paints a picture of dazzling growth, though 
there are also several areas where the Chinese authorities have expressed concern. There is more 
than a hint of froth in Chinese asset markets, especially the share market, which has increased by 
around 50 per cent this year. Rises in prices for soft commodities are also finding their way into food 
prices, which is a pretty big share of the cost of living in China and a number of other like countries. 
In  response,  China  has  tightened  its  macroeconomic  management  policies,  and  taken  taxation 
measures aimed at dampening speculative excesses in the share market. 
We can expect, however, that China will seek to remain on a pretty rapid growth path for some time to 
come. To do so will require continuing efforts to find domestic sources for growth, with not quite so 
much emphasis on export-led growth, if only because China will be too big for the rest of the world to 
accommodate  an  export-led  strategy  either  comfortably  or  willingly.  It  will  also  involve  increasing 
attention  to  environmental  issues,  especially  as  Chinese  living  standards  continue  to  rise  towards 
those elsewhere.1 But the Chinese authorities are aware of all that, and have shown an impressive 
capacity for economic adjustment over the years. 
Hence, I remain reasonably optimistic about China’s long run growth potential, and by extension the 
growth  potential  of  those  parts  of  Australia’s  economy  that  are  complementary  to  China’s  growth 
needs. That said, it would be imprudent to assume that the recent consistency of exceptionally strong 
Chinese growth is normal. It is more likely that there will be occasional bumps along the road, and 
some of them could be pretty big. 
In the near term, were the US slowdown to become deeper and more protracted, Asia would probably 
be affected. It is true that direct trade linkages with the US have become relatively smaller as a share 
of total Asian trade in recent years. But while a larger share of Asian exports is now going to China, 
most of this trade is just part of the regional chain producing final goods for sale outside of the region 
in the major countries, a big part of which is still accounted for by the US. So higher intra-Asian trade 
does not of itself mean that Asia is more independent of the US. The power of linkages via financial 
market  prices  and  attitudes  of  risk  takers  should  not  be  underestimated  either.  Hence  a  bigger  US 
slowdown  would  still  be  a  big  deal,  if  it  occurred,  and  keeping  good  global  growth  going  would 
increasingly depend on policy responses in other parts of the world. 
But  provided  the  weakness  in  the  US  economy  remains  largely  confined  to  its  housing  sector,  as 
seems to have been the case to date, the spillover effects to the rest of the world through trade and 
financial channels are likely to remain small. There is some historical evidence in support of this point 
of view,2 with other moderate US growth slowdowns in the past having had a relatively modest effect 
                                                      
1   One recent study suggests that, based on the experience of most other countries which have made that transition, the number of 
motor  vehicles  owned  in  China  would  be expected  to  rise  from  20 million  in  2002  to  almost  400 million  by  2030.  That would  be 
equivalent to nearly 50 per cent of the vehicles in the world today. Other startling statistics can be quoted. No-one knows whether 
such projections will turn out to be accurate, but even a start down such a track by China surely will carry significant implications for 
energy 
at 
http://www.econ.nyu.edu/dept/courses/gately/DGS_Vehicle%20Ownership_2007.pdf. 
In its April 2007 World Economic Outlook, the IMF examines the global repercussions of past US recessions and mid-cycle growth 
slowdowns. The IMF finds that the US growth slowdowns in 1986 and 1995 had a negligible effect on growth elsewhere in the world. 
Specifically,  the  median  growth  decline  in  industrial  countries  was  0.1 per  cent  during  US  growth  slowdowns,  compared  with  a 
issues.  Available 
technology 
resource 
change, 
climate 
prices, 
other 
host 
and 
and 
of 
2  
a 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2007
on world growth. This seems to be the most likely outcome as we look forward over the next year or 
two. 
The Australian economy 
The trends in the global economy have imparted a very large expansionary impetus to the Australian 
economy.  The  rise  in  resource  prices  (and  to  a  lesser  extent  a  decline  in  global  prices  for 
manufactures) have increased Australia’s terms of trade by about 40 per cent over the past four years, 
to their highest level since the 1950s. 
Despite the various other factors that are affecting the economy – like the drought – this is a boost of 
first order importance, with real national income nearly 8 per cent higher than it would otherwise have 
been. Some of that additional income accrues to the foreign shareholders of companies but a good 
deal of it stays in Australia in the form of profits and dividends, taxes, wages and so on. There are then 
indirect effects as that income is partly spent on domestically-produced goods and services. Assuming 
the change to the terms of trade is not just temporary, there are further effects as firms respond to the 
prospect  of  higher  profits  in  future  by  investing  in  greater  capacity  in  the  relevant  sectors,  though 
investment  could  well  decline  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy  where  relative  prices  look  less 
attractive. 
Typically, in such episodes the exchange rate rises because capital tends to be attracted to Australia 
by  the  same  prospects  of  profitable  investment,  and  also  because  markets  anticipate  that  the 
expansionary forces at work will require higher interest rates. This tends to dampen activity in some 
parts of the traded sector, distributes the benefits of the higher terms of trade more widely across the 
economy, and gives a price signal for labour and capital resources to shift, over time, to the parts of 
the economy with the strongest prospects. It also assists to keep inflation under control by lowering 
prices for tradeable goods and services. 
The national income accounts show the broad contours of the effects. It is usually hazardous to base a 
story  heavily  on  any  one  quarter’s  statistics,  as  these  data  can  display  considerable  volatility  over 
short periods. But taking the trend over the past year, growth in real GDP was around 3¾ per cent, 
half  a  percentage  point  higher  than  in  the  preceding  twelve-month  period.  Business  investment 
spending is high, suggesting a substantial increase in the nation’s capital stock is occurring. Consumer 
spending  gathered  pace,  on  the  back  of  large  gains  in  employment  and  disposable  incomes.  Final 
spending  by  governments  (that  is,  spending  that  directly  affects  demand,  as  opposed  to  transfer 
payments  and  taxation  measures)  has  also  risen  at  an  above-average  pace  over  the  past  year. 
Together  these  pushed  domestic  final  demand  up  by  about  4½ per  cent  over  the  four  quarters  to 
March. Some of the growth in demand was satisfied by imports. Exports picked up on the preceding 
period,  but  were  held  back  somewhat  by  the  drought,  and  in  the  case  of  some  bulk  resources, 
continuing capacity constraints. 
This is a strong result considering that the effects of the drought and rising interest rates were also at 
work.  But  these  data  seem  at  present  to  align  reasonably  well  with  other  information.  Business 
surveys  have  consistently  pointed  to  buoyant  conditions.  The  labour  market  survey  shows  strong 
growth in employment, and measures of surplus labour, whether the standard unemployment rate or 
various measures of underemployment, have all declined further. Tax revenues, a rough cross-check 
on the growth of the nominal economy, have continued to be very strong. 
Looking ahead, there does not seem to be a high likelihood of the world economy slowing abruptly in 
the near term. Hence, the external forces at work will in all likelihood continue to be pretty positive. 
Australian  households  overall  appear  to  have  plenty  of  disposable  income  and  the  confidence  to 
spend it. Business profits are in good shape, and firms will be well placed to continue their high levels 
of investment as needed. They are also displaying a strong propensity to borrow, with business credit 
growth at its highest for nearly two decades. 
Meanwhile,  the  number  of  dwellings  being  built  looks  to  be  below  what  is  normally  thought  to  be 
underlying demand arising from population growth and household formation. At some stage, therefore, 
it will probably need to pick up, adding to demand for labour in the construction sector and to demand 
                                                                                                                                                                      
decline of 2 per cent during US recessions. In most emerging market economies, median growth increased slightly during US growth 
slowdowns, but declined during US recessions. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 3
for raw materials. There are nearly a million people working in construction, broadly defined as by the 
ABS, a rise of about 50 per cent from six years ago. Perhaps there is some further supply of labour 
available, but realistically there could well be a need for other types of private construction activity to 
tail off, so as to release some productive resources to accommodate (no pun intended) higher rates of 
dwelling construction. The intended further step-up in public infrastructure projects at the State level 
could also put some pressure on the engineering sector, unless private infrastructure projects also tail 
off. 
That is just one manifestation of the point that we need to pay attention to the economy’s supply side, 
as well as to the demand side. Observers conventionally assess the outlook for growth by looking at 
the prospects for demand components, adding them up, and then assuming that supply will respond. 
Anything that stimulates demand is thought to be “good for the economy”. 
But  over  recent  years,  we  have  increasingly  been  reminded  that  it  is  the  economy’s  supply  side 
performance –  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  capital  stock,  the  availability  of  labour  and  the 
productivity with which both those factors are used – that ultimately determines its rate of growth over 
the  long  term.  Demand  management  policies –  monetary  policy  and  government  spending  and 
taxation  measures  designed  to  have  a  broad  economic  impact –  can  usually  ensure  that  there  is 
adequate  expenditure  to  use  the  economy’s  productive  resources.  But  while  we  can,  in  most 
circumstances,  create  additional  demand,  it  is  much  harder  to  create  additional  supply.  Unless 
additional  supply  is  somehow  forthcoming,  however,  expanding  demand  just  produces  overheating 
and inflation. 
Inflation did pick up in Australia during the middle years of the current decade, from 2.4 per cent in 
2003, to 2.6 per cent in 2004, 2.8 per cent in 2005, and 4 per cent by mid 2006. That peak in the CPI 
inflation  rate  was  affected  by  some  temporary  factors,  which  have  now  reversed.  But  measures  of 
inflation  designed  to  extract  the  underlying  trend  showed  a  pick-up  too,  from  about  2½ per  cent  to 
3 per cent during the first half of last year. 
The most recent data for inflation, however, showed a more welcome trend, with underlying measures 
of inflation running at a reduced pace and the CPI rate on its way down as well. In our Statement on 
Monetary  Policy  released  about  six  weeks  ago,  our  judgement  was  that  underlying  inflation  would 
probably run at about 2½ per cent for the year 2007, which was a slight downward revision to earlier 
expectations. Data on labour costs received since then add credence to that forecast. 
Compared with what we expected a year ago, then, growth has turned out to be stronger, employment 
higher,  but  underlying  inflation  a  little  lower,  and  wages  growth  has  been  steady  in  the  face  of 
unanticipated labour market strength. This is quite a favourable set of outcomes, and should prompt 
us to ask how it all fits together. 
One  possibility  is  that  all  we  are  observing  is  lags  at  work.  Earlier  national  accounts  showed  a 
weakening in growth from mid 2005 through to mid 2006. Perhaps this led, with a lag, to the slowing in 
prices recorded in recent quarters. If this is the story, the recent apparent acceleration in growth will 
presumably  before  long  lead  to  a  noticeable  renewed  pick-up  in  inflation.  While  we  should  not 
completely discount this possibility, one shortcoming of this story is that the earlier slowing recorded in 
the  GDP  data  was  by  and  large  not  so  apparent  in  other  pieces  of  information,  especially  labour 
market  information.  The  recent  acceleration  in  GDP  likewise  is  not  so  marked  in  other  indicators, 
though neither is it entirely absent. 
But  my  guess  at  present  is  that  at  least  some  of  the  explanation  for  these  better-than-expected 
outcomes probably has to do with changed behaviour in the labour market. Despite, on most counts, 
the tightest labour market conditions for a generation, growth in most measures of labour costs has 
remained well disciplined for the past two years or more, after a mild acceleration earlier. Wages are 
rising quickly in some areas, but quite slowly in others. That is, relative wages are changing, adjusting 
to  the  forces  at  work  on  the  economy,  but  without,  so  far  at  least,  a  serious  inflation  of  the  whole 
economy-wide cost structure. This looks like a text-book case of adjustment. We could note as well 
that, even though firms have been saying for some years now that labour is hard to find, they seem in 
many cases to have found it nonetheless. A rise in immigration has helped to accommodate the strong 
demand for labour (though immigration, of course, itself also adds to demand to some extent). Rising 
labour force participation across a number of groups, especially among those aged over 55, has also 
been quite important. 
In economist-speak, the supply side of the labour market has recently been more “elastic” than it used 
to be. It is a very different environment from the one that was in place last time we had a terms of 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2007
trade event of this magnitude, testimony to the host of changes to the way the labour market functions 
that have occurred over the past two decades or so. 
To this we can add globalisation, where for some products at least, the “elasticity” of the global market 
is available in response to short-term demand fluctuations in Australia (or any other country). Australia 
is open to trade, which means not only that we have recourse to imports to meet demand if domestic 
supply is short, but since we are small in the world economy our demand per se has relatively little 
effect  on  the  world  price  of  those  goods.  The  rise  in  the  exchange  rate  would  also  be  acting  to 
dampen, at the margin, the rate of inflation for tradeables. All these factors presumably help to explain 
the recent pattern of moderate price increases in the face of stronger demand and output growth. 
But it would be a mistake to rely too heavily on these influences over a long period. While domestic 
supply has been reasonably elastic of late, it is surely not infinitely so. And while global sources of 
supply  are  steadily  becoming  more  important  for  many  products,  large  parts  of  demand  are  still 
overwhelmingly supplied from domestic sources. It follows that persistent rapid growth in demand for 
non-tradeables would eventually start to be accompanied by more pressure on prices and wages than 
we have seen lately. We must, furthermore, be closer to the point where that will occur today than we 
were a year ago. If strong demand growth persists, risks will increase. 
Nor can we assume that a rising exchange rate will exert a consistent dampening force on inflation of 
traded goods and services over the longer term, since exchange rates do not keep rising indefinitely. 
The  ability  to  supply  an  increasing  proportion  of  additional  demand  from  imports  probably  also  has 
some limit, though it is hard to tell where that might be. 
Hence,  as  things  currently  look,  inflation  is  more  likely  to  rise  during  2008  than  to  recede.  This 
probability is something which was embodied in the medium-term part of the outlook we released six 
weeks ago. Data becoming available since then have given more credence to that part of the forecast. 
These  are  the  considerations  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  is seeking  to  balance  as  it  meets  month  by 
month. On the one hand, the medium-term concerns about inflation remain, for the reasons I outlined 
a moment ago. That is cause enough to err on the cautious side in setting policy, and to ask whether 
current  settings  are  restrictive  enough.  On  the  other  hand,  the  somewhat  lower  short-term  inflation 
outlook  means  that  the  starting  point  for  a  future  pick-up  in  inflation  is  likely  to  be  a  bit  lower  than 
earlier thought. This has afforded some additional time in which to assess trends in demand and the 
economy’s  capacity  to  meet  them,  while  still  leaving  scope  to  implement  a  further  response  by 
monetary  policy  as  and  when  needed.  Weighing  all  this  up,  the  Board  has  decided  at  each  of  its 
recent meetings to maintain, for the time being, the settings which have been in place since November 
last year. 
The  fact  that  a  number  of  timely  adjustments  to  monetary  policy  had  already  been  made  gave  us 
some confidence in adopting that approach. In fact, a lot of the work needed to keep inflation on a 
reasonable track was done in the period from 2002 to 2005, when unusually low interest rates, which 
had been  appropriate  for the  earlier  part  of  the  decade, were gradually  lifted towards  normal.  They 
were raised a bit further, to be slightly higher than normal, during 2006. Without that sequence, we 
would today have been in a much less comfortable position. 
Whether  or  not  further  instalments  in  that  sequence  will  be  needed  is  a  question  the  Board  will 
continue to address over the months ahead. The Board’s judgement will, as usual, be informed by all 
the relevant data and an assessment of the risks we face over the coming couple of years. 
Conclusion 
We  are  living  though  a  period  of  profound  change  in  the  world  economy,  which  is  offering  a  rare 
chance to improve further the economic success Australians have enjoyed over the past decade and a 
half. Historically, Australia often did not manage periods of prosperity very well, as our institutional and 
policy  structures  were  not  sufficiently  flexible  and  long-term  in  their  orientation.  The  chances  of 
success are much higher on this occasion, and the evidence so far is that we are doing much better, 
but the situation is not without risks. 
I trust that on some future visit to Queensland we will be able to look back and find that the risks had 
been  effectively  managed.  If  so,  then  monetary  policy  will  have  played  its  part  in  furthering  the 
prosperity and welfare of the Australian people. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 5
