Mario Draghi: Monetary policy and new financial instruments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum, at Session I on Challenges in the World’s Financial Markets of the 2007 Money and Banking 
Conference "Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos 
Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
1. 
In  my  talk  on  “Monetary  Policy  and  New  Financial  Instruments”  I  will  first  review  some  of  the  most 
important financial innovations we have seen in recent years, and the consequences they have had 
for financial markets and institutions. Then I’ll discuss some of the implications for financial stability 
policies, before closing with some thoughts on the implications for monetary policy. 
The recent wave of financial innovation 
2.  
While there have been many changes in how financial markets function in recent years, perhaps the 
most striking changes have come in the area of credit risk. Large banks in the developed markets are 
rapidly  moving  away  from  the  traditional  business  of  making  loans  and  holding  them  to  maturity. 
Increasingly they see their business model as originating credit claims (or packaging claims originated 
by others) and selling them, often in seniority-based tranches, to investors. As a result, the process of 
disintermediation – which was already well underway in many markets in the 1980s and 1990s – has 
accelerated. Credit is now something that is largely bought and sold on markets, rather than held for 
the long term on the balance sheets of financial intermediaries. 
The increased trading of securitized credit instruments has accompanied, as both cause and effect, 
the  explosive  growth  in  the  market  for  credit  derivatives.  Meanwhile,  derivatives  and  structured 
products  in  other  risk  categories,  such  as  interest  rates,  foreign  exchange  and  equities,  have  also 
continued to grow in volume and complexity. 
Rapid  innovation  in  financial  instruments  has  accompanied  –  again,  both  as  cause  and  effect  – 
increased activity by non-traditional financial players, notably hedge funds and private equity funds. As 
institutions, of course, these are not themselves new. But there has been a qualitative shift in the size 
and scope of  their  activity.  They have gone  from  being  niche  players  to  being  key participants and 
drivers of innovation in a broad range of markets and transactions. 
The  growth  of  hedge  funds  is  part  of  an  ongoing  realignment  of  the  roles  of  different  categories  of 
financial  institutions.  Hedge  funds  now  account  for  a  large  share  of  trading  in  many  core  market 
segments,  and  manage  a  steadily  increasing  share  of  the  assets  of  the  world’s  pension  funds  and 
university endowments. At the same time, traditional asset managers have adopted hedge-fund-like 
strategies, including taking on leverage and adopting short positions. Some hedge funds are taking a 
prominent  role  in  credit  markets,  either  as  direct  providers,  as  investors  in  the  riskiest  tranches  of 
funded or synthetic CDOs, and by providing liquidity to the credit derivative market. The rise of stand-
alone CDO vehicles as a channel for credit intermediation in turn has altered and potentially reduced 
the role of traditional banks in credit markets. Private equity funds have assumed an important role in 
restructuring  corporate  assets,  with  the  help  of  innovative  loan  structures  and  financing  techniques 
that  rely  on  hedge  funds  as  traders  and  investors.  And  the  boundaries  between  the  functions  and 
behaviour of private equity funds and hedge funds have blurred as well. 
In some respects it’s still too early to forecast the full consequences of these developments. But we 
can already see some of the changes in financial systems that have resulted. Let me suggest some of 
the consequences that these changes may have, for financial markets, for financial institutions, and for 
how we go about fulfilling our responsibilities as central bankers. 
With respect to markets, the most critical change has been the increased liquidity and transferability of 
risk. Not only are there ever more instruments and markets in which all kinds of risks can be hedged or 
traded; there is also a growing pool of counterparties willing to take one or the other side of a risk-
transfer transaction – as long as the price is right. When analysts talk about the increased liquidity of 
markets, this is what they’re referring to: in more and more markets, an asset can readily find a buyer 
at a price that does not command too great a liquidity premium. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
One reason for this is that many of the new instruments are capital-efficient, meaning that traders do 
not need to allocate a large amount of up-front capital to adopt the relevant exposure. A second factor 
helping to increase market liquidity is that more and more players are structurally better at providing it. 
For  example,  institutional  investors  with  long  investment  horizons  have  now  become  the  largest 
investors in private equity and hedge funds. Because these investors can agree to lengthier “lock in” 
periods, in normal times, hedge funds and private equity funds can provide ready liquidity to markets 
because they themselves do not need to worry about meeting the liquidity needs of their investors. 
The  funds  may,  however,  face  liquidity  demands  from  other  counterparties,  particularly  in  times  of 
stress – a point I’ll come back to in a moment. 
The greater diversity of players and instruments, and the increase in liquidity, have had a profound 
impact on how financial markets function. Volatility and risk premia have fallen steadily over this period 
of rapid innovation. To a degree, this has reflected reduced real volatility. But, more fundamentally, 
markets have become structurally more efficient at pricing risks and arbitraging valuation differences 
across assets. Financial prices are now driven more actively towards fundamentals than before. 
One  consequence  of  this  is  that  we  are  moving  to  a  world  where  financial  shocks  are  more  easily 
absorbed than they used to be, because there is a larger pool of players available who are willing and 
able  to  switch  quickly  from  one  market  to  another. As  a result,  liquidity  shortages  in  one market  or 
financial sector can rapidly be made up by transfers of liquidity from another. This helps ensure that 
prices for related assets are broadly in line with one another. 
But  at  the  same  time  the  risk  of  a  broader  shock,  affecting  several  markets  at  once,  may  have 
increased.  Such  a  shock  could  result  from  a  fall  in  risk  appetites  of  a  broad  range  of  participants, 
perhaps  in  conjunction  with  a  fall  in  the  liquidity  available  to  hedge  funds  and  other  active  traders. 
Hedge  funds  may  be  shielded  from  liquidity  demands  from  their  investors,  by  lock-up  periods  and 
withdrawal  gates,  but  they  still  need  liquid  funds  to  meet  margin  calls  on  their  positions.  Those 
demands are likely to rise most steeply at times when markets are turbulent and the supply of liquidity, 
whether from other traders or from dealers and prime brokers, is likely to be reduced. If initial price 
movements  trigger  counterparty  concerns,  this  could  well  generate  deeper  and  more  broad-based 
liquidity erosions that can pose risks of a systemic nature. 
What are the implications of this new environment for financial institutions, particularly the ones that 
are  subject  to  regulation?  One  important  development  is  that  improved  trading  and  pricing  of  risks 
enable  financial  institutions  of  all  kinds  to  manage  their  risks  better.  For  the  official  sector,  this  is 
clearly good news. At the same time, however, competitive pressures from new players and new ways 
of doing “old business” pose challenges. Greater risk management capacity also means it is easier for 
participants to take on risks, which can reinforce moral hazard problems. The operating environment 
has also become riskier, with complex instruments posing risk management and valuation challenges 
even for the most sophisticated firms. A shock to profitability that reduces the credit standing of one or 
more large institutions, or leads banks to take on riskier strategies in order to reach a desired level of 
profits, could have systemic implications that authorities need to be aware of. 
A critical question for the stability of global financial markets is whether the core intermediaries – the 
fifteen or twenty large global firms that make markets in the most widely traded derivatives and act as 
prime  brokers  to  hedge  funds  –  are  adequately  managing  their  counterparty  and  principal-based 
trading activities. The large dealers firms manage counterparty exposures through a combination of 
initial  margin,  variation  margin,  and  allocations  of  their  own  capital.  So  far,  these  firms  seem  to  be 
keeping  their  direct  credit  exposures  to  hedge  funds  and  principal  trading  under  control.  However, 
there is evidence that competition for hedge fund business may be putting margining arrangements 
under pressure. It is also unclear whether firms have adequately protected themselves against indirect 
exposures  to  the  consequences  of  greater  leveraged  activity,  such  as  the  risk  of  a  sudden  global 
shock to liquidity as I mentioned a moment ago. Firms are still devising methodologies to model such 
events and incorporate them in stress tests. But ultimately the best safeguard will be adequate capital 
and liquidity cushions. 
Implications for financial stability policy 
3.  
What do these developments mean for financial stability policy? In the new environment, risks seem to 
be dispersed more widely, but transparency about where risks are located has declined. This reduces 
the  sectoral  impact  of  real  and  financial  shocks,  but  may  also  make  it  harder  to  anticipate  which 
sectors  are  vulnerable  to  a  shock.  Even  more  than  before,  policy  needs  to  move  from  a  reactive 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
orientation, where we intervene in response to problems and threats, to a preventative stance in which 
systems are made more robust to potential shocks.  
Certainly it’s not the task of the official sector to stand in the way of innovation or improved efficiency. 
However,  we  do  need  to  minimize  the  moral  hazard  risks  that  might  come  from  the  increased  risk 
capacity of regulated firms. One way to do this is to redouble our efforts to use regulatory tools – risk-
based capital requirements, prudential rules, disclosure that is aimed towards strong market discipline 
– to align the decisions of regulated firms more closely to market signals. 
New  instruments  and  trading  patterns  also  call  for  the  expansion  or  adaptation  of  the  market 
infrastructure  that  underpin  financial  activity.  Here,  collective  action  problems  among  market 
participants can arise that prevent the market from finding appropriate solutions on its own. Giving the 
impetus that the markets need to resolve collective action problems is a key task of central banks and 
financial regulators. We’ve seen some creative examples of this in the last few years, for example the 
efforts of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Financial Services Authority in London to 
press large dealers to reduce their backlogs of unconfirmed credit derivatives contracts and to create 
more resilient settlement arrangements for these transactions. 
The approach to regulation of hedge funds has been much discussed over the years. After extensive 
debate following the 1998 LTCM crisis, political and financial authorities agreed an “indirect approach”. 
This approach relies on the counterparties who provide hedge funds with leverage – largely regulated 
banks or investment banks – to exercise appropriate discipline in their lending and dealing with hedge 
funds. Counterparties are expected to impose limits on their exposure to a hedge fund that takes on 
excessive leverage, is engaged in excessively risky strategies, or is not sufficiently forthcoming with 
information about their risk exposures. 
This  indirect  approach  has  generally  worked  well  in  containing  the  financial  stability  risks  posed  by 
hedge  funds.  It  is  a  joint  effort,  involving  first  and  foremost  the exercise of  discipline  by  the  private 
sectors, with supervisors buttressing that discipline when competitive pressures erode it. As markets 
grow and evolve we need to work constantly to ensure that all of the relevant parties are doing what 
they need to do. 
This is the message that came out of the Financial Stability Forum’s recent update of its 2000 report 
on  highly  leveraged  institutions.  In  the  update  we  set  out  five  recommendations  –  addressed  to 
supervisors, hedge fund counterparties, investors, and the hedge fund industry – that FSF members 
agree  are  likely  to  be  most  effective  in  financial  stability  risks  related  to  hedge-funds  Three  of  the 
recommendations are addressed to supervisors. They are urged to press dealer firms to strengthen 
counterparty  risk  measurement  and  management,  especially  where  instruments  are  new  and 
complexity is high. They will also work with firms to strengthen their capacity to assess and mitigate 
their exposures to the market liquidity erosions I mentioned earlier. Lastly, supervisors will evaluate 
the case for developing more systematic data on core institutions’ global credit exposures to hedge 
funds. A fourth recommendation calls on counterparties and investors in hedge funds to demand and 
act  upon  appropriate  information  from  hedge  fund  managers,  while  a  fifth  urges  the  hedge  fund 
industry to review and enhance existing sound practice benchmarks for hedge fund managers. 
I  would  like  to  dispel  the  notion  that  this  indirect  approach  is  a  light  approach.  In  particular,  for 
supervisors to be able to judge the adequacy of firms’ risk management processes and to induce more 
conservatism where this is needed, they must establish – continuously – where the frontier in terms of 
risk  management  practices  is.  And  they  must  then  set  out  expectations  about  changes  that  firms 
individually and collectively must make, and oversee firms’ implementation of necessary changes. An 
extensive review by the main supervisory authorities of how the largest banks and prime brokers in the 
world manage their hedge fund related risks is now underway. Separately, the hedge fund industry 
has begun to take steps to strengthen existing sound practice guidance, notably in the areas of risk 
management, valuation practices and disclosures to investors and counterparties. We will be following 
progress in these areas very closely in period ahead. 
Implications for monetary policy 
4.  
The widespread innovations in the financial markets that I just mentioned – the expansion in the use of 
marketable  instruments,  the  rise  of  new  players,  the  development  of  derivatives  and  structured 
products  markets  –  have  brought  important  changes  in  the  way  monetary  policy  is  conducted, 
communicated and transmitted to the economy. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 3
First  of  all,  the  transmission  mechanism  is  changing.  While  the  effect  of  monetary  policy  on  the 
availability and cost of bank credit is decreasing, monetary policy actions have prompter effects on a 
whole range of financial market yields and asset prices. The latter development may be positive, if our 
intentions are communicated well and correctly interpreted by investors. It could be detrimental, if it 
causes more volatility. 
Our  decision-making  process  is  also  changing.  We  have  at  our  disposal  a  wide  range  of  new 
information from asset prices, which enables us to gauge market expectations more carefully and take 
them into account. However, the interpretation of other crucial variables, such as monetary and credit 
aggregates,  is  more  difficult  than  in  the  past,  although  by  no  means  less  important,  and  calls  for 
renewed research efforts. 
Let me address some of these issues in turn. 
Monetary policy, asset securitization and the changing role of banks 
4.1 
The role of the banking system in the transmission of monetary policy decisions to the economy – the 
so called “bank lending channel” – was once central. It is now rapidly diminishing. Compared with the 
traditional way of thinking, this is a sea change. 
Banks  were  previously  at  the  centre  of  the  monetary  transmission  process.  The  existence  of 
asymmetric information on the quality of borrowers assigned a special role to banks in assessing firms’ 
creditworthiness and providing external finance; the sensitivity of banks’ checking deposits to interest 
rate  changes  gave  monetary  policy  a  powerful  tool  with  which  to  affect  banks’  funding  and 
intermediation activity. 
The development of new financial products and intermediaries is radically reshaping this environment. 
Banks are taking on a new role in originating, pooling and distributing credit risks outside the banking 
system.  In  most  markets  the  securitization  of  bank  loans  is  booming,  and  this  is  affecting  the  way 
monetary policy operates. By disseminating information about firms, loan securitization is helping to 
reduce the spread between the cost of internal and external finance. The possibility to securitize loans 
and sell them to institutional investors, such as hedge funds, insurance companies and pension funds, 
eases banks’ funding constraints for new lending. It also allows banks to transfer a substantial part of 
credit risk and reduce their capital requirements, making possible, other things being equal, a further 
increase in loans supplied. 
We are devoting a good deal of research to the implications of securitization on the role of banks in the 
transmission  mechanism.  Ongoing  research  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  ECB  (using  microdata  on 
3,000  euro-area  banks  over  the  last  eight  years)1  finds  that  banks  that  make  greater  use  of 
securitization  are  more  sheltered  from  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  changes:  in  response  to 
increases  in  official  rates,  their  lending  activity  shrinks  less  than  does  that  of  other  institutions. 
Securitization  therefore  appears  to  reduce  the  overall  effect  of  monetary  policy  on  loan  supply 
significantly. 
This finding has important implications on how we assess policy. We can no longer limit ourselves to 
examining the state of the banking system and its credit risk in order to evaluate the effect of monetary 
policy on credit conditions and the stability of the financial system. While the banking system may still 
be  the  lever  by  which  the  entire  financial  system  is  controlled,  other  actors,  often  located  far  from 
where  the  loans  are  originated,  have  an  increasing  influence  on  credit  supply.  The  changing 
distribution of credit risk in the economy may affect the way the transmission mechanism operates, in 
ways we do not yet completely understand. 
The resilience of the financial system in the face of larger shocks has yet to be fully tested. Although 
credit risk will be less concentrated on banks, the financial risks that are being created by the system 
may actually be greater. It cannot be precluded that episodes of credit risk mispricing may be followed 
by abrupt adjustments, posing new challenges to the stability of the financial system as a whole. It is 
too  early  to  tell  whether  the  changes  on  the  financial  markets  have  determined  the  end  of  “credit 
cycles”. 
                                                      
1   Y. Altunbas, L. Gambacorta and D. Marqués, “Securitisation and monetary policy”, mimeo, May 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2007
Monetary policy and asset markets 
4.2  
While the role of banks in monetary policy transmission is diminishing, other channels are gaining in 
importance. To the extent that financial innovation makes markets more complete and more efficient, 
actual  and  expected  changes  in  official  interest  rates  are  readily  transmitted  to  a  wide  range  of 
financial assets. Overall, the effects of policy decisions on financial markets are stronger and faster. 
A more immediate impact of monetary policy on a wide range of asset prices may have favourable 
implications,  since  it  provides  monetary  authorities  with  a  powerful  instrument  for  affecting  the 
economy. Market expectations on future policy intentions move long-term rates and affect financing 
conditions,  even  before  official  interest  rates  are  changed.  The  modification  of  asset  prices  affects 
consumption and investment decisions. If policy communication is effective, these changes may partly 
“do the job” for central banks. 
At the same time, unless we are suitably careful the consequences may be disruptive. Policy actions 
that diverge from the pace expected by economic agents, which is built into long-term interest rates 
and other yields as well as into positions taken on the market, may upset markets, increase volatility 
and, in extreme cases, induce a simultaneous revision in positions, with potentially disorderly effects 
on liquidity and asset prices. 
The concern not to destabilize financial markets is one reason why many central banks have striven in 
recent years to reduce the uncertainty arising from policy decisions. They are paying more attention to 
proper communication of their objectives, strategies and, with different nuances and practices, future 
intentions.  A  trend  to  greater  gradualism  in  policy  action  has  emerged  in  all  the  main  industrialized 
economies  (policy  moves  in  excess  of  25  basis  points  are  now  quite  rare  for  major  central  banks) 
partly in response to the greater uncertainty over the impact of rate changes on the financial markets. 
As the interplay between policy actions and market expectations gathers importance, we should also 
guard against the risk of what has been described by Alan Blinder as the “dog chasing its tail”. It is 
fundamental that we to avoid a situation in which financial markets look at the central bank and the 
central  bank  looks  at  financial  markets,  both  losing  sight  of  the  underlying  factors  that  determine 
inflation. 
In the Eurosystem, we consider it definitely desirable that our policy be predictable in order to reduce 
uncertainty  and  volatility  in  financial  markets.  However,  our  actions  are  ultimately  dictated  by  the 
economic outlook, not the view of the financial market. In general it is better to avoid surprising the 
market, but there are times when it cannot be avoided, because we have new information or, more 
simply, different views from market participants. In these cases, effective communication is even more 
important. To deliver price stability over the medium term, it is essential that the leadership remain with 
the monetary authorities. 
Monetary policy and financial market indicators 
4.3  
Let  me  further  observe  that  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  the  introduction  of  new 
instruments  affect  not  only  monetary  transmission  but  also  our  decision-making  process.  The 
availability of a wide range of new products gives us a wealth of information that we jacked even just a 
few years ago. By contrast, the traditional indicators are now harder to interpret. 
We have at our disposal a large set of information from derivatives markets (futures, options, swaps) 
that  is  key  to  our  decision-making.  Prices  on  these  markets  allow  us  to  estimate,  with  a  degree  of 
precision  that  a  few  years  ago  would  have  been  unthinkable,  the  entire  distribution  of  market 
expectations about crucial variables. We now have indicators of market expectations about inflation, 
growth and policy decisions, of the uncertainty surrounding those expectations, and even of investors’ 
attitude towards risk. This helps us to produce better policy decisions: investors’ expectations shape 
the way the economy is likely to react to our actions and are a source of information on the underlying 
economic trends. 
However, the diffusion of new financial instruments is also likely to affect the information content of 
some  of  the  indicators  that  central  banks  regularly  monitor  and  that  serve  as  a  basis  for  policy 
decisions.  The  behaviour  of  money  and  credit  is  particularly  affected  by  the  emergence  of  new 
products and new players. 
Ten years ago, most of M3 in the euro area was held by households and firms, whose behaviour as 
money-holders we could understand reasonably well. Only around 6 per cent was held by so-called 
non-bank  intermediaries  (which  include  mutual  funds  and  “financial  vehicle  corporations”  that 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 5
purchase, pool and repackage bank loans as marketable securities). This percentage is now almost 
twice  as  large,  and  about  one  fifth  of  M3  growth  is  accounted  for  by  these  intermediaries.2  Their 
demand  for  money  is  likely  to  respond  to  different  motives,  and  is  harder  to  interpret.  Moreover, 
marketable instruments (such as money market funds) now represent 14 per cent of M3, as against 10 
per cent  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineties and only 5  per cent  in  the  mid-eighties.  They are  held  for 
portfolio  purposes  and  are  less  directly  connected  to  transactions  and  spending  on  goods  and 
services. 
These developments call for deeper analysis. It would be wrong to conclude, as some commentators 
seem to have done, that they require a reduction in the role of money in the strategy of central banks, 
and of the ECB in particular. The dynamics of monetary aggregates still conveys important information 
on the future evolution of prices, but in order to extract this information it is necessary to process a 
larger  set  of  monetary  data  and  take  account  of  the  significant  impact  of  the  recent  financial 
innovations. All the central banks in the Eurosystem are committed to improving their analysis in this 
direction. 
Ongoing research at the Bank of Italy is aimed at developing techniques to extract information from 
the common trend of a large set of monetary indicators (M3, but also its components, the monetary 
holdings  of  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  the  counterparts  of  M3,  including  credit 
developments), using multivariate techniques (dynamic factor analysis) to get rid of noise. Our results 
indicate  that  the  common  trend  derived  from  the  various  monetary  components  conveys  useful 
information on the behaviour of inflation a few years down the road.3 This confirms that the analysis of 
monetary variables remains essential in the conduct of monetary policy, provided it is based on the 
assessment of a large information set and sound economic interpretation. 
This implies that we should not be complacent about the value of our current tools, which are clearly 
affected  by  the  ongoing  change  in  the  euro-area  financial  landscape.  However,  playing  down  the 
importance of monetary and credit analysis would be a dangerous mistake. In this respect I believe 
that the “full-information” strategy adopted by the Eurosystem, based on cross-checking the signals 
derived from real and monetary variables, is probably the best to deal with the challenges posed by a 
changing environment. 
Conclusions 
5.  
I have offered a few thoughts on how financial innovation may affect monetary policy. Certainly, I have 
not exhausted the issues, but sought rather to highlight the key themes and the main lines of current 
thinking  among  central  banks  and  other  official  institutions.  We  need  the  experience  of  a  full  credit 
cycle  before  drawing  conclusions.  As  with  any  period  of  rapid  innovation,  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty about how critical variables – including credit aggregates, consumption, fixed investment, 
and inflation – will behave under different scenarios. Policymakers will need to be humble about what 
they  do  not  know,  and  to  be  creative  and  flexible  in  dealing  with  the  changes  to  the  traditional 
relationships that are rapidly taking place. Conferences like this one are of vital importance to foster 
understanding of these developments and exchange views on what they mean for the tasks we face 
as central bankers. 
                                                      
2   G. Ferrero, A, Nobili and P. Passiglia, “The sectoral distribution of money supply in the euro area”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di 
discussione, No. 627, 2006. 
3   A. Nobili, “A composite indicator for monetary analysis”, Banca d’Italia, mimeo, May 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2007
