Axel A Weber: Challenges posed by (financial) globalisation  
Lecture by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the University of Pune, 
Pune, 15 March 2007.  
 Introduction  
1 
Dear Mr. Jadhav, members of the University of Pune, ladies and gentlemen  
This is my first visit to India. Although I flew in only ten hours ago, I am already quite impressed by 
what I have seen in my very brief time here. The official slogan of the Indian ministry of tourism is: 
“Incredible India!” This is almost a perfect description of my impressions so far.  
My speech is entitled “Challenges posed by (financial) globalisation”. Regarding globalisation, there 
isn’t any other term which has attracted nearly as much attention over the past ten years. It is quite 
justified  to  say  that  globalisation  and  its  implications  are  the  “topic  of  the  decade”.  And  I  think  that 
globalisation is very likely to maintain this position in the foreseeable future.  
The process of globalisation has various facets. Hence, there are many angles from which one might 
look at this process (for example, historical, political, social, or economic). Not surprisingly, in most of 
my  remarks,  I  shall  take  a  central  banker’s  point  of  view:  I  shall  focus  mainly  on  the  economic 
implications of the ongoing global integration. Besides financial aspects of globalisation, I shall cover 
real economic aspects as well, since both features cannot be meaningfully separated.  
Globalisation: basic remarks and characteristics  
2  
Let me start by making some basic observations with respect to globalisation. Globalisation is a term 
referred to pretty often in the media, and by politicians and economists. However, there is no single 
definition of what globalisation actually means nor is there a single key figure for measuring its scale 
and evolution over time.  
To me, a useful approach to defining globalisation is that, quite fundamentally, the term “globalisation” 
describes the ongoing process of the international division of labour. In the wake of this process, the 
domestic markets for goods and services, as well as the labour markets, are becoming more and more 
interlinked and interdependent internationally.  
In the absence of a single yardstick to gauge the extent to which globalisation is evolving, it is useful to 
look at various developments that, in combination, reflect this process quite well. Primarily, there are 
three elements that characterise globalisation.  
First: The steadily rising volume of global trade, whose growth rate has been exceeding that of global 
GDP for a long time now. On average, global trade has grown 50% faster than world GDP over the 
past  35  years.  During  the  1990s,  global  trade  even  grew  twice  as  fast  as  global  GDP.  Among  the 
reasons explaining this development, there are a number of factors which have particular relevance. 
More  and  more  goods  and  services  are  becoming  tradable.  In  addition,  companies  and  economies 
have become more involved in foreign trade. As a result, the degree of real economic openness of 
many countries, measured by total exports and imports of goods and services as a ratio of GDP, has 
increased significantly. In the German case, the relevant figure amounted to roughly 75% last year, 
compared with just over 60% in 1990.  
Second:  The  ongoing  internationalisation  of  production  processes,  measured,  for  example,  by  the 
growing  volume  of  foreign  direct  investments  (FDI).  FDIs  have  increased  considerably  since  the 
1970s. According to UNCTAD figures, worldwide FDI stocks amounted to over USD10 trillion in 2005. 
About 77,000 transnational enterprises with roughly 770,000 branches are involved. FDI flows among 
developed countries still account for the majority of FDI flows. The share of developing countries as 
recipients  of  FDIs,  though,  has  been  increasing  markedly  over  the  past  few  years.  However,  the 
investment has been concentrated on just a few countries, mainly in Asia.  
Third: The increasing openness of many economies in financial terms, measured by the ratio of the 
sum of external assets and liabilities to domestic GDP. For Germany, this figure currently amounts to 
roughly  340%,  which  is  three  times  as  high  as  in  1990.  Compared  with  other  developed  countries, 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
Germany is among those with a high degree of financial openness. In addition, the increasing financial 
openness of many economies has also been reflected by strongly rising international capital flows, for 
example, in terms of cross-border securities transactions.  
The process of globalisation has been evolving among developed countries for many decades now. 
Therefore, in contrast to what some observers might think, the current process of globalisation per se 
is neither new nor of special uniqueness. Rather, it is the logical outcome of efforts to further exploit 
the benefits of the division of labour on an international scale.  
However,  the  pace  of  this  process  has  been  increasing  rapidly  for  more  than  a  decade  now.  In 
particular, declining costs of telecommunication and transportation have been the main drivers of this 
development. In addition, skill levels in many regions of the world have improved considerably as has 
the quality of goods and services produced in formerly rather underdeveloped countries.  
Additionally,  what  has  changed  the  face  of  globalisation  is  the  fact  that  globalisation  nowadays 
extends to a larger group of countries than in the past. More and more countries with formerly rather 
closed economies have opened themselves to the world market. Thus, new players have entered on 
to  the  global  stage  and  are  becoming  increasingly  relevant  economic  powers  and,  as  a  result, 
competitors to established developed countries.  
As  a  consequence,  the  process  of  globalisation  is  leading  to  a  shift  in  weights  within  the  global 
economy. This shift is nothing exceptional. It is quite a natural development which simply reflects the 
continuously evolving global economic landscape. Within this process, China and India, in particular, 
have gained particular relevance over the past decade, in both economic and political terms.  
In the case of India, there can be little doubt that the world’s largest democracy is an emerging global 
economic  power.  Its  economic  growth  has  averaged  some  8%  over  the  past  four  years,  placing  it 
among  the  world’s  fastest-growing  economies,  while  inflation  has  remained  largely  contained.  Its 
dynamic development in foreign trade, for instance, has been quite impressive, too, thus leading to a 
rising share in the volume of global trade. “India goes global” – which is the title of a book that was 
published last year by the IMF – is an appropriate description of India’s recent development.  
I think that the outlined process of globalisation is among the most important factors that have fuelled 
the global growth dynamics we have been seeing for more than four years now. And it is likely to keep 
on doing so, at least in the medium-term future. IMF estimates suggest that, unless we witness rather 
unexpected incidents, 2007 will be the fifth consecutive year with an above-average increase in global 
real GDP.  
After having outlined major characteristics of the current process of globalisation, let me continue by 
elaborating more on its implications. 
3  
Implications and challenges of globalisation  
 Real economic implications  
3.1 
In  various  parts  of  the  world,  quite  a  lot  of  people  are  rather  sceptical  if  they  think  about  the  real 
economic  implications  of  globalisation.  In  fact,  there  is  often  an  indistinct  fear  that  globalisation  is 
mainly  a  risky  development  in  which  the  negative  consequences  clearly  prevail.  At  the  heart  of 
concerns  in  developed  countries  are  the  fear  of  loss  of  jobs  as  well  as  the  pressure  on  the  social 
security systems.  
While  recognising  the  associated  challenges,  the  fact  that  globalisation  is  basically  a  positive 
phenomenon  cannot  be  stressed  too  much.  What  are  the  benefits  of  globalisation?  According  to 
foreign trade theory, the international division of labour, which exploits comparative cost advantages, 
leads, under competitive conditions, to efficiency gains and increases the average per capita income. 
Compared with a situation without foreign trade, the economies concerned have greater consumption 
possibilities. In addition, globalisation increases product variety, which is beneficial to consumers, and 
enlarges  the  input  and  output  markets  for  companies.  Finally,  globalisation  intensifies  competition, 
thus fostering innovation, and accelerating the dissemination of technological expertise.  
But it is not only economic theory which underlines that globalisation is a positive process. Besides the 
theoretical  aspects,  empirical  evidence  clearly  shows  that  there  is  no  developed  country  which  has 
opted out of the world economy and the associated global exchange of goods and services.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
In turn, actively participating in the globalisation process is a prerequisite for increasing real income 
and  the  living  standard  of  the  population,  not  an  impediment  to  it.  To  me,  it  is  obvious  that 
globalisation, among other factors, has made a crucial contribution to increasing wealth in more and 
more parts of the world.  
However,  the  integration  of  formerly  rather  closed  economies  into  the  world  economy  is  a  process 
which has to be set up prudently. Otherwise, the integration process might impact negatively on the 
domestic economy and the well-being of its population and might increase the risk of crisis instead of 
enhancing the chance of prosperity. This is true of the real sector, and especially of the financial sector 
and the task of liberalising capital flows.  
The process of opening to the world economy needs to be accompanied, among other things, by a 
regulatory  and  supervisory  system  that  strengthens  financial  institutions  and  their  ability  to  manage 
risks as well as strengthening the resilience of the financial and economic system as a whole. Thus, 
domestic factors, above all, are of major importance if a country wishes to benefit from globalisation.  
India’s  approach  of  liberalising  its  capital  flows  as  part  of  far-reaching  economic  reforms  that  were 
initiated in the early 1990s, has proved to be a well-founded strategy. With gradual and cautious steps, 
which have been carefully phased and sequenced across the country, India has successfully paved 
the way for the stronger position we see it in today.  
Let me continue by looking more closely at the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy, 
which is certainly of special interest to a central banker.  
Globalisation and monetary policy  
3.2  
For central banks, it is important to understand the forces and transmission channels of globalisation 
in  order  to  calibrate  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  an  adequate  way  given  the  domestic  goals  of 
monetary  policy.  Two  aspects  are  of  special  interest  for  central  banks:  First,  the  way  in  which 
globalisation changes the domestic inflation processes. Second, the way in which globalisation alters 
the transmission of monetary policy measures – in other words, changes in the short-term interest rate 
– through the economic system.  
By  and  large,  the  first  aspect  is  closely  related  to  real  globalisation,  whereas  the  second  question 
deals with the consequences of financial globalisation.  
Globalisation and inflation  
The ongoing increase in real globalisation is coinciding with a decline in inflation rates worldwide. It is 
not surprising that these parallel developments have been given a causal interpretation along the lines 
that increased real globalisation has been driving down inflation rates. And, indeed, over the past six 
years, the price of manufacturing imports in the euro area has been rather stable, thus dampening, 
other things being equal, the increase in the overall consumer price index. The same developments 
could be observed in other mature economies as well.  
This prima facie evidence seems to support the view that globalisation has been a main factor in low 
inflation  rates.  However,  I  am  quite  sceptical  about  whether  the  story  of  globalisation  adequately 
captures the aspects that are most important for explaining the decline in inflation rates, at least for the 
euro area.  
First, the increase in trade volumes relative to GDP is a process that was already under way in the 
1970s  and  1980s.  However,  inflation  rates  during  this  period  were  substantially  higher  than  today. 
Second, the effects of increased trade with labour-abundant economies will affect only relative prices. 
It is a well-known fact that, for the aggregate price level and its rate of change, relative price effects 
have no ultimate influence.  
It is monetary policy that, over the medium to long term, pins down trend inflation. Globalisation might 
have  contributed  to  the  observable  decline  in  cross-country  trend  inflation  as  positive  price  shocks 
have created an environment in which some central banks could use “the opportunistic approach to 
disinflation”. But this does not seem a convincing explanation for the bulk of industrial countries.  
Third, even the immediate relative price effects of trade with emerging economies are not as benign 
for inflation in industrial countries as is commonly assumed. The rapid industrialisation of economies 
like China and India has led to sharply rising energy demand from these countries. This demand has 
contributed markedly to the increases in oil and commodity prices over the past couple of years. It is 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
difficult  to  estimate  the  net  effect  of  these  developments  on  the  overall  price  level  in  industrial 
countries. But, in my view, there are no reasons to assume that the overall outcome has been one of a 
more benign inflation outlook.  
Taken all together, there are reasons for exercising caution with regard to the popular globalisation 
story of inflation. In other words, in my view, the real effects of globalisation on the inflation process 
are an issue that should be of some interest for monetary policymakers. But, at the end of the day, the 
importance commonly attached to globalisation forces is less clear than popular views often assume.  
The decline in trend inflation worldwide is better explained by monetary policy in many countries being 
geared towards price stability, which is enhanced by the increasing independence of central banks in 
achieving their goals. Globalisation will have played a supportive role, but, in the final analysis, it is 
monetary policy that is responsible for medium to long-term inflation outcomes.  
Financial globalisation and the transmission of monetary policy  
Another aspect of globalisation with potential crucial implications has to do with the impressive growth 
in cross-border financial flows. As domestic asset prices are increasingly determined by global factors, 
the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  measures  might  change  as  well.  This  is  especially 
relevant  to  long-term  interest  rates  as  they  constitute  one  of  the  main  variables  through  which 
monetary policy influences economic outcomes and inflation.  
Does globalisation mean that monetary policy is losing its leverage over domestic long-term interest 
rates? And if so, does this mean monetary policy is becoming ineffective?  
I do not want to go too much into the details. Let me just make two points: First, even if it is true that 
long-term  interest  rates are  increasingly  determined  on  the global  capital  market,  this  by no  means 
renders monetary policy ineffective.  
One of the workhorses of international macroeconomic theory, the Mundell-Fleming model, dealt with 
precisely  this  issue  some  40  years  ago.  And  you  are  familiar  with  the  result  that,  as  long  as  you 
operate a flexible exchange rate, monetary policy becomes the more effective the higher the degree of 
capital  mobility  is.  The  exchange  rate  channel  then  more  than  compensates  for  the  decline  in  the 
ability to influence long-term rates.  
Second, one might debate whether influence over long-term rates is the most important way in which 
central banks achieve their goals. Issues such as the transparency, independence and credibility of 
monetary  policy  are,  in  my  view,  far  more  important  in  stabilising  inflation  expectations  and  thus 
safeguarding price stability.  
Globalisation and financial stability aspects  
3.3  
Apart from its likely influence on inflation and the conduct of monetary policy, financial globalisation is 
increasingly affecting financial stability aspects as well. The term “financial stability” broadly describes 
the financial system’s ability to perform its key functions efficiently, including in stress situations and 
periods of profound structural change. This embraces the efficient allocation of financial resources, the 
settlement of payments and securities transactions, and the spreading and pricing of risk.  
The importance which many central banks attach to the stability of the financial systems has increased 
substantially  over  the  past  few  years.  Regarding  financial  globalisation,  the  main  reason  for  this 
development is that the internationalisation of financial flows has increased the degree of integration of 
the national financial systems and has therefore also heightened the risks of contagion in the event of 
turbulence.  
Financial  stability  issues  are,  at  least  implicitly,  also  a  task  for  central  banks.  What  is  the  basic 
rationale  behind  this  conclusion?  The  central  banks’  primary  objective  of  safeguarding  monetary 
stability, and thereby facilitating sustainable growth and development, is based on the prerequisite of a 
stable  financial  system.  In  fact,  monetary  and  financial  system  stability  are  intertwined  phenomena: 
Monetary  stability  can  be  maintained  only  if  the  financial  system  is  sufficiently  stable  to  transmit 
monetary policy signals, for example. In turn, a stable financial system is unthinkable without monetary 
stability, which is a necessary, albeit not sufficient prerequisite for financial stability.  
With respect to current challenges or, rather risks to financial stability, let me finally and rather briefly 
mention two developments which are of continuing – or even increasing – global relevance.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
First aspect: global imbalances  
The issue of global imbalances has been a continuous part of nearly every analysis dealing with risks 
to the world economy over the past few years. The term ‘imbalances’ refers to today’s uneven pattern 
in trade and, closely related to this, capital flows among major countries or regions. In this connection, 
it is the US current account that has attracted most attention among economists and policymakers as 
well.  
Basically,  today’s  situation  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  the  US,  in  particular,  is  recording  large 
trade  deficits,  thus  requiring  substantial  net  capital  inflows,  with  other  countries  –  especially  in 
emerging  Asia,  but  also  oil  exporting  countries  –  providing  this  capital  through  sizeable  trade 
surpluses.  Today’s  uneven  pattern  in  global  trade  and  capital  flows  is  being  accompanied  by  a 
massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves – mostly in these Asian or oil-exporting surplus 
regions.  This  reveals  that  the  unprecedented  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  following 
large  current  account  surpluses  in  many  emerging  market  countries,  is  as  much  a  part  of  global 
imbalances as is the US current account deficit.  
Global  imbalances  are  an  ongoing  matter  of  concern  since  they  still  harbour  the  latent  risk  of  a 
disorderly  unwinding,  with  substantial  negative  consequences 
for  global  economic  growth, 
employment  and  stability.  Thus,  successfully  rebalancing  the  global  economy  remains  a  pressing 
issue of global relevance. Undoubtedly, this goal can only be achieved through the combined policy 
actions of all parties involved.  
Second aspect: search for yield in riskier assets  
The search for yield in riskier assets was one of the main topics during the time of record-low interest 
rates in major economic regions. Key central bank interest rates as well as long-term market interest 
rates have moved upwards in the meantime, while remaining rather moderate by historical standards. 
Therefore,  the  search  for  yield  in  riskier  assets  still  seems  to  define  the  actions  of  many  market 
participants.  
Despite the marked corrections in various financial markets quite recently, there are ongoing signs of 
relatively  low  risk  premia  and  still  increasing  use  of  leveraged  instruments,  such  as  in  the  credit 
markets. Both developments reflect a rather pronounced feeling of complacency among many market 
participants.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether  risks  are  appropriately  reflected  in  the  prices  of 
various financial assets.  
Why  does  search  for  yield  entail  risks?  The  search  for  yield  in  riskier  assets  might  be  a  profitable 
investment  if  economic  conditions  remain  as  favourable  as  they  are  at  present.  However,  an 
unexpected deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, for instance, could trigger a turnaround 
in  sentiment  with  widespread  repercussions.  It  is  therefore  key  that  risks  are  adequately  taken  into 
account and priced appropriately. The ongoing search for yield in riskier assets warrants further close 
monitoring by central banks.  
Concluding remarks  
4  
Globalisation, defined as the process of the international division of labour, is a quite natural process 
in an economic environment that is evolving continuously. Basically, it is beneficial for all the countries 
participating in this process. However, the degree to which a country can benefit from the opportunities 
of  open  markets  is  determined  mainly  by  domestically  influenced  factors.  India  has  shown  how  to 
integrate  successfully  in  the  global  exchange  of  goods  and  services  and  has  become  an  emerging 
market economy of major importance.  
Moreover, (financial) globalisation poses various challenges to both the domestic and global economic 
and  monetary  policy  environment.  The  analysis  of  these  challenges,  their  origin  and  possible 
implications,  remains  on  the  top  of  many  central  banks’  agenda.  Coping  successfully  with  these 
challenges continues to be vital to fostering sustainable growth and development in many parts of the 
world and is hence a matter of global interest.  
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
