Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Fostering linkages in Islamic finance 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Global 
Islamic Finance Forum 2007: "Fostering Linkages in Islamic Finance", Kuala Lumpur, 27 March 2007. 
 Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim 
Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri Abdullah Badawi, 
Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia 
Your Excellencies, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my very great pleasure and honour to welcome you to this Global Islamic Finance Forum (GIFF) 
2007,  hosted  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  conjunction  with  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board 
(IFSB) Annual Meetings and Seminars. Allow me to first express my gratitude to the Honourable Prime 
Minister  of  Malaysia,  Yang  Amat  Berhormat  Dato'  Seri  Abdullah  Ahmad  Badawi,  for  graciously 
accepting  to be  with us  this  afternoon  to  deliver  the keynote address  and  to  officiate  this  important 
forum.  
The significant gathering at this forum, with the theme fostering Greater Linkages in Islamic Finance', 
is  a  manifestation  of  the  increasing  interest  towards  evolving  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic 
finance. Indeed, building stronger alliances and greater intermediation inter-linkages forms part of the 
endeavor to facilitate greater international trade and investment flows.  
The  Islamic  financial  system,  comprising  the  financial  institutions,  the  markets  and  the  financial 
infrastructure, has demonstrated its viability and robustness as a form of financial intermediation. Its 
growing role in mobilising and channeling the funds to productive investment activities across borders 
brings two significant benefits to the global economy. Firstly, it enhances the potential for higher global 
growth, while also contributing towards some rebalancing of the global growth. 
Secondly,  the  strengthened  international  financial  linkages  allows  for  greater  potential  for  the 
diversification of risks. The increase in the Islamic financial products, the growing number of assets 
classes being offered, the increased cross ownership of assets all have expanded the possibilities for 
greater diversification of risks and the potential for return.  
Today,  Islamic  finance  represents  a  multi-billion  dollar  industry  which  has  a  presence  in  many 
countries and more recently, there has been widening participation by established financial centres. 
There are now more than 200 Islamic financial institutions, some of which are global players, offering 
an extensive range of Shariah compliant products and services to a broad spectrum of consumers and 
businesses that transcends beyond the Muslim world.  
This  global  forum  has  aimed  to  bring  together  the  industry  practitioners,  issuers  and  investors,  the 
regulators, scholars as well as those in related services, including the IT services, legal, accounting 
and  auditing  professionals  and  those  in  human  resource  development.  It  is  our  hope  that  the 
deliberations  today  will  play  a  catalytic  role  in  building  greater  collective  efforts  through  multi-
stakeholder  dialogues  and  network-building  activities  whilst  discovering  opportunities  and  also 
improving our understanding on important areas in Islamic finance.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As we know today, there are already clusters of cross-border collaborative activities taking place on 
several  fronts  that  serve  to  contribute  towards  increasing  the  international  integration  process  of 
Islamic finance. These activities have taken many forms ranging from equity and non-equity business 
collaboration, regulatory cooperation in setting the global development blueprint, information exchange 
and  building  consensus  on  issues  for  international  prudential  standards  development,  to  inter-
governmental  memorandums  of  understanding  for  collaborative  developmental  initiatives  in  Islamic 
finance, and many others. 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  Islamic  finance  continues  to  make  significant  inroads  in  the  international  financial  markets  with 
expanding  scale,  growing  magnitude  and  greater  sophistication,  a  critical  need  emerges  for  an 
expanded discourse on the developments and emerging issues with its global relevance and impact, 
of interest to all its major stakeholders. This is the first time that Bank Negara Malaysia has organized 
a  full-scale,  multi-disciplinary,  international  event  of  this  nature  on  Islamic  finance.  These  sessions 
include  the  annual  Investors  &  Issuers  Forum,  and  Financial  Regulators  Forum  and  the  biannual 
Banking and Financial Law School. It is our hope that participants will benefit from any of the parallel 
sessions of their interests and have increased opportunities for network building among the widening 
groups  of  stakeholders  participation  in  the  Forum.  These  forums  have  been  designed  to  provide 
dynamic  and  interactive  formats  to  encouraging  open  and  inclusive  dialogues  that  foster  a  greater 
collective understanding in Islamic finance. 
Let  me  record  our  appreciation  to  the  many  distinguished  speakers  from  various  international 
institutions,  financial  practitioners,  legal  fraternity,  regulatory  bodies  and  other  prominent  thought 
leaders in Islamic finance. It is our sincere hope that this global forum will be rewarding and may the 
collective  wisdom  derived  from  the  deliberations  lead  to  more  collective  actions  that  will  be  to  our 
increased mutual benefits.  
Let me once again express our appreciation to Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri Abdullah Badawi for 
his presence here this afternoon and for accepting to deliver the keynote address at our Forum today.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2007
