Savenaca Narube: Unveiling the newly designed Fiji banknotes 
Welcome address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the unveiling of 
the new design currency notes featuring the new $100 banknote, Suva, 9 March 2007. 
 His Excellency, the President, Ratu Josefa Iloilovatu Uluivuda: 
Prime Minister: 
Ministers: 
Distinguished Guests: 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
On behalf of the Board, Management and staff of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, I welcome you all to today’s 
function. I express our gratitude to His Excellency the President for agreeing to be our Chief Guest this 
afternoon. I thank all our guests for accepting our invitation to the unveiling of our new currency notes. 
We  are  indeed  honoured  that  you  could  be  here  today  as  we  celebrate  another  milestone  in  the 
history of the country and the Reserve Bank of Fiji. 
It has been a little over ten years since we launched the 50 dollar note. We thought that that was a 
significant  step  forward  for  our  currency.  After  a  slow  start,  the  use  of  the  50  dollar  note  has  risen 
dramatically driven by the use of Automated Teller Machines. The note is now widely accepted and 
has become an integral part of our everyday transactions. 
Today, we are again raising the bar and introducing a 100 dollar note. Raising the denomination of the 
highest  currency  reflects  a  combination  of  basically  three  things  –  the  growth  in  the  economy,  the 
change in spending habits and the advance in technology. 
As  the  sole  issuer  of  currency  in  Fiji,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  must  anticipate  and  respond  to  the 
evolving  currency  needs  of  the  public  and  businesses.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  periodically 
upgrade  the  security  features  of  our  currency  notes  to  take  advantage  of  new  innovation  and 
technology. We have, as we did in the last review, decided to again change the designs of our notes. 
Today,  in  addition  to  introducing  the  100  dollar  note,  we  are  unveiling  the  new  designs  for  the  2 
dollars, 5 dollars, 10 dollars, 20 dollars and the 50 dollars. 
Changing a nation’s currency is a complex process. Let me therefore explain briefly the road to today’s 
function. 
It has been a long journey that started in April 2002 when the Board of the Bank approved the start of 
the work for the new currency designs for circulation in 2007. Two Committees were formed to work 
on  this  project.  The  first  committee  looked  at  the  design  of  the  Notes.  This  Currency  Design 
Committee  was  chaired  by  our  Board  Director,  Mr.  Kanti  Tappoo  OBE  and  members  of  that 
Committee were Dr. Dick Watling, Mr Ikbal Jannif OF, Mr. Radike Qereqeretabua OF and Ms. Saqale 
Buadromo.  
Another  committee  was  formed  to  examine  the  technical  elements  of  the  notes  which  include  the 
choice  between  paper  and  polymer,  the  security  features,  the  sizes  and  the  colour.  This  Technical 
Committee  was  chaired  by  Deputy  Governor,  Mr.  Sada  Reddy  and  the  members  were  the  Bank’s 
Executive Management. 
The Bank also conducted a nationwide survey to gauge the views of the general public. 
We kept Cabinet informed and obtained the necessary approvals as we went along. 
In 2005, we went out to tender. Four out of nine reputable banknote printers in the world responded to 
the Bank’s “Expression of Interest” and were invited to tender for the production of the notes. After a 
comprehensive  evaluation,  the  tender  was  awarded  to  De  La  Rue  Currency  &  Security  Print,  a 
company in the United Kingdom. This company has been printing Fiji’s banknotes since 1914. We are 
pleased that three representatives of the company are able to be here with us today. I extend a warm 
welcome to Mr. Tim Jones, Ms. Maria Atkinson, and Ms. Brooke Banks to Fiji and to this ceremony. 
The new bank notes have arrived and are safely stored in our vault. 
I take this opportunity to thank everyone who has contributed to this project. A special appreciation 
goes to the members of the two committees. 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 1
Let me mention a few specific features of our new notes. We decided to stay with paper rather than 
change to polymer or plastic. This decision was based on our public survey and improvements made 
over  the  years  by  the  printers  to  make  paper  money  last  longer.  For  durability,  we  have  coated  all 
denominations except the new 100 dollar with a substance called “platinum” which will virtually double 
the life of these notes. 
Let me say a few words on the security features. Almost all of the security features which are in our 
current banknotes like the watermark will remain. But at the same time, we have taken the steps to 
improve them. In addition, we have also introduced the state of the art security technology. On the 100 
dollar bill, we have included what is called “OPTIKS” which is De La Rue’s top security feature. Fiji 
would be perhaps the first or the second country in the world to use this new security feature. On the 
50  and  20  dollar  notes,  we  have  retained  the  “multi  image  hologram”  or  the  round  silver  foil,  but 
instead of having both of them of the same shape we have different shapes – the 50 dollars have the 
shape of a turtle and the 20 dollars the shape of a fan. 
On  counterfeits,  I  wish  to  clarify  that  in  relation  to  the  total  value  of  currency  in  circulation,  the 
combined  value  of  counterfeits  is  extremely  negligible  at  .0009  percent.  We  obviously  cannot 
completely eradicate counterfeits. However, we are well aware of the importance of safeguarding at all 
times public confidence in our currency. The Bank will therefore continue to work with the Fiji Police 
Force to renew media awareness on the security features of our currency notes. 
For the first time, Fiji’s banknotes will vary in length to help the visually impaired. The 100 dollar note 
will be the length of our existing banknotes. The length of the lower denomination will progressively 
reduce by 5 millimetres. This means that the two dollars will be the shortest note being 25 millimetres 
less than the 100 dollar note. The notes will all have the same width as the current notes.  
I am confident that we will be proud of our new banknotes. 
In the next two weeks, we will be starting a public awareness campaign to inform the public of the new 
notes. The new banknotes will go into circulation from 10 April. The new and the “existing” notes will 
circulate side by side until the existing notes go out of circulation. Both designs are of course legal 
tender. 
With  the  introduction  of  the  100  dollar  banknote,  we  have  the  same  highest  denomination  with 
developed countries like the United States, Australia and New Zealand. The United States has stated 
that it is not raising its highest banknote above 100 dollars. I believe that it would be a very, very long 
time before Fiji will think again about raising its highest bank note.  
Once again, I express our sincere thanks to His Excellency, the President for agreeing to be our Chief 
Guest. We are indeed honoured that you have graced the occasion with your presence today. 
I now have the pleasure of inviting His Excellency to address us. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2007
