Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with FOCUS 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  on 
20 February  2007  by  Ms  Alexandra  Kusitzky,  Mr  Bernd  Johann  and  Mr  Thomas  Zorn,  published  in 
FOCUS on 26 February 2007. 
 Central  bank  presidents  must  take  enormous  care  over  what  they  say.  Your  US  counterpart 
Ben Bernanke caused turmoil in the financial markets when he made remarks to a journalist at 
a party regarding Federal Reserve strategy. How do you guard against inadvertently divulging 
information? 
We  central  bankers  know  that  we  are  watched  very  closely  indeed  and  that  any  sign  can  be  over-
interpreted. But I do not think that we are very different in that respect from other people with important 
responsibilities in the public eye. 
But you could at least tell us what you expect the key ECB interest rate to be at the end of the 
year? 
I invite you to participate in my next press conference on Thursday, 8 March. 
As  ECB  President,  if  you  so  much  as  smile  for  slightly  too  long,  that  can  give  rise  to 
speculation. With such intense scrutiny, is it at all possible to have a private life? 
My private life is unfortunately subject to tough constraints. Nevertheless, I try to make time for myself, 
even  if  I  don't  succeed  all  that  often.  European  and  international  meetings  are  often  held  during 
weekends, of all times. But when I have a free Saturday or Sunday, I really enjoy it, believe me. 
What do you get up to? 
I love art, as well as literature and opera. We are privileged in Europe, and there are some wonderful 
exhibitions here in Frankfurt. 
But you must surely miss the spectacular cultural opportunities that you had when you lived in 
Paris? 
Paris is of course wonderful, but I have to say that the Rhine-Main area really was a very pleasant 
discovery. Within 30-45 minutes of my house you have the opera houses and theatres of Frankfurt, 
Wiesbaden, Mainz and Darmstadt. Where else can you find so many in such a small area? 
If you already live in Germany, do you also read German literature? 
Yes, indeed. Heine, for example. You know, a good poem is like a gold coin that goes into circulation 
and doesn't lose its value. It's something that lasts forever. I also read Rilke, but I only read him in 
French. 
Your German's coming along well. 
I'm learning German. That's also important to me for my work. Germany has the largest population 
and the largest economy of all the EU Member States. If you understand the language, you gain a 
profound understanding of how the people think. Because of their language, the Germans are more 
direct than the French or the English. For instance, simply saying "no" in French or English is always 
somewhat more complicated! 
But the most recent French criticism of the ECB's stability policy has been distinctly direct. In 
the presidential election campaign, both the conservative candidate Nicolas Sarkozy and the 
socialist  Ségolène  Royal  argued  that  the  ECB  should,  for  example,  do  more  to  support 
economic growth. 
I  will  only  remind  you  that,  by  the  will  of  the  French  democracy,  the  Banque  de  France  was  made 
independent  from  French  politics  before  the  establishment  of  the  ECB,  with  a  primary  mandate  for 
price  stability.  To  allow  the  central  bank  to  become  independent,  both  chambers  of  the  French 
parliament changed the constitution of General de Gaulle with a three-fifths majority. 
It rather looks like people in your home country have forgotten that. 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
Certainly not the people, who, according to surveys, are firm supporters of our independence. In any 
case,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  calls  for  the  full  independence  of  the  central  bank.  Under  the  Treaty, 
governments are not even allowed to try to influence the ECB.  
Nevertheless,  would  it  not  be  better  for  the  ECB  to  be  a  little  more  flexible  and  –  like  the 
Federal Reserve – react more strongly to the needs of the economy as a whole? 
Our mandate is unambiguous. Our primary objective is price stability. And price stability is a necessary 
condition  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  The  central  banks  of  nearly  all 
industrialised and emerging countries have policies based around the combating of inflation, and that 
is precisely what our fellow citizens want. The Americans present things in a different way, but they too 
consider that price stability is a necessary condition for sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
Most  Finance  Ministers  of  the  euro  area  countries  and  the  European  Commissioner  for 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Joaquín Almunia want regular discussions with the ECB. Does 
that bother you? 
The  Treaty  already  arranges  for  precisely  that.  I  myself  invite  Jean-Claude  Juncker  and  Joaquín 
Almunia twice a month to attend the meetings of the Governing Council at the ECB, and I am invited to 
attend the meetings of the Eurogroup. As I have always said, we have to apply the whole Treaty and 
nothing but the Treaty. 
Is there really no political pressure? 
Everyone in Europe and the rest of the world knows that the ECB is independent, even on the major 
financial markets of New York, Tokyo, Singapore and Hong Kong. There is no doubt about that. The 
ECB's credibility, which stands at a very high level, relies on its independence. It is that independence 
which allows us to solidly anchor inflation expectations. Our credibility is reinforced by the strong team 
spirit  within  the  Eurosystem  –  including  our  excellent  relationship  with  the  Bundesbank  and  its 
President Axel Weber – and within the ECB's Executive Board, which features of course my colleague 
Jürgen Stark.  
But in the view of many consumers, the introduction of the euro actually pushed up inflation.  
At the level of the euro area, we have had inflation under control since the introduction of the euro. I 
know that the people are calling on us very strongly to deliver price stability. They can count on us 
doing  that,  in  cooperation  with  the  Bundesbank  and  all  the  other  national  central  banks  in  the 
Eurosystem.  
With  the  economic  upswing,  the  demands  of  the  trade  unions  increase  too.  In  Germany,  for 
instance, IG Metall is demanding a 6.5% increase in wages. 
Wage moderation is and will remain important not just in Germany, but all over Europe. I say on behalf 
of the Governing Council that moderate increases in labour costs have been a key factor in increasing 
employment and reducing unemployment over the last few years.  
You  have  helped  to  shape  the  euro.  Many  Europeans,  however,  seem  dissatisfied  and, 
according to opinion polls, want their old currencies back. Is the euro really a success story? 
A very reliable survey conducted by Gallup for the European Commission last November reported that 
48% of Europeans found the euro to be an advantage, compared with less than 38% finding it to be a 
disadvantage.  Positive  developments  have  been  seen  in  employment  since  the  introduction  of  the 
euro, with 12 million new jobs created in the euro area during those eight years. In the eight years 
before the introduction of the euro less than three million jobs were created.  
Since 2003 your place of work has been Frankfurt. Do you miss Paris a lot? 
It was quite a change. Paris is actually irreplaceable.  
Does it often draw you back? 
Not that often. I now live in Frankfurt and feel good. 
How many days a week do you spend there? 
It's difficult to say. To express it like a central banker: perhaps 3.25 out of 6.5 working days! The rest 
of the time I spend working elsewhere, in Europe and further afield.  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2007
In 2011 the ECB will leave Frankfurt's city centre for a former industrial area on the edge of the 
city. Do you regret the fact that you will have to leave the city centre? 
On 
the  renowned  Viennese  architects  COOP 
HIMMELB(L)AU, with its two intertwined towers and incorporating the listed Grossmarkthalle building, 
will greatly enrich the city's skyline while creating a European icon. 
the  design  of 
the  contrary, 
I  believe 
that 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 3
