Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines’ e-Rediscounting 
System 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Launching Program for the BSP e-Rediscounting System (ERS), La Union, 
14 June 2007. 
 Members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  distinguished  officers  of  the  various  associations  of  rural  banks, 
other bankers, staff of the participating banks coming from La Union and other parts of Regions I, II, III 
and the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR), colleagues at the BSP, distinguished guests, friends 
from media, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
It is indeed a great pleasure for all of us from the BSP to be here in La Union today. The members of 
the Monetary Board are here to witness the launch of the e-Rediscounting System and allow me to 
acknowledge them (again): MBM Vicente Valdepeñas, Jr., MBM Raul Boncan, MBM Juanita Amatong 
(who  was  introduced  earlier),  MBM  Nelly  Villafuerte  and  MBM  Alfredo  Antonio,  Alternate  Member 
Marge Songco. Aside from this launching of the e-Rediscounting System, the Monetary Board will also 
be holding its regular meeting here this afternoon. We likewise have our senior management with us: 
DG Diwa Guinigundo (who was introduced earlier), DG Armando Suratos, DG Nestor Espenilla, Jr. 
and Gen. Counsel/Asst. Gov. Juan de Zuniga, Jr. Our presence here shows the importance that we 
attach  to  understanding  and  getting  better  appreciation  of  local  conditions  so  that  we  can  respond 
more appropriately and effectively to the needs and requirements of the community. So let’s all take 
advantage of this opportunity, we’d appreciate any suggestion or feedback that you might wish to give 
us, perhaps over lunch.  
Since the unveiling of the BSP’s e-Rediscounting System in Manila in December 2006, then in Cebu 
City in March 2007, the banking industry and the business community have responded positively to 
this online, internet-based system. Indicative of their strong interest to participate, a total of 112 banks 
consisting  of  21  commercial  banks,  9  thrift  banks  and  82  rural  banks  have  already  qualified  and 
participated in the e-Rediscounting System in just about five (5) months since the initial unveiling in 
Manila. We expect to expand the number of participating banking institutions by 7 more banks today 
here in La Union and by an additional 11 banks in Davao when we launch this system next month. 
These should  bring  the  overall  number of  participating  entities  to 130  banks.  In  terms  of  volume  of 
e-rediscounting loans (as of 31 May 2007), we are pleased to report that loans released by the BSP 
Head Office in Manila already amounted to P10.6 billion. In addition, the BSP Regional Offices had 
released some P700.5 million e-rediscounting loans during the period. 
Today’s  launch  of  the  BSP’s  e-Rediscounting  System  here  at  the  La  Union  Convention  Center  is 
expected to break new ground in BSP lending. The introduction of a real-time loan refinancing facility 
to help banks in La Union and in the neighboring areas of Regions I, II, III and the CAR is expected to 
scale  up  their  lending  capability  and  help  pump-prime  the  local  economy.  In  the  process,  this 
innovation in refinancing technology is expected to significantly improve the credit access for exporters 
and small, medium, and micro-enterprises in this part of the country. 
These  liberalized  rediscounting  guidelines,  together  with  the  requirement  under  the  Electronic 
Commerce Act of 2000 for government offices to integrate electronic data documents and processes 
in  their  transactions,  provided  the  basis  for  the  development  of  the  e-Rediscounting  System.  The 
preparatory work for the paperless rediscounting scheme began in March 2006, with the issuance of 
BSP Circular No. 515. Aligned with the objective of maintaining price stability, new policy guidelines 
were  established  under  the  circular  towards  a  more  consistent,  transparent,  and  efficient  BSP 
rediscounting facility. 
 The  main  objective  of  the  e-Rediscounting  System  is  the  simplification,  standardization,  and 
automation  of  loan  processes  and  payment  procedures.  The  front-end  system  of  e-Rediscounting 
allows qualified banks to conduct their rediscounting transactions with the BSP through the Internet. 
The  back-end  system  automates  the  processing  of  loan  applications,  crediting  of  loan  proceeds, 
debiting of the demand deposit accounts of banks with BSP for loan payments and generating account 
entries– all in less than 10 minutes. This paperless rediscounting facility allows banks to file or send 
loan applications and payments with the BSP on a real-time basis, and is a landmark improvement 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 1
from  the  manual  system  which  takes  at  least  three  days  to  process  before  the  loan  proceeds  are 
released to borrower-banks. 
At this point, let me take this opportunity to thank the officers of the pilot and participating banks. They 
have made their resources available in the conduct of the test runs of the system and have provided 
us  important  information  in  the  process.  Equally  essential  in  the  smooth  operations  of  the 
e-Rediscounting System is the participation of the officials and staff from the BSP, particularly from the 
Department of Loans and Credit and the Information Technology Sub-sector. Ultimately, our shared 
vision  is  to  deliver  fast,  adequate,  and  affordable  credit  to  the  public,  particularly  to  our  small-  and 
medium-sized borrowers from the countryside. I am confident that this vision is now more attainable 
with the help of the business and banking sectors as collegial partners of the BSP. Working together 
towards  the  realization  of  this  vision,  we  become  more  mindful  of  our  common  goal,  which  is  to 
promote the sustained and robust growth of the economy. This we endeavor to attain by empowering 
each and every Filipino as enterprising and dynamic agents of overall economic growth. 
Thank you and good day. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2007
