Y V Reddy: Role of monetary policy in attaining growth with stability - the 
Indian experience 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bank of Greece, Athens, 
2 April 2007. 
 Governor Garganas and Friends,  
I am honoured by the kind and persuasive invitation of Governor Garganas to visit Greece and give an 
address at the central bank. The ties and understanding between Greece and India can be traced to at 
least  well  over  two  millennia.  There  are  references  to  Megasthenes  as  Greek  Ambassador  in  the 
Chandragupta  Maurya's  Court  of  Pataliputra  in  the  4th  century  B.C.  The  Monetary  Museum  of 
Reserve Bank of India displays coins, which indicate active trade between Mauryan Empire in India 
and Greece over two thousand years ago. For me personally, it is an exhilarating experience to be in 
the land with which Socrates, Plato and Aristotle are associated. In fact, enthusiastic grounding in their 
philosophy, in my youth, helped me not to only get through the civil services examination forty years 
ago but also prompted me to pursue, in my own way, knowledge and truth. I am grateful to this country 
for all the wisdom and inspiration, which still guide us.  
My  address  today  is  on  a  theme  traditionally  close  to  the  heart  of  any  central  banker  but  gaining 
increasing and broader relevance in the context of market integration and globalisation. I will make a 
brief presentation on the evidence of impressive and accelerating growth in India; reining in inflation 
and  containment  of  inflation  expectations;  and  assurance  of  financial  stability.  Recognising  that 
several factors contribute to this, I would like to highlight the role of monetary policy in this complex 
process. 
Evidence of impressive and accelerating growth 
1. 
The average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 (India’s fiscal 
year  is  from  1st  April  to  31st  March)  has  been  about  6.0  per  cent,  which  is  quite  a  significant 
improvement over the annual growth rate of 3.5 per cent over the previous three decades from 1950-
51 to 1979-80. In the more recent period, the Indian economy has entered what one might call a high-
growth phase, the growth rate averaging 8.6 per cent per annum in the last three years. In the last two 
years,  the  growth  rate  has  averaged  9.1  per  cent.  While  the  GDP  growth  has  accelerated,  the 
population growth rate has moderated. The combined effects of these have given impetus to a sharp 
acceleration in the per capita GDP growth. For example, during the 1970s, the per capita income in 
India grew by 0.6 per cent, which implicitly meant that a person might not see doubling of his income 
even once in his lifetime. Since the 1990s, the per capita income has been growing at an average rate 
of around 4.0 per cent, implying that a person’s income will double in nearly 18 years. A person with a 
life expectancy of, say, 72 years could thus see his income doubling at least three times in his adult 
life. If the current GDP growth rate of around 9 per cent is maintained, a person can hope to see the 
standard of living multiplying by almost five times in his lifetime.  
A  noteworthy  feature  of  Indian  growth  process  over  the  last  one  and  a  half  decades  has  been  its 
stability. This is evident from the substantially lower coefficient of variation of real GDP growth during 
the post-reform period as compared to that during the pre-reform period, that is, before the nineties. It 
is  also  important  to  note  that  India's  growth  is  driven  by  domestic  consumption,  contributing  on  an 
average  to  almost  two-thirds  of  the  overall  demand,  while  investment  and  export  demand  are  also 
accelerating.  As  consumption  is  less  volatile  component  of  demand,  this  has  also  contributed  to 
reducing the volatility of GDP. The economy, which withstood the spike in oil prices in recent years, is 
displaying  moderate  deficit  in  current  account  after  a  few  years  of  marginal  surplus.  Reflecting  the 
growing competitiveness of the economy, merchandise exports have been growing at an annual rate 
of  over  25.0  per  cent  per  annum  in  the  last  three  years,  while  net  invisibles  have  continued  to  be 
strong on account of workers' remittances and software exports. 
The strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent increase 
in domestic investment rate from 22.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 33.8 per cent in 2005-06 coupled 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 1
with an efficient use of capital. Domestic saving rate has also improved from 23.5 per cent to 32.4 per 
cent during the same period. This was made possible due to improvements in both public and private 
corporate saving.  
Reining in inflation and containment of inflation expectations 
2. 
The inflation rate accelerated steadily from an annual average of 1.7 per cent during the 1950s to 6.4 
per cent during the 1960s and further to 9.0 per cent in the 1970s before easing marginally to 8.0 per 
cent  in  the  1980s.  India  had  generally  not  experienced  runaway  inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
volatility in the inflation rate, as measured by the coefficient of variation, which was fairly high in the 
1950s  at  4.4,  moved  in  a  narrow  band  of  0.4–1.0  in  the  subsequent  decades,  thus  reducing  the 
inflation-risk premium. The pick up in inflation rate from 1970s onwards reflected the impact of a sharp 
rise  in  money  supply  growth  and  also  partly  supply  shocks  from  crude  oil  prices  and  crop  failures. 
Demand  pressures,  emanating  partly  from  the  widening  fiscal  imbalances,  also  contributed  to 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  1980s.  The  second  half  of  the  1990s  was  marked  by  a  significant 
turnaround in the inflation outcome reflecting the improved monetary-fiscal interface.  
The  inflation  rate  declined  from  an  average  of  11.0  cent  during  1990-95  to  5.3  per  cent  during  the 
second half of the 1990s. The inflation rates since the second half of the 1990s have been, by and 
large,  benign  despite  sustained  external  capital  inflows  and  continued  surge  in  fuel  prices,  mainly 
attributable  to  more  focused  macroeconomic  and  monetary  management  and  increasing  trade 
openness. During this period, the average inflation rate has been contained at about 5 per cent, which 
has been significantly lower than that of around 8 per cent in the previous three-and-a-half decades. 
During  2005-06,  the  average  headline  inflation  rate  remained  at  about  4.5  per  cent  and  inflation 
expectations remained well contained despite continued dominance of somewhat adverse supply-side 
factors.  
In  the  recent  period,  the  headline  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  Wholesale  Price  Index  (WPI), 
remained above 6.0 per cent level during January-March 2007, touching 6.46 per cent for the week 
ended March 10, 2007; however, the average inflation was 5.3 per cent during the period April 2006 to 
March 10, 2007. It is useful to recognise that, historically, the tolerance level to inflation has been low, 
relative to many developing countries, especially on account of democratic pressures.  
In this context, I quote from a recent book by Sadiq Ahmed of World Bank titled 'India's Long Term 
Growth Experience', which has analysed the growth experience of India in two phases: from 1950 to 
1980 (Phase I) and from 1980 till date (Phase II)1: 
 
“On the whole, the ability to contain India's inflation rate at substantially below the world rate 
and  the  rate  prevailing  in  non-oil-exporting  developing  countries  during  both  phases  is  a 
testimony  to  the  sound  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  particularly  encouraging  because 
India faced many external shocks and associated adverse effects of imported inflation during 
phase II when it opened up the economy as opposed to the closed economy environment of 
phase I.” 
Assurance of financial stability 
3. 
In  the  context  of  financial  stability,  the  increased  resilience  of  the  economy  to  the  external  and 
domestic shocks is worth mentioning. India faced a major balance of payments crisis in 1991 triggered 
by the Gulf-war, which was responded with macroeconomic and structural reforms, both domestic and 
external;  and  a  stabilisation  programme.  The  reforms  led  to  sustainable  growth  as  the  resilience  of 
Indian economy to withstand external shocks improved. This is reflected in the fact that we, in later 
years,  could  successfully  avoid  adverse  contagion  impact  of  shocks  from  the  East  Asian  crisis,  the 
Russian crisis during 1997-98, sanctions-like situation in post-Pokhran (nuclear testing) scenario, and 
border  conflict  during  May-June  1999.  The  Indian  economy  in  the  1990s  was  able  to  absorb  such 
shocks without any significant impact on the real economy and the financial sector.  
The Indian record on the financial stability is especially noteworthy as the decade of the 1990s has 
been otherwise turbulent for the financial sector in most of the EMEs. Also, the different segments of 
                                                      
1   Ahmed Sadiq (2007); “India’s Long term Growth Experience”, The World Bank, Sage Publications. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2007
domestic financial markets have generally remained stable. From the financial stability perspective, it 
is necessary to have a financial system in which orderly functioning of financial markets is ensured 
coupled with sound, competitive and efficient financial institutions nurtured by prudential policies and 
practices. We have observed that the Indian banks’ balance sheets have strengthened considerably, 
financial  markets  have  deepened  and  widened  and,  with  the  introduction  of  the  real  time  gross 
settlements (RTGS) system, the payment system has also become robust.  
Role of monetary policy  
4. 
It is reasonable to say that the performance of the Indian economy has been by and large robust and 
resilient,  which  is  attributable  to  economic  reforms  in  several  areas  thus  improving  efficiency  and 
competitiveness in the system as a whole. The conduct of monetary policy also has some significant 
role in this outcome, in view of its success in broadly fulfilling its objective – growth with stability, the 
latter  encompassing  macroeconomic,  price  and  financial  stability.  The  positive  contributions  of 
monetary  policy  were  made  possible  by  reviewing  and  continuously  refining  the  monetary  policy 
framework, in tune with changing economic environment and context. In this address, I would like to 
take you through various aspects of our experience in the conduct of monetary policy in an emerging 
market economy, which is gradually, but significantly, opening up. 
(a) Dynamics in objectives: growth and stability 
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 sets out in a way broadly the tone of Reserve 
Bank’s monetary policy objectives: "to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of reserves 
with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit 
system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage".  I  can  do  no  better  than  quote  one  of  my  distinguished 
predecessors  and  current  Chairman,  Economic  Advisory  Council 
the  Prime  Minister, 
Dr. C. Rangarajan on this subject:  
 
“In  a  broad  sense,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  can  be  no  different  from  the  overall 
objectives of economic policy. The broad objectives of monetary policy in India have been: (1) to 
maintain a reasonable degree of price stability and (2) to help accelerate the rate of economic 
growth. The emphasis as between the two objectives has changed from year to year, depending 
upon the conditions prevailing in that year and in the previous year.” 
to 
Thus,  although,  unlike  the  current  trend  in  many  countries,  there  is  no  explicit  mandate  for  price 
stability,  the  twin  objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India  have  evolved  as  those  of  maintaining  price 
stability  and  ensuring  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  latter 
captures  the  growth  objective  by  ensuring  provision  of  adequate  or  appropriate  liquidity  to  support 
investment and export demand. The relative emphasis placed on price stability and economic growth 
is modulated according to the circumstances prevailing at a particular point in time and is clearly spelt 
out,  from  time  to  time,  in  the  policy  statements  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Of  late,  considerations  of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  have  assumed  an  added  importance  in  view  of  increasing 
openness of the Indian economy.  
(b) Changes in the framework 
A monetary targeting framework was in place since mid-1980s and till 1997-98 with broad money (M3) 
as  an  intermediate  target.  The  aim  was  to  modulate  money  supply  growth,  consistent  with  two 
parameters,  viz.,  (a)  the  expected  growth  in  real  income,  and  (b)  a  projected  or  a  tolerable  rate  of 
inflation. On the basis of these two parameters, the targeted monetary expansion was set. In practice, 
the monetary targeting framework was used in a flexible manner with feedback from developments in 
the real sector.  
With the changing inter-relationship between money, output and prices in the wake of financial sector 
reforms  and  opening  up  of  the  economy,  a  review  was  warranted.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank 
formally switched over in 1998-99 to a multiple indicator approach under the guidance and framework 
evolved by my distinguished predecessor, Dr. Bimal Jalan. As per this approach, interest rates or rates 
of  return  in  different  markets  (money,  capital  and  government  securities  markets),  along  with  data 
such as on currency in circulation, credit extended by banks and financial institutions, fiscal position, 
trade  balance,  capital  flows,  inflation  rate,  exchange  rate,  refinancing  and  transactions  in  foreign 
exchange, which are available with high-frequency, are juxtaposed with the trends in output, with a 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 3
view to deriving policy perspectives. Keeping in view the intrinsic reporting lags and varying reliability 
of  inflation  indicators  coupled  with  the  infirmities  surrounding  the  relevant  indicators  like  potential 
output  and  unemployment,  our  efforts  have  focused  on  improving  the  information  set,  both 
quantitatively and qualitatively. 
(c) Fine-tuning the operating procedure  
As  regards  the  operating  procedure  of  monetary  policy  in  India,  reliance  on  direct  instruments  has 
been reduced and a policy preference for indirect instruments has become the cornerstone of current 
monetary policy operations. Liquidity management in the system is carried out through open market 
operations (OMO) in the form of outright purchases/sales of government securities and daily reverse 
repo  and  repo  operations  under  a  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF).  The  LAF  has  enabled  the 
Reserve Bank to modulate short-term liquidity under varied financial market conditions, including large 
capital  inflows.  In  addition,  it  has  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  set,  as  far  as  possible,  an  informal 
corridor for the short-term interest rates consistent with the policy stance. This has also facilitated a 
reduction  in  the  levels  of  statutory  pre-emptions  without  engendering  liquidity  pressures.  These 
operations  are  supplemented  by  providing  access  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  standing  export  credit 
refinance facility, in a limited manner, and liquidity support to the primary dealers.  
In  this  new  operating  environment,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  increasingly  relying  on  a  mix  of 
market-based instruments and changes in reserve requirements, when necessary, for the conduct of 
monetary policy. Changes in fixed reverse repo/repo rates set by the Reserve Bank from time to time 
for the conduct of its Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), under which the central bank conducts daily 
auctions for the banks, have emerged as the main instruments for interest rate signalling in the Indian 
economy.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  actively  encouraged  the  development  of  the  collateralised  segment  of 
money market to facilitate safe and smooth clearing of the short-term liquidity mismatches amongst 
market  participants.  Two  types  of  collateralised  markets  have  emerged  –  first,  a  repo  market  and 
second, a market for collateralised borrowing and lending obligations (CBLOs). The latter is a unique 
product  similar  to  a  tri-partite  repo.  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd.  (CCIL)  acts  as  a  central 
counterparty and facilitates collateralised lending and borrowing amongst market participants. 
The liquidity management was further refined in 2004  with the introduction of a market stabilisation 
scheme (MSS) under which the Reserve Bank was allowed to issue government securities as part of 
liquidity  sterilisation  operations  in  the  wake  of  large  capital  inflows  and  surplus  liquidity  conditions. 
While these issuances do not provide budgetary support, interest costs are borne by the fisc; as far as 
Government securities market is concerned, these securities are also traded in the secondary market, 
on par with the other government stock. 
In brief, currently in its monetary operations, the Reserve Bank uses multiple instruments to ensure 
that  appropriate  liquidity  is  maintained  in  the  system,  consistent  with  interest  rate  policy  and  the 
objective of price stability, so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met. Towards this end, the 
Bank pursues, inter alia, a policy of active management of liquidity through open market operations 
(OMO)  including  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF),  Market  Stabilization  Scheme  (MSS)  and  cash 
reserve ratio (CRR), and deploys the policy instruments at its disposal, flexibly, as warranted by the 
situation.  
(d) Gains in operational autonomy  
The  mid-1950s  witnessed  the  beginning  of  serious  erosion  of  autonomy  in  the  monetary  policy 
function  due  to  the  emergence  of  the  system  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  and  automatic  monetisation. 
Under this system, it was agreed that the Reserve Bank would replenish Government’s cash balances 
by  creation  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  issued  in  the  Bank’s  favour  whenever  such  balances  with  the 
Reserve Bank fell below the stipulated minimum. Thus, the ad hoc Treasury Bills, which were meant to 
meet temporary mismatches between receipts and payments of the Government, became cumulative 
and eventually emerged as a significant source of monetary financing of the Government expenditure.  
The  relationship  between  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  Government  took  a  significant  turn  in 
September  1994  when  a  supplemental  agreement  was  entered  into  with  the  Government  which 
limited, initially, the net issuance of ad hoc treasury Bills. This initiative culminated in the abolition of 
the  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  in  April  1997  and  the  system  was  replaced  by  a  provision  for  extending 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2007
limited ways and means advances. The phasing out of automatic monetisation of budget deficit has, 
thus, strengthened the monetary policy framework, imparting flexibility and operational autonomy. 
With  the enactment  of  the  Fiscal Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act  in  2003,  the  Reserve 
Bank  has  withdrawn  from  participating  in  the  primary  issues  of  Central  Government  securities  with 
effect from April 2006. There could be exceptions only on the grounds of national security or national 
calamity or such other exceptional circumstances.  
The  recent  legislative  amendments  enable  a  flexible  use  of  the  CRR  for  monetary  management, 
without being constrained by a statutory floor or ceiling on the level of the CRR. The amendments also 
enable the lowering of the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) to the levels below the previous statutory 
minimum of 25 per cent of net demand and time liabilities of banks – which would further improve the 
scope for flexible liquidity management.  
term 
the  medium 
(e) Strengthening the transmission channels 
In  a  market-oriented  economy,  policy  signals  are  transmitted  through  an  integrated  and  efficient 
money, government securities and foreign exchange markets combined with a robust payments and 
settlement  system.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  therefore,  been  engaged  in  developing,  widening  and 
deepening of various markets and institutions. The medium-term framework is to keep developing the 
financial markets, preserving the integrity of financial markets and thereby, improving the transmission 
of monetary policy impulses. In the area of money market, several measures were taken to refine the 
overnight and the notice money market, the term money, commercial paper and certificate of deposit 
markets, besides the repo market. A screen-based, negotiated, quote-driven system for dealings in the 
call/notice and term-money markets (NDS-CALL) has also been recently launched.  
Well  functioning  market  for  government  securities  is  necessary,  both  for  effective  public  debt 
management  and  monetary  management,  while  serving  the  broader  interest  of  development  of 
financial markets in general, and debt markets, in particular. Accordingly, a number of initiatives have 
been  taken  over  the  years  to  develop  both  the  primary  and  secondary  markets  for  Government 
securities.  The  need  for  further  development  assumed  greater  significance  in  the  context  of  the 
imperative  prohibition  of  Reserve  Bank  from  participating  in  the  primary  issuance  of  Central 
Government securities with  effect  from  April  2006  as  per  the provisions  of  the  Fiscal Responsibility 
and Budget Management Act. An Internal Technical Group on Central Government Securities Market 
(July 2005) was constituted to, inter alia, suggest measures for enhancing the depth and liquidity of 
the secondary market, in the new environment. The Group envisaged that steps were needed to be 
taken  over 
terms  of 
instruments/processes/participants. The recommendations are being acted upon in a phased manner. 
The  corporate  debt  market  in  India  is  relatively  under-developed  but  has  a  large  potential  to  raise 
resources  particularly  for  infrastructure  projects,  housing  sector  and  for  the  corporates  themselves. 
Development  of  various  market  segments  including  mortgage-backed  securities,  bond  insurance 
institutions  for  credit  enhancement  and  greater  access  to  real  time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  with 
state-of- the-art technology would provide a strong impetus for growth of corporate bond markets in 
India.  Pursuant  to  the  announcement  made  in  the  Union  Budget,  2005-06,  a  High  Level  Expert 
Committee  on  Corporate  Bonds  and  Securitisation  (Chairman:  Dr.  R.H.  Patil)  was  appointed  to 
examine  legal,  regulatory,  tax  and  market  design  issues  in  the  development  of  the  corporate  bond 
market.  The  recommendations  of  the  Committee  included  enhancing  the  issuer  as  well  as  investor 
base, simplification of listing and disclosure norms, rationalisation of stamp duty and withholding tax, 
consolidation of debt, improving trading systems through introduction of an electronic order matching 
system, efficient clearing and settlement systems, a comprehensive reporting mechanism, developing 
market conventions and self-regulation and development of the securitised debt market. Actions have 
been initiated to implement the recommendations of the Committee. 
The Indian foreign exchange market has been widened and deepened with the transition to a market-
determined exchange rate system in March 1993 and the subsequent liberalisation of restrictions on 
various  external  transactions  leading  up  to  current  account  convertibility  under  Article  VIII  of  the 
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund in 1994. As a part of the continuing efforts 
aimed at liberalising and developing the foreign exchange market in India, an Internal Technical Group 
on  Foreign  Exchange  Markets  was  appointed  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  review  of  measures 
initiated  by  the Reserve Bank  so  far and  identify areas  for  further  liberalization  of restrictions  along 
with  a  medium-term  framework.  The  Committee  on  Fuller  Capital  Account  Convertibility  (CFCAC) 
chaired by Mr. S.S. Tarapore has also made recommendations for development of financial markets 
the  Government  securities  market 
to  develop 
in 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 5
including  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Several  measures  have  been  taken  to  further  liberalise  the 
extant regulations and thereby improve the structure, integration and efficiency of the markets.  
(f) Payment and Settlement Systems 
The Reserve Bank has also initiated a number of steps – institutional, procedural and operational for 
making the payment systems safe, secure and efficient. A Board named the Board for Regulation and 
Supervision  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS)  has  been  set  up  as  a  Committee  of  the 
Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India, with the Governor as its Chairman and all the four Deputy 
Governors and two external Central Board Directors as its members. The BPSS lays down the policies 
and standards relating to the regulation and supervision of both the existing and the evolving payment 
and settlement systems.  
For  efficiency  enhancements  and risk  reduction,  usage  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement (RTGS) 
System and other electronic payment mechanisms are being encouraged in a big way. Almost 40 per 
cent of the 70,000 plus bank branches in the country are now RTGS enabled. Sometime back, the 
Reserve  Bank  examined  India’s  position  with  regard  to  compliance  with  the  Core  Principles  of 
Systemically Important Payment Systems. It was found that we were largely compliant with all Core 
Principles  except  the  first  one,  i.e.,  "well  founded  legal  basis". The  Reserve  Bank,  with  the 
concurrence of the Government of India, has drafted a Payment and Settlement Systems Bill and this 
Bill is  under  consideration  of  the  Parliament.  This  Bill,  when  enacted,  will  not  only  authorise  the 
Reserve Bank to lay down the policies relating to regulation and supervision of the payment systems, 
but also provide legal recognition to 'netting' and 'settlement finality'.  
Given the critical requirements of information technology and in its endeavour to sustain the progress 
and provide direction to the IT initiatives of the financial sector, the Reserve Bank has set out a Vision 
Document which provides a bird’s eye view of the plans for IT development in the medium term, with 
the required focus on corporate governance. 
(g) Strengthening institutional setting 
Monetary  policy  formulation  is  carried  out  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  a  consultative  manner.  The 
Monetary Policy Department of the Bank organises discussions between the top management of the 
Bank and the select commercial banks as also with the industry associations, bodies representating 
markets and the significant industry groups. It also holds monthly meetings with select major banks 
and financial institutions, which provide a consultative platform for issues concerning monetary, credit, 
regulatory and supervisory policies of the Bank. Decisions on day-to-day money market operations, 
including management of liquidity, are taken by a Financial Markets Committee (FMC), which includes 
senior  officials  of  the  Bank  responsible  for  monetary  policy  and  related  operations  in  money, 
government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  The  Deputy  Governor,  Executive  Director(s) 
and heads of four departments in charge of monetary policy and related market operations meet every 
morning as financial markets open for trading. They also meet more than once during a day, if such a 
need arises. 
Besides  FMC  meetings,  Monetary  Policy  Strategy  Meetings  take  place  once  every  month.  The 
strategy  meetings  take  a  near-term  view  of  the  monetary  policy  and  consider  key  projections  and 
parameters  that  can  affect  the  stance  of  the  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  a  Technical  Advisory 
Committee  on  Money,  Foreign  Exchange  and  Government  Securities  Markets  comprising 
academicians  and  financial  market  experts,  including  those  from  depositories  and  credit  rating 
agencies,  provides  support  to  the  consultative  process.  The  Committee  meets  once  a  quarter  and 
discusses proposals on instruments and institutional practices relating to financial markets.  
In pursuance of the objective of strengthening the consultative process in monetary policy, a Technical 
Advisory  Committee  (TAC)  on  Monetary  Policy  has  been  set  up  with  four  external  members  drawn 
from the areas of monetary economics, central banking, financial markets and public finance. The TAC 
meets ahead of the annual policy and reviews of annual policy. The TAC reviews macroeconomic and 
monetary developments and advises on the stance of monetary policy.  
(h) Emphasising communication 
Faced with multiple tasks and a complex mandate, clear communication on the part of the Reserve 
Bank of India assumes special significance in the area of monetary policy. We emphasise three kinds 
6 
 BIS Review 32/2007
of  communications,  viz.,  (a)  analysis  of  the  economy,  (b)  policy  measures,  and  (c)  reasons  behind 
such  policy  measures.  In  fact,  by  international  standards,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  a  fairly 
extensive  and  transparent  communication  system.  The  bi-annual  policy  statements  traditionally 
communicated the Reserve Bank’s stance of monetary in the immediate future of six months to one 
year. Since July 2005, a system of publishing quarterly reviews in addition to the bi-annual statements 
has  been  put  in  place.  Speeches  by  the  top  executives  of  the  Bank  also  form  an  important  part  of 
communication process of the Reserve Bank. We have taken a middle path of sharing our analysis, in 
addition to information, with the market participants, to enable them to develop their own perceptions. 
In doing so, we have the benefit of the process of two-way communication, of information as well as 
perceptions, between the market participants and the RBI. The two-way process is also enabled by 
several formal structured meetings with industry associations, through standing advisory committees, 
and informal / ad hoc committees and technical/working groups.  
(i) Aligning with international best practices 
The Reserve Bank has adopted a multi-pronged strategy based on international best practices with 
suitable  adaptations  to  promote  development  and  stability  of  institutions,  markets  and  the  financial 
infrastructure.  Benchmarking  our  financial  sector  to  international  standards  and  best  practices  has 
been  very  useful  to  us.  In  this  context,  our  effort  to  assess  the  status  and  implementation  of 
international standards and codes of various standard setting bodies including the IMF was one of the 
cornerstones  of  the  recent  initiatives  which  helped  us  to  understand  our  relative  position  vis-a-vis 
international standards. The approach to implementation of financial standards and codes was based 
on the efficiency-enhancing elements of the standards and codes, and on the need to consider them 
as part of the process of institutional development in the country, while not ignoring their relevance to 
domestic  as well  as  external  financial stability.  The  process enabled  an objective,  independent  and 
‘external’ assessment of the domestic economy. Such a participative and consultative approach with 
emphasis on gradualism was advocated to secure a convergence of viewpoints and, hence, to evolve 
a favorable environment for bringing about necessary changes with harmony.  
Government  of  India,  in  consultation  with  the  Reserve  Bank,  have  again  constituted  in  September 
2006  a  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  to  undertake  a  self  assessment  of  financial 
stability and to further update the status and implementation of various standards and codes. 
Concluding observations  
5. 
To conclude, we have a good story to tell the world on our performance relating to the role of monetary 
policy  in  attaining  growth  with  stability.  However,  there  are  still  challenges  in  maintaining  the 
momentum and more importantly make the growth meaningful to the millions of poor and unemployed. 
I can do no more than fully endorse, what Dr. C. Rangarajan, one of my predecessors and currently 
Chairman of the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister, recently highlighted. He referred to 
six most important challenges warranting priority attention. These are stepping up agricultural growth, 
infrastructure  development,  fiscal  consolidation,  building  social  infrastructure  particularly  primary 
education and basic health, managing globalisation and good governance. The conduct of monetary 
policy will continue to provide support to these areas by creating an appropriate atmosphere of macro-
economic stability, especially price and financial stability; which will, undoubtedly, facilitate accelerated 
growth. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 7
