X P Guma: Higher education in South Africa  
Graduation  address  by  Dr  X  P  Guma,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  and 
Chairperson of Council, at the Cranefield College of Project and Programme Management, Pretoria, 
23 March 2007. 
 Introduction 
Principal of Cranefield College, Prof P. Steyn; 
Distinguished colleagues, members of the Governing Council of Cranefield College; 
Graduands; 
Parents and relatives of the graduands; 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
1.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  our  14th  graduation  Ceremony:  the  first  for  2007.  This  is 
worthy of mention if only because 2007 will be the year during which the higher education sector will 
first admit those school-leavers who have spent their entire school careers in a free and democratic 
South Africa. 
Were we to use the American expression “Commencement” rather than graduation – with which many 
are  more  familiar  –  likely,  we  would  note,  immediately  that  the  composition  of  the  body  of  persons 
entering the higher education sector will be expected now better to reflect the demographics of our 
society – a path on which Cranefield College commenced from its inception: and which is evident in 
the evolving composition of its Council and its student’ enrolment. 
A perspective 
2.  
Before addressing the graduands, it may be appropriate for me to note a few pertinent issues. First, as 
Vice-Chancellor B. Pityana of UNISA has noted, 
…  In  any  society,  …prosperity  presupposes  a  well-equipped  and  trained 
source of human capital, capable of facilitating the required development, and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  that  sense,  higher  education  is  a  national 
resource.1
In South Africa, moreover, 
… there is now an urgent need for higher education institutions to respond in 
a more targeted fashion to national growth and development needs.2
We at Cranefield anticipated this requirement early on, constituting ourselves as a targeted “College of 
Project and Programme Management”. 
Second,  it  does  appear  to  be  a  justifiable  concern,  here  and  abroad  that  in  general,  we  may  be 
breeding a culture of mediocrity, where excellence and aspiration are no longer “cool” or fashionable: 
where too many of our young people love the high life but do not wish to work to attain it. 
What  is  more  worrying  still  is  the  fact  that  many  of  the  young  people  who  emerge  from  the  school 
system, seem to be the worse for it. As an exasperated Professor Jansen has stated: – 
… while some schools celebrate “a 100% pass in matric”, their graduates run 
around  Pretoria  East,  beating  up  homeless  and  anonymous  black  citizens. 
Young  people,  who  should  be  in  school,  run  rampant  through  our  society 
killing and maiming at random. … 
                                                      
1   B.  Pityana  (2007)  “Increasing  the  Business  Viability  &  Employment  Growth  in  the  Country  –  A  Higher  Education 
Perspective”; Keynote address, Skills Development Summit, Sandton, Johannesburg. 
ibid. 
2  
BIS Review 42/2007 
 1
Growing  numbers  of  school-age  children  begin  to  overpopulate  the  prison 
system….3
And yet it must be stressed, as Prof Jansen does, that it is not true that all young people suffer from 
these  pathologies.  We  would  point  to  the  enormous  drive  towards  aspiration  and  achievement  of 
today’s graduands, in counterpoise. 
Viewed from an historical perspective, it is interesting to recall the views of John Maynard Keynes – 
one of the towering economists of the twentieth century – regarding “the triple evils of modern society”. 
The first evil, in Keynes’ view – which has resonance in South Africa today – is the “vast enrichment of 
individuals out of proportion to any services rendered”. 
He saw the second and third evils as being “the disappointment of expectations and difficulty of laying 
plans  ahead”;  and  third  “unemployment”.  Re-stated  in  the  elegant  prose  of  Mervyn  King,  “Fat  cats, 
short-termism, and the jobless society”, this in the United Kingdom, in 1923!4
We  at  Cranefield  earn,  honestly,  that  which  is  attributed  to  us;  acknowledge  the  existence  of  and 
manage the short and the long-term; and attempt to make our modest contribution to the improvement 
of  the  conditions  of  our  modern  society  through  thorough  training.  Not  here  mediocrity:  rather,  the 
pursuit of excellence. 
To o the graduands 
3.  
For  today’s  graduands,  this  ceremony  is  the  culmination  of  systematic  application  to  structured 
learning. Each one of you, no doubt, has had high moments and has suffered, at least occasionally, 
despair: – moments of absolute clarity and commitment to what you are doing interspersed, perhaps, 
with moments of confusion. Each of you has a story of personal achievement to tell: and tell it you 
must. Your achievement is commendable. 
You  graduate  from  a  credible  institution  and  your  qualification  is  recognised  here  at  home  and 
internationally.  South  Africa  has  many  things  for  which  it  could  be  grateful:  today,  one  of  the  most 
important of these is your achievement. Use it wisely: even to confront the evils of modern society. As 
the Greek poet Constantine Cavafy wrote, in his poem Ithaka; which treats of the ancient evils of the 
Laistrygonians and Cyclops, angry Poseidon too: – 
… don’t be afraid of them: 
you’ll never find things like that on your way 
as long as you keep your thoughts raised high,  
as long as a rare excitement 
stirs your spirit and your body.5
Conclusion 
4.  
One clown is alleged one day to have said to another: “Considering the cost of tuition, clothing and 
books, a person today, more than ever, has to be careful, very careful in his/her selection of parents!”. 
Viewed from the perspective of parents, however, isn’t it true that you age by about 20 years per child 
– between his/her 18th and 22nd year? Or was I unlucky? 
To all, the mothers, fathers, children and other relatives of our graduands – however well you chose 
each other, and whatever have been your relative aging processes – we say, Congratulations indeed! 
Savour this moment. Cherish it, for yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery. Today is reality. 
                                                      
3   Jansen, J (2006) “Teaching the Wrong stuff in a Dangerous World”, Teaching Times. 
4 
5   C.P. Cavafy (1911) in Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard (1992) Collected Poems, Princeton University Press. 
 See Mervyn King (1998), Speech at the Employment Policy Institute’s Fourth Annual Lecture: 1 December. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2007
