V Leeladhar: Indian financial sector reforms 
Address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual Washington 
Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, DC, 5 March 2007. 
 Introduction 
At the outset, I am thankful to the Institute of International Bankers for giving me this opportunity of 
addressing the Annual Washington Conference 2007. 
The banking system in India has undergone significant changes during last 15 years. There have been 
new banks, new instruments, new windows, new opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. 
While  deregulation  has  opened  up  new  vistas  for  banks  to  augment  revenues,  it  has  also  entailed 
greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks.  The  traditional  face  of  banks  as  mere  financial 
intermediaries has since altered and risk management has emerged as the defining attribute. 
Financial sector reforms introduced in the early 1990s as a part of the structural reforms have touched 
upon almost all aspects of banking operations. For a few decades preceding the onset of banking and 
financial  sector  reforms  in  India,  banks  operated  in  an  environment  that  was  heavily  regulated  and 
characterised by sufficient barriers to entry, which protected them against too much competition. This 
regulated environment set in complacency in the manner in which banks operated and responded to 
the customer needs. The administered interest rate structure, both on the liability and the assets sides, 
allowed  banks  to  earn  reasonable  spread  without  much  efforts.  Despite  this,  however,  banks’ 
profitability was low and NPLs level was high, reflecting lack of efficiency. Although banks operated 
under  regulatory  constraints  in  the  form  of  statutory  holding  of  Government  securities  (statutory 
liquidity  ratio  or  SLR)  and  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  lacked  functional  autonomy  and 
operational efficiency, the fact was that most banks did not operate efficiently.  
While  the  broad  objectives  of  the  financial  sector  reforms,  thus,  were  to  enhance  efficiency  and 
productivity, the process of reforms were initiated in a gradual and properly sequenced manner so as 
to have a reinforcing effect. The approach has been to consistently upgrade the financial sector by 
adopting the international best practices through a consultative process. Financial sector reforms were 
carried out in two phases. The first phase of reforms was aimed at creating productive and profitable 
financial institutions operating within the environment of operational flexibility and functional autonomy. 
The focus of the second phase of financial sector reforms starting from the second-half of 1990s has 
been on strengthening of the financial system consistent with the movement towards global integration 
of financial services. 
Financial sector reforms in India 
The deregulation of interest rates constituted an integral part of financial sector reforms. The interest 
rate regime has been largely deregulated with a view to achieving better price discovery and efficient 
resource allocation. Banks now have flexibility to decide their deposit and lending rate structures and 
manage  their  assets  and  liabilities  accordingly.  At  present,  apart  from  interest  rates  on  savings 
deposits and NRI deposits on the deposit side, and export credit and small loans up to Rs. 2 lakh on 
the lending side, all other interest rates have been deregulated. 
Indian  banking  system  operated  for  a  long  time  with  high  reserve  requirements  both  in  the  form  of 
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). This was mainly to accommodate the 
high fiscal deficit and its monetisation. The efforts in the recent period have been to lower both the 
CRR and SLR. The SLR has been gradually reduced from a peak of 38.5 per cent to 25 per cent. The 
CRR was reduced from its peak level of 15.0 per cent maintained during 1989 to 1992 to 4.5 per cent 
of NDTL in June 2003. Although the Reserve Bank continues to pursue its medium-term objective of 
reducing the CRR, in recent years, on a review of macroeconomic and monetary conditions, the CRR 
has been revised upwards to 6.0 per cent (to be effective from March 3, 2007).  
It has been the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to establish an enabling regulatory framework with 
prompt  and  effective  supervision,  and  development  of 
institutional 
infrastructure.  Persistent  efforts,  therefore,  have  been  made  towards  adoption  of  international 
benchmarks,  as  appropriate  to  Indian  conditions.  In  1994,  a  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  (BFS) 
technological  and 
legal, 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 1
was constituted comprising select members of the Reserve Bank Board with a variety of professional 
expertise  to  exercise  'undivided  attention  to  supervision'  and  ensure  an  integrated  approach  to 
supervision of commercial banks and financial institutions. The Reserve Bank had instituted a state of-
the-art  Off-site  Monitoring  and  Surveillance  (OSMOS)  system  for  banks  in  1995  as  part  of  crisis 
management framework for Early Warning System (EWS) and as a trigger for on-site inspections of 
vulnerable  institutions.  The  scope  and  coverage  of  off-site  surveillance  has  since  been  widened  to 
capture various facets of efficiency and risk management of banks. 
As  a  part  of  the  financial  sector  reforms,  the  regulatory  norms  with  respect  to  capital  adequacy, 
income  recognition,  asset  classification  and  provisioning  have  progressively  moved  towards 
convergence with the international best practices. These measures have enhanced transparency of 
the balance sheet of the banks and infused accountability in their functioning. Besides sub-standard 
assets, provisioning has also been introduced for the standard assets. Measures to reduce the levels 
of NPAs concentrated on improved risk management practices and greater recovery efforts facilitated 
by  the  enactment  of  Securitisation  and  Reconstruction  of  Financial  Assets  and  Enforcement  of 
Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002. Several other channels of NPA management have also been 
instituted,  including  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals,  Lok  Adalats  (People’s  court)  and  corporate  debt 
restructuring mechanism with separate schemes for small and medium industries. 
The minimum capital to risk assets ratio (CRAR), which was earlier stipulated at eight per cent was 
revised to 9 per cent in 1999, which is one percentage point above the international norm. As some 
banks in the public sector were not able to comply with the CRAR stipulations, there was a need to 
recapitalise them to augment their capital base. Banks were allowed to raise capital from the market. 
In line with the amendment to incorporate market risk in Basel I, separate capital charge for market 
risk was also introduced in 2004.  
Accounting standards and disclosure norms were strengthened with a view to improving governance 
and  bringing  them  in  alignment  with  the  international  norms.  The  disclosure  requirements  broadly 
covered capital adequacy, asset quality, maturity distribution of select items of assets and liabilities, 
profitability, country risk exposure, risk exposures in derivatives, segment reporting, and related party 
disclosures.  In  April  2005,  commercial  banks  were  advised  to  put  in  place  business  continuity 
measures, including a robust information risk management system within a fixed time frame.  
In view of the increasing degree of deregulation and exposure of banks to various types of risks, the 
Reserve Bank initiated measures for further strengthening and fine-tuning risk management systems 
in banks. The guidelines on asset-liability management and risk management systems in banks were 
issued  in  1999  and  Guidance  Notes  on  Credit  Risk  Management  and  Market  Risk  Management  in 
October 2002 and the Guidance Note on Operational risk management in 2005. In the Reserve Bank, 
the risk-based approach to supervision has been adopted since 2003 and about 23 banks have been 
brought under the fold of risk-based supervision (RBS) on a pilot basis. On the basis of the feedback 
received from the pilot project, the RBS framework is being reviewed. 
As part of the reform programme, due consideration has been given to diversification of ownership of 
banking institutions for greater market accountability and improved efficiency. The public sector banks 
expanded their capital base by accessing the capital market, which diluted the Government ownership. 
To  provide  banks  with  additional  options  for  raising  capital  funds  with  a  view  to  enabling  smooth 
transition to the Basel II, the Reserve Bank in January 2006, allowed banks to augment their capital 
funds by issue of additional instruments. 
With a view to enhancing efficiency and productivity through competition, guidelines were laid down for 
establishment  of  new  banks  in  the  private  sector  and  the  foreign  banks  have  been  allowed  more 
liberal  entry.  Since  1993,  12  new  private  sector  banks  have  been  set  up.  As  a  major  step  towards 
enhancing competition in the banking sector, foreign direct investment in the private sector banks is 
now allowed up to 74 per cent, subject to conformity with the guidelines issued from time to time. The 
regulatory framework in India, in addition to prescribing prudential guidelines and encouraging market 
discipline,  is  increasingly  focusing  on  ensuring  good  governance  through  'fit  and  proper'  owners, 
directors  and  senior  managers  of  the  banks.  Transfer  of  shareholding  of  five  per  cent  and  above 
requires acknowledgement from the Reserve Bank and such significant shareholders are required to 
meet rigorous ‘fit and proper' requirements. Banks have also been asked to ensure that the nominated 
and  elected  directors  are  screened  by  a  nomination  committee  to  satisfy  ‘fit  and  proper'  criteria. 
Directors are also required to sign a covenant indicating their roles and responsibilities. The Reserve 
Bank  has  issued  detailed  guidelines  on  ownership  and  governance  in  private  sector  banks 
emphasising diversified ownership.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2007
The  Reserve  Bank  released  a  roadmap  for  foreign  banks  articulating  a  liberalised  policy  consistent 
with the WTO commitments in March 2005. The roadmap is divided into two phases. During the first 
phase, between March 2005 and March 2009, foreign banks wishing to establish presence in India for 
the first time could either choose to operate through branches or set up 100 per cent wholly owned 
subsidiaries (WOS), following the one-mode presence criterion. For new and existing foreign banks, it 
is proposed to go beyond the existing WTO commitment of 12 branches in a year. During this phase, 
permission for acquisition of shareholding in Indian private sector banks by eligible foreign banks will 
be limited to banks identified by the Reserve Bank for restructuring. The second phase is scheduled to 
commence from April 2009 after a review of the experience gained and after due consultation with all 
the stakeholders in the banking sector. In this phase, three interconnected issues would be taken up. 
First, rules for the removal of limitations on the operations of the WOS and treating them at par with 
domestic banks, to the extent appropriate, would be designed and implemented. Second, the WOS of 
foreign banks, on completion of a minimum prescribed period of operation, may be allowed to list and 
dilute their stake so that, consistent with the guidelines issued on March 5, 2004, at least 26 per cent 
of the paid-up capital of the subsidiary is held by resident Indians at all times. Third, during this phase, 
foreign  banks  may  be  permitted  to  enter  into  merger  and  acquisition  transactions  with  any  private 
sector bank in India, subject to the overall investment limit of 74 per cent. 
In recent years, comprehensive credit information, which provides details pertaining to credit facilities 
already availed of by a borrower as well as his payment track record, has become critical. Accordingly, 
a  scheme  for  disclosure  of  information  regarding  defaulting  borrowers  of  banks  and  financial 
institutions  was  introduced.  In  order  to  facilitate  sharing  of  information  related  to  credit  matters,  a 
Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL) was set up in 2000.  
The Banking Ombudsman Scheme was notified by the Reserve Bank in 1995 to provide for a system 
of redressal of grievances against banks. The scheme sought to establish a system of expeditious and 
inexpensive resolution of customer complaints. The scheme was revised twice, first in 2002 and then 
in 2006. At present, the scheme is being executed by Banking Ombudsman (BO) appointed by the 
Reserve Bank at 15 centres covering the entire country. The BO scheme covers all commercial banks 
and  scheduled  primary  cooperative  banks.  The  scheme  was  revised  recently  which  brought  more 
grounds of complaints within its ambit. 
An independent Banking Codes and Standards Board of India was set up on the model of the UK in 
order to ensure that comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is evolved and 
adhered to. With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, since November 2005, all banks need 
to make available a basic banking ‘no frills’ account either with ‘nil’ or very low minimum balances as 
well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of population. Banks were 
urged to review their existing practices to align them with the objective of ‘financial inclusion’. 
The smooth functioning of the payment and settlement system is a pre-requisite for financial stability. 
The Reserve Bank, therefore, has taken several measures from time to time to develop the payment 
and settlement system in the country along sound lines. The Board for Regulation and Supervision of 
Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS), set up in March 2005 as a committee of the Central Board 
of the Reserve Bank, is the apex body for giving policy direction in the area of payment and settlement 
systems. Real time gross settlement (RTGS) was operationalised on March 26, 2004. Its usage for 
transfer of funds, especially for large values and for systemically important purposes, has increased 
since  then.  With  introduction  of  RTGS,  whereby  a  final  settlement  of  individual  inter-bank  fund 
transfers is effected on a gross real time basis during the processing day, a major source of systemic 
risk in the financial system has been reduced substantially.  
A  risk  free  payments  and  settlements  system  in  government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  was 
established by the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), which is set up by banks. CCIL acts 
as  the  central  counter  party  (CCP)  for  all  the  transactions  and  guarantees  both  the  securities  and 
funds legs of the transaction. Under the DvPIII mode of settlement that has been adopted, both the 
securities  leg  and  the  fund  leg  are  settled  on  a  net  basis.  The  settlement  through  CCIL  has  thus 
reduced  the  gross  dollar  requirement  by  more  than  90  per  cent.  A  screen-based  negotiated  quote-
driven  system  for  dealings  in  the  call/notice  and  the  term  money  market  (NDS-CALL)  has  been 
launched  by  the  CCIL  in  September  18,  2006.  The  introduction  of  NDS-CALL  helps  in  enhancing 
transparency, improving price discovery and strengthening market microstructure. 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 3
Impact of financial sector reforms in India  
Banks  have  been  accorded  greater  discretion  in  sourcing  and  utilisation  of  resources,  albeit  in  an 
increasingly  competitive  environment.  The  outreach  of  the  Indian  banking  system  has  increased  in 
terms of expansion of branches/ATMs. In the post-reform period, assets/liabilities of banks have grown 
consistently  at  a  high  rate.  The  financial  performance  of  banks  also  improved  as  reflected  in  their 
increased profitability. Net profit to assets ratio improved from 0.49 per cent in 2000-01 to 1.13 per 
cent in 2003-04. Although it subsequently declined to 0.88 per cent in 2005-06, it was still significantly 
higher than that in the early 1990s. Banks have been successful in weathering the impact of upturn in 
interest rate cycle through increasing diversification of their income. Though banks had to incur huge 
expenditures  on  upgradation  of  information  technology,  the  restructuring  of  the  workforce  in  public 
sector banks helped them cut down the staff cost and increase in business per employee.  
Another  welcome  development  has been  the  sharp reduction  in non-performing  loans  (NPLs).  Both 
gross and net NPLs started to decline in absolute terms since 2002-03. Gross NPLs as percentage of 
gross advances, which were above 15 per cent in the early 1990s, are now less than 3 per cent. This 
distinct improvement in asset quality may be attributed to the improved recovery climate underpinned 
by  strong  macroeconomic  performance  as  well  as  several  institutional  measures  initiated  by  the 
Reserve Bank/Government such as debt recovery tribunals, Lok Adalats, scheme of corporate debt 
restructuring in 2001, the SARFAESI Act in 2002.  
Since 1995-96, the banking sector, on the whole, has been consistently maintaining CRAR well above 
the minimum stipulated norm. The overall CRAR for scheduled commercial banks increased from 8.7 
per cent at end-March 1996 to 12.3 per cent at end-March 2006. The number of banks not complying 
with the minimum CRAR also declined from 13 at end-March 1996 to just two by end-March 2006. 
Improved capital position stemmed largely from the improvement in profitability and raising of capital 
from the market, though in the initial stages the Government had to provide funds to recapitalise weak 
public sector banks.  
Even  though  public  sector  banks  continue  to  dominate  the  Indian  banking  system,  accounting  for 
nearly three-fourths of total assets and income, the increasing competition in the banking system has 
led to a falling share of public sector banks, and increasing share of the new private sector banks, 
which were set up around mid-1990s. It is clear that we are at the beginning of this new phase in the 
Indian banking with competitive pressure, both domestic and external, catching up and the need for 
banks to continuously reassess and reposition themselves in their business plans.  
Future challenges for Indian banks 
A few broad challenges facing the Indian banks are: threats of risks from globalisation; implementation 
of Basel II; improvement of risk management systems; implementation of new accounting standards; 
enhancement of transparency and disclosures; enhancement of customer service; and application of 
technology. 
Globalisation – a challenge as well as an opportunity 
The waves of globalisation are sweeping across the world, and have thrown up several opportunities 
accompanied by concomitant risks. Integration of domestic market with international financial markets 
has  been  facilitated  by  tremendous  advancement  in  information  and  communications  technology. 
There is a growing realisation that the ability of countries to conduct business across national borders 
and the ability to cope with the possible downside risks would depend, inter alia, on the soundness of 
the financial system. This has necessitated convergence of prudential norms with international best 
practices as well consistent refinement of the technological and institutional framework in the financial 
sector through a non-disruptive and consultative process.  
Opening up of the capital account 
The Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore) observed that 
under  a  full  capital  account  convertibility  regime,  the  banking  system  would  be  exposed  to  greater 
market  volatility,  and  this  necessitated  enhancing  the  risk  management  capabilities  in  the  banking 
system in view of liquidity risk, interest rate risk, currency risk, counter-party risk and country risk that 
arise  from  international  capital  flows.  The  potential  dangers  associated  with  the  proliferation  of 
derivative instruments – credit derivatives and interest rate derivatives also need to be recognised in 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2007
the  regulatory  and  supervisory  system.  The  issues  relating  to  cross-border  supervision  of  financial 
intermediaries in the context of greater capital flows are just emerging and need to be addressed.  
Basel II implementation 
The Reserve Bank and the commercial banks have been preparing to implement Basel II, and it has 
been decided to allow banks some more time in adhering to new norms. As against the deadline of 
March  31,  2007  for  compliance  with  Basel  II,  it  was  decided  in  October  2006  that  foreign  banks 
operating in India and Indian banks having presence outside India would migrate to the standardised 
approach for credit risk and the basic indicator approach for operational risk under Basel II with effect 
from March 31, 2008, while all other scheduled commercial banks are required to migrate to Basel II 
by March 31, 2009.  
It is widely acknowledged that implementation of Basel II poses significant challenge to both banks 
and the regulators. Basel II implementation may also be seen as a compliance challenge. But at the 
same time, it offers two major opportunities to banks, viz., refinement of risk management systems; 
and  improvement  in  capital  efficiency.  The  transition  from  Basel  I  to  Basel  II  essentially  involves  a 
move from capital adequacy to capital efficiency. This transition in how capital is used and how much 
capital is needed will become a significant factor in return-on-equity strategy for years to come. 
The  reliance  on  the  market  to  assess  the  riskiness  of  banks  would  lead  to  increased  focus  on 
transparency and market disclosure, critical information describing the risk profile, capital structure and 
capital  adequacy.  Besides  making  banks  more  accountable  and  responsive  to  better-informed 
investors, these processes enable banks to strike the right balance between risks and rewards and to 
improve the access to markets. Improvements in market discipline also call for greater coordination 
between banks and regulators.  
Improving risk management systems  
Basel II has brought into focus the need for a more comprehensive risk management framework to 
deal with various risks, including credit and market risk and their inter-linkages. Banks in India are also 
moving from the individual silo system to an enterprise-wide risk management system. While the first 
milestone would be risk integration across the entity, the next step would entail risk aggregation across 
the group both in the specific risk areas as also across the risks. Banks would, therefore, be required 
to  allocate  significant  resources  towards  this  endeavour.  In  India,  the  risk-based  approach  to 
supervision  is  also  serving  as  a  catalyst  to  banks’  migration  to  the  integrated  risk  management 
systems. However, taking into account the diversity in the Indian banking system, stabilizing the RBS 
as an effective supervisory mechanism is another challenge. 
Corporate governance 
To a large extent, many risk management failures reflect a breakdown in corporate governance which 
arise due to poor management of conflict of interest, inadequate understanding of key banking risks, 
and  poor  Board  oversight  of  the  mechanisms  for  risk  management  and  internal  audit.  Corporate 
governance  is,  therefore,  the  foundation  for  effective  risk  managements  in  banks  and,  thus,  the 
foundation  for  a  sound  financial  system.  Therefore,  the  choices  which  banks  make  when  they 
establish their risk management and corporate governance systems have important ramifications for 
financial  stability.  Banks  may  have  to  cultivate  a  good  governance  culture  building  in  appropriate 
checks and balances in their operations. There are four important forms of oversight that should be 
included  in  the  organisational  structure  of  any  bank  in  order  to  ensure  appropriate  checks  and 
balances: (i) oversight by the board of directors or supervisory board; (ii) oversight by individuals not 
involved in the day-to-day running of the various business areas; (iii) direct line supervision of different 
business areas; and (iv) independent risk management, compliance and audit functions. In addition, it 
is important that key personnel are fit and proper for their jobs. Furthermore, the general principles of 
sound  corporate  governance  should  also  be  applied  to  all  banks,  irrespective  of  their  unique 
ownership structures.  
Implementation of new accounting standards  
Derivative  activity  in  banks  has  been  increasing  at  a  brisk  pace.  While  the  risk  management 
framework  for  derivative  trading,  which  is  a  relatively  new  area  for  Indian  banks  (particularly  in  the 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 5
more structured products) is an essential pre-requisite, the absence of clear accounting guidelines in 
this area is a matter of significant concern. The World Bank’s ROSC on Accounting and Auditing in 
India  has  commented  on  the  absence  of  an  accounting  standard  which  deals  with  recognition, 
measurement and disclosures pertaining to financial instruments. The Accounting Standards Board of 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is considering issue of Accounting Standards in 
respect of financial instruments. These will be the Indian parallel to International Accounting Standards 
32  and  39.  The  proposed  Accounting  Standards  will  be  of  considerable  significance  for  financial 
entities and could, therefore, have implications for the financial sector. The formal introduction of these 
Accounting Standards by the ICAI is likely to take some time in view of the processes involved. In the 
meanwhile,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  considering  the  need  for  banks  and  financial  entities  adopting  the 
broad  underlying  principles  of  IAS  39.  Since  this  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  some  regulatory/prudential 
issues, all relevant aspects are being comprehensively examined. The proposals in this regard would, 
as  is  normal,  be  discussed  with  the  market  participants  before  introduction.  Adoption  and 
implementation  of  these  principles  are  likely  to  pose  a  great  challenge  to  both  the  banks  and  the 
Reserve Bank.  
Supervision of financial conglomerates 
The  financial  landscape  is  increasingly  witnessing  entry  of  some  of  the  bigger  banks  into  other 
financial  segments  like  merchant  banking,  insurance  etc.  Emergence  of  several  new  players  with 
diversified presence across major segments make it imperative for supervision to be spread across 
various  segments  of  the  financial  sector.  In  this  direction,  an  inter-regulatory  Working  Group  was 
constituted  with  members  from  RBI,  SEBI  and  IRDA.  The  framework  proposed  by  the  Group  is 
complementary to the existing regulatory structure wherein the individual entities are regulated by the 
respective regulators and the identified financial conglomerates are subjected to focussed regulatory 
oversight  through  a  mechanism  of  inter-regulatory  exchange  of  information.  As  a  first  step  in  this 
direction,  an  inter-agency  Working  Group  on  Financial  Conglomerates  (FC)  comprising  the  above 
three  supervisory  bodies  identified  23  FCs  and  a  pilot  process  for  obtaining  information  from  these 
conglomerates  has  been  initiated.  The  complexities  involved  in  the  supervision  of  financial 
conglomerates are a challenge not only to the Reserve Bank of India but also to the other regulatory 
agencies, which need to have a close and continued coordination on an on-going basis.  
In view of increased focus on empowering supervisors to undertake consolidated supervision of bank 
groups and since the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision issued by the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision have underscored consolidated supervision as an independent principle, the 
Reserve  Bank  had  introduced,  as  an  initial  step,  consolidated  accounting  and  other  quantitative 
methods to facilitate consolidated supervision. The components of consolidated supervision include, 
consolidated  financial  statements  intended  for  public  disclosure,  consolidated  prudential  reports 
intended for supervisory assessment of risks and application of certain prudential regulations on group 
basis. In due course, consolidated supervision as introduced above would evolve to cover banks in 
mixed  conglomerates,  where  the  parent  may  be  non-financial  entities  or  parents  may  be  financial 
entities coming under the jurisdiction of other regulators.  
Application of advanced technology 
The  role  of  technology  in  banking  in  creating  new  business  models  and  processes,  in  maintaining 
competitive  advantage,  in  enhancing  quality  of  risk  management  systems  in  banks,  and  in 
revolutionising  distribution  channels,  cannot  be  overemphasised.  Recognising  the  benefits  of 
modernising  their  technology  infrastructure,  banks  are  taking  the  right  initiatives.  While  doing  so, 
banks have four options to choose from: they can build a new system themselves, or buy best of the 
modules, or buy a comprehensive solution, or outsource. A further challenge which banks face in this 
regard  is  to  ensure  that  they  derive  maximum  advantage  from  their  investments  in  technology  and 
avoid wasteful expenditure which might arise on account of uncoordinated and piecemeal adoption of 
technology; adoption of inappropriate/ inconsistent technology and adoption of obsolete technology. A 
case  in  point  is  the  implementation  of  core  banking  solution  by  some  banks  without  assessing  its 
scalability or adaptability to meet Basel II requirements.  
Financial inclusion 
While banks are focusing on the methodologies of meeting the increasing demands placed on them, 
there  are  legitimate  concerns  with  regard  to  the  banking  practices  that  tend  to  exclude  rather  than 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2007
attract  vast  sections  of  population,  in  particular  pensioners,  self-employed  and  those  employed  in 
unorganised  sector.  While  commercial  considerations  are  no  doubt  important,  banks  have  been 
bestowed with several privileges, especially of seeking public deposits on a highly leveraged basis, 
and  consequently  they  should  be  obliged  to  provide  banking  services  to  all  segments  of  the 
population, on equitable basis. Further, experience has shown that consumers’ interests are at times 
not  accorded  full  protection  and  their  grievances  are  not  properly  attended  to.  Feedback  received 
reveals  recent  trends  of  levying  unreasonably  high  service/user  charges  and  enhancement  of  user 
charges without proper and prior intimation. It is in this context that the Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India had mentioned in the Annual Policy Statement 2005-06 that RBI will take initiatives to encourage 
greater  degree  of  financial  inclusion  in  the  country;  setting  up  of  a  mechanism  for  ensuring  fair 
treatment of consumers; and effective redressal of customer grievances.  
Conclusion 
With the increasing levels of globalisation of the Indian banking industry, evolution of universal banks 
and  bundling  of  financial  services,  competition  in  the  banking  industry  will  intensify  further.  The 
banking industry has the potential and the ability to rise to the occasion as demonstrated by the rapid 
pace  of  automation  which  has  already  had  a  profound  impact  on  raising  the  standard  of  banking 
services.  The  financial  strength  of  individual  banks,  which  are  major  participants  in  the  financial 
system, is the first line of defence against financial risks. Strong capital positions and balance sheets 
place banks in a better position to deal with and absorb the economic shocks. 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 7
