Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Economic outlook and business opportunities in 
Malaysia 
Opening remarks by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
for Malaysia Country Showcase at the IFSB Summit: "Economic Outlook and Business Opportunities 
in Malaysia", Dubai, 14 May 2007. 
 I would like to welcome you to the Malaysia Country Showcase held in conjunction with the 4th Islamic 
Financial Services Board Summit. On behalf of the Malaysian delegation, I wish to thank you for your 
presence  here  on  this  important  occasion  as  it  gives  us  an  opportunity  to  share  the  Malaysian 
business proposition and to nurture strong trade and investment ties in the region. 
We are fortunate to have with us distinguished panel of experts who will be engaging in an interactive 
discourse.  Today's  forum  provides  a  platform  for  greater  awareness  of  the  economic  climate  and 
outlook as well as the business potentials and opportunities in Malaysia. 
A  decade  after  the  financial  crisis,  the  Malaysian  economy  including  the  financial  system  is  at  its 
strongest position. Malaysia has greater economic flexibility to shift to new areas of growth and thus 
sustain the development momentum. Economic growth has been achieved with relative price stability, 
low unemployment and strong external balances. The level of savings remains high at 37 percent as a 
percentage to the GDP and the level of external reserves remains strong at USD91 billion. Malaysia 
has also taken advantage of globalisation to strengthen its economic and financial relationships with 
the major trading blocs across the globe. In 2006, the total value of the external trade exceeded RM1 
trillion for the first time. Foreign direct investment has been sustained, particularly into the new areas 
of  growth.  The  private  sector  continues  as  the  main  driver  of  growth  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year, 
while the public sector plays have a supportive role. GDP per capita at current prices has increased to 
about USD 6,000 in 2006. 
While Malaysia continues to attract investment, both domestic and foreign from the traditional sectors, 
new sectors such as the manufacturing, services, and oil and gas sectors are gaining in importance. 
Resources are flowing into new growth areas such as revitalised agriculture sector, high-technology 
manufacturing  industries  and  biotechnology.  The  services  sector  such  as  information  technology 
services,  shared  services  and  outsourcing,  health  and  medical  tourism,  and  financial  services,  in 
particular Islamic finance has increased its market share.  
The  Malaysian  Islamic  banking  system  saw  in  particular  strong  performance  in  2006  with  higher 
profitability,  and  has  remained  well  capitalised.  Islamic  banking  assets  amounting  to  about  USD34 
billion  or  13  percent  in  terms  of  market  share.  The  takaful  sector  stands  at  USD1.7  billion.  The 
Malaysian  Islamic  capital  market  has  been  equally  encouraging.  Islamic  corporate  bonds  now 
amounting  to  USD36  billion,  or  48  percent  of  the  total  corporate  bond  issuance  in  Malaysia.  The 
domestic bond market plays a crucial role in ensuring that the financing needs of the economy are 
being  fulfilled.  The  multinationals  and  multi-lateral  institutions  such  as  the  International  Finance 
Corporation and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has begun to tap the fund 
from the Malaysian capital market by issuing ringgit sukuks, thus increasing its depth and diversity. 
The  Malaysian  private  debt  securities  market  including  the  conventional  market  has  become  the 
second largest market in Asia. 
The economic and financial linkages between Asia and the Middle East are growing. While the world 
trade has on the average expanded by 10% over the period 2001-2005, Asia's trade with the Middle 
East has increased on the average by 24%. More than half of the exports from the Gulf states goes to 
Asia and more than one-fifth of its imports are from Asia. While the US remains the major recipient of 
investment  flows  from  the  GCC,  Asia  has  surpassed  the  Euro  region  as  the  second  most  popular 
investment destination.  
Malaysia is well positioned to provide the linkages through Islamic finance to support the flow of this 
kind of investment. We have put in place a comprehensive Islamic financial system that includes the 
legal, Shariah and regulatory infrastructure, supported by a diversity of players and a wide range of 
products  and  services.  Our  capital  market  has  depth  and  breadth  that  is  supported  by  an  active 
secondary  bond  market.  Situated  centrally  in  the  Asian  time  zone,  Malaysia  offers  to  serve  as  an 
investment gateway to the region, specialising in Islamic fund and wealth management, and providing 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
a platform for the issuance of sukuk. Malaysia launched the MIFC initiative last year in order to provide 
a more conducive business environment. We have liberalised the foreign equity to a maximum of 49 
percent in existing Islamic banks and takaful companies.  
New licences for International Islamic Bank and International Takaful Operator for the conduct of full 
range Islamic banking business or takaful and retakaful business in international currencies are being 
offered. Operational flexibility is given to new licensees to be set up as a branch or subsidiary who will 
enjoy  tax  holiday  for  10  years  under  the  Income  Tax  Act.  Stamp  duty  exemption  for  ten  years 
beginning this year has been granted on foreign currency instruments executed by these participants, 
and  on  instruments  relating  to  ringgit  and  foreign  currency  Islamic  securities.  Approval  has  been 
granted  to  fully  exempt  from  withholding  tax  any  profits  or  income  on  non-residents'  investments  in 
non-ringgit Islamic securities including sukuks issued in Malaysia.  
Malaysia maintains a liberal foreign exchange administration regime where investors are freely able to 
obtain ringgit and foreign currencies to fund their investments in Malaysia. We have relaxed the rules 
further  to  allow  resident and  foreign  issuers  to raise  foreign currency-denominated bonds,  including 
Islamic  bonds.  Foreigners  investing  in  Malaysia  are  also  free  to  hedge  with  onshore  banks  their 
committed flow of funds such as the repatriation of investment proceeds, dividends and profits from 
Malaysia as well as the purchase of ringgit assets in Malaysia. There is free mobility of inward and 
outward movement of funds relating to both foreign direct investment and portfolio capital investments. 
Multilateral  development  banks  and  multinational  corporations  may  also  issue  ringgit  or  non-ringgit 
denominated instruments in the domestic bond market. 
To  enhance  the  delivery  system,  an  executive  committee  of  key  government  officials,  financial 
regulators and industry players has been has been set up for the implementation of the initiatives to 
support the operations in the Islamic financial system. Among others, an "executive green lane" has 
been accorded to expedite applications by expatriates for long-term employment passes with multiple 
entry visas. The Foreign Investment Committee rules will also be relaxed further to allow 100 percent 
foreign equity ownership in these financial institutions. Moreover, the Islamic financial system will also 
adopt  a  conducive  stance  on  Shariah  interpretations  and  practices,  consistent  with  its  international 
dimensions. It will mutually recognise and accommodate the various juristic reasoning that has been 
approved by recognised Shariah advisers. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  the Malaysia Country  showcase  a success.  I  invite  the  business  and  financial 
communities from this region and the Malaysian delegation to capitalise on this event to arrange for 
business meetings on the sideline of this Summit.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
