European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 8 February 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting has further underpinned the reasoning behind our previous decisions to raise interest rates. It 
has also confirmed that strong vigilance remains of the essence so as to ensure that risks to price 
stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise.  This  will  permit  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations in the euro area to remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. As 
emphasised on previous occasions, such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an 
ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro 
area. Our monetary policy remains accommodative, with the key ECB interest rates still at low levels, 
money and credit growth vigorous, and liquidity ample by all plausible measures. Therefore, looking 
ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  remains 
warranted.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail. 
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  the  latest  indicators  and  survey  data  suggest  that  the 
economic  expansion  has  continued  into  2007  and  remains  solid  and  broad-based.  Looking  ahead, 
while  some  volatility  in  the  quarter-on-quarter  growth  rates  of  real  GDP  cannot  be  excluded,  the 
medium-term outlook for economic activity continues to be favourable. Conditions remain in place for 
the  euro  area  economy  to  continue  to  expand  at  rates  around  potential.  Global  economic  growth, 
which  has  become  more  balanced  across  regions,  remains  robust,  providing  support  for  euro  area 
exports. Domestic demand in the euro area is expected to maintain its momentum. Investment should 
remain dynamic, reflecting the benefits of an extended period of very favourable financing conditions, 
balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business 
efficiency.  Consumption  should  also  continue  to  gradually  strengthen  over  time,  in  line  with 
developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  labour  market  conditions  –  in  particular  employment 
growth – continue to improve.  
Risks surrounding this favourable outlook for economic growth are broadly balanced over the shorter 
term. At longer horizons, risks lie mainly on the downside. The main risks relate to fears of a rise in 
protectionist pressures, the possibility of a renewed increase in oil prices, and concerns about possible 
disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, it is essential to stress the importance of taking a medium-term 
perspective and to look through the possible volatility of inflation rates over the course of 2007. In this 
respect,  it  may  be helpful  to  consider  the  potential volatility  of  inflation  in greater  detail.  In  the  very 
short term, it appears that the changes in VAT in a large euro area country were not fully reflected in 
prices  in  January.  Thereafter,  it  should  be  noted  that  on  the  basis  of  current  prices  for  oil  and  oil 
futures  and  previous  oil  price  developments,  significant  favourable  base  effects  may  progressively 
lead to lower inflation rates in the spring and summer. However, these effects will be temporary. Later 
in 2007 inflation rates are expected to rise again as a result of unfavourable base effects.  
The medium to longer-term outlook for price stability remains subject to upside risks. They continue to 
include a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into consumer prices than currently anticipated 
and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus far. 
Furthermore, renewed increases in oil prices cannot be excluded. More fundamentally, stronger than 
currently  expected  wage  developments  pose  substantial  upward  risks  to  price  stability,  given  the 
favourable momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters, the fact that survey 
measures of capacity utilisation are approaching the peak levels reached in 2000, and the ongoing 
improvement in labour market performance. It is therefore crucial that the social partners continue to 
meet  their  responsibilities.  In  this  context,  wage  agreements  should  take  into  account  productivity 
developments  while  recognising  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  and  price  competitiveness 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
positions. Indeed, the Governing Council will monitor the upcoming wage negotiations in the euro area 
countries very carefully.  
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  rose  further  to  9.7%  in  December,  marking  the  largest  increase  seen 
since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Of  course,  monthly  figures  can  be  volatile  and  we  should  not 
overemphasise short-term developments. However, continued strong money and credit growth confirm 
the view that the underlying rate of broad money expansion in the euro area remains vigorous, with no 
evidence  as  yet  that  the  steady  upward  trend  observed  since  mid-2004  has  been  halted  or  even 
reversed.  
The ongoing robust expansion of money and credit reflects the still accommodative monetary policy 
stance and the strengthening of economic activity in the euro area. At 10.7%, the annual growth rate 
of loans to the private sector remained strong in December, although showing a slight moderation with 
respect to the previous month. Strong growth in private sector credit reflects the continuation of the 
upward  trend  in  the  growth  of  borrowing  by  non-financial  corporations  seen  since  mid-2004. 
Meanwhile,  in  the  context  of  rising  mortgage  rates  throughout  the  euro  area  and  slowing  housing 
markets  in  some  regions,  the  growth  of  household  borrowing  has  shown  some  further  signs  of 
moderation in recent months, albeit remaining at still very high rates.  
Taking the appropriate medium to longer-term perspective for assessing trends in money and credit 
growth, the latest developments confirm the continuation of a persistent upward trend in the underlying 
rate of monetary expansion. Following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation 
in the euro area is ample by all plausible measures. Persistent strong monetary and credit growth in 
an environment of ample liquidity point to upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
Monetary developments therefore continue to require very careful monitoring, particularly against the 
background  of  a  solid  expansion  in  economic  activity  and  continued  strong  property  market 
developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is particularly important to look through any short-term volatility. 
On the basis of today’s assessment, after a possible fall over the spring and summer, inflation rates 
are likely to increase again later in the year. Risks to the medium-term outlook for price stability remain 
on the upside, relating in particular to stronger than currently expected wage developments. Given the 
very strong monetary and credit growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of 
the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that 
upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium to longer term. Hence, we will be strongly vigilant 
in order to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will support 
the  solid  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure 
price stability in the medium term remains warranted. 
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  first  indications  confirm  that  fiscal  developments  in  the  euro  area  were 
relatively  favourable  in  2006  on  the  back  of  strong  output  growth  and  revenue  windfalls.  It  is  now 
essential  that  the  momentum  of  improving  public  finances  is  maintained  and  that  the  pace  of  fiscal 
consolidation accelerates in 2007 and 2008 so that all euro area countries attain their medium-term 
objective of a sound fiscal position as soon as possible. Better than expected budgetary outcomes in 
2006 and possible further revenue windfalls this year should be used for faster fiscal consolidation. 
Experience has shown that the temptation to relax expenditure restraint, delay necessary reforms or 
pursue pro-cyclical policies in an upswing needs to be firmly resisted. Fiscal consolidation measures 
have  the  best  chance  of  success  when  they  are  based  on  a  credible  and  comprehensive  reform 
strategy, with a focus on reducing expenditure rather than increasing revenue ratios.  
The  Governing  Council  stressed  that  progress  in  the  area  of  structural  reforms  and  moderate 
increases  in  labour  costs  in  some  countries  have  been  key  factors  in  increasing  employment  and 
reducing unemployment over the last few years. Indeed, while still high at a rate of 7.5% in December 
2006, the standardised unemployment rate was the lowest since the series began in 1993 and has 
fallen by 1.4 percentage points since its latest peak in June 2004. To fully exploit the beneficial effects 
of Economic and Monetary Union and the Single Market, further structural reforms must enhance the 
adjustment  capacity  of  the  euro  area.  This  includes  sufficient  wage  differentiation,  especially  to 
improve employment opportunities for less skilled workers and in regions with high unemployment. It 
also encompasses more flexible product and labour markets that would give rise to new investment 
possibilities and innovation. And it requires the removal of impediments to labour mobility – between 
jobs, between regions and across borders. Let me therefore recall that with Slovenia having entered 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2007
the euro area, its labour force needs to be granted full access to the labour markets of all euro area 
countries.  Generally,  structural  reforms,  in  combination  with  fiscal  consolidation,  must  support 
sustainable  developments  by  limiting  the  burden  that  is  shifted  to  younger  and  future  generations. 
Considerable challenges therefore remain, which differ across countries but which all urgently require 
determined action. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 3
