Christian Noyer: Financial innovation, monetary policy and financial stability  
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Spring Conference of the Bank 
of France/Deutsche Bundesbank, Eltville, Germany, 27/28 April 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
- 
 It is a privilege and a real pleasure to open this conference, which is the first one to be jointly 
organised  by  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  And  I  look  forward, 
together  with  President  Weber,  to  many  other  events  of  the  same  kind  to  be  held  either  in 
France or in Germany. 
This  conference  addresses  a  topic  which  I  believe  is  of  utmost  importance.  Indeed,  central 
banks extensively collect and analyse micro-data, mainly on banks and firms. Such information 
is used in an extensive way in order to assess the economic situation and short-term prospects 
for output, demand and prices. It also provides inputs to macroeconomic models for forecasting 
and  policy  evaluation;  and  finally,  it  helps  identifying  possible  threats  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. At a time when financial innovation is developing rapidly, micro-data analytical 
research  is  particularly  useful  in  helping  central  bankers  meeting  the  challenges  we  face  for 
maintaining price stability and financial stability. 
 Financial innovation, defined as the emergence of new financial instruments and services, and of new 
forms  of  organisation  in  more  sophisticated  and  complete  financial  markets,  has  many  well-known 
positive effects: 
• 
by  creating  more  complete  markets,  it  improves  resource  allocation,  thereby  supporting 
longer-term growth prospects1; 
financial innovation even appears to reduce growth volatility, as has been shown in the case 
of  the  US2  and  confirmed  on  a  sample  of  25  countries3.  As  regards  firms,  this  seems  to 
result  from  a  more  flexible  financial structure. With  respect  to  households,  this  appears  to 
stem from relaxed collateral constraints on borrowing4 allowing households to better smooth 
consumption in the face of temporary changes in their income5. Moreover, deregulation and 
innovation  on  the  housing  finance  markets  enable  households  to  purchase  houses whose 
values are consistent with their long-term income prospects, as shown e.g. in the case of the 
US using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. 
Financial innovation does not follow a regular pattern, as some periods are more active than others 
especially  those  of  financial  liberalisation  and  increased  use  of  IT  in  financial  related  activities.  It  is 
clearly the case of the last few years with the rapid development of credit derivatives, securitization, 
hedge funds and private banking that has led to a situation where most credit risk are no longer in the 
form of loans, held to maturity on the balance sheets of banks, but where much of the credit risk is 
now  held  by  nonbank  financial  institutions  that  can  take  on  substantial  leverage.  It  has  occured  in 
Europe  in  the  context  of  a  major  financial  innovation,  the  introduction  of  the  Euro,  and  poses  new 
challenges  for  central  bankers:  it  makes  monetary  analysis  more  complex,  modifies  the  monetary 
policy transmission mechanisms and, in some cases, may endanger financial stability. 
                                                      
1   Weber, 2006; Rajan and Zingales, 1998 
2   Dynan, Elmendorf and Sichel, 2006 
3   Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes and Krause, 2006 
4   Campbell and Horovitz, 2005 
5  
IMF, 2006 
BIS Review 42/2007 
 1
1. 
Financial innovation is a challenge for the interpretation of developments in the 
monetary aggregates and for the best use of our second pillar 
It is clearly not a surprise, at a time of burgeoning financial innovation to observe signs of instability in 
money demand. New products and new intermediaries tend to blur the distinction between monetary 
and non-monetary assets and to modify the financial behaviour of economic agents. And indeed, the 
demand for M3 in the euro area has shown clear signs of instability since 2001 and a break in the 
income velocity of M3 occurred at the same time. Most remarkably, instead of delivering some erratic 
pattern, a new velocity trend seemed to emerge with liquidity expanding much more rapidly6. It is fair 
to say that the precise role of financial innovation in this regard is still unknown but we have all the 
reasons to believe that, taking it into account should help explain this change in money demand, and 
better gauge its consequences for future inflationary pressures. Let me elaborate further.  
First of all, the introduction of the euro in itself a major financial innovation, had many effects on the 
financial behaviour of economic agents. 
The introduction of the euro immediately resulted in: 
• 
• 
• 
the removal of any exchange rate risk between participating countries; 
the introduction of a new system of remunerated reserve requirements; 
and the creation of an integrated money market – thanks in particular to the setting up of a 
new large-value payment system (TARGET). 
Furthermore, thanks to the introduction of the euro and to the successful monetary policy conducted 
by  the  ECB,  all  member  countries  now  benefit  from  an  environment  of  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations and, as a result, low interest rates. 
This new context has had several consequences: 
• 
both  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area,  the  reputation  of  the  euro  as  a  solid  currency  has 
fostered the holding of euro-denominated banknotes, which has doubled in a few years, now 
representing the largest banknote circulation in the world; 
the so-called “home bias” in asset holdings has decreased further, both inside the euro area 
vis-à-vis assets issued in other Member States and outside the euro area vis-à-vis assets 
issued  in  the  euro  area.  This  has  increased  globally  the  demand  for  euro-denominated 
financial assets; 
the integration and competition in the banking and financial markets that has been fostered 
by  the  euro  speeded  up  the  development  and  the  spreading  out  of  financial  innovation 
throughout the euro area, affecting money and credit developments in different ways. Let me 
just mention some of them. 
(cid:131) 
  One is the rapid pace of expansion in the activities of the so-called “other financial 
institutions” or OFIs. OFIs are not part of the money-creating sector and are neither 
insurance companies nor pension funds. In particular, they include financial vehicle 
corporations that purchase, pool and repackage as marketable securities loans that 
are “securitised” by banks, thereby reducing the growth rate of loans to the private 
sector.  The  expansion  in  OFIs’  activities  is  to  a  certain  extent  mirrored  in  the 
development of their monetary assets: which is now quite significant and amounts 
to around 10.5% of M3. I would submit that, in normal circumstances OFIs’ money 
holdings are unlikely to be transferred to non-financial agents and to generate an 
additional demand for goods and services. The reading of M3 developments, and 
its  interpretation  in  terms  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  should,  most  likely,  be 
adapted accordingly. 
Financial innovation has also affected money and credit developments by making it 
easier for banks to hedge credit risk and manage maturity and credit mismatches. 
This  may  have  supported  the  supply  of  credit,  especially  long-term  loans  to 
(cid:131) 
                                                      
6   Noyer, 2006b 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2007
(cid:131) 
households, in recent years. Indeed, housing loans have grown at a rate of 9.8% 
per year in the euro area since the beginning of 1999. 
In  recent  years,  two  innovations  that  may  have  an  impact  on  the  interest  rate 
elasticity of money demand have emerged. One takes the form of high-yielding and 
highly  liquid  deposits  accessible  via  direct  banking  or  internet  accounts.  The 
second,  which  is  still  marginal,  consists  in  the  introduction  of  so-called  “retail 
derivatives”,  which  are  usually  short-term  deposits  with  embedded  derivatives 
tailored to the needs of investors. 
Taking  into  account  the  effects  of  financial  innovation  is  a  clear  challenge  for  monetary  analysis. 
Meeting this challenge requires regularly updated tools and in-depth research based, in particular, on 
sectoral analysis. 
2.  
By affecting the transmission mechanism, financial innovation is also a challenge for 
the conduct of monetary policy 
A good knowledge of the mechanisms through which monetary policy affects the economy is of crucial 
importance  for  central  banks.  Financial  innovation  affects  these  mechanisms  both  by  altering  the 
channels  through  which  monetary  policy  operates  and  by  changing  the  overall  impact  of  monetary 
policy decisions. But the magnitude of the changes and the precise effect due to financial innovation at 
a time when other factors such as globalisation are at work are not well known. At the present juncture 
research shows that financial innovation tends to strengthen the interest and exchange rate channels 
whereas it appears to weaken the credit channel. 
- 
Financial innovation certainly contributes to stronger wealth effects and thus probably also to 
strengthen interest rate channel7. This can be explained as follows : 
• 
Financial innovation fosters faster dissemination of information and its more rapid 
incorporation  into  financial  market  prices.  This  is  of  course  particularly  true  for 
monetary  policy  decisions  and  can  therefore  increase  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy, particularly via the interest rate channel8. 
Financial  innovation  contributes  to  an  increased  holding  of  financial  assets  by 
lowering 
funding  and 
investment strategies. 
Financial  innovation  often  relies  on  stronger  leverage,  increasing  the  effect  of 
interest rate change by the central bank. One example of this enhanced impact is 
provided by the behaviour of hedge funds who customarily borrow short-term funds 
to finance their (longer-term) investments9. 
facilitating  arbitrage,  hedging, 
transaction  costs  and 
    Turning  to  the  exchange  rate  channel,  financial  innovation  results  in  greater  integration  of 
domestic  and  international  financial  markets,  which  should  also  strengthen  the  exchange 
rate channel as exchange rates become more sensitive to interest rate differentials between 
currency  areas.  This  has  been  illustrated  by  the  recent  debate  about  cross-border  carry 
trades10. 
At the same time, financial innovation has probably weakened the credit channel11. Several 
phenomena may be at play : 
• 
Financial innovation gives firms broader access to securities markets, which may 
reduce information asymmetries at the source of the credit channel. 
                                                      
7   BIS, 1994 
8   Noyer, 2001 
9   Weber, 2007 
10   Weber, 2007 
11   BIS, 1994; Thornton, 1994 
BIS Review 42/2007 
 3
  More specifically, securitisation by banks has reduced their liquidity constraints and 
thus further weakened the credit channel. A recently published research paper by 
the New York Fed, using a micro data set of individual loans granted by a sample 
of  banks  between  1997  and  2005,  shows  that  the  use  of  credit  derivatives  is 
associated  with  a  greater  supply  of  newly  negotiated  loans  extended  to  large 
corporate borrowers. Previous research has generally found that banks have used 
earlier credit market innovations such as loan sales and securitisation to diversify 
credit risk exposures and increase lending. 
However,  credit  derivatives  might  also  encourage  banks  to  monitor  risks  less 
carefully than in the past and thus mitigate the aforementioned effects that dampen 
the  credit  channel.  To  the  extent  that  banks  monitor  their  risks  efficiently  that 
mitigating impact should nevertheless be only partial. 
Research conducted within the Eurosystem Inflation Persistence Network has already shown that the 
interest rate channel is a prominent channel of transmission in the euro area12. As financial innovation 
tends to strengthen that channel, it would be tempting to assert that it makes monetary policy more 
efficient. However, countervailing effects make it difficult to draw a general conclusion. Furthermore, 
empirical  work  is  lacking  on  this  issue.  I  would  thus  strongly  encourage  researchers  to  provide 
policymakers with further evidence – drawing especially on micro-data. 
3.  
Financial innovation may in some cases endanger financial stability and central banks 
should take appropriate action in order to mitigate potential systemic risks 
Such issues may arise both at the microeconomic and at the macroeconomic levels. 
- 
Let us first look at the microeconomic level 
• 
Specific difficulties may arise in the infancy of new products: valuation difficulties, 
lack  of  market  liquidity,  possible  lack  of  expertise  of  some  traders,  and  so  on. 
However, such problems can be regarded as mostly transitory in nature. Indeed, 
financial  innovation  has  improved  and  increased  the  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system. In particular, risks are spread among a greater number of agents, who are 
willing  and  a  priori  able  to  bear  them.  However,  innovations  constantly  introduce 
additional  layers of  sophistication  and  complexity13.  In  this  regard,  the  system of 
incentives  by  which  professional  asset  managers  operate  should  be  closely  and 
permanently aligned with the interests of investors. 
One  specific  type  of  financial  innovation  is  the  emergence  of  new  unregulated 
players whose default might have implications for systemic risk. One such type of 
investor  are  hedge  funds.  Hedge  funds’  activities  could  clearly  be  the  source  of 
systemic risk since they are now major – often dominant – actors in several market 
segments accounting for 40% of the turnover of major stock exchanges and 25% of 
the  turnover  of  credit  derivatives  markets.  They  are  also  the  main  providers  of 
liquidity in some markets that would dry up very quickly should they withdraw. They 
often leverage themselves with very high multiples either directly through borrowing 
or indirectly by intensive use of derivatives. 
The importance of hedge funds and more generally of the already mentioned OFIs 
illustrates  that  there  may  be  circumstances  in  which  injecting  liquidity  into  the 
banking system – a traditional tool of crisis management used by central banks – 
may not be sufficient to prevent major instability. Three main avenues for mitigating 
the risks of contagion from hedge fund defaults either through potential losses to 
their  bank creditors  or  through  adverse  market  dynamics  have been  proposed14. 
First, appropriate intervention by supervisors vis-à-vis prime brokers to make sure 
that they ask for and get broad information from hedge funds and that they put in 
                                                        
12   Angeloni, Kashyap and Mojon, 2003 
13   Noyer, 2006a 
14   Noyer, 2007 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2007
 At the macroeconomic level 
• 
place  comprehensive  risk  management  of  all  hedge  funds-related  exposures  is 
essential. Second, there may be scope for policy-makers to encourage appropriate 
organisation of infrastructure in order to improve the information available on the 
markets in which hedge funds operate. Third, a specific information system to be 
triggered in the event of a crisis could be established ex ante in order to ensure 
that relevant information on exposures and positions could be quickly gathered if 
necessary. 
facilitating 
Increased  financial  asset  holding  resulting  from  financial  innovation  is  likely  to 
result in higher sensitivity of households to asset price booms and busts15. On the 
liabilities  side  of  non-financial  agents’  balance  sheets,  by 
the 
management of risk and easing liquidity constraints, financial innovation stimulates 
both the supply of and demand for credit, which may lead to higher leveraging and 
financial fragility. Note that both effects run counter to the result I mentioned at the 
start,  i.e.  that  financial  innovation  tends  to  reduce  growth  volatility.  Although  this 
result  may  still  hold  true  in  normal  circumstances,  it  may  thus  be  reversed  in 
specific ones, especially in stress situations. 
Finally,  as  links  between  markets  are  tightened  by  financial  innovation,  a  shock 
occurring  on  one  specific  market  may  be  more  easily  transmitted  and  possibly 
amplified on other markets. This may particularly be the case if the shock is large 
and if market participants adopt herd behaviour in the face of incoming information 
that is disseminated very fast. 
  I will not try to conclude these opening remarks, since it is precisely the purpose of the conference to 
go into deeper analysis of all the issues I tried to mention briefly, and perhaps of others I forgot. And it 
will be up to President Axel Weber at the end, to draw the conclusions. But let me make just one final 
remark. Financial innovation brings a lot of progress and should be welcome in principle. It is also a 
constant  challenge  for  central  bankers.  Good  knowledge  of  microeconomic  behaviour  is  of  prime 
importance in order to better cope with the increased uncertainties and the new types of risks they 
bring about. This in turn is a challenge I am sure this conference will endeavour to rise to. 
References 
• 
Angeloni  I.,  A.  Kashyap  and  B.  Mojon  (eds)  (2003),  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  in  the 
Euro Area, Cambridge University Press. 
Banque  de  France  (2007),  Financial  Stability  Review,  Special  issue  on  hedge  funds,  10, 
Banque de France, April. 
BIS (1994), Macroeconomic and monetary policy issues raised by the growth of derivatives 
markets, CGFS – Monetary Policy (Hannoun Report), 4, November. 
Campbell  J.R.  and  Z.  Hercowitz  (2005),  “The  role  of  collateralized  Household  Debt  in 
Macroeconomic Stabilization”, NBER Working Paper Series, 11330, May. 
Cecchetti S., A. Flores-Lagunes and S. Krause (2006), “Assessing the Sources of Change in 
the Volatility of Real Growth”, NBER Working Paper Series, 11946, January. 
Dynan  K.E.,  D.W.  Elmendorf  and  D.E.  Sichel  (2006),  “Can  financial  innovation  help  to 
explain the reduced volatility of economic growth?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, pp 
123-150. 
Gerardi K., H. Rosen and P. Willen (2007), “Do Households Benefit from Deregulation and 
Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage Market, NBER Working Paper Series, 12967, March. 
                                                            
15   IMF, 2006 
BIS Review 42/2007 
 5
            6 
 Hirtle B. (2007): “Credit Derivatives and Bank Credit Supply”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, Staff Reports, 276, February. 
IMF (2006), “How do financial systems affect economic cycles ?” World Economic Outlook, 
chap. 4, pp 105-138, September. 
Jermann U., V. Quadrini (2007), “Financial Innovation and Macroeconomic Volatility”, paper 
presented at the Bundesbank Spring Conference, 27-28 April. 
Noyer  C.  (2001),  “Overview”,  in  Economic  Policy  for  the  Information  Economy,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas, pp 399-404. 
Noyer C. (2006a), “Financial systems for economic growth”, Speech at the 3rd Conference 
of the Monetary Stability Fondation, Frankfurt-am-Main, 6 July. 
Noyer C. (2006b), “Does money matter? A European perspective”, Speech at the 4th ECB 
Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt-am-Main, 9-10 November. 
Noyer  C.  (2007),  “Hedge  funds:  what  are  the  main  issues?”,  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Special issue on hedge funds, Banque de France, 10, pp 105-111, April. 
Rajan  R.G.  (2005),  “Has  Finance  Made 
Management, 12 (4), 499-533. 
Rajan R.G. and L. Zingales (1998), “Financial dependence and growth”, American Economic 
Review, 88, pp 559-586. 
Thornton D.L. (1994), “Financial Innovation, Deregulation and the “Credit View” of Monetary 
Policy”,  Review  of  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Saint  Louis  Review,  pp  31-49,  January-
February. 
Weber A. (2006), “Concluding Remarks”, Conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network on 
“Financial system modernisation and economic growth in Europe”, September 29. 
Weber  A.  (2007),  “Hedge  funds:  a  central  bank  perspective”,  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Special issue on hedge funds, Banque de France,10, pp 101-168, April. 
the  World  Riskier?”,  European  Financial 
BIS Review 42/2007
