Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The vital role of statistics in national development 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  15th  Philippine  Statistics  Quiz  (PSQ)  National  Finals,  Central 
Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 5 December 2006. 
 Dr.  Isidoro  P.  David,  President  of  the  Philippine  Statistical  Association;  Dr.  Romulo  A.  Virola, 
Secretary-General  of  the  National  Statistical  Coordination  Board;  Honorable  Carmelita  N.  Ericta, 
Administrator of the National Statistics Office; our distinguished judges and guests; regional finalists 
and  their  teachers  and  parents;  fellow  workers  in  the  government;  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
afternoon. 
We,  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  warmly  welcome  this  opportunity  to  once  again  host  the 
Philippine  Statistics  Quiz  National  Finals.  The  BSP  has  always  been  supportive  of  these  kinds  of 
activities  that  give  due  recognition  to  the  vital  role  of  statistics  in  national  development.  As  the 
country’s central monetary authority and as the supervisor and regulator of the banking system, we 
formulate policies on the basis of statistical information that we produce, collect and compile, as well 
as  monitor,  assess  and  review.  Statistics  are  important  not  only  for  the  stories  they  tell  but  also 
because  they  provide  the  basis  for  sound,  sensible  policies  going  forward.  Timely,  relevant  and 
reliable information provide sound guideposts that enable us to make informed choices and, ultimately, 
form an educated stand on issues that affect our nation’s future. 
With statistics permeating the different facets of life, the BSP, together with other statistical agencies, 
is  confronted  with  the  challenge  of  going  beyond  the  production  of  statistics  and  moving  toward 
upgrading the level of statistical literacy in the country. It is in this light that we commend the Philippine 
Statistics  Quiz  (PSQ)  Steering  Committee  for  its  efforts  to  promote  and  enhance  awareness  of  the 
value of statistics in the school environment. This initiative of the PSQ is laudable as it helps demystify 
statistics as a science. Statistics has long been perceived by many as a complex and even perhaps 
mysterious field of study. Fora, such as this, however, can display how fascinating and practical this 
subject can be, as students tackle problems that show the interconnection between statistics and the 
real world. 
The BSP welcomes every opportunity to help nurture young minds with a view to strengthening the 
human resource base of our nation. I challenge our young college freshmen here to develop their love 
and enthusiasm for statistics, for with this goes the development of their critical thinking.  
On this note, the BSP unites with the Philippine statistical community and the academe in honoring 
this year’s finalists and in congratulating the winners and their mentors.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
