David Dodge: Income trusts 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons Standing 
Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 1 February 2007. 
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and members of the Committee. I'm happy to be here and to assist the 
Committee, insofar as I am able, in your study on income trusts. 
I should start by making clear where the Bank of Canada's main interest in the income trust sector lies. 
Our  interest  in  income  trusts  relates  to  the  efficient  functioning  and  health  of  Canada's  financial 
system. A safe and efficient financial system is essential to Canada's economic well-being. The Bank 
of Canada works with other government agencies, as well as market participants, to promote the safe 
and efficient functioning of the financial system. Capital markets are a key component of that system. 
And so we are naturally interested in developments in financial markets – such as the evolution of the 
income trust market – that have the potential to affect financial system efficiency. 
With that introduction, let me quickly summarize the highlights of the Bank's analysis of this topic. I'd 
refer committee members to the June 2006 edition of our Financial System Review. In that publication, 
we noted that limited evidence suggests that income trusts can enhance market completeness in a 
couple of ways. First, income trusts can provide diversification benefits to investors, because trusts 
can have different risk-return characteristics than either equities or bonds. Second, the income trust 
structure  appears  to  allow  some  firms  improved  access  to  market  financing.  So,  insofar  as  income 
trusts allow investors to achieve risk-return benefits that they could not otherwise achieve, and serve 
as a source of financing to firms that might not otherwise have had access to markets, it can be said 
that income trusts enhance market completeness, and therefore support financial system efficiency. 
That same article also noted two areas where the standards for trusts are not the same as those for 
corporations, and where improvement is clearly needed – standards related to accounting, and those 
related to governance. 
These are the aspects of income trusts that we at the Bank have looked at and on which we are best 
able to comment. Of course, there are very important public policy questions related to income trusts 
that fall outside the Bank's mandate. The Bank has done no specific research on how the income trust 
structure  affects  economic  performance,  or  would  affect  the  future  productivity  of  the  Canadian 
economy. 
But,  based  on  general  economic  principles  and  my  understanding  of  the  structure  of  the  Canadian 
economy, I can say that while the income trust structure may be very appropriate where firms need 
only to manage existing assets efficiently, it is definitely not appropriate in cases where innovation and 
new  investment  are  key.  To  the  extent  that  the  system  was  favouring  the  use  of  the  income  trust 
structure in these cases, the incentives for innovation and investment were reduced, and the potential 
for future productivity growth was reduced. 
Finally,  members  of  the  Committee  should  realize  that  the  different  risk-return  characteristics  of 
income trusts may not enhance market completeness if they arise from differences in tax treatment. 
Clearly, there has been a very significant tax incentive to use the income trust form of organization in 
cases where this would not have been the appropriate form of organization from a business efficiency 
point  of  view.  By  giving  incentives  that  led  to  the  inappropriate  use  of  the  income  trust  form  of 
organization, the tax system was actually creating inefficiencies in capital markets, inefficiencies that, 
over time, would lead to lower levels of investment, output and productivity. 
While  we  at  the  Bank  have  not  done  any  research  on  how  the  rules  of  the  tax  system  could  be 
designed  so  that  they  do  not  give  inappropriate  incentives  that  would  bias  the  choice  of  firms  to 
operate either as an income trust or as a corporation, the changes proposed by the government last 
October  would  appear  to  substantially  level  the  playing  field.  For  the  income  trust  sector  to  deliver 
efficiency  benefits  through  the  enhancement  of  market  completeness,  it's  important  that  the  tax 
system provide a level playing field. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
