Stefan Ingves: Communication – what demands are made of an independent 
central bank? 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish  Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 24 April 2007.  
 Introduction  
I shall begin by thanking you for the invitation to the Swedish Economics Association. It has become a 
recurring and pleasant task for the Governor of the Riksbank to discuss the Riksbank’s activities with 
this knowledgeable assembly. 
Since I was last here, a year ago, quite a lot has happened in the monetary policy field. We at the 
Riksbank have, for instance, implemented a number of changes to make our communication clearer. 
We  have  replaced  the  earlier  Inflation  Report  with  a  Monetary  Policy  Report.  We  intend  that  this 
change  of  name  should  signal  that  the  report  now  contains  a  description  of  the  considerations  we 
have made when we have taken our interest rate decisions. Another new element is that we have now 
begun to present the forecast for the repo rate that we consider will provide well-balanced monetary 
policy ahead.  
There is nothing strange about our methods of working changing over time. We are constantly trying to 
improve  and  develop  our  methods.  After  all,  monetary  policy  is  also  to  a  large  extent  a  learning 
process. In part, this is a case of gradually discovering shortcomings in our methods of working and 
trying to remedy them. However it is also because we live in a changing world, where we must adapt 
as demands on our operations change – demands that may come from various directions. 
My theme today is that a modern, independent central bank needs to take many considerations in its 
monetary policy work, not least in its communication. There are above all two aspects that we must 
always take into account. The first is that we have a responsibility as an authority towards the Swedish 
people and their political representatives. The second is that we must communicate and interact with 
the financial markets when we implement our monetary policy. 
I intend to devote the major part of my speech to illustrating some different aspects of the demands 
made of us. The areas I intend to talk about are transparency, signalling and the future interest rate 
path. There are no sharp dividing lines between these areas. How we regard the future interest rate 
path is, for instance, part of our signalling, and the quality of our signalling in turn has significance for 
how  transparent  we  are.  Transparency  in  itself  is  part  of  our  role  as  a  public  authority.  But  I 
nevertheless consider it worth discussing them under separate headings. 
The role as authority and interaction with the market 
Let me before I do so say a few more words about our role as public authority and our interaction with 
the market. I intend to begin with the latter aspect. The interplay between the Riksbank and the market 
is of central significance for monetary policy. It is a question of mutual dependence. For example, the 
Riksbank is to supply an efficient payment system – a financial infrastructure. We also oversee the 
stability  of  the  system.  Moreover,  we  are  responsible  for  providing  Swedish  banknotes  and  coins. 
However, at the same time we are dependent on the financial markets to implement monetary policy 
measures.  
The game rules for our interaction with the financial markets have changed quite a lot over the past 25 
years.  The  most  dramatic changes  took  place  in  connection  with  the  deregulation  of  the  credit  and 
foreign exchange markets that begin in the 1980s. The deregulation has contributed to more efficient 
pricing which better reflects demand and supply conditions. The efficiency of the financial markets has 
considerable importance for the impact of monetary policy via the transmission mechanism.  
The impact of our policy also depends on how well we succeed in communicating our intentions to the 
market. The more open and clear we are, the better chance we have of influencing interest rate setting 
in the way we want, not just in the short term, but also over a part of the so-called yield curve. This 
makes some demands of our actions. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
The other aspect – that we are a public authority with responsibility towards the general public and 
their  elected  representatives  –  also  makes  a  number  of  demands  of  us.  The  public  authority  role 
means that we are at the end of a delegation chain. The people have elected a parliament which has 
legislated  on  the  Riksbank’s  objective  and  appointed  the  General  Council  of  the  Riksbank.  The 
General Council in turn appoints the Executive Board with six members who are to make the monetary 
policy decisions.  
This type of delegation may be appropriate when political decisions risk leading to time horizons that 
are too short. This problem is dealt with in monetary policy by the Riksbank having a high degree of 
independence and a clear statutory task. Delegation may also be appropriate if there is a question of 
technically  complicated  activities.  Monetary  policy  is  such  an  activity.  There  are  also  many  other 
authorities,  for  example,  the  Swedish  Nuclear  Power  Inspectorate  and  the  Swedish  Civil  Aviation 
Authority, who are responsible for technical issues that have considerable importance to society. Most 
people  probably  think  that,  for  instance,  the  length  of  a  runway  at  an  airport  or  the  design  of  the 
cooling system in a nuclear power station should be determined by experts and not through political 
voting.  
Some of the demands made of us on the basis of our role as authority are fairly obvious. We must, for 
instance, to the best of our ability try to meet the price stability target we have been allocated. We 
must also be able to explain in a good way to the general public why we act in the way we do. This is 
particularly important as the Riksbank has such a high degree of independence. This independence 
means  that  it  is  important  to  be  able  to  evaluate  how  we  are  carrying  out  our  duties.  To  make  it 
possible to evaluate us, we must be open and clear in everything we do.  
But it is perhaps not as self-evident that the responsibility of public authority makes a number of other 
demands on our actions. This applies, for instance, to the forms for how we make our interest rate 
decisions  and  how  we  communicate  our  monetary  policy  intentions.  The  latter  is  usually  called 
“signalling” in central bank language. I shall return to this. 
Transparency – being open and clear 
It  was  long  common  for  central  banks  to  be  secretive  and  a  little  mysterious.  One  example,  which 
today  may  sound  fairly  strange,  is  that  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  US  central  bank,  did  not  begin 
publishing the interest rate changes it had decided until 19941.  
However, over  the  past  fifteen years, central  banks  have  in general become increasingly open and 
clear with regard to their actions and intentions. This applies both in inflation-targeting countries like 
Sweden and in countries that have not quantified a target, like the United States.  
Democratic reasons for transparency… 
There  are  several  reasons  for  the  increased  openness  and  clarity,  or  transparency,  as  it  is  usually 
called. The most important one is probably that the central banks have become more independent in 
relation  to  the  political  system.  As  I  observed  initially,  it  is  the  general  public  who,  via  the  political 
system,  are  the  central  bank's  ultimate  principals.  As  the  central  banks  became  independent,  it 
became  more  important  that  the  general  public  should  have  an  insight  into  their  operations.  It  was 
quite simply not compatible with good democratic tradition for an authority allocated a high degree of 
independence  to  remain  closed  and  secretive.  Increased  transparency  was  a  means  of  creating 
legitimacy among the general public for the new system.  
…and efficiency reasons 
But  there  are  not  only  political  reasons  as  to  why  the  central  banks  have  become  more  open  and 
clear. Another explanation is that many central banks have seen greater transparency as a means of 
                                                      
1   See, for instance, Chapter 1, “Through the Looking Glass: Central Bank Transparency”, in Blinder, A.S., (2004), The Quiet 
Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press or Geraats, P., (2006), “Transparency of Monetary Policy: 
Theory and Practice”, CESifo Economic Studies 52, 111-152. Both of these are examples of good reviews of transparency 
in central banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2007
more  easily  attaining  their  objectives  and  of  making  monetary  policy  more  efficient.  This  applies  in 
particular in the countries that have begun applying inflation targeting. One could call this an economic 
argument  in  favour  of  transparency.  This  is  partly  connected  to  the  fact  that  if  monetary  policy  is 
transparent it will become easier for economic agents to know that the interest rate decisions made 
are really aimed at achieving low and stable inflation. Openness and clarity can thereby contribute to 
increased credibility and anchor inflation expectations around the target. This was an important reason 
why the Riksbank began to publish its forecasts and other material on which decisions were based 
early on in the new inflation-targeting regime. I am convinced that we would not have been able to 
build up confidence in the price stability target as quickly as we did if we had not been as open as we 
were regarding our work and our decisions. 
The economic argument in favour of transparency is also linked to the fact that openness and clarity 
are today considered an important part of the monetary policy in itself. According to economic theory, 
there is a correlation between interest rates with different times to maturity. Expectations of short-term 
interest  rates,  which  the  central  bank  governs,  are  important  to  the  long-term  interest  rates.  By 
influencing expectations of short-term interest rates, a central bank can therefore also indirectly affect 
interest  rates  with  longer  maturities.  Greater  influence  over  rate-setting  for  all  maturities  –  the  yield 
curve  –  will  raise  the  degree  of  impact  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  sometimes  called  conducting 
monetary  policy  by  “management  of  expectations”.  Monetary  policy  is  to  a  large  degree  about 
influencing expectations. And the best way to do this is to provide good information.  
The most obvious way for a central bank to influence expectations of monetary policy is to present the 
future path for the policy rate that the bank itself considers most reasonable. This is what the Riksbank 
began doing with effect from the first Monetary Policy Report published this year. I will talk about this a 
little more in a moment.  
Let me take up a final argument in favour of transparency that I believe should not be underestimated. 
It is that by being open and clear towards the outside world we also become better in our analysis 
within the walls of the Riksbank. As transparency makes it easier to evaluate how well monetary policy 
functions, it quite simply increases the incentives for us to do a good job. 
The objections are not convincing 
However, not everyone is agreed that transparency is a general blessing. Academic research shows 
both advantages and disadvantages with transparency. A theoretical result from this research that has 
received much attention is that more public information from central banks and other authorities can in 
some cases be a negative element2. However, this result is based on the public information being of 
low quality. If the economic agents attach greater importance to poor public information than to their 
own better private  information,  the  economy  as a  whole  may suffer  losses.  However,  this  assumes 
that the public information is much poorer than the agents’ own information – an assumption that is 
hardly true in practice3. A more reasonable assumption, in any case with regard to central banks and 
monetary policy, is that public information is not poorer than the assessments made by private agents. 
Central banks probably invest greater resources than any individual agent into studying the economy, 
assessing the economic situation and making forecasts. Reasonably, central banks should also know 
more about their own intentions than any other agent. 
It  is  therefore  possible  to  construct  theoretical  cases  where  a  lower  degree  of  transparency  is 
preferable to a higher degree. But on the whole the research appears to indicate quite clearly that a 
high degree of transparency is something the central banks should aim at. It is easy to agree with this 
conclusion. Here I think that the demands on a public authority in a democracy have great importance. 
Then I believe that in practice there are limits as to how transparent a central bank can be. In some 
respects  it  is  quite  simply  difficult  to  be  open  and  clear.  This  applies,  for  example,  to  how  much 
emphasis  the  central  bank  places  on  stabilising  the  real  economy  relative  to  stabilising  inflation.  In 
theoretical models this is usually represented by a special parameter in the central bank’s so-called 
goal function. However, placing a value on this parameter which is then published would probably be 
                                                      
2   Morris, S. and H.S. Shin, (2002), "The Social Value of Public Information”, American Economic Review 92, 1521-1534. 
3   Svensson, L.E.O., (2006), “Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin (2002) Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not 
Con,” American Economic Review 96, 448-451. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 3
very difficult in practice. The step from theory to practice is probably too great in this case, at least for 
now.  
The interest rate path 
An  important  part  of  the  transparency  concerns  the  central  bank’s  communication  of  its  monetary 
policy intentions. So, how open and clear should a central bank be with regard to its own assessment 
of the future interest rate path? I would like to reply "as open and clear as possible”. And I believe that 
we at the Riksbank work in this way today. But the road to this standpoint has been very long and 
lined with various requirements and considerations.  
With regard to the assumption of the future interest rate, central banks use three different approaches. 
The first is that the policy rate will remain unchanged throughout the forecast period. According to the 
second  approach,  the  policy  rate  is  instead  assumed  to  follow  market  expectations.  The  third 
approach means that the central bank works on the basis of its own forecast for the development of 
the  policy  rate.4 5  The  Riksbank  has  moved  away  from  the  first  of  the  three  approaches,  via  the 
second, to now publish and build its forecasts on the basis of our own view of what we consider to be 
a reasonable development in interest rates in the future.  
Why did we take this step and why did we not take it before this year? Well, the easiest answer is 
probably that “everything has its place”. A solution that at one point in time matches the requirements 
made of us will perhaps not work at all when conditions change. And the world around us is of course 
anything but static. Then there is also a measure of “learning by doing” in this. 
From unchanged repo rate… 
Up to October 2005 our inflation forecasts were made under the assumption that the policy rate would 
not change during the forecast period. The advantage of this method was that it illustrated in a simple 
manner when there was reason to change the policy rate. If the forecasts showed that inflation two 
years ahead would be lower than two per cent, this was a signal that the interest rate needed to be 
cut. If inflation would be higher, the interest rate usually needed to be raised.  
This rule was easy to understand and was therefore a good educational tool. This characteristic was 
particularly important when the rule was introduced. It was a question of winning back confidence in 
monetary  policy  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations  around  the  new  target  of  two  per  cent.  To 
succeed in this it was necessary for households, companies and the financial markets to understand 
the motives behind the monetary policy decisions. Here the simple rule probably played an important 
role. 
However,  there  were  also  considerable  disadvantages.  For  instance,  it  is  not  a  particularly  realistic 
scenario for the policy rate to remain unchanged a couple of years ahead. It was therefore difficult to 
make  forecasts  that  were  totally  coherent.  The  assumption  also  made  it  difficult  to  assess  our 
forecasts and to compare them with those of other forecasters.  
Moreover,  it  gradually  became  clear  that  this  rule  could  sometimes  be  an  obstacle  to  our 
communication. Too much focus was on the current interest rate decision and the inflation forecast 
exactly  two  years  ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  neither  the  general  public  nor  the  financial  markets 
received any clear guidance as to how we viewed interest rate developments further ahead. As our 
credibility increased, we gradually gained greater scope to conduct more flexible monetary policy. This 
also led to a greater need to show that it is the entire expected sequence of events for inflation and the 
real economy a few years ahead that is important to monetary policy decisions, and not merely the 
                                                      
4   See,  for  instance,  Blinder,  A.S.,  (2006),  ”Monetary  Policy  Today:  Sixteen  Questions  and  about  Twelve  Answers”,  paper 
presented  at  the  Banco  de  España  Conference  on  “Central  Banks  in  the  21st  Century,  Madrid,  June  8-9,  2006  and 
Kontulainen,  J.,  D.,  Mayes  and  J.,  Tarkka,  (2004),  “Monetary  Policy  Assumptions  in  Central  Bank  Forecasts”,  Bank  of 
Finland Bulletin 4, 2004. 
5   However, the monetary policy decisions made by the central banks always apply to only the current level of the policy rate, 
that is, the level that  will apply until the next decision is taken. There are some expectations. One  example is  when the 
Japanese central bank committed itself during  a deflation crisis to keeping the policy  rate at a low level during a certain 
period. For another example, see the press release from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors on 12 August 2003. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2007
levels we foresee two years ahead. And the focus should be on not only current interest rates, but also 
expectations of future interest rate changes6.  
…to market expectations… 
We left most of these problems behind us when we changed over in October 2005 to making forecasts 
based  on  market  expectations  of  the  future  development  of  the  policy  rate.  Compared  with  the 
assumption of an unchanged repo rate, market expectations normally provide a much more realistic 
forecast. This was one thing that made it easier to evaluate us. 
However,  an  assumption  that  the  policy  rate  will  develop  in  accordance  with  expectations  in  the 
financial  markets  has  its  disadvantages.  This  perhaps  applies  above  all  to  the  difficulties  in 
communicating the interest rate path when market agents’ assessments differ substantially from those 
of the Riksbank. Another problem that could lead to a lack of clarity in communication is how market 
expectations of the development of the policy rate should actually be measured. It may be difficult to 
estimate and adjust for different premiums – the compensation for differences between securities with 
regard  to  the  maturity,  credit  risk  and  degree  of  liquidity  required  by  an  investor.  There  are  also 
different ways of doing it.  
…to our own interest rate path 
These  problems  disappeared  or  at  least  were  much  alleviated  when  we  chose  to  present  our  own 
forecast for the interest rate path. One important reason why the new interest rate assumption was 
introduced was so that it would become easier to understand the motives behind our decisions. This 
creates  better  opportunities  to  evaluate  monetary  policy.  It  thereby  provides  good  conditions  for 
accountability and legitimacy for an independent central bank like the Riksbank. To refer back to what 
I  said  earlier  this  evening  –  I  believe  that  the  new  system  will  enable  us  to  better  meet  the 
requirements for openness and clarity made of us in our interaction with the general public and the 
financial markets. 
As I mentioned earlier, it is probably difficult a central bank to be much clearer than this with regard to 
what they consider to be well-balanced monetary policy. We gain an even better tool for influencing 
expectations  among  households,  companies  and  agents  in  the  financial  markets.  This  is  a 
precondition for monetary policy to function well.  
One  aspect  that  may  not  have  been  given  so  much  attention  is  that  it  has  become  simpler  for 
households planning their private economy to form an impression of which direction the interest rate 
will  take.  Previously,  many  people  were  probably  forced  to  rely  entirely  on  financial  advisers  to 
understand  how  the Riksbank envisaged  interest  rate  developments  a  couple of  years ahead.  Now 
this information is available in our Monetary Policy Report. In general, it can be observed that many 
people, particularly in the financial markets, put a lot of effort into making forecasts for the repo rate. If 
we  can  contribute  to  reducing  uncertainty  over  how  we  ourselves  view  the  future,  this  should  be 
positive for everyone.  
Manageable difficulties 
But of course there are also some difficulties that need to be managed when a central bank presents 
its own forecast of the interest rate path. As you know, the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions are 
taken by an Executive Board consisting of six people. While the decisions we make concern the level 
of  the  repo  rate  applying  until  the  next  monetary  policy  meeting,  we  must  also  agree  on  what  we 
consider to be a reasonable development for the repo rate throughout the forecast period. There may, 
of  course,  be  occasions  when  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  have  different  opinions.  For 
                                                      
6   See Jansson, P., and A. Vredin, (2004), ”Preparing the Monetary Policy Decision in an Inflation Targeting Central Bank: The 
Case of Sveriges Riksbank”, in the conference volume Practical Experiences With Inflation Targeting, Czech National Bank, 
Woodford, M. (2005), “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, essay presented at a symposium organised 
by FRB Kansas City ‘The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future’, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 25-27 August and Faust, J., 
and D. W. Henderson, (2004), “Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis 
Review, 86(4), 117-143. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 5
instance, the members may disagree as to how quickly inflation should be returned to target after a 
shock. This type of situation may be complicated. But after all, we have managed to agree earlier on 
interest rate messages that have contained information on our future intentions.  
Other  arguments  have  also  been  put  forward  against  publishing  one’s  own  forecast  for  the 
development of the policy rate. One is that it could damage our credibility and make communication 
with the general public and the financial markets more difficult. Let us assume that the central bank 
first notifies a particular interest rate path but that new information is received afterwards, which leads 
to a policy rate decision that differs from the path published earlier. According to this argument, the 
deviation could be perceived as a failure by the central bank and could impair the bank’s credibility7.  
However, I am fairly convinced that it is the other way around – that communication will now be clearer 
and  more  efficient.  I  believe  that  there  is  currently  widespread  understanding  among  households, 
companies  and  market  participants  that  monetary  policy  must  be  adjusted  when  the  prevailing 
conditions change. A forecast is by nature uncertain and this applies even more the further ahead it 
stretches. We have also been clear on this point. Our assessment of the development of the repo rate, 
as presented in the Monetary Policy Report, is a forecast. It is not a promise! When new information 
changes the economic outlook, we must of course reconsider our view of how the repo rate should be 
set in the future. But this is hardly a reason to refrain from being as open and clear as possible about 
what we currently believe will happen. As I have said on previous occasions – it would be roughly like 
the Swedish Meteorological Institute refraining from publishing five-day forecasts because conditions 
might change in the meantime.  
Another argument against publishing interest rate paths is linked to the way the market functions. This 
means that in principle the financial market agents could stop looking for other information if they have 
access  to  the  central  bank’s  forecasts  for  interest  rates  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  How  the  market 
views  economic  prospects  is  normally  reflected  in  the  long-term  market  rates.  This  source  of 
information could thus be lost and this would impair the functioning of the market. 
But  I  find  it  very  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  market  agents  would  stop  making  independent 
assessments because we are now publishing our own view of interest rate developments. They know 
as well as we do that we are living in an uncertain world and that the forecasts we make are constantly 
being revised. They have strong reasons for continuing to look for information via other channels than 
the  Riksbank  and  for  assessing  this  information,  even  when  we  publish  our  forecast  of  the  future 
interest rate path. In the long term, there are of course more factors than expected monetary policy 
which are significant for interest rates. Although we have as yet only had time to present one repo rate 
forecast,  there  has  been  no  sign  that  the  market  has  become  “passive”.  On  the  contrary,  it  has 
become clear that we and other market agents have had slightly differing views as to what would be a 
reasonable future development for the repo rate. In a way, this is a good sign. It is in the nature of 
things that forecasters make different forecasts, particularly in the slightly longer term. That it how it is 
when one works with economic forecasting. 
Our assessment is therefore that any difficulties arising from the new assumption are manageable. But 
different types of interest rate assumption also make different demands on our communication. One 
important  aspect  of  what  the  publication  of  our  own  interest  rate  path  means  is  our  method  of 
signalling.  
Signalling 
Let me therefore go on to talk about the Riksbank’s signalling. By this I mean, quite simply, how we 
communicate  our  monetary  policy  intentions.  In  brief,  the  Riksbank’s  practice  can  be  described  as 
follows. Between the monetary policy meetings the individual members of the Executive Board have 
often  held  speeches  on  the  theme  of  "the  current  situation"  or  similar.  In  these  speeches  we  have 
given our views on economic developments and sometimes also indicated, with varying degrees of 
explicitness,  how  we  consider  the  interest  rate  should  be  set  at  the  next  meeting.  It  has  on  these 
occasions  been  clearly  understood  that  the  Executive  Board  members  are  expressing  their  own 
personal opinions. One could call this a sort of “signalling by degrees”. That is, when the interest rate 
                                                      
7   See, for example, Giavazzi, F. and F. Mishkin (2006), “An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy between 1995 and 2005”, 
Reports from the Riksdag 2006/07:RFR 1, Committee on Finance. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2007
decision has been taken at the monetary policy meeting enough information should have already been 
signalled  by  degrees  so  that  economic  agents  are  not  taken  by  surprise.  And  on  the  whole,  our 
signalling policy appears to have worked quite well.  
But, like many other things, the demands made of our signalling have changed over time. Things look 
quite different today from when the inflation target was new and confidence in monetary policy was 
low. This is partly linked to the fact that for some years we have been an independent authority, with 
the demands for insight that this entails. It is also, as I have just implied, connected to the important 
changes  we  have  recently  made  in  our  communication.  Moreover,  there  may  be  some  potential 
problems in the way we have signalled previously, although as I said it has worked fairly well.  
I intend to mainly focus on the time aspect of the signalling, that is, when or how often we signal or 
should do so. I would like to point out that what I say here is my own personal reflection after just over 
one year as Governor of the Riksbank. It is not an expression of the general view of the Executive 
Board. At present we are discussing the issues I am taking up here. And it is quite natural that we 
should  discuss  this.  Since  the  inflation  target  was  introduced  we  have  been  constantly  working  on 
refining  and  developing  our  methods  of  conducting monetary  policy  in  general.  There  is  hardly  any 
reason to believe that signalling should have reached its final form and it is therefore not something 
that should remain outside of the general change process. 
Reduced need for signalling 
The changes we have made in our communication recently have significance for the need to signal. 
We  now  publish  the  path  of  the  future  repo  rate  that  we  consider  most  reasonable  in  our  new 
Monetary  Policy  Reports. The  reports also explain why  we  have  chosen  this particular  path.  These 
forecasts for the repo rate will be presented three times a year. At the meetings where no Monetary 
Policy  Report  is  published  we  will  make  a  qualitative  assessment  of  whether  the  most  recently 
published  path  “holds  good”,  given  the  new  information  received.  We  can  then  communicate,  for 
instance, that our assessment has not changed or that we now believe that the interest rate may need 
to  be  raised  or  cut  slightly  faster  than  we  had  previously  assumed.  This  will  make  our  intentions 
regarding  future  monetary  policy  as  clear  as  they  can  be.  In  my  opinion,  this  new  way  of  working 
reduces the need for signalling prior to the monetary policy meetings. 
Objections of principle… 
It  is  also  possible  to  raise  issues  of  principle  regarding  when  and  how  one  should  signal.  The 
signalling  has  sometimes  been  a  question  of  wanting  to  communicate  that  we  have  had  a  slightly 
different view of how the interest rate should be set at the next meeting than the market has expected. 
In  these  situations  one  can  say  that  we  have  preferred  to  prepare  the  market  by  signalling  a  few 
weeks  before  a  monetary  policy  meeting  rather  than  to  risk  surprising  them  when  the  decision  is 
announced. But it is not necessarily the case that much can be gained by “fine tuning” expectations 
over the course of a few weeks. Although this system has meant that we have sometimes been able to 
avoid strong reactions and indignant comments in connection with the actual interest rate decision, we 
have nevertheless had roughly the same reactions when we have signalled the probable interest rate 
decision a few weeks earlier. The question is then what value the signalling has had. 
…not least because we are several members who must agree 
Many  questions  regarding  the  signalling  are  connected  to  the  fact  that  we  are  a  group  of  persons 
making interest rate decisions. The Executive Board of the Riksbank is what is usually known as an 
individualistic committee8. This means, quite simply, that the members act as individuals. This applies 
both when we are out speaking and when the interest rate is set. The interest rate decisions are made 
through voting and the members can publicly state whether or not they share the majority view. In the 
case  of  so-called  collegial  committee,  there  is  instead  an  agreement  that  the  individual  members’ 
views are subordinate to the group’s overall opinion. If there are internal differences of opinion, they 
                                                      
8   See,  for  example,  Blinder,  A.S.,  (2007),  "Central  Banking  by  Committee:  Why  and  How?”  European  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 23, 106-123. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 7
are often concealed from the outside world and once a decision has been taken, all of the members 
officially support it. 
The  combination  of  making  interest  rate  decisions  in  a  group  and  signalling  between  the  monetary 
policy meetings is not entirely problem-free. If we assume, for instance, that an individual member is to 
hold a speech a few weeks prior to a monetary policy meeting where he or she gives signals that the 
interest rate should be changed. Regardless of whether or not the Executive Board is an individualistic 
committee, I believe that sometimes there may be uncertainty as to who is actually sending the signal. 
Is it merely the individual member who is describing his or her view, or is he or she expressing the 
majority's opinion?  
If different members were to send out different signals as to what should happen at the next meeting, it 
may also cause uncertainty as to which of them one should believe in the most. This is also a problem 
raised in academic research as one of the dangers of individualistic committees – the communication 
risks becoming a “cacophony of voices”, without any clear message9.  
A decision following the correct procedure 
Here  a  potential  conflict  might  arise  with  regard  to  the  demands  made  of  the  Riksbank  as  an 
independent authority. The responsibility as an authority means that interest rate decisions must follow 
the correct procedure. It is important that our principals – ultimately the general public – have insight 
into the decision-making process. One expression for this is that minutes are taken at the monetary 
policy  meetings,  which  are  then  published  soon  afterwards.  Another  is  that  the  Chairman  and  Vice 
Chairman of the General Council have the right, according to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, to attend the 
Executive  Board’s  meetings,  which  they  usually  do10.  One  might  say  that  they  are  monitoring,  on 
behalf of the general public, that everything is done properly, that the decision-making process follows 
the correct procedures. This means, for instance, that interest rate decisions may not be “mortgaged” 
in advance, as I described earlier. 
This shows that at least in theory there are some problems in signalling prior to the monetary policy 
meetings. There is a risk of confusing the market or of "tying up” both the discussion at the monetary 
policy meeting and the actual interest rate decision. As the need for signalling has also declined with 
the changes made in our communication, as I see it there is good reason to reconsider the forms for 
signalling. 
What conclusion do I reach then? Well, as I see it, it should normally be enough to give clear signals in 
connection  with  the  seven  monetary  policy  meetings  held  every  year.  Only  in  exceptional  cases  is 
there a need to signal prior to the monetary policy meetings. And this is the way it has functioned in 
practice in recent years. In the cases where we nevertheless choose to signal prior to a meeting, it 
should in my opinion be clear who is behind the message, for instance, the entire Executive Board. 
This method of working also guarantees the principle of following correct procedures and observable 
decision-making that in my opinion is required in our role as public authority.  
Let me point out that what I have said should not be interpreted as advocating a transition from an 
individualistic to a collegial committee, or “putting a lid on” internal differences of opinion. Of course 
the  individual  Executive  Board  members  should  continue  to  be  able  to  express  their  own  opinions 
publicly. But as I see it, this should be more a question of afterwards clarifying and explaining personal 
deliberations made in connection with the monetary policy meetings. Differences of opinion within the 
Executive Board will also, as before, be made clear in the minutes of the meetings. Here I think, as I 
have  said  on  earlier  occasions,  that  there  is  also  reason  to  consider  further  increasing  insight  by 
naming the members as they take part in the discussion, not merely if they have entered a reservation 
against the interest rate decision. This way, we would both follow the correct procedure for decision-
making and everyone would know who stands for what. 
                                                      
9  
10   Sveriges Riksbank Act (1983:1385), Chapter 3, Article 3. 
Ibid 
8 
 BIS Review 40/2007
Conclusion 
Let  me  round  off.  Our  method  of  working  has  changed  considerably  over  time.  But  this  is  how 
monetary policy is conducted. The world around us is anything but static and the external demands 
made of our activities change. Within the bank we try to learn from our practical experiences and we 
always  work  to  develop  and  improve  our  methods.  This  is  always  a  question  of  finding  suitable 
methods to manage both the authority role and the interplay with the financial markets.  
Ever since the inflation target was introduced, transparency has been a guiding principle for us. We 
are currently considered to be one of the most open central banks in the world11. But getting where we 
are today has been a gradual process. The most recent step has been the decision to publish our own 
forecast  of  how  the  repo  rate  will  develop.  Hopefully  this  means  we  will  become  even  better  at 
explaining  to  the  general  public  and  the  financial  markets  how  we  reason  when  making  monetary 
policy decisions. 
But the process does not stop here. We will continue to seek ways of increasing our openness and 
clarity. One area where I myself feel that it might be time to move on is the forms for our signalling. 
This applies even more after the changes we have made recently. In my opinion, the Riksbank should 
only in exceptional cases signal before formally making a decision at the monetary policy meetings. As 
I have said on earlier occasions, I also believe that it may be appropriate to name the members in 
connection with their comments in the minutes of the monetary policy meetings.  
The purpose of the changes we make is of course essentially to become clearer and more efficient in 
our  communication.  The  fact  that  we  are  constantly  striving  to  achieve  this  is  something  that  both 
financial market agents and the general public expect of us. 
Thank you! 
                                                      
11   See, for instance, Eijffinger, S. and P. Geerats, (2006), “How transparent are central banks?” European Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 22, 1-21. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 9
