Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The ING-FINEX search for CFO of the Year 
Award – a search for inspiring leadership 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Launching  of  the  ING-FINEX  Search  for  CFO  of  the 
Year Award, Makati, 10 July 2007. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. I am pleased to be here at the launching of the ING-
FINEX Search for CFO of the year.  
It is a matter of public knowledge that the Philippines breeds world-class finance executives. 
Through  their  vision  and  leadership  in  financial  management,  they  create  wealth  for  their 
institutions and stakeholders.  
This award program therefore will identify role models who can inspire and motivate financial 
executives to do better. In the process, we can look forward to generating an even wider pool 
of  dynamic,  internationally  competitive  and  highly  ethical  chief  financial  officers  in  our 
country.  
For an institution such as the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas which fosters the development of a 
dynamic,  professional  and  healthy  financial  system  for  sustained  economic  growth  the 
launching of the CFO of the Year Award is welcome news indeed.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  magazine  Institutional  Investor  said  there  is  now  growing 
appreciation for CFOs who transcend the traditional number-crunching, cost-controlling role 
and embrace responsibility for improving operations, driving revenue growth and executing 
big acquisitions. CFOs more and more have been called on to analyze the potential risks and 
returns of strategic decisions so companies can avoid critical mistakes. And as companies 
have  sought  to  become  leaner  and  less  centralized,  many  have  eliminated  the  position  of 
chief  operating  officer,  opening  the  door  for  CFOs  to  assume  some  of  these  critical 
responsibilities. 
This is no small matter. It is time therefore that we honor the best CFOs in our midst. 
On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  therefore,  I  congratulate  the  organizers  of  this  program: 
FINEX, ING, the AIM-Gov. Jose B. Fernandez Jr. Centre for Banking & Finance, IAFEI, the 
CFA Society of the Philippines. Let us give them a big hand! Let us also thank the media 
groups who share our belief in the significance of this award program, in alphabetical order 
now:  ANC  Business  Channel  of  the  ABS-CBN  Group,  Business  World,  Philippine  Daily 
Inquirer and Philippine Star.  
Personally, I am already looking forward to meeting the first awardee of the ING-FINEX CFO 
of the Year! Who will it be? Is she or he in this room? A member of FINEX or not? Let’s wait 
and see.  
Again, congratulations to FINEX and ING! Thank you all and good evening. Mabuhay po ang 
bansang Pilipinas! 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
