Ernesto Gouveia Gove: Central Bank of Mozambique’s review of 2006 and 
prospects for 2007 
Speech by Mr Ernesto Gouveia Gove, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique, on the occasion of the 
2006 Financial Year Closing Ceremony, Maputo, 20 December 2006. 
 Distinct Members of the Board of Directors of the Banco de Moçambique 
Distinct Presidents and Representatives of Commercial Banks and Financial Institutions 
Dear Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank you, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Banco de Moçambique 
and personally, for your presence in this traditional meeting of the end of the year in which we make 
the first analysis of the financial year ending and present our perspectives for the 2007 financial and 
economic year. 
Introduction 
The year 2006 was marked by important events for the country and our institution. The agreement on 
the reversion of Cahora Bassa Hydroelectric (HCB) plant to the Mozambican Government was indeed 
an  event  with  an  historic  and  economic  dimension.  Under  this  agreement,  the  Mozambican 
Government became the holder of 85% of the shares of that important undertaking, which empowers 
the government greater autonomy to make use of the HCB immense potential for social and economic 
development of the country as well as the whole SADC region. 
We  congratulate  our  Government  for  this  important  victory  and  hope  that  Cahora  Bassa  becomes, 
more  and  more,  a  strong  instrument  of  promotion  of  national  interests  and  implementation  of  the 
national strategy of internal development and in the context of Southern African region. 
In 2006, the IMF Board, World Bank and African Development Bank, decided to include Mozambique 
in  the  list  of  poor  countries,  which  benefited  of  debt  relief,  in  the  context  of  Multilateral  Debt  Relief 
Initiative,  widely  known  as  MDRI.  For  our  country,  this  decision  meant  a  write-off  of  about  USD  2 
billion in the stock of external debt, being USD 1.3 billion from the World Bank, 540 million from the 
African Development Bank and 154 million from the IMF. This gesture encourages us and confirms the 
commitment of the international community in relation to the performance of the Government in the 
implementation of PARPA (Plan of Action for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty) and macroeconomic 
stability and development programs. With this forgiveness, the ratios of Mozambique external position 
become greatly improved, allowing the Government to resort to external financing, on the basis of a 
criteria based management indebtedness, to pursue the multiple purposes of its development program 
and fight against absolute poverty. 
The international recognition of the Government positive performance was once more expressed by 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) when on December 18th, 2006, approved the PRGF program 
(Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility) that Mozambique has with that multilateral financial institution, 
a fact that offers good perspectives for the consolidation of international cooperation. 
It is worth referring to the changes that took place at the top management level of our institution during 
the  present  year.  On  this  occasion,  I  would  like,  once  again,  to  express  our  tribute  to  Dr.  Adriano 
Maleiane  who  until  mid  of  the  present  year  was  the  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  Moçambique.  This 
recognition is extended to the colleagues of the Board of Directors who have also retired. They left a 
legacy of unselfish work in favour of our institution and the Mozambican financial system that we are 
all invited to preserve and to deepen. 
We would also like to praise the Associação Moçambicana de Bancos (Mozambican Association of 
Banks)  for,  most  recently,  having  achieved  a  consensus  in  relation  to  a  code  of  conduct  for  all  its 
members. 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 1
Main goals for 2006 
At the end of the last year, when we met in this same venue, we announced that our performance in 
2006 aimed at contributing to the success of the Government’s agenda, established in the Economic 
and Social Plan and Government Budget, documents that pointed out to 7.9% economic growth, 9.5% 
average inflation and an external position measured by gross international reserves equivalent to four 
months  of  imports  of  goods  and  non-factorial  services.  Our  intermediary  objectives  pointed  out  to 
14.5% money supply and a growth of the credit to the economy in line with the GDP nominal growth. 
At that moment, we explained that our agenda for 2006 would basically comprise multi-faced actions 
aimed at implementing the Law nº 7/2005, which defines the Conversion Rate of the Metical of the 
New Family. 
Performance of the monetary and foreign exchange policy 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
We began the year 2006 in an adverse international environment, due to the oil price volatility, which 
in  the  present  year  reached  a  new  historic  record  of  about  USD  78/barrel.  Fortunately,  the  signs 
reported this part towards the end of the year give us a certain optimism. 
Preliminary information, based on data of the first semester of 2006, pointed out that the Mozambican 
economy may experiment a real growth around 7.9%. Moreover, differently from the last years, GDP 
growth was influenced by the construction, mining, transports and communication, and cattle-raising 
activity sectors, which revealed themselves to be more dynamic and with greater relative contribution 
than  the  major  projects.  That  is  really  positive  for  our  growth  sustainability,  as  it  results  from  the 
activity of small and medium enterprises, which greatly absorb resources and local labour force and, 
which  has  greater  impact  on  the  process  of  the  fight  against  absolute  poverty  and  reflect  the 
diversification of the productive activity in the country. 
As we know, the main mission of our institution is to ensure price stability. The evaluation we make is 
that  inflation  recorded  a  stable  behaviour  in  2006,  compared  with  the  year  2005,  even  taking  into 
account that it was characterized by three different moments. Until April, we observed a rising trend of 
prices, period in which the annual variation rate peaked to 17%. Between May and August inflation 
slowed down, having the monthly variations been successively negative, prompting the annual rate to 
decline to 10%, the lowest level observed in the whole year. 
Seasonally, at the end of the year, inflation tends to rise. However, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
monthly variation in November differs from that of the similar period of 2005, which makes it possible 
to record one-digit cumulative inflation at the end of 2006, even if in terms of average rate, we stand 
slightly above the projections of the beginning of the year. 
The main instrument of monetary policy we use to restrain and maintain inflation under control were 
the  Interbank  Money  Market  operations  supported  by  a  strong  vigilance  over  the  requirement  of 
compulsory reserve, which stand at 11.51% and by the rise of our intervention interest rate announced 
at the end of the first semester. 
The oil price rise in the international market had a considerable impact on fuel and related products 
domestic  prices.  This  factor  influenced  the  inflation,  but  the  combination  of  policies  by  different 
macroeconomic  management  institutions  and  the  performance  of  real  sector  of  the  economy  have 
allowed to soften this shock. 
In 2006, the National Institute of Statistics (INE) introduced a new CPI basket, changing the year-base 
for  2004  and  adjusting  the  weighing  factors  of  several  products  comprising  the  basket.  We 
congratulate the INE for this effort that reinforces the comparability of our statistics with those of other 
SADC countries, thus contributing to a greater integration of our economies. 
After a year of clear disturbances, in 2006, the Metical revealed to be well more stable against the 
main  currencies  traded  in  various  segments  of  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  exceptional 
measures  announced  late  2005  revealed  to  be  important  to  abate  the  market  and  endow  it  with 
greater  discipline  and  professionalism.  We  would  like  to  praise  the  results  obtained  with  the 
adjustments undertaken in the whole chain of the complex process of fuel imports, in order to stabilize 
the exchange rate. The Metical depreciation in relation to the USD in 2006 was less than 10%, against 
27% recorded in 2005; in relation to the Rand, our currency inverted the loss of 11% recorded last 
year, as it appreciated by about 3.3%. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2007
The Banco de Moçambique continued to be the main supporter of the Interbank Foreign Exchange 
Market (IFEM), in terms of foreign currency sales, having to date allocated a total of USD 435 million 
net, in auctions and bilateral sales, against 393 million recorded in 2005. The foreign exchange market 
witnessed an increased confidence among its operators and this is proved by the increased volume 
and  frequency  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  among  commercial  banks,  which  peaked  to  181.4 
million in 2006, against 39.5 million in 2005. 
External sector developments (BoP) 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
According to information reported to September 2006, our Balance of Payments shows encouraging 
results.  However,  it  still  depends  significantly  on  external  support,  making  us  more  exposed  to 
exogenous shocks, whose macroeconomic impacts are not always easy to predict. 
Our Country is totally dependent on imports of liquid fuels. The rise of Brent price in the international 
market results prejudicial in the behaviour of domestic inflation and international reserves. The fuel bill 
until September 2006 had amounted to about USD 300 million, against 218 million recorded in 2005. 
This figure worries us, taking into account that our exports, excluding the mega projects effect, are of 
only USD 600 million, in other words, about a half of the country export revenues are set to finance 
fuel bill. 
Until  September  2006,  Mozambique  current  account  deficit  had  improved  38%  compared  with  the 
similar period of 2005, if we include mega projects, and 9% excluding the operations of such projects. 
In the overall, we continue to import more than we export, having the amount of imports risen 23% in 
the  first  nine  months  of  the  current  year,  amounting  to  about  USD  2  billion,  whereas  that  of  total 
exports amounted to USD 1.750 million. 
Thanks to a relatively more dynamic growth of goods export than that of imports, the imports coverage 
rate by exports improved again, representing 89.4% in September 2006, including mega projects (10 
percentage points rise in comparison with the similar period of 2005), or 32.9%, when excluding mega 
projects. 
Even though, this level may be considered low, requiring additional efforts in order to promote greater 
diversification of exports, which must be done via increased production aimed at replacing imports, a 
condition to reduce the strong external dependence of our economy. 
In  turn,  the  coverage  ratio  of  imports  of  goods  and  nonfactorial  services  by  gross  international 
reserves stood at 4.7 months in November, above the four programmed months, including the mega 
projects. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
One of our objectives is to foster a sound, strong and competitive financial system. In the period under 
analysis,  we  improved  the  evaluation  instruments  of  the  risk  of  financial  sector  through  CAMEL 
methodology – Capital, Asset Quality, Management Quality, Earnings and Liquidity. 
Financial system and banking supervision 
Available data showed that, in the overall, our institutions are more sound and robust today, with the 
main indicators evolving positively and with more encouraging perspectives. The level of capitalization 
of the institutions continues to grow, standing at a position that can be considered satisfactory. 
The  improvement  of  the  soundness  of  financial  system  indicators  reflects  a  combined  effort  of  the 
Central Bank through the banking supervision and that of the credit institutions in strengthening their 
internal management and control processes. 
We can assert that today our system is more prepared to face several risks that the financial activity 
brings about. In effect, the ratio of non-performing loan reduced to 3.6%, while the solvency ratio grew 
to  16.7%,  against  the  minimum  of  8%  required,  according  to  the  Basel  I  Convention  terms  or  12% 
under Basel II terms. 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 3
Metical of the New Family 
Simultaneously, we continued to undertake efforts aiming at modernizing our payment systems. The 
process of implementation of the Law Nº 7/2005, regarding the introduction of the notes and coins of 
the Metical of the New Family began on July 1st, 2006, contributed to the fulfillment of this objective. 
We launched a broad advertising and civic education campaign addressed to resident citizens and our 
expatriates, about the details of this process. 
We praise the involvement of everyone, credit institutions, the local authorities, community leaders and 
the  media,  in  the  campaign  of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family,  process  running  calmly,  with  no 
disturbances, having the notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family been accepted widely. We 
are grateful for having achieved, until now, a rate of substitution of the notes and coins of the former 
families of the Metical by that of the New Family above 85%, expecting it to stand above 90% by the 
end of the year, which is a really satisfactory level for our conditions. 
We would like to remind all the citizens that as from January 1st, 2007, the notes and coins of the 
former families of the Metical will no longer have a legal tender for any payment, otherwise they should 
be  deposited  or  exchanged  at  any  banking  institution.  Therefore,  I  would  like,  once  again,  to  invite 
everyone  to  change  the  former  families  of  the  Metical  by  that  of  the  new  family  through  the 
commercial, banking and financial services existing in the country. 
Such as established in the Law, during 2007 the currency exchange should be done at the commercial 
banks, but even so, the people who by serious reasons are unable to change their money during this 
period, they will have the opportunity to do it at the Banco de Moçambique until 2012. 
Moreover, we would like to stress that as also prescribed in the Law, December 31st, 2006, marks the 
end of the use of the register designation “MTn” and the return to the designation “MT”, as well as the 
end of the mandatory double indication of prices in force since March 31st, 2006. 
Territorial expansion (branches) 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The strategy defined by the Government setting districts as the poles of planning and development of 
our  economy,  brings  increased  challenges  to  the  financial  sector.  We  are  expected  to  give  our 
contribution towards this objective, expanding our services throughout the national territory, especially 
to the less favoured areas but with enormous wealth and business potential. 
The  financial  sector  should  be  sensible  to  the  current  low  saving  indices  that  the  country  records, 
which  require  pragmatic  initiatives  to  encourage  saving  habits  on  our  population.  The  increased 
demand of credit to finance public and private investment projects requires more dynamism in financial 
savings. 
On December 15th, 2006, we inaugurated the first branch of the Banco de Moçambique, in Quelimane 
city and within a few days we are going to Maxixe with a similar purpose. In the coming months we are 
going to open Tete, Pemba and Lichinga branches. This decision opens a new era in the activity of the 
Mozambican financial system and within our performance philosophy, as the issuing and supervisory 
bank of the financial and non-financial institutions. 
With this measure, we showed a great sign to the banking system on the urgent need to do our best in 
order to enlarge the financial services and decentralisation of banks throughout the country. 
The  branches  of  the  Banco  de  Moçambique  will  enable  our  mission  in  terms  of  issuance  and 
circulation  of  notes  and  coins  of  good  quality,  modernization  of  the  national  payment  systems, 
reduction  of  storing  costs  and  transport  of  notes  and  coins  by  commercial  banks,  enable  the 
Government financial operations, in the context of the Treasury single account and more decentralized 
financial administration, as well as everything related with licensing, support and supervision of micro-
finance institutions. Our branches are being open in a decisive stage of the process of introduction of 
the Metical of the New Family. 
We  were  pleased  to  note  that  in  2006  some  credit  institutions  expanded  their  branch  network  and 
financial services throughout the country, which we encourage recognizing its importance in fostering 
savings. 
Together  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance we  will continue  to  devise  strategies  and  measures  aimed  at 
minimizing constraints that today are pointed out by the national banking system as impeditive of a 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2007
greater territory expansion and extension of financial services outside the main cities. The presence of 
banks in districts is going to foster the necessary savings for investments that the country really needs 
in order to face the millennium challenges, related to the fight against poverty. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Parliament has just analysed the Economic and Social Plan of the Government and the Budget 
for  2007,  two  important  instruments  of  economic  policy.  In  those  instruments  the  Government 
envisages  7%  real  growth  and  8%  annual  average  inflation.  For  such  purpose,  our  intermediate 
objectives  will  be  set  for  17.5%  money  supply,  measured  by  the  variation  of  stocks  of  the  greater 
monetary aggregate (M3) and an expansion of Reserve Money, our instrumental variable, not above 
14.5%. 
In  2007,  we  will  continue  to  deepen  the  reforms  underway  in  the  interbank  monetary  and  foreign 
exchange  markets,  the  main  instruments  of  execution  of  our  monetary  policy.  Once  set  the  foreign 
exchange  market  stability,  we  assume  to  have  the  conditions  created  for  a  gradual  removal  of  the 
transitional measures introduced in November 2005. We have just approved a new regulation of the 
Interbank Foreign Exchange Market (IFEM). 
This normative instrument introduces procedures that were object of a long process of negotiation with 
commercial banks, namely: (i) inclusion of an adhesion requirement and obligation to quote firm to a 
reference amount of USD 50.000 (fifty thousand American Dollars), to a maximum of one call per day; 
(ii) enlargement of the spread between bit and offer rates, from the current 10 Ctn (ten cents) to 20 
CTn (twenty cents); (iii) definition with greater detail of the bilateral operations with the Central Bank; 
(iv) enlargement of the variation maximum limit of the daily rate to 1%, which appears reasonable for 
greater  flexibility  of  the  IFEM  operators  in  the  whole  business  environment,  where  the  foreign 
exchange stability continues to be our major interest. 
In order to offer greater credibility and transparency to the management of monetary policy, as well as 
to conform to the international good practices on the matter, after a long process of preparation, which 
included,  among  other  aspects,  the  design  of  forecasting  models  and support  monetary  analysis  to 
decision making, our committee on monetary policy is going to change its format and content, as from 
next year. 
The model we are going to adopt will address special attention to communication with the public, with 
the  purpose  of  disseminating  the  nature  of  measures  that  the  Central  Bank  takes,  throughout  the 
market and the whole society, signalling more clearly the monetary policy pursued in the present and 
future, which will certainly help the process of formation of economic agents expectations. 
The year 2007 is decisive for the implementation of the International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS), thus marking the end of a transition process began in 2004. For such purpose, the banking 
supervision is going to address a future risk approach, conforming with the international practices on 
the matter. 
As from February 2007, the Banco de Moçambique will start performing the clearance of visa network 
credit cards issued by national banks, with the purpose of ensuring that (i) all domestic transactions 
performed in Meticais using cards issued by national banks, members of Visa are settled in Meticais, 
(ii) the role of the Metical as national currency is reinforced, (iii) the foreign exchange risk is reduced, 
(iv) transactions performed with Visa payment cards are accompanied and recorded; (v) the absence 
of a single payment network is partially fulfilled, and (vi) the ATMs (Automated Teller Machines) and 
EFT/POS (Point of Sale) services are enlarged. 
At the regional level, we will continue to give our contribution so that the objectives of macroeconomic 
convergence and  integration  defined  by  the  SADC (Southern  African Development  Community)  are 
achieved, particularly with respect to inflation, harmonization of procedures and legal framework that 
governs the central banks of the region. 
Within the African continent, as a member of the Association of African Central Banks (AACB), we will 
continue to contribute to the objective of the creation of a central bank of the continent. 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 5
Final remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  would  like  to  express  our  profound  recognition  of  the  valuable  contribution  that  all  national 
economic agents, the society in general and the international community has been giving us in order 
to  fulfil  our  mission,  particularly  in  respect  of  the  formulation  and  execution  of  a  monetary  policy  in 
conformity with the objectives of economic growth, with low inflation. 
Allow me to address special thanks to the employees of the national financial system and in particular, 
to the collaborators of the Banco de Moçambique, for their devotion and commitment demonstrated 
during the year. 
I finish wishing you all and your distinct families, Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2007
