T T Mboweni: The role of the South African Reserve Bank in the protection of 
consumers 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the National Consumer 
Forum Conference to celebrate World Consumer Rights Day, Johannesburg, 15 March 2007.  
Honoured Guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for the invitation to address you on the occasion of the celebration of World Consumers 
Rights Day. As consumers we often forget that we have rights, and it is often said that South African 
consumers are among the most apathetic when it comes to asserting their rights. Consumers are the 
reason  for  the  existence  of  business,  and  World  Consumer  Rights  Day  accordingly  deservers  our 
support. 
The relevance of the theme of this conference; “holding the public and private sectors accountable” is 
without  question.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  plays  an  important  role  in  the  South  African 
economy, and our actions impact directly on consumers. It is therefore essential that institutions such 
as the South African Reserve Bank are fully accountable to consumers for the autonomy they enjoy. In 
my  address  to  you  this  afternoon,  I  will  expand  on  the  role  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank, 
particularly with respect to the consumer, and, in line with the theme of the conference, I will highlight 
our efforts to ensure full accountability.  
Monetary policy and the consumer 
2.  
The South African Reserve Bank, like central banks in other countries, has a unique position in the 
economy. The operations of the Bank are governed in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 
its associated regulations and the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The Act and regulations 
describe the framework and structure of the Bank, the way in which it is managed and the actions it 
may take. The Constitution prescribes that the objective of the Bank should be the protection of the 
currency in the interest of sustainable economic growth and development.  
The  Bank  interprets  this  mandate  to  be  the  achievement  and  maintenance  of  price  stability.  In 
February 2000 an inflation targeting framework was adopted in South Africa with the inflation target 
being set by the Government. The Bank, therefore, in line with most inflation targeting central banks, 
does  not  have  goal  independence.  However,  in  its  pursuit  of  this  target,  the  Bank  is  guaranteed 
operational or instrument independence. In other words, we can apply our interest rate policy without 
interference from government. In terms of our mandate, we have to keep CPIX inflation, (i.e. headline 
consumer price inflation excluding mortgage interest costs) between 3 to 6 per cent per annum on a 
continuous basis. 
In carrying out our mandate, we have a direct impact on the consumer through the impact of monetary 
policy on inflation and interest rates. The question we are often asked is, why target inflation? Low 
inflation is in the interest of all South Africans, irrespective of whether they are consumers, business 
people,  or  retirees.  Inflation,  which  is  a  continuous  increase  in  the  general  price  level,  implies  a 
continuous  decline  in  the  value  of  money,  which  implies  an  erosion  of  the  purchasing  power  of 
consumers. The Bank aims to limit such a decline by achieving price stability. However, it is important 
to note that price stability does not imply that the prices of goods and services do not change at all. 
Relative prices in a market economy will always change in response to changes in relative scarcities, 
for example after a drought, food prices are likely to increase.  
It is also generally the case that those consumers most vulnerable to the ravages of inflation are the 
poor. The wealthy members of society are in a better position to hedge against inflation for example by 
borrowing money to buy non-monetary assets. The wealthy often have assets that can more easily be 
protected against expected inflation.  
BIS Review 26/2007 
 1
Inflation  has  other  adverse  effects  such  as  the  distortion  of  the  tax  system,  and  also  results  in 
increased uncertainty which makes economic decision-making more difficult. High inflation is usually 
also accompanied by greater price variability. The confusing price signals make the price system less 
efficient, and the result is lower levels of investment and growth. 
We are also often asked why employment or economic growth is not the primary objective of monetary 
policy.  As  noted  in  the  Constitution,  inflation  is  not  an  objective  in  itself,  but  is  in  the  interest  of 
sustained growth. It goes without saying that the target of monetary policy should be something that 
monetary policy can achieve. It is the view of the Bank that although monetary policy can impact on 
cyclical unemployment and growth, it cannot determine long-run trend real growth. Growth in the long 
run is determined by real variables and other supply-side factors, including government policies and 
the general macroeconomic environment that monetary policy contributes to. Monetary policy plays an 
important  role  in  shaping  the  macroeconomic  environment  in  which  economic  agents  operate.  The 
best contribution that monetary policy can make is to provide a low and stable inflation environment 
that is conducive to sustainable long-term growth.  
The main monetary policy tool at the disposal of the Bank is the interest rate. Essentially the Bank sets 
the  repo  rate,  which  is  the  rate  at  which  the  banks  borrow  from  us,  and  this  in  turn  affects  other 
interest  rates  in  the  economy.  It  could  be  seen  as  somewhat  ironical  that  in  order  to  protect  the 
consumer  from  inflation,  the  means  to  achieve  this  are  likely  to  impact  negatively  on  consumers 
through higher interest rates. Unfortunately, on the part of the Bank there is no way to avoid this.  
At  times,  the  increase  in  interest  rates  to  keep  inflationary  pressures  in  check  has  drawn  some 
criticism particularly by borrowers who were not expecting such increases. I should note however, that 
depositors or savers are happy when interest rates increase. Perhaps more publicity is given to the 
plight of those who are negatively affected by interest rate changes. It should be emphasised that the 
Bank acts in the interest of all consumers, irrespective of whether they are borrowers or depositors, by 
setting interest rates at an appropriate level to ensure that the inflation target is achieved. 
Low  inflation  allows  for  generally  lower  nominal  interest  rates.  Furthermore,  as  the  Bank  builds  up 
credibility  for  its  inflation-fighting  policies,  interest  rate  cycles  are  likely  to  have  a  lower  amplitude. 
Hopefully the strong interest rate cycles we have seen in the 1980s and 1990s are a thing of the past. 
By achieving sustained low inflation, we believe that interest rate adjustments can be more moderate 
and more certainty will result for both consumers and producers. Ultimately we would like to achieve a 
virtuous circle of low inflation, moderate interest rate cycles and high and sustained economic growth. 
At  times  it  is  possible  that  the  actions  of  consumers  could  threaten  the  inflation  target,  and  it  our 
responsibility to take appropriate action. In the past three years we have seen household consumption 
expenditure increasing to extremely high levels. Credit extension by banks has been rising at very high 
rates, and household indebtedness has also increased to record highs. Some of this can be explained 
by a number of positive developments in the economy apart from lower interest rates. These include 
stronger  household  balance  sheets,  higher  real  incomes  and  increased  employment.  Our  monetary 
policy  actions  in  the  second  half  of  last  year  were  in  part  an  attempt  to  dampen  the  inflationary 
potential of this higher consumption expenditure.  
There are other dangers emanating from excessive borrowing, particularly when interest rates start to 
rise  and  consumers  find  themselves  overcommitted.  In  accepting  credit,  consumers  should 
understand  their  rights  and  not  fall  prey  to  aggressive  marketing  of  credit.  For  this  reason  we  are 
gratified that the banks have adopted a code of good conduct in the marketing of credit. The National 
Credit Act, to be implemented in the middle of this year will provide further protection to consumers. 
There are however always two sides to every transaction, and consumers should also act responsibly 
when taking on further debt. 
Accountability of the Bank 
3.  
As noted earlier, our operational mandate is to keep CPIX inflation between 3 to 6 per cent and the 
Bank has autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy. It is well recognised that autonomy goes hand 
in  hand with accountability.  Thus,  one of  the primary  measures of  accountability  relates  to  how  the 
bank has performed in relation to its operational mandate.  
Monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in  achieving  the  inflation  target  since  September  2003  when 
CPIX  moved  to  within  the  target  range.  This  allowed  for  a  reduction  in  the  repo  rate  by  650  basis 
points  between  June  2003  and  April  2005.  In  2006,  in  response  to  perceived  risks  to  the  inflation 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2007
outlook, the Monetary Policy Committee increased the repo rate by 50 basis points at four consecutive 
meetings from June. Despite this adjustment, economic growth has remained strong and we expect 
growth  rates  of  around  5  per  cent  to  be  sustained.  Although  monetary  policy  cannot  claim  all  the 
credit, its contribution to the economy’s robust growth performance over the last couple of years is well 
recognised in many circles. 
Our accountability extends beyond simply achieving the inflation target. Since the announcement of an 
inflation  target  in  South  Africa,  any  ambiguity  about  the  ultimate  goal  of  monetary  policy  has  been 
removed.  The  smooth  conduct  of  an  inflation  targeting  framework  implies  a  great  deal  of  trust  and 
confidence on the part of the public in a central bank’s ability and determination to achieve the target. 
Without this credibility in the eyes of the public, a central bank’s policy goal is not easily achievable. 
Since the introduction of an inflation targeting policy framework, the Bank has introduced a number of 
initiatives  to  improve  transparency  and  communication  with  all  its  stakeholders  to  enhance  the 
credibility  of  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  communication  plays  an  important  role  in  fulfilling  the  Bank’s 
obligation  of  accountability.  For  example,  decisions  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  are 
announced after each meeting at a televised media conference, where the motivation for the decision 
is explained. Media representatives also have an opportunity to question the monetary policy decision 
and the policy stance. 
The publication of a bi-annual Monetary Policy Review also broadens the understanding of the aims 
and  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Review  analyses  developments  in  and  factors  influencing 
inflation, assesses recent policy developments and considers the outlook for inflation. In conjunction 
with  statements  after  MPC  meetings,  this  publication  sheds  more  light  on  monetary  policy 
deliberations.  
Monetary  policy  and  broader  economic  issues  are  discussed  with  stakeholders  at  Monetary  Policy 
Forums, hosted bi-annually in Bloemfontein, Cape Town, Durban, East London, Gauteng, Kimberley, 
Mafikeng,  Polokwane,  Port  Elizabeth  and  Nelspruit.  These  Forums  provide  for  discussions  on 
monetary  policy  over  a  broad  geographical  spectrum  and  involve  a  large  cross-section  of 
stakeholders, including trade union representatives, analysts, academics, the media and the general 
public. 
The Bank is ultimately accountable to Parliament as the representative body of all the people in South 
Africa, and an annual report is submitted to Parliament. I also meet periodically with members of the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Finance. After the publication of the Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin, a 
presentation  is  made  to  the  Committee  highlighting  the  contents  of  the  Bulletin,  and  I  answer 
questions put by the Committee. 
In addition to our accountability to Parliament, we also report to our shareholders. The Bank has had 
shareholders  since  its  inception  in  1921,  but  the  legislation  is  drafted  in  such  a  way  that  no  single 
shareholder  can  exercise  any  undue  influence  over  the  activities  of  the  Bank.  The  structure  of 
shareholders adds an additional degree of accountability, in as much as the Bank publishes an Annual 
Report that is tabled, discussed and approved at the Annual General Meeting of shareholders. 
The  Bank  publishes  an  abridged  version  of  the  annual  Governor’s  Address  to  shareholders  at  the 
Annual  General  Meeting  in  six  official  languages  of  South  Africa  in  a  variety  of  newspapers  and 
magazines. This ensures that the Address is accessible to all stakeholders in the Bank.  
The  importance  of  communication  within  an  inflation  targeting  framework  is  without  question. 
Communication  is  a  critical  part  of  monetary  policy  since  it  can  lead  to  more  effective  policy  by 
influencing expectations. The challenge for the Bank is to ensure maximum efficiency and consistency 
of its communication. As I have outlined, it is clear that the communications strategy of the Bank is 
directed  at  a  broad  spectrum  of  individuals  and  institutions.  From  time  to  time  our  actions  may  be 
misinterpreted  or  misunderstood  but  we  shall  nevertheless  endeavour  to  undertake  whatever 
communication is necessary to ensure that the trust of the general public in the Bank is maintained. 
Conclusion 
4.  
The Constitution does not deal specifically with the rights of consumers, but deals with the rights of 
consumers to meet their basic needs which include adequate food, clothing, drinking water, electricity, 
education, health care and shelter. The National Consumer Forum identifies some important rights of 
the  consumer  that  supports  their  endeavours  to  achieve  their  basic  needs.  These  range  from 
educational  rights  to  ensure  informed  decision  making  on  the  part  of  consumers  to  the  rights  of 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 3
individuals to raise views on matters of concern to consumers. The choice of a variety of quality goods 
and services at competitive prices has also been identified by National Consumer Forum as one of the 
fundamental  rights  of  consumers.  The  mandate  of  the  Bank  of  maintaining  price  stability,  that  is 
keeping inflation at low levels, goes a long way toward ensuring competitive pricing practices in the 
South African economy.  
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2007
