David Dodge: Meeting global economic challenges – the need for flexibility 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Calgary  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Calgary, Alberta, 8 March 2007.  
 Good afternoon. I'm very happy to be here in Calgary today to talk to you about what I see as one of 
the most important issues that we face in dealing with global economic challenges; namely, how we 
can increase the flexibility of our economy. 
I'll spend a bit of time talking about some of the structural concerns that I think are very important to 
our  future  prosperity.  In  light  of  the  global  challenges  that  have  become  very  clear  to  us  all,  I'll 
particularly focus on the necessity of a well-trained and flexible workforce. 
But first, I'd like to provide you with some context for my remarks by saying a few words about the 
framework that we follow at the Bank of Canada in conducting monetary policy.  
A framework for monetary policy 
Our  primary  objective  at  the  Bank  is  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canadians. 
Over  the  years,  we  have  learned  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  in  this 
regard  is  to  give  Canadians  confidence  in  the  future  value  of  their  money.  We  do  this  by  keeping 
inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
How we can best achieve this goal has been a matter of much study and debate and, indeed, some 
trial and error. But by the early 1990s, the Bank decided to achieve price stability by directly targeting 
inflation.  A  formal  agreement  between  the  Bank  and  the  federal  government  set  out  the  goals  for 
reducing inflation to 2 per cent by 1995. And that inflation-targeting system worked so well that it has 
been renewed four times, most recently, near the end of last year. This means that we will continue 
with our goal of holding inflation to 2 per cent – the midpoint of a 1- to 3-per cent target band – over 
the coming five years. 
But  we  don't  want  to  rest  on  our  laurels.  We  have  been  pondering  whether  it  might  be  possible  to 
improve upon what has been a very good policy for the Canadian economy. To that end, the Bank has 
announced a major research program for the next three years to probe whether there might be ways 
to  improve  our  inflation-targeting  regime.  In  particular,  we  want  to  examine  the  potential  costs  and 
benefits of moving to a lower inflation target, as well as the potential costs and benefits of pursuing a 
price-level path instead of an annual inflation target. But that said, the research would need to show 
very strong evidence in support of any change before we would be willing to alter the system that has 
proven so successful over the past 15 years. 
A very important factor in the success of our inflation-targeting paradigm is the effort that we have put 
into making this system understandable, transparent, and predictable. In doing so, we've managed to 
help people comprehend how the Bank will react to economic developments, and thus, we've reduced 
the risk of misunderstandings. 
The  basic  principles  are  pretty  simple.  When  the  economy  is  expanding  beyond  the  limits  of  its 
capacity in a way that would threaten to push inflation above our target, we tend to raise interest rates, 
all  other  things  being  equal.  This  action  helps  to  restrain  demand  in  the  economy,  thus  reducing 
inflationary pressures. Or, if the economy is expanding more slowly and would likely operate below 
capacity, which would threaten to push inflation below our target, we would tend to lower rates. This 
would likely give demand a bit of a boost, thus nudging inflation back towards our target. 
Now, an essential element of this paradigm is that it aims to make very clear that we are targeting the 
national inflation rate. That can sometimes be hard to appreciate in a country as large and diverse as 
Canada, where there are frequently sizable differences in inflation pressures in different parts of the 
country. Right now, inflation rates in Alberta are dramatically higher than those in central Canada. In 
January,  for  example,  national  inflation,  measured  by  the  total  consumer  price  index  across  the 
country, showed an average increase of 1.2 per cent per year. But the national average masked a 
much  higher  annual  inflation  rate  of  3.9  per  cent  here  in  Alberta.  In  contrast,  the  annual  rate  was 
considerably lower in Ontario, at 0.3 per cent, and in Quebec, at 0.6 per cent.  
BIS Review 23/2007 
 1
Of course, the different rates of inflation in different regions reflect changes in the relative prices of 
goods and services across Canada. The energy and mining sectors, which are particularly important in 
the West, have been gaining strength in recent years relative to the manufacturing sector, much of 
which is based in central Canada. As part of this shift in activity between industrial sectors, we have 
seen waves of new workers flood into Alberta to fill jobs in the booming energy industry. That is driving 
up demand and prices for housing and other goods and services here. 
These regional and sectoral distinctions are important. But our mandate at the Bank of Canada is to 
work for the economic benefit of all Canadians. It's therefore crucial that we keep our focus on the 
national inflation rate. We can't concentrate on just one region, because at any given time, it's very 
likely that different regions will be experiencing quite different economic conditions. And since we at 
the Bank of Canada have only one policy lever – our ability to control the overnight interest rate – we 
can focus on only one policy goal: the national inflation rate. 
But, we do take note of the difficulties that various sectors of the economy are experiencing, and we 
are well aware of the diverse issues facing different regions. To better understand concerns across the 
country, we have staff in regional offices – including our office in Calgary – who actively seek input 
from  businesses.  One  message  that  we  have  been  hearing  is  that  business  widely  recognizes  the 
importance  of  flexibility  and  the  need  to  be  able  to  rapidly  adjust  to  changing  circumstances.  That 
realization  has  certainly  helped  Alberta  to  better  adjust  to  economic  upheaval  and  change  more 
quickly today than it did during the 1970s and '80s. Since those days, we've all learned that it does no 
good to try to shelter the economy from adjustments driven by global changes such as large swings in 
energy prices. 
The need for flexibility 
So, let me talk a bit more about flexibility. I'm going to address this from two perspectives. First, I'll give 
the macroeconomic view, and then I'll look at the microeconomic issues. 
Canadian governments, both federal and provincial, are in a strong fiscal position. At the federal level, 
overall  government  debt  has  been  reduced.  Alberta  has  successfully  eliminated  its  debt,  and  other 
provincial  governments  have  worked  hard  to  balance  their  books.  This  success  has  given 
governments more flexibility to deal with cyclical shocks. More importantly, lower debt-to-GDP ratios 
have meant that over time, the share of government revenues that must go to servicing debt has been 
reduced. That frees up revenues to help governments deal with looming demographic issues without 
the  necessity  of  raising  taxes.  At  the  same  time,  federal  and  provincial  governments  have  made 
strides in preparing for these demographic changes, with reforms designed to ensure the long-term 
viability of the Canada Pension Plan. So, from a fiscal point of view, Canada is in a position that is 
envied by almost every other country in the world. And, as I said earlier, we at the Bank of Canada 
have kept the rate of inflation low, stable, and predictable. This has allowed business and consumers 
to have confidence in the value of their money. So, I can say with assurance that Canada, because of 
its strong fiscal position and low inflation rate, has the flexibility needed to deal with whatever comes 
its way in the future. 
But while good macroeconomic policies are a necessary condition for meeting the challenges we face, 
they are not sufficient. Improved microeconomic policies are also required to increase flexibility and 
contribute  to  growing  productivity  over  time.  There  are  a  number  of  important  aspects  to  these 
policies, but I can talk about only a few today. And the first that I want to focus on relates to labour. 
Critical to building a flexible labour force is, as always, the education and training of young people. We 
must not only invest in basic education for our children. We must also prepare for an economy where 
most workers will expect to train and re-train throughout their careers; an economy where it will be 
considered normal to add skills or change career paths through life. 
We have to recognize that changing demographics mean there will be fewer and fewer young people 
in the labour pool to draw upon. We must therefore learn to concentrate on making the most of our 
experienced and trained workers. How can we make the very best use of the skills of those workers 
who are now in their 50s and 60s? Many individuals may wish to remain active in the labour force well 
past the conventional retirement age, and to increase our flexibility, it's important that we remove any 
barriers to their continued participation. 
This means that we, as employers, have to be more flexible in setting up work schedules. It means 
that  we,  as  employers,  must  look  at  the  redesign  of  pension  plans.  It  also  means  that  we,  as 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2007
employers, must put more effort into upgrading skills and increasing our openness to hiring mature 
workers. And it means that we, as employers, have to put more emphasis on mentoring programs, so 
that  younger  workers  can  benefit  from  the  skills  and  experience  of  older  workers,  ensuring  that 
intellectual capital is not lost. 
I've talked about government obligations and about our obligations as employers. But individuals also 
have an obligation to seize every opportunity to learn new skills. Failure on any of our parts would be 
very short-sighted and will mean lower standards of living for us all. And these are ongoing obligations. 
Even in times like these, when the labour market is very tight, none of us can afford to lose sight of the 
importance of skills development. 
We must keep in mind that it's not just developing and using skills that's important. Provinces must 
ensure that they don't set up road blocks that impede the mobility of workers. In this respect, I really 
do commend the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia for their recent pact allowing a free flow of 
labour and investment across the Rockies. 
Labour markets are not the only things that must be able to adjust – flexibility is important in all of our 
policies.  We  need  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  in  place  that  encourage  competition  and  allow 
market  incentives  to  flow  through. We  really  must eliminate  barriers  to  interprovincial  trade.  As  you 
know,  these  can  take  the  form  of  a  wide  range  of  regulatory  obstacles  in  areas  as  diverse  as 
transportation, packaging, or financial services. 
Capitalizing on Alberta’s strengths 
Policies  that  encourage  flexibility  are  crucial  for  Alberta  if  the  economy  here  is  to  capitalize  on  its 
current strengths and build a solid base for the future. The important and growing knowledge base in 
Alberta is creating opportunities to develop industries that complement the oil and gas sector. It also 
provides  a  platform,  built  on  skilled  professionals  and  financial  resources,  for  expanding  the  vital 
education and health sectors.  
A challenge, as well as an opportunity, for Alberta relates to the production and use of hydrocarbons in 
a  time  of  increasing  global  concern  about  climate  change.  Around  the  world,  there  is  a  growing 
demand  for  products  and  technologies  that  limit  or  reduce  the  emission  of  greenhouse  gases.  And 
what better place than Alberta for the development of these types of technologies? As I've mentioned, 
the dramatic growth in the province's oil and gas sector has made Alberta a magnet for workers, many 
of  whom  have  the  specialized  knowledge  and  spirit  of  innovation  needed  to  develop  such  new 
products.  
The province's knowledge base and rising prosperity also give Calgary a great opportunity to build a 
solid  financial  services  sector.  This  industry  could  be  very  important  for  Calgary's  future.  Financial 
services is a sector that attracts highly skilled workers who add a great deal of value. And Calgary has 
some natural advantages. It is situated in the heart of the oil patch and is already home to the Venture 
Exchange and to a fledging commodity exchange. But Calgary is unlikely to be able to fully exploit 
these  advantages  until  Canada,  as  a  whole,  develops  a  more  efficient  framework  for  its  securities 
market.  
From  the  analysis  that  we  have  done  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  it's  clearly  in  the  interests  of  all 
Canadians, but particularly in the interests of Calgarians, to establish a uniform Canadian regulatory 
framework.  This  must  be  based  on  uniform  principles,  which  are  applied  appropriately,  taking  into 
account the size and complexity of the issuer. And our securities laws must be consistently enforced. 
Just as Alberta played a lead role in reshaping the Canada Pension Plan to make it a model for the 
world, I trust that the Government of Alberta and the Calgary business community will play a lead role 
in establishing a uniform framework for securities regulation in Canada – a framework that will help to 
develop this city's potential beyond the oil and gas sector. 
Economic issues 
Before concluding, I'd like to say just a few words about our most recent thinking on what we at the 
Bank of Canada see happening globally and in our national economy. 
Last  month,  I  attended  the  Group  of  Seven  meetings  in  Germany.  The  discussions  on  the  global 
economy  were  very  much  in  line  with  what  we  had  set  out  in  the  Bank's  January  Monetary  Policy 
Report Update. Global prospects remain very favourable. While weakness in the U.S. housing sector 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 3
is likely to continue for a short while, the weakness doesn't appear to have spread to the rest of the 
U.S. economy, and growth is expected to pick up over the course of 2007. The Bank judges that the 
Canadian economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity at the end of last year. We 
continue  to  project  that  it  should  operate  near  its  capacity  throughout  2007  and  2008.  Total  CPI 
inflation at the national level should average just above 1 per cent in the first half of this year, returning 
to the 2 per cent inflation target in early 2008. Core inflation should remain near 2 per cent through to 
the end of next year. 
That's a look at our base-case economic projection. But if there's one thing we can be certain about, 
it's that the economy will not evolve exactly as set out in our base case. So, a very important part of 
our  outlook  is  the  assessment  of  the  risks  surrounding  our  projection.  There  are  risks  on  both  the 
upside and the downside. 
The main upside risk to our inflation projection continues to come from stronger household demand in 
Canada.  Consumption  could  be  stronger  than  expected,  as  households  borrow  against  increased 
equity in their homes. Various indicators of household credit have also shown strong growth over the 
past year. 
The  main  downside  risk  continues  to  come  from  the  United  States  where,  as  I  mentioned,  clear 
weakness remains in the housing sector. But there are some encouraging signs. The slowdown in the 
U.S. housing and automotive sectors does not appear to have spread more broadly. There is evidence 
that a significant portion of the adjustment in the automotive sector has already taken place, while the 
adjustment in the housing sector continues. 
Overall,  we  judge  that  the  risks  to  our  inflation  outlook  in  Canada  are  roughly  balanced.  However, 
there remains a possibility of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances. 
On 6 March, we left our key policy interest rate unchanged at 4 1/4 per cent. In line with our outlook, 
the  current  level  of  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  is  judged,  at  this  time,  to  be  consistent  with 
achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
I've discussed some of what I see as the major challenges that we all face. I've also emphasized the 
crucial need for flexibility on all of our parts: government, labour, and business. This flexibility is vitally 
important.  It  will  enable  all  of  us  to  successfully  capitalize  on  the  opportunities  presented  by  an 
expanding global economy. 
I'd now be happy to answer your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2007
