Martín Redrado: The Argentine response to the financial turmoil 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the Euromoney 
conferences, London, 13 September 2007. 
 The first thing that came into mind when I was drafting this speech was to explain the basis 
of  our  monetary  and  financial  strategy  and  to  what  extent  it  has  contributed  to  promote 
macroeconomic stability over the last years.  
I must admit, paradoxically, that the financial turmoil of the lasts weeks gave me a big hand. 
This is the first time, as in many other Latin American countries, the whole macroeconomic 
program – which includes our global monetary and financial policy strategy – is under stress.  
So, this stress test provides us with a unique opportunity to witness our policies in action. It 
also  allows  us  to  assess  the  internal  consistency  and  intertemporal  sustainability  of  our 
approach. 
As markets have come under pressure, emerging economies have shown general resilience. 
But, not all are in the same category.  
In  a  de-leveraging  scenario,  countries  with  solid  economic  fundamentals  (or  “liquidity 
suppliers”), which include large fiscal and current account surpluses, flexible exchange rate 
regimes and abundant foreign reserves are likely to outshine the “liquidity consumers”.  
As  we  analyze  the  behavior  of  this  asset  class,  Argentina’s  performance  in  the  monetary, 
financial and exchange rate markets shows that we are in the first camp. 
In a nutshell, our country is riding the storm due to better macroeconomic management. We 
have established a new framework that, in my view, is going to last for the next decades. It is 
based on the interaction of five pillars:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Fiscal solvency; 
External sustainability; 
A  prudent  and  consistent  monetary  policy  that  ensures  the  equilibrium  between 
supply and demand in the monetary market; 
Countercyclical  financial  policies.  They  include  active  FX  accumulation  and 
management.  Moreover,  the  development  of  a  sound  and  well-matched  financial 
system acts as a buffer against any turmoil; and 
A managed floating exchange rate regime. 
5. 
Let  me  elaborate  upon  the  interaction  of  these  pillars  and  how  they  are  key  to  keep  the 
economy moving to its long-term equilibrium.  
Firstly,  fiscal  accounts  show  a  surplus,  boosted  by  increased  tax  revenues.  The  primary 
balance  currently  stands  at  almost  3.5%,  achieving  five  consecutive  years  of  budgetary 
discipline. As a result, the ratio of debt to gdp continues to decline. Financing requirements 
are  manageable  in  a  context  of  restrained  access  to  capital  markets  for  emerging  market 
economies.  
Secondly, since 2002 the current account balance is projected to remain positive in 2007 for 
six consecutive years, an unprecedented event since the mid-1940s.  
Argentina  is  taking  advantage  of  structural  changes  in  the  world  economy  that  yield  high 
commodity prices for several of its exporting products. This fact, combined with factors such 
as  the  abundance  of  natural  resources,  a  reasonable  infrastructure  and  the  high  level  of 
4. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 1
to  be 
immune 
for  soft  commodities,  where  demand  seems 
education  standards,  put  the  country  in  an  interesting  competitive  position  in  the  global 
economy.  
Shipments  of  manufactured  products  (of  both  agricultural  and  industrial  origin)  are  leading 
the growth of exports.  
This increase has occurred together with a greater diversification in terms of products and, 
especially, destinations. This has been boosted by a very active trade policy pursued over 
the last years to open and diversify markets.  
For example, the number of countries Argentina sells its products has grown steadily from 
159  in  1999  to  more  than  190  in  2006.  This  factor  clearly  helps  mitigating  the  risks 
associated with adverse shocks in some of our trade partners. 
And, despite a likely deceleration in the US and, probably, in Europe, I am not expecting a 
significant  shift  away  from  this  scenario  any  time  soon.  Today,  commodity  prices  depend 
almost  exclusively  on  the  long-term  equilibrium  between  supply  and  demand  in  each 
particular  market.  And  these  balances  have  been  virtually  unaffected  by  recent  financial 
turmoil.  
Especially, 
to  recent 
developments. In fact, agricultural prices have shown persistent upside movements recently 
associated  with  a  structural  change:  a  sustained  growth  in  demand  (rather  than  negative 
supply shocks as in other times in history).  
Steady  demand  is  based  on  higher  consumption  from  emerging  market  economies 
worldwide.  The  middle  east,  southeast  Asia  and  Latin  America  are  delivering  the  best 
economic  performance  of  the  last  decades.  Together,  they  act  as  a  positive  factor  that 
balances (and also mitigates) the prospective weakness in the US and Europe.  
Wheat  prices,  for  instance,  showed  a  new  record  high  last  month  explained  by  higher 
demand coming from the emerging world (mainly India). This will keep inventories low and 
the ratio stock-consumption at minimum levels. 
Escalating shipments have also their grounds on the increasing use of agricultural products 
such as corn as inputs for producing substitutes to fossil fuel (to be consumed in industrial 
countries).  
According  to  recent  USDA  studies,  corn  needs  for  energy  demand  will  grow,  in  quantity, 
more than the world’s total production for, at least, the next five years.  
This phenomenon contributes to sustain high quotes. As a by-product, it affects food prices 
overall due to its impact on the cost of producing meat and dairy products.  
Consequently, we are experiencing higher food prices worldwide. The impact on inflation is 
particularly large in developing countries, where foodstuff usually has a higher weight in the 
consumption basket (and, consequently, a higher weight in cpi).  
Additionally, in these countries, cereals dominate the daily diet (according to FAO, cereals 
represent 52% of the diet in developing economies compared to only 31% in the developed 
world).  
However, emerging market economies – both foods exporters such as Argentina and many 
other countries in Latin America and consumers, including many Asian countries – are also 
facing sustained increases in food prices. 
Therefore, the twin surpluses (fiscal and external) have been a trademark of the Argentine 
economy over the last years and are expected to remain so. As opposed to what happens in 
other emerging markets, being able to show a positive cash flow that comes from the real 
side of the economy together with a flexible exchange rate regime and a solid central bank 
gives the country a paramount position to face external turbulences.  
2 
 BIS Review 101/2007
Nevertheless, on the fiscal side, the consolidated primary  balance reached an outstanding 
5.3%  in  2004  to  decline  about  two  percentage  points  to  current  levels.  Going  forward,  a 
commitment  to  increase  the  primary  surplus  is  essential  to  keep  a  sustainable  growth 
towards equilibrium.  
So, the need to preserve and deepen these surpluses is a priority. Mainly, because we are 
still  going  through  a  transition  phase  typical  of  post-crisis  periods.  And,  these  transition 
stages – where key macroeconomic variables converge to their long-term values – take time 
and raise enormous challenges. 
For  instance,  it  took  long  to  countries  such  as  Chile  to  fully  stabilize  their  economies  and 
achieve  sustained  growth.  Our  neighbor  put  in  place  a  gradualist  approach  during  the 
normalization  period.  It  involved  four  common  elements  that  have  been  of  utmost 
importance: consolidating fiscal solvency, reestablishing external sustainability, restructuring 
liabilities, and rebuilding the financial system.  
Once  all  these  aspects  were  addressed,  progress  in  the  consolidation  of  a  full-fledged 
inflation  targeting  regime  was  achieved.  Thus,  for  several  years,  Chile  lived  with  higher 
inflation, while patiently building credibility and institutions.  
So, the experience of other emerging economies shows that flexibility and gradualism in both 
policy  design  and  implementation  are  the  adequate  approach  during  this  phase  of  their 
history.  
In  Argentina,  despite  a  notable  recovery,  several  features  of  the  current  macroeconomic 
performance indicate that the economy is still heading towards a new long-term equilibrium. 
Neither in our history nor in the international experience is possible to find precedents for the 
2001-2002 crisis.  
Unlike  the  case  of  Brazil,  Mexico  or  southeast  Asia,  the  abandonment  of  the  convertibility 
regime  included  simultaneously  an  institutional  breakdown,  a  huge  devaluation,  the 
destruction of the financial system and the default on the public debt.  
In addition, the country  has a long  history of macroeconomic instability. Monetary regimes 
have  unsuccessfully  shifted  from  one  extreme  to  the  other.  While  in  the  eighties  money 
supply grew vis-à-vis the financing of the fiscal deficit, in the past decade, the rigidity of the 
convertibility  regime  was  neither  consistent  with  the  structure  of  the  economy  nor  with  the 
government fiscal behavior.  
There  are  several  examples  of  the  normalization  phase  that  is  still  taking  place:  monetary 
transmission channels are just being rebuilt, since credit to the private sector accounts for 
only 11 percent of the economy, still far below the Latin American average.  
Therefore,  patiently  rebuilding  the  power  of  monetary  policy  and  developing  the  required 
infrastructure  is  an  important  step  towards  consolidating  growth  and  stability.  Meanwhile, 
monetary  and  financial  policy  should  be  conceived  under  a  general  equilibrium  approach, 
where  fiscal  solvency,  the  monetary  balance  and  external  sustainability  are  mutually 
determined.  
So,  the  Argentine  economy  is  simply  at  different  a  stage  after  the  crises  compared  to  the 
current situation in other Latin American countries.  
Thus, hasty diagnosis and, as I heard from many analysts, simplistic comparisons among the 
various  countries’  situations  may  lead  to  inappropriate  policy  recommendations.  The  path 
towards an effective inflation targeting regime is a sequential one. Building strong pillars is 
the track of a Central Bank that operates strategically. 
Under these circumstances, a sustainable and long-lasting reduction of the inflation rate in 
Argentina  depends  on  the  comprehensive,  joint  and  coordinated  action  of  the  monetary 
policy,  the  fiscal  policy,  the  wage  policy,  and  the  competition  policy  during  the  transition 
phase.  
BIS Review 101/2007 
 3
 And  this,  takes  me  to  the  last  three  pillars  I  mentioned,  which  are  the  outcome  of  the 
monetary and financial strategy set by the central bank of Argentina over the last years. In 
fact,  the  turbulences  we  are  experiencing  today  has  enabled  us  to  see  our  monetary  and 
financial policy strategy in action: 
• 
A prudent and consistent monetary that ensures the equilibrium between supply and 
demand in the monetary market. 
Countercyclical  financial  policies.  They  include  active  FX  accumulation  and 
management and a sound and well-matched financial system that acts as a buffer 
against any turbulence. 
A managed floating exchange rate regime. 
• 
Far  from  being  erratic,  each  move  in  this  strategy  has  been  in  line  with  the  intertemporal 
goals of equilibrium in the monetary market, the preservation of the value of currency and the 
stability and depth of the financial system. I say “intertemporal” because the central bank has 
“an across-the-cycle” view rather than a short-term one. 
In  the  first  place,  our  policy  guarantees  the  stability  by  ensuring  the  equilibrium  between 
supply and demand for money. Thus, we see that the current regime of control over money 
supply combines the necessary doses of monetary prudence (as shown by sixteen running 
quarters of compliance with self-imposed monetary aggregate targets) and flexibility (which 
has enabled us to weather recent turbulences). 
We  have  consolidated  the  monetary  policy  scheme  based  on  the  control  of  money  supply 
since it is the most adequate for an economy in transition, which still makes intensive use of 
relatively liquid means of payment and has a relatively low bank penetration.  
The strategy is implemented through various instruments which allow us to absorb the supply 
of pesos derived from our FX accumulation policy. This aggressive policy is feasible because 
the central bank has a strengthened balance sheet and positive annual results.  
Instruments include the placement of securities at fixed and floating rates, the repo market, 
the  reserve  requirement  policy,  and  the  early  payment  of  rediscounts.  The  latter  resulted 
from central bank incentives and led to a significant monetary absorption over the last years.  
We have also been working to deepen the repo market and to empower its interest rate as a 
reference policy tool. We have been gradually but persistently hiking this rate. Since 2005, 
the  interest  rate  on  7-days  repo  operations  has  increased  by  more  than  500  basis  points, 
acting as an important absorption instrument.  
Recently, we have established a regular auction mechanism to provide daily liquidity and we 
have expanded the universe of securities taken as underlying assets for these operations.  
What does the recent trend in money supply reflect? M2 shows a downward trajectory, with a 
steep fall in its year-over-year change in 2007-2006 vis-à-vis growth rates in 2003 and 2004. 
In fact, for the first time after the crisis, the money supply is growing below the nominal gdp. 
These are clear indicators of our monetary policy prudential bias.  
Also, state-owned banks have started to manage their liquidity more in line with the rest of 
the financial system. Let’s recall that they hold 26 billion pesos of liquidity from the various 
government agencies of which about 10 billion pesos are still on sight deposits.  
This prudent monetary stance contributed to achieve a more stable macroeconomic position. 
The different measures of core inflation that we track are showing today very similar monthly 
variations  to  those  experienced  in  2006:  around  0.7%  on  average;  ranging  between  0.4% 
and 0.9%. Additionally, in the first quarter of 2007 (last data available), the gdp deflator grew 
below the average of 2006.  
Then, through the full use of all available instruments, we have contributed to the stabilization 
in core inflation while fostering the stability of the financial system.  
4 
 BIS Review 101/2007
But, make no mistake on this: the Central Bank is concerned about current levels of inflation. 
There is no reason for complacency.  
As  a  consequence,  further  joint  work  between  fiscal,  monetary,  wage  and  competition 
policies needs to be done to make sustained progress over the next years. 
Prudential  FX  accumulation  is  another  example  that  speaks  for  itself.  As  with  every 
insurance policy, it represents an “abstract” benefit while it is not used, but a “concrete” one 
in  situations  of  financial  stress:  the  $43  billion  of  external  liquidity  in  the  Central  Bank’s 
coffers are enough to discourage speculation.  
An additional element of the strategy developed in the past few years to face contingencies 
is the recovery of banking liquidity and solvency. Due to an improved regulatory framework, 
we developed a sound financial system today that acts as a “turbulence buffer” rather than 
“amplifier”.  
Just as reserves play the role of liquidity insurance to the monetary authority, banks’ cash is 
the  first  defense  line  against  unexpected  events.  For  this  reason,  banking  regulations 
fostered  the  recovery  of  liquidity,  equivalent  to  almost  40  percent  of  total  deposits,  one  of 
soundest  of  the  region.  To  strengthen  our  monetary  and  financial  system,  we  have  also 
adopted measures that are producing what I consider to be one of the major breakthroughs 
in our history: a system that is independent from the public sector, and that takes and trades 
in domestic currency, with a lender of last resort that also lends in domestic currency.  
In  this  regard,  we  have set  strict  guidelines  to  reduce  exposure  to  the national,  provincial, 
and municipal public sectors. Ceilings have been established based on the capital of each 
institution and on the relevant jurisdiction. In addition, an overall maximum restriction was set 
at  35  percent  of  each  bank’s  total  assets,  which  is  fully  effective  now.  As  a  result,  banks’ 
exposure  to  the  public  sector  accounts  for  less  than  17  percent  of  total  assets,  vis-à-vis 
around 50 percent during the crisis.  
Besides,  we  took specific  measures  to  prevent those  who cannot  repay  in  us  dollars  from 
borrowing  in  that  currency,  encouraging  the  development  of  the  credit  market  in  domestic 
pesos. 
This action not only strengthened the stability of the system but also crowded-in the private 
sector,  helping  to  deepen  the  market.  In  a  context  of  high  growth  of  credit  to  firms  and 
households, the non-performing portfolio has hit an all-time low.  
The system has already shown profits for a couple of fiscal years now, and the process of 
capitalization and extension of terms for liabilities has been gathering momentum. Thus, we 
now  have  a  financial  system  that  is  more  mature  and  better  prepared  to  face  any  sort  of 
disruption. 
Lastly,  the  current  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  has  been  at  the  core  of  our 
monetary  and  financial  strategy.  On  the  one  hand,  it  avoids  ensuring  a  “foreign  exchange 
insurance” that favors the inflow of hot money. On the other, it aims to prevent short-term 
volatility from affecting spending, savings and investment decisions.  
And  it  has  been  proven  that  this  is  the  most  adequate  scheme  for  this  transition  towards 
long-term  equilibrium  in  our  economy.  Under  a  free  float,  the  exchange  rate  would  have 
reached  significantly  higher  quotations,  running  serious  risks  of  going  back  to  the 
devaluation-inflation  dynamics  that  has  been  so  recurrent  throughout  argentine  economic 
history. 
Our actions included the – sequential and combined – adoption of a set a tools – monetary, 
exchange and financial regulation measures – that dodged every possible inflationary impact 
while injecting liquidity to the system. On the foreign exchange side, the Central Bank has 
coordinated the intervention with state-owned banks and has acted aggressively through the 
futures market to stabilize the exchange rate.  
BIS Review 101/2007 
 5
We also resorted to the use of monetary and financial regulation instruments: buying back 
our own securities in auctions and in the secondary market, optimizing the strength of bills 
and notes auctions according to the prevailing liquidity conditions and intensifying operations 
in the repo market through transparent auctions, among others. 
All in all, Central Bank actions show us the consistency and effectiveness of our strategy. We 
proved  to  have  the  necessary  “artillery”  to  preserve  money  and  exchange  market  stability 
and,  at  once,  a  wide  variety  of  tools  to  maneuver  in  the  face  of  turbulence  showing  clear 
symptoms of permanence in time.  
Moreover, we have proven our commitment to price stability (with the limitations derived from 
the instruments we have at hand in this transition stage) from an intertemporal approach, that 
is, looking through the economic cycle. This is the only conceivable course of action for a 
Central Bank with a strategic vision. 
In my view, this framework has been extremely useful in a transition phase to achieve a five-
year cycle of high and continued economic growth with social inclusion. Now, it is the time to 
strengthen and calibrate it to take us to the next level: the challenge is to turn this framework 
into permanent policies with long-term parameters.  
The development of pluri-annual targets for monetary, fiscal and wage policies in order to set 
up a predictable horizon for long-term investment is an example of the tools that this next 
stage requires. Looking ahead, an investment rate of, at least, 25% of gdp will be needed to 
sustain  current  levels  of  economic  growth  over  time,  helping  to  attain  price  stability  at  the 
same time.  
For  this  purpose,  the  harmonization  of  the  whole  set  of  instruments  of  economic  policy 
should  be  oriented  to  protect  the  purchasing  power  of  national  income.  It  is  all  about, 
focusing on macroeconomic stability but from an “across-the-cycle” perspective to achieve a 
sustainable economic policy over time. 
Otherwise, all efforts will be vain and we will be trapped in the typical Argentine pendulum, 
swinging  from  one  end  to  another  of  the  spectrum  of  potential  policies  with  no  continuity 
whatsoever. In fact, we face a synchronic challenge: achieving sustained growth and building 
institutions simultaneously.  
To implement these policies effectively for the benefit of future generations, the only possible 
way is to keep the consistent and gradualist approach to build the right infrastructure so that 
there is no way back.  
The  most  successful  stories  are  those  of  countries  that  understood  how  important  was  to 
reconcile goals with instruments.  
Especially,  in  a  stage  such  as  this  one,  where  the  combination  of  fundamental  economic 
policy tools is what will allow us to achieve a gradual and long-lasting reduction of inflation in 
a context of economic growth that includes all our citizens. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2007
