Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening partnerships for a more resilient 
banking system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Thanksgiving Dinner hosted by the AIG Philam Savings Bank, Inc., Makati 
City, 23 November 2006. 
 Thank you Ched. Former Central Bank Governor and now Philamlife President and CEO Jose Cuisia, 
Jr., Mr. Ridha Wirakusumah of AIG Asia, other officers and staff of the Philamlife-AIG family, fellow 
bankers, special guests. Good evening!  
I  am  glad  I  am  here  to  witness  what  you  call  the  gala  premier  to  celebrate  the  merger  of  Philam 
Savings  Bank  and  AIG  Credit  Card  Company  Philippines  which  gives  birth  to  AIG  Philam  Savings 
Bank.  
To us in the banking sector, this strategic move by the Philamlife Group and AIG to consolidate their 
consumer  finance  businesses  will  further  strengthen  the  bank’s  financial  position  and  boost  its 
competitive edge. Ultimately, this should translate to a more efficient and reliable delivery of financial 
products and services to the public.  
To central bankers like me who are responsible for keeping the banking sector sound, healthy, and 
responsive to the needs of the economy, this is welcome news indeed. My former boss, former Central 
Bank Governor Joey Cuisia, will attest to this.  
In  fact,  it  has  been  the  policy  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  to  encourage  mergers  and 
consolidation….so that we will have stronger and more globally competitive banks.  
Thus, those keeping track of developments in the banking community will realize that the AIG Philam 
Savings Bank is the latest outcome in a series of mergers that have been taking place as our banks 
gear up for increasing competition.  
In this period of global convergence where competition is the norm and banks are measured against 
rigorous standards, one strategy that enhances the likelihood of survival and sustained viability is to go 
the way of mergers and consolidation.  
In this regard, we foresee a scenario of fewer but more financially powerful universal and commercial 
banks that are better able to compete in a world of more open borders.  
However, this is not to say that there will be no place in the evolving financial environment for smaller 
banks such as thrift and rural banks. In fact, smaller specialist banks cover important niche markets 
that  have  unique  needs;  for  instance,  consumer  trade  and  microfinance  come  to  mind.  Under  this 
scenario,  the  smaller  banks  complement  the  services  of  the  bigger  banks,  thus  ensuring  the 
availability of financial services to the entire market spectrum.  
In the case of thrift banks, their areas of specialization lean toward consumer lending, housing loans, 
small  business  loans,  agri-business  loans.  This  is  a  vital  role  that  the  thrift  banking  industry,  AIG 
Philam Savings Bank included, should fully serve.  
In  particular,  AIG  Philam  Savings  Bank’s  considerable  experience  in  consumer  banking  and  its 
commitment to deliver quality service to a broader clientele will certainly add value to the development 
of local financial services. I am certainly looking forward to AIG Philam Savings Bank taking a more 
active  role  in  financial  literacy  to  fully  realize  the  growth  potential  of  your  market.  Indeed, providing 
consumers with adequate, timely and relevant information about financial products and services is a 
necessary prerequisite to ensuring the growth of your market.  
Alongside  our  aim  to  promote  a  more  efficient  and  competitive  banking  system  is  our  initiative  to 
implement  major  structural  reforms  for  enhanced  transparency  and  accountability,  improved  risk 
management, and stronger capital position of banks and other financial institutions.  
I am happy to report to you that such reforms continue to take root within the banking industry.  
Over  the  years,  we  have  stepped  up  the  reform  process  in  the  banking  system  to  keep  pace  with 
market  changes  and  international  best  practices  in  the  areas  of  corporate  governance,  risk 
management and capital adequacy. 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
In the months ahead, we can look forward to even more challenging and exciting developments as we 
move  closer  to  full  compliance  with  Basel  II,  the  global  capital  standards  for  banks.  Preparation  is 
crucial; by now, for instance, banks should have established a sound risk management system. 
Given the financial strength and leadership of its parent companies, I am positive AIG Philam Savings 
Bank will be up to the challenge and emerge as a major thrift bank player whose brand of service will 
raise the bar for bank customers.  
On this optimistic note, I thank the Philamlife Group and AIG for its abiding faith in the future of our 
economy in particular and our country in general, and for joining the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in its 
drive to strengthen the banking system.  
Finally, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I extend our best wishes to all the officers and 
staff of AIG Philam Savings Bank. May you serve your customers well, adhering at all times to the 
good governance tenets of transparency, fairness and accountability.  
Good luck and congratulations! Mabuhay!  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
