Emsley D Tromp: The Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Investment Conference 
Speech  by  Dr  Emsley  D  Tromp,  President  of  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  (Bank  van  de 
Nederlandse Antillen), at the cocktail reception hosted by the Bank van de Nederlandse Antillen on the 
occasion of The Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Investment Conference, Willemstad, 9 May 2007.  
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen, 
On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  I  welcome  each  of  you  to  our  beautiful 
island by extending you a warm “Bon Bini”. We are very pleased in having you here at the Bank for a 
cocktail party on the occasion of the Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Investment Conference. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Caribbean region has made impressive economic progress in recent years. 
In  2006,  our  region  recorded  a  growth  rate  of  around  5  percent.  The  services  sector  has  been  the 
main  driver  of  growth  in  the  Caribbean.  In  most  countries  in  the  region,  tourism  has  played  an 
important role in the expansion of the services sector, and hence the economic growth. According to 
the World Travel and Tourism Council, the Caribbean is the most tourism intensive region in the world. 
Based  on  the  latest  statistics  of  the  Caribbean  Tourism  Organization1,  the  region  hosted 
approximately 10 million stay-over and 8.6 million cruise visitors in 2006.  
In all the Caribbean countries, tourism has shown to be a highly labor intensive sector that provides 
possibilities  for  many  small  and  medium  enterprises  that  are  connected  to,  or  offer  products  and 
services to the industry. Its impact is especially strong in the retail trade, hotels & restaurants, and the 
construction  sectors.  Tourism  in  most  Caribbean  economies  is  a  major  employment  and  foreign 
exchange  generator.  According  to  the  World  Travel  and  Tourism  Council,  nowadays,  tourism 
contributes to approximately 15 percent of the Caribbean’s GDP and 16 percent of total employment. 
Similar  to  the  other  Caribbean  countries,  tourism  is  also  an  important  sector  of  the  Netherlands 
Antilles’ economy. This is reflected in our recent economic performance. In 2006, economic growth in 
the  Netherlands  Antilles  was  sustained  by  an  encouraging  performance  of  stay-over  tourism, 
particularly on the island of Curacao. Rising occupancy rates triggered a wave of new hotel projects 
and expansion of existing hotels.  
The tourism sector is also a crucial contributor to foreign exchange receipts, which is about 36% of our 
total foreign exchange earnings from the exports of goods and services.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  similar  to  other  economies  in  the  Caribbean,  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is 
characterized as a small and open economy, which makes it highly vulnerable to external shocks. The 
achievements of the tourism sector in the Netherlands Antilles and other Caribbean islands are mainly 
due  to  the  many  positive  endowments  we  are  blessed  with  in  this  region.  These  include  favorable 
locations,  excellent  climates,  the  advantage  of  the  English  language  in  most  countries  –  Spanish, 
French,  and  Dutch  in  other  cases,  an  early  targeting  of  primary  education,  strong  traditions  of 
democratic participation, and political stability for most countries.  
However,  nowadays,  the  Caribbean  tourism  sector  is  facing  increased  competition  from  emerging 
economies, namely Asia and the Pacific, and the rapidly changing nature of global tourism demand. 
However, the strong growth expected in global tourism and the emerging of new market segments, 
create possibilities for growth in the Caribbean tourism sector.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the tourism industry will only remain an important driving force of our regional 
economic  growth,  if  we  address  certain  issues  in  our  economies.  In  this,  the  improvement  of  the 
investment  climate  is  crucial  for  all  countries  in  the  region.  A  good  investment  climate  provides 
opportunities and incentives for firms to invest productively, create jobs, and expand their activities. 
More investments in the tourism industry will not only raise activities in this sector, but also stimulate 
additional investments in related sectors, and hence contribute to economic expansion. It is therefore 
crucial that the investment climate gives the correct signals and encourages higher quality and more 
productive private investments.  
                                                      
1   Caribbean Tourism Organization, latest statistics 2006. February 16, 2007. 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
The  policy  agenda  to  enhance  the  investment  climate  is  relatively  similar  to  most  countries  in  the 
region,  and  consists  of  several  actions.  First,  improve  the  quality  and  effectiveness  of  the  human 
resources. Second, make the public sector more cost effective and efficient. Third, address the level of 
taxation  and  infrastructure  deficiencies.  Fourth,  diversify  the  economy  with  more  knowledge-based 
activities. And lastly, address the issue of crime in some countries. At the same time, governments in 
the region should pursue sound macro-economic policies.  
Moreover, Caribbean countries can enjoy the benefits of tourism fully and create strong linkages with 
national  economies  if  they  take  specific  aspects  of  tourism  development  into  account.  As  a  result, 
each and everyone in the community will benefit from the tourism growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the tourism sector in the region is facing many challenges, but at the same 
time it has great potential for growth. In order to realize this potential, the region, as I have mentioned 
will  need  to  improve  its  investment  climate,  and  manage  and  market  the  tourism  sector  more 
effectively. To accomplish this, it is necessary for the public and private sectors to work in synergy. 
Today, I understand that you have dealt with many of the challenges and issues that impact the future 
investment and growth of tourism in the Caribbean. In addition, tomorrow you will address some key 
topics related to the development of the Caribbean tourism product. I wish you all success during the 
plenary  sessions  and  in  the  workshops  tomorrow,  thereby  contributing  to  a  further  dynamic 
development and reinforcement of the competitiveness of Caribbean tourism. Once again I bid you all 
welcome and hope that during the conference you will have an inspiring exchange of views.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
