Hermann Remsperger: Current financial stability issues from a European 
viewpoint 
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  representative  office  of  the  Federal  State  of  Hesse  at  the 
European Union, Brussels, 27 June 2007.  
My thanks are due to Ms Susanne Korbmacher for her kind assistance in preparing this talk. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
I have chosen to give this lecture the title "Current financial stability issues from a European 
viewpoint" for the simple reason that it allows me to elaborate on a whole bundle of burning 
questions concerning financial stability. Needless to say, these issues are highly complex in 
their nature.  
Summary  
I  
In order to make matters more understandable I used last Sunday to go through my speech 
again and completely rework it. I shall begin at the end – that is to say, by focusing on the six 
comments that I had originally intended to use in my final summary.  
1. 
Despite some risks in the financial markets – particularly in the credit markets – I 
consider  the  international  financial  system  to  be  remarkably  robust,  not  least  on 
account  of  the  very  good  performance  and  ample  capitalisation  of  systemically 
important banks  
With  the  arrival  of  new  financial  market  instruments  for  credit  risk  transfer  and 
thanks  to  the  growing  influence  of  unregulated  financial  investors,  credit  risks  are 
not  necessarily  located  in  the  kind  of  places  where  they  would  have  traditionally 
been  expected.  This  not  only  makes  it  more  difficult  for  market  participants  to 
manage  risk.  The  task  of  assessing  stability  risks  relating  to  the  international 
financial system is also made more difficult for the official agencies responsible.  
When evaluating the stability situation in future, it will be even more important than 
in  the  past  to  combine  a  proper  examination  and  assessment  of  new  instruments 
with an analysis of the behaviour of new market participants. This would appear to 
be the best way to deal with the fact that the financial system is not only expanding 
but also becoming increasingly complex.  
The transparency of the distribution of risks across the financial system has tended 
to decrease, thus presenting the official agencies with the question of how it might 
be possible to increase this transparency again. Much of the recent discussion on 
hedge funds has revolved around this point.  
The  remarkable  initiative  by  London-based  hedge-fund  managers  to  consider 
introducing improved, and possibly also binding, sectoral standards is an indication 
of the real potential that exists for agreement between official agencies and market 
players on the urgent need for greater transparency.  
The fact that financial markets are becoming more complex is partly explained by 
their growing geographical integration. At the same time, the emergence of closer 
links  between  European  banks  raises  the  question  of  how  banking  supervision 
should be structured. Bearing in mind the political and legal conditions that apply in 
Europe, the “cooperation model”, as it is called, offers a good framework for further 
developing the kind of convergence that is needed in supervisory practice.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
If  you  were  to  ask  me  how  I  arrived  at  this  six-point  conclusion,  the  simple  answer  would 
have to be that I started with a definition.  
Monetary and financial stability  
II  
We  view  a  financial  system  as  being  stable  when  it  is  able  to  efficiently  perform  its  key 
functions  of  allocating  capital  and  risks  as  well  as  settling  payments  and  securities 
transactions, and can do so in stress situations and during periods of structural adjustment. 
There are three aspects that deserve particular emphasis in this connection.  
1. 
Disturbances  in  core  functions  of  the  financial  system  generally  come  at  an 
economic  cost,  in  the  form  of  loss  of  growth  and,  in  some  circumstances,  direct 
fiscal aid to help prop up financial institutions. This is something to be avoided.  
In  the  event  of  a  shock  there  may  be  a  sudden  and  dramatic  rise  in  the  liquidity 
needs  of  individual  financial  market  participants.  In  integrated  financial  markets, 
such shortages of liquidity can be  passed on quickly and, especially if they reach 
systemically  important  market  participants,  can  have  a  negative  impact  on  the 
financial system as a whole. Once again, this is something that is best avoided.  
Last but not least, it must be emphasised that price stability and financial stability go 
hand in hand. Disruptions in the financial system can delay or otherwise impair the 
transmission of monetary policy impulses to the real economy. It follows that central 
banks have a special interest in maintaining a stable financial system.  
2. 
3. 
Current stability situation  
III  
Against this backdrop, most central banks have, in recent years, extended and refined their 
financial stability analysis. The main focus here is on risks, that is to say not the likeliest of 
events but possible unfavourable developments that may arise.  
If  you  were  to  ask  me  about  the  current  situation  concerning  risks  for  the  international 
financial  system,  I  would  start  by  pointing  out  that  for  about  two  years  macroeconomic 
developments  have  surpassed  expectations.  The  global  economy  is  forging  ahead  on  its 
expansionary course, with an increasingly more balanced regional growth pattern. This has 
improved the outlook for a gradual reduction of financial imbalances – with the US current 
account deficit serving as one of the crystallisation points.  
The USA seems as if it is enjoying a soft landing while European countries are experiencing 
larger growth than expected. In the emerging market economies, especially in Asia, there is 
no end in sight to the ongoing boom.  
However,  this  situation  should  not  lead  us  to  view  things  through  rose-tinted  spectacles. 
Macroeconomic risks continue to exist. Contrary to my own expectations it is quite possible 
that the US economy will cool down even more. Over and above this, a disorderly dissolution 
of financial imbalances in the global economy still cannot be ruled out altogether. Should the 
downturn in residential construction in the USA spill over into other sectors, this could lead to 
a reversal in the credit cycle as well as to pessimism in the financial markets, which in turn 
would test the resilience of market participants.  
Certainly, the large and complex international financial institutions that are based in Europe 
and  the  USA,  in  other  words,  those  which  are  systemically  important  for  the  international 
financial  system,  are  in  a  fairly  robust  state.  The  favourable  cyclical  background  and  the 
propitious capital market environment play a major role in this connection. In the fiscal year 
2006,  the  large  international  financial  institutions  posted  record  results.  They  were  able  to 
record  an  average  year-on-year  earnings  growth  of  around  30%.  Volatile  income  sources 
such  as  proprietary  trading  are  proving  particularly  productive  while  the  need  for  risk 
provisioning is modest. The positive yield trend seems to be continuing in the current year.  
2 
 BIS Review 81/2007
Owing  to  their  extremely  good  performance,  ample  capitalisation  and  the  continuous 
improvement  in  their  management  of  risks,  the  resilience  of  these  financial  intermediaries, 
that is, their ability to absorb external shocks, is to be considered strong.  
There will, of course, be cyclical risks in the medium term, and these will mostly be in the 
form  of  the  turn-around  in  the  credit  (quality)  cycle,  which  has  already  been  expected  for 
some time. We are observing quite high and/or rising levels of debt in households in the USA 
as  well  as  in  a  number  of  European  countries.  This  is  compounded  by  the  heavy 
indebtedness  of  some  non-listed  enterprises.  A  deterioration  in  macro-financial  conditions 
could  place  a  strain  on  them  and  therefore  their  creditors  as  well.  At  the  same  time,  in  a 
depressed  environment  the  increasingly  homogeneous  focus  of  large  financial  institutions 
could have the effect of reinforcing unfavourable financial market developments  
In  the  international  financial  markets  pricing  and  risk  assessment  are  being  determined 
largely  by  positive  macroeconomic  expectations.  This  said,  in  some  parts  of  the  credit 
markets there are signs of overheating. In the market for risky syndicated loans, for example, 
providers  of  capital  have  considerably  eased  their  conditions.  In  the  case  of  financing  for 
leveraged buyouts (LBOs), there has been a further rise in the leverage. The trend towards 
more  relaxed  loan  terms  and  conditions  is  continuing,  owing  to  the  favourable  economic 
environment and strong competition.  
The easing of credit standards witnessed in recent years has for some time left its mark on 
the US mortgage market in the form of rising default rates among debtors with poorer credit 
ratings.  A  large  part  of  the  credit  risk  arising  from  subprime  mortgages  is  to  be  found  in 
securitised and structured form at institutional investors. These include hedge funds. News 
reports over the past few days have made this patently clear. It is my view , however, that in 
terms  of  the  market  as  a  whole  such  relatively  minor  distortions  do  not  yet  constitute  a 
systemic risk. Nevertheless, they do raise the fundamental question of how these securitised 
credit risks should be assessed.  
A phase of fundamental re-assessment in the markets and therefore also in the corporate 
credit  markets  would  present  risk  managers  with  special  challenges.  This  would  typically 
involve changes in the correlation between financial market prices and burdens on market 
liquidity.  
The rapid recovery that followed this year’s spring turbulences and the as yet limited impact 
of the crisis in the sub-prime mortgage business in the USA would appear to have bolstered 
the  confidence  of  market  participants.  Even  before  this,  the  somewhat  more  turbulent 
financial  market  episodes  experienced  in  the  springs  of  2005  and  2006  proved  to  be  very 
short-lived.  Bearing  all  of  this  in  mind,  I  believe  there  is  a  certain  risk  in  the  fact  that  not 
enough consideration is being given to the time when this period of market calm comes to an 
end.  
On balance, however, I would say that the international financial system is now in a robust 
state. I rest this assessment mainly on the resilience exhibited by the financial institutions as 
I still see risks in the kind of things that are happening in the financial markets. These risks 
are not only of a cyclical nature. In some cases they are closely linked to structural changes 
occurring in the financial sector.  
Structural change in the financial system  
IV  
In the light of these conclusions I would now like to talk in greater detail about two structural 
trends which are relevant to the question of stability in the international financial system. The 
first of these is the trend towards new financial instruments, especially in the credit markets. 
The second is the growing importance of new financial market participants or categories of 
investor.  
BIS Review 81/2007 
 3
Innovative financial instruments and new categories of investor have resulted in even greater 
differentiation  in  the  financial  markets.  In  terms  of  efficiency  this  is  definitely  a  positive 
development, as it enables a better allocation of capital and financial risks. This should have 
the effect of enhancing the financial system’s ability to absorb shocks.  
At the same time, however, it is possible that investors with volatile investment habits and 
financial instruments with an inherent leverage effect will generate risks. Please note that I 
am only saying this is a possibility.  
We cannot tell for sure whether such structural changes will in fact improve or worsen the 
stability of the financial system. This said, ladies and gentlemen, we surely all agree on one 
point and that is that these developments present market participants, financial supervisors 
and policy-makers with some major challenges.  
New financial instruments  
1  
Although  I  myself  come  from  the  banking  business,  the  financial  markets’  capacity  for 
change never ceases to amaze me. The credit markets are the most recent example of this. 
For  a  long  time,  the  lending  business  was  an  exchange  merely  between  lenders  and 
borrowers, what we now refer to as “buy and hold”.  
Since then, a large market with many new instruments has evolved around this bread and 
butter  business.  Loans  can  now  be  sold  on  the  secondary  market.  Loans  can  also  be 
bundled and tranched to be treated as structured products. And, finally, a debtor’s credit risk 
can be traded via derivatives completely separately from a credit relationship.  
With all of these possibilities, a new business model has been born. The maxim is “originate 
and  distribute”.  Of  course,  the  basics  of  lending  are  still  being  carried  out  as  before. 
However,  instead  of  keeping  loans  in  own  books,  the  loans,  or  at  least  the  isolated  credit 
risks, are often quickly passed on to investors.  
These  new  forms  of  credit  markets  are  growing  dramatically,  whereby  the  structural  trend 
has been boosted significantly by the global economic situation – strong economic growth 
coupled with low interest rates.  
The  outstanding  volume  of  credit  default  swaps,  the  backbone  of  most  credit  derivatives, 
doubled in both 2005 and 2006, according to BIS statistics. In December 2006, the nominal 
volume amounted to USD 29 trillion. The incentive to achieve balance sheet relief by insuring 
against default risk has long since become less important than the incentive to trade or to 
design new financial products.  
By  appropriate  structuring,  even  a  portfolio  which  includes  loans  to  borrowers  with  a  less 
than  perfect  credit  rating  can  produce  investment  securities  with  an  AAA  rating.  Despite 
having the same rating classification, these instruments are riskier than the best government 
bonds and have a much higher coupon. The interest rate premium makes these instruments 
attractive  to  institutional  investors  geared  to  rating-based  investment  criteria.  However, 
market  participants  express  doubt  as  to  whether  the  legal  risks  can  be  evaluated 
appropriately. The arranging banks currently earn a large proportion of their commission from 
their structuring business.  
At the same time, the banks that originally granted the loans create new scope for granting 
loans  by  passing  on  their  loans.  The  option  of  selling  on  loans  plays  a  significant  role  in 
lending – especially for debt-financed acquisitions. Exercising all due caution, this suggests 
that the large demand for structured products increases primary lending.  
With the new instruments, credit risks are not just being reallocated but additional risks are 
also  being  created.  For  example,  operational  risks  arise  if  the  expansion  of  the  market’s 
technical infrastructure lags behind the development of business volume. Up until the start of 
last  year,  trade  confirmations  for  credit  default  swaps  were  often  written  weeks  after  the 
transaction had been concluded.  
4 
 BIS Review 81/2007
For me, the most important factor here is the simple realisation that it is precisely in the new 
credit markets that two types of financial investor play an important role: private equity funds 
and hedge funds. I can imagine what you are thinking, and you are right: these are not “new” 
financial market participants per se. I personally had many a dealing with hedge funds long 
before  my  time  at  the  Bundesbank.  But  the  significance  that  they  have  now  achieved  for 
financial markets has reached new heights owing to the capital constantly accruing to these 
funds  and  increasingly,  too,  from  regulated  institutional  investors  such  as  insurance 
companies  and  pension  funds.  I  therefore  see  them  as  “new”  players  on  the  international 
financial stage.  
In some credit market segments, for example, hedge funds now generate more than half of 
turnover volume. At the same time, loans for debt-financed acquisitions conducted by private 
equity funds promote the international large exposure business. In short, the dynamics of the 
credit  markets  and  the  new  financial  instruments  are  closely  connected  with  the  growth  in 
hedge funds and private equity funds. 
Hedge funds  
2  
The  speed  with  which  hedge  funds1  have  developed  shows  that  the  volume  of  assets 
managed by them has tripled over the past six years from almost USD 500 billion to just over 
USD 1,500 billion. At the same time, the number of funds – with a high degree of fluctuation 
– more than doubled from almost 4,000 to approximately 9,500.  
Of course, the term “hedge funds” refers to a very heterogeneous group with a wide range of 
market  strategies.  However,  all  hedge  funds  have  one  thing  in  common,  the  use  of  high 
financial  leverage,  which  they  also  apply  by  means  of  short  selling  or  derivatives.  The 
volumes  of  capital  shifted  by  hedge  funds  therefore  far  exceed  their  reported  assets.  We 
closely observe hedge funds from a financial stability perspective for two reasons.  
Firstly, hedge funds are borrowers from and counterparties to systemically important financial 
institutions.  Should  a  series  of  unfavourable  developments  arise,  extensive  business 
relationships  with  a  risk-seeking  group  of  investors  could  have  a  negative  effect  on 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  and  therefore,  in  a  worst-case  scenario,  on  the 
functioning of the entire financial system. Intense competition for lucrative (prime brokerage) 
business with hedge funds can result in large concessions being granted to this important 
group of customers, for example, in collateral.  
Secondly,  hedge  funds  can  both  trigger  and  intensify  disruptions  to  financial  markets.  Not 
only  the  characteristic  high  leverage  of  these  funds  but  also  the  increasing  investment  in 
illiquid  and  complex  instruments  give  observers  food  for  thought.  This  is  all  the  more  true 
considering relaxed margin requirements during unfavourable market developments can give 
rise to margin calls with corresponding pressure to backtrack. In such a situation, tension can 
build  up  in  the  market  and  market  liquidity  can  decrease  considerably  or  even  dry  up 
completely.  
However,  I  would  also  like  to  stress  that  precisely  hedge  funds,  as  long  as  their  positions 
allow, often identify such situations as good business opportunities, go against the trend and 
consequently stabilise the market. A range of market participants with different positions has 
a  stabilising  effect  on  the  market.  In  other  words,  market  liquidity  is  enhanced  by  the 
heterogeneity of market participants.  
However,  this  conclusion  does  not  change  my  opinion  that  hedge  funds  need  to  become 
more  transparent.  Without  transparency  how  can  investors  and  counterparties  correctly 
assess the risk profile of a fund and make sound investment decisions?  
                                                 
1   See:  Axel  A  Weber,  “Hedge  funds:  a  central  bank  perspective",  in  Banque  de  France,  Financial  Stability 
Review, Special Issue Hedge Funds, April 2007, p 161-168. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 5
I therefore believe that it was right to include the topic of hedge funds on the agenda of the 
German G7/G8 presidency and to ask the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) for a statement. 
We in the FSF were unanimous in making a series of recommendations based on market 
discipline and indirect regulation of the already regulated hedge fund counterparties. These 
met  with  approval  at  the  G8  summit  in  Heiligendamm.  The  recommendations  ask  all 
participants, that is investors, counterparties, supervisors and hedge funds, to work actively 
towards increasing transparency and risk awareness.  
The  hedge  fund  sector  is  called  upon  to  review  and  enhance  existing  sound  practice 
benchmarks,  especially  with  regard  to  risk  management,  assessment  and  disclosure 
practice.  
I  therefore  welcome  the  fact  that  more  than  a  dozen  large  hedge  funds,  which  are  all 
managed  in  London,  have  launched  a  remarkable  initiative.  Under  the  leadership  of  Sir 
Andrew Large, the group plans to develop improved sectoral standards based on the various 
recommendations  and  best  practices  that  already  exist.  These  home-grown  sectoral 
standards are to abide by the principle of “comply or explain”. These standards are to cover 
assessment, disclosure and risk management and thereby the exact same areas identified 
by the FSF.  
Of course, only time will tell if the group’s project will bring us closer to a code of conduct with 
mandatory disclosure requirements which is on the to-do list of the G7/G8 presidency. I for 
one am taking this initiative seriously and see it as a good step in the right direction.  
The  FSF’s  recommendation  to  investors  and  counterparties  is  to  actively  obtain  the 
information  required  so  that  market  discipline  has  a  chance  to  come  into  effect.  This 
particularly concerns information on the risk profile.  
The FSF’s other three recommendations are addressed to financial supervisors. They should 
take  an  indirect  approach  to  ensuring  that  systemically  important  financial  intermediaries 
firstly  strengthen  their  counterparty  risk  management  practices  and  secondly  prepare 
themselves for a sudden erosion of market liquidity. Thirdly, financial supervisors should also 
explore  the  extent  to  which  systematically  collecting  data  from  systemically  important 
intermediaries  on  their  consolidated  counterparty  risks  vis-à-vis  hedge  funds  would  be  an 
effective  complement  to  existing  supervisory  efforts.  It  should  also  be  considered  whether 
international cooperation between supervisory authorities should be strengthened.  
I believe that the important factor now is for all parties to ensure that no time is lost in putting 
these recommendations into practice, especially as the macroeconomic and financial setting 
is not likely to remain as favourable as it is at the moment.  
At  this  interim  point,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  take  a  moment  to  recount  a  personal 
experience.  In  all  of  the  discussions  about  new  financial  instruments  and  new  market 
players, I have discovered that the Anglo-Saxon perspective is often quite different from that 
of continental Europe. Whilst the emphasis here is on risk, in the UK it is the stability of the 
financial  system  through  innovations  in  the  field  of  financial  instruments  and  financial 
intermediaries that is promoted. I believe that both perspectives are justified.  
And I am also of the opinion that both of these perspectives – that is, opportunities and risks 
– also play a role in the evaluation of financial integration but here I am jumping forward to 
another section of my speech.  
The integration of financial markets and the banking systems are causing the structure of the 
financial  system  to  change.  Financial  markets  will  become  broader  and  deeper  if  market 
players look beyond national borders more and more and find a larger selection of financial 
instruments, greater turnover and higher liquidity. This indicates that an integrated financial 
system is more capable of absorbing shocks and that it is more resilient.  
However, it should also be noted that disruptions in a highly integrated system can spread at 
a much faster pace over market segments, market players and countries, meaning that it is 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2007
much easier for an unfavourable self-perpetuating momentum to develop, which is likely to 
be much stronger than in a fragmented financial system.  
Integration of European financial markets  
V  
Europe  is  making  headway  towards  a  single  market  for  financial  services.  This  single 
financial market is a cornerstone of European economic and monetary union – and let’s not 
forget that this is not just a monetary union but also an economic one. Tighter integration of 
further sub-markets would be desirable in order to take maximum advantage of the economic 
benefits which a shared currency has to offer.  
Financial integration  
1 
Monetary  union  was  followed  virtually  overnight  by  integration  in  the  unsecured  money 
market, which in turn led to uniform market interest rates applying to all euro-area countries.  
Since  EMU  began,  other  segments  of  the  financial  market  in  Europe  have  become 
increasingly  interlinked.  The  closer  a  financial  market  segment  has  been  tied  to  monetary 
policy and the larger the volume of business, the faster integration has occurred.  
Bond markets belong to the category of particularly well-integrated markets. In the case of 
government bonds, most interest rates have been brought into line.  
The  remaining  interest  rate  differentials  reflect  differences  in  the  degree  of  credit  risk  in 
individual countries as well as in the liquidity of specific instruments.  
With  regard  to  banking  services,  business  with  major  corporate  customers  has  likewise 
become very well integrated. To take the example of syndicated loans, there has been an 
increase  in  the  proportion  of  financing  that  is  arranged  by  a  foreign  bank,  from  the 
perspective of the borrower.  
Integration is least developed in retail banking. Some experts complain about “fragmentation” 
in the retail banking business. My advice would be to take a more relaxed view.  
Of course, the regulatory framework for convergence has to be right, and the FSAP along 
with its follow-up and the Lamfalussy procedure certainly have a helpful role to play here. But 
the  market  participants  will  definitely  themselves  find  the  right  speed  and  identify  the 
appropriate  areas  for  action  and  the  methods  to  be  used.  This  applies  in  even  greater 
measure  to  retail  banking,  where  national  traditions  set  natural  limits  to  the  degree  and 
speed of integration. Integration cannot be achieved with force.  
However, it is not just the financial markets that are integrating. The big banks and banking 
groups  are  following  suit  and  becoming  more  and  more  European.  Starting  in  2001,  the 
ESCB’s  Banking  Supervision  Committee  has  examined  this  process  every  two  years  (the 
most recent data relating to year-end 2005).They have been doing this on the basis of the 
cross-border activities of 46 European banking groups at the last count. Their latest survey 
clearly confirms the trend towards Europeanisation that had already been observed.  
The European banking groups have grown considerably, mainly as a result of mergers, with 
30% of the groups of institutions under review having assets of more than €500 billion.  
The foreign presence of these groups is on the increase, both in terms of the number of EU 
countries where they have a foreign affiliate and in terms of their share of external assets. 
These average 38% of the consolidated group assets, 14 percentage points higher than the 
figure for 2003! Big differences exist between individual countries, with the share of external 
assets ranging from 16% in the case of Greece to 65% for Italy. The value for a total of eight 
countries is equal to or above the average.  
BIS Review 81/2007 
 7
In  the  EU15  countries,  the  aggregated  market  share  of  the  banking  groups  under  review 
stands at an average of 20%. Meanwhile, at 56%, the figure for new EU member countries is 
more than half of the total.  
What  we  see  here  is  a  pronounced  degree  of  Europeanisation  at  the  level  of  the  larger 
banking groups. I am sure there is little need for me to emphasise that this development is 
directly  connected  with  the  question  of  what  kind  of  structure  is  best  suited  for  banking 
supervisory purposes in Europe.  
Implications for financial supervision  
2 
This  question  is  anything  but  easy  to  answer.2  This  is  because  the  large  financial 
intermediaries active across Europe operate alongside a much larger number of nationally or 
even locally focused institutions. Also, the EU member states each have their own individual 
legal systems.  
A  European  supervisory  system  must  therefore  take  account  of  the  financial  reality  of  an 
increasingly integrated financial system as well as the political reality of national legal and 
administrative systems. Moreover, and I would like to place particular emphasis on this, the 
supervisory structure should also be competitively neutral. This means that a “level playing 
field”  must  be  established  not  only  between  domestic  institutions  and  their  foreign 
competitors  but  also  between  nationally  and  internationally  focused  institutions.  This  is 
definitely no easy feat.  
The  EU  has,  however,  developed  a  system  which,  in  my  opinion,  has  met  these 
requirements. While the supervision of institutions is the responsibility of member states, a 
cooperation  model  between  home  and  host  supervisors  applies  for  internationally  active 
institutions.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  consolidated  supervisor  as  defined  in  the  Banking 
Directive  will  carry  out  supplementary  supervision  of  an  institution  through  the  supervisory 
authorities of the bank’s country of domicile in cooperation with the supervisory authorities of 
the host countries.  
The  nature and  scope of  this  cooperation  are defined  in  the  “home/host  guidelines”  of  the 
level  3  committee  CEBS.  This  expert  committee  was  established  under  the  Lamfalussy 
framework  and  is  designed  to  provide  for  a  convergent  application  of  European  banking 
supervisory legislation among other things.  
The “home/host guidelines“ also describe the “supervisory colleges” in which the participating 
supervisory  authorities  responsible  for  a  bank  organise  themselves.  This  facilitates  the 
exchange of information and the coordination of supervision.  
A whole range of measures such as exchanges of staff, joint training sessions or the option, 
currently being developed, of a mediation procedure in cases of dispute between supervisory 
authorities serve to increase cooperation and convergence in supervisory practice.  
This  cooperation  model  provides  the  best  solution  under  the  present  political  and  legal 
conditions.  The  necessary  and  desired  improvement  in  supervisory  cooperation  and 
convergence should be further developed within this framework.  
But I know that this approach is criticised by some for not going far enough. Large European 
banks have been requesting a concentration of supervisory functions for some time. At the 
beginning of June, the IMF strongly criticised the existing arrangements for the supervision of 
institutions and crisis management in its concluding statement to Article IV consultation with 
the  euro-area.  Not  only  did  they  lag  behind  the  market  but  they  even  prevented  further 
integration.  
                                                 
2   See:  Meister,  Edgar,  European  financial  supervision:  next  steps,  Lecture  given  at  the  “Kangaroo  group 
breakfast debate”, European Parliament, Brussels, 29 March 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 81/2007
In  my  opinion,  however,  the  IMF’s  criticism  of  the  European  supervisory  model  can  be 
qualified  by  the  fact  that,  among  other  things,  there  are  no  appropriate  legal  and  political 
provisions  to  enable  the  solution  suggested  by  the  IMF  for  large  internationally  operating 
financial institutions to be applied.  
Most important is that a single supervision and bankruptcy law be established in all member 
states. Even then the question would remain as to whether a supervisory system which de 
facto is in two parts is consistent with the idea of the single market and the goal of a level 
playing field.  
The IMF also criticised the sluggish progress in the preparations for the management of any 
financial crises in internationally active financial institutions.  
Without  doubt,  the  question  of  adequate  crisis  management  in  the  financial  sector  is 
extremely  important  for  financial  stability.  The  aim  of  supervisory  authorities  and  central 
banks is to avoid systemic consequences in the event of an incident.  
In  my  opinion,  two  things  are  important,  when  preparing  for  a  crisis:  First,  what  market 
participants expect from the crisis management system and, second, the flexibility necessary 
to make the best of the individual circumstances of a critical situation.  
The expectation that the central bank and the taxpayer will make funds available in a crisis 
situation  reduces  the  financial  institutions’  own  sense  of  responsibility.  Such  expectations 
could even lead to a careless attitude towards risk and would therefore be counterproductive. 
Owing to this moral hazard phenomenon, I believe advance detailed arrangements are not 
helpful.  
The institutional system in the EU for crisis management has been expanded over the past 
few years and has been tested in several crisis simulations.3 It addresses the expectation 
problems and offers the necessary flexibility.  
At an EU level, two memoranda of understanding currently exist for cooperation in a crisis 
situation. The older one (2003) was agreed between supervisory bodies and central banks; 
the  second  (2005)  includes  the  finance  ministries.  These  agreements  cover  the  principles 
and procedures for the exchange of information and assessments in crisis situations. Then 
there 
the  supervisory  authorities  already 
institutionalised in the “supervisory colleges”.  
Independent  of  this,  the  Eurosystem  has  arrangements  and  procedures  in  place  for  the 
effective  performance  of  its  functions  in  crisis  situations  as  well  as  for  the  provision  of 
emergency liquidity assistance by the national central banks.  
With this institutional framework, Europe is, in my opinion, well prepared for a situation which 
could  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Some  participants  in  the  discussion  on 
crisis management envisage further, more extensive agreements.  
However,  I  see  the  danger  that  flexibility  in  financial  crisis situations  will  be  limited  if  such 
further,  more  extensive  agreements  are  reached.  Each  crisis  is  unique.  Predetermined 
contingency plans would restrict flexibility and could therefore impede an optimum solution 
being reached. This applies even more, as a private sector solution always has priority. Ex 
ante  agreements  on  the  sharing  of  the  financial  burdens  of  a  crisis  are,  in  my  opinion, 
unfeasible and problematic.  
To  be  honest  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I’m  finding  it  difficult  to  think  of  an  appropriate 
conclusion. I will, therefore, finish by asking you to bear my initial comments in mind.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
information  exchange  between 
the 
is 
                                                 
3   See: ECB, The EU arrangements for financial crisis management, Monthly Bulletin, February 2007, p 73 ff. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 9
