David Dodge: The importance of appropriate exchange rate regimes 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  46th  ACI  Financial  Markets 
Association World Congress, Montreal, Quebec, 4 May 2007. 
 Thank you and good morning. It's great to be here and to have an opportunity to talk about some key 
issues  that  relate  to  your  meeting's  theme  of  convergence.  I  think  that  it  is  very  important  that 
economies  all  over  the  globe  converge  towards  becoming  part  of  a  market-based,  liberalized  trade 
and financial order.  
Why  do  I  think  that  such  an  order  is  so  important?  Well,  in  part  it's  because  history  has  helped  to 
demonstrate its virtues. But it's also extremely important to bear in mind the context, that is, the world 
in which we live today. This is a world in which adjustment is perpetual, where change is driven by the 
development of new technologies, where sectors and nations continually attempt to secure some new 
advantage. And in this world, price signals from markets help us to understand what adjustments are 
needed. 
So, this market-based, liberalized trade and financial order is really the best that we have found for 
promoting growth and prosperity. But it is critical that members of this system adhere to a common set 
of rules or policies that operate for the benefit of all. In this way, we can encourage a healthy pace of 
global economic growth. 
Of course, many policies are necessary to move an economy towards converging on a market-based, 
liberalized trade and financial order. I'll elaborate further in my remarks on some of those policies. But 
today, I will focus on one particular policy. That is the vital role that a flexible exchange rate regime 
can  play  for  many  countries  in  helping  their  economies  to  operate  for  the  maximum  benefit  of  all 
citizens. 
Why a flexible exchange rate is the right choice for many 
Now, I should be clear right off the top that I'm not saying a floating exchange rate is the one and only 
choice for all countries at all times. A fixed exchange rate can be the right choice for economies – 
especially small economies – where an independent monetary policy is difficult to execute. In such a 
situation, the costs associated with having a flexible currency may outweigh the benefits. But for many 
–  and  indeed,  for  most  large  economies  –  a  flexible  exchange  rate  can  bring  important  economic 
benefits, benefits that clearly outweigh the costs. 
A  flexible  rate  supports  a  market-based,  liberalized  financial  order,  an  order  that  has  the  great 
advantage  of  providing  for  continuous  adjustment  in  response  to  price  signals.  A  flexible  exchange 
rate adds one more market-determined price. It not only absorbs shocks, but it uses prices to facilitate 
changes.  
At the same time, we must always remember that a flexible exchange rate is just one of several key 
policies that are critical to achieving economic efficiency. But a flexible rate is crucial if a country is to 
pursue an independent monetary policy aimed at price stability. 
During my remarks, I will illustrate some of my points by drawing on Canada's lengthy experience with 
a  floating  exchange  rate.  Our  experience  can  be  very  instructive  for  others,  even  though  57  years 
have  passed  since  Canada  broke  with  the  Bretton  Woods  system  and  implemented  a  flexible 
exchange rate regime. We have had more experience with this type of exchange rate mechanism than 
almost any other country in the world, so we have a deep understanding of how it works. 
Canada's bold – some might say radical – decision in 1950 to break with the Bretton Woods system 
was  driven  by  a  couple  of  problems.  Some  of  these  problems  still  plague  many  emerging-market 
economies  today.  In  the  late  1940s,  Canada  was  dealing  with  a  large  inflow  of  foreign  capital  and 
postwar  investment,  as  well  as  strong  household  demand.  Following  an  earlier  revaluation  of  the 
Canadian  dollar,  short-term  capital  was  flowing  heavily  into  the  country  amid  speculation  about 
another revaluation. Rising commodity prices were also adding to upward pressure on the dollar. All of 
this  led  to  concerns  about  inflation,  as  well  as  worries  that  capital  inflows  might  lead  to  a  sizable 
increase in the country's foreign debt. Unfortunately, the fixed exchange rate meant that policy-makers 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 1
had to focus monetary policy on exchange rate stability, rather than on steps that would have been 
appropriate to stabilize domestic prices. 
To give the Bank of Canada the freedom to pursue policies aimed at stabilizing prices, authorities took 
the  critical  step  of  allowing  the  dollar  to  float  at  values  set  by  the  market.  I'd  also  like  to  remind 
everyone that this policy continues: the Bank of Canada today still has no specific target for the dollar, 
because we believe that market conditions should determine the currency's value. 
The 1950 decision to float the currency was controversial, especially with the International Monetary 
Fund and most of its member states, which subscribed to a fixed exchange rate regime. But in the 
postwar  years,  experience  proved  that  a  floating  exchange  rate  was  truly  beneficial  for  domestic 
policy.  
However, during the 1970s and 1980s, the Canadian-dollar foreign exchange market was quite thin. 
As  a  result,  the  Bank  of  Canada  had  to  intervene  on  a  day-to-day  basis  with  the  aim  of  providing 
liquidity and reducing volatility. This strategy of "leaning against the wind" was pursued symmetrically, 
with  the  goal  of  smoothing  fluctuations  in  either  direction.  By  the  1990s,  however,  markets  had 
become deep enough that daily interventions were no longer helpful. Government policy now restricts 
such  interventions  to  the  most  exceptional  circumstances  and,  in  fact,  Canada  hasn't  intervened  to 
influence the Canadian dollar since 1998. 
Uncertainty under fixed and flexible exchange rates 
Despite Canada's success with a flexible exchange rate system, there are still critics who find it hard 
to deal with the uncertainty that can come with a floating dollar. Large currency movements, such as 
the  roughly  35  per  cent  appreciation  in  the  Canadian  dollar  since  early  2003,  can  be  hard  for 
businesses to deal with. A floating currency does entail somewhat larger transactions costs and, in the 
short run, additional risks for business. In this regard, the development of deep and well-functioning 
forward foreign exchange markets is extraordinarily important in assisting businesses to hedge their 
foreign  exchange  risk.  Such  well-developed  markets,  along  with  financial  institutions  geared  to 
providing  business  –  especially  small  business  –  with  the  opportunity  to  hedge  at  low  transactions 
cost,  minimize  the  additional  exchange  risks  that  businesses  face  under  a  floating  exchange  rate 
regime. 
But even with well-developed foreign exchange markets and the ability of firms to hedge, some still 
fear that a flexible exchange rate will introduce undue risks and uncertainties. They argue that fixed 
exchange rates are the solution. But a fixed exchange rate is no panacea. Over time, a fixed nominal 
exchange rate can actually heighten uncertainty and, eventually, add to volatility. A fixed rate limits the 
actions of central bankers because monetary policy must be aimed at protecting the fixed level of the 
exchange rate.  
Under a regime of fixed nominal exchange rates, the economy is forced to absorb the full effect of 
changes in world prices through changes in domestic nominal wages and prices. To bring this about, 
the burden initially falls on output and employment and, eventually, spreads to most wages and prices. 
And  because  domestic  wages  in  particular  tend  to  be  "sticky,"  changes  in  output  and  employment 
need  to  be  quite  large.  Thus,  adjustment  tends  to  be  more  difficult  and  more  costly  for  many 
individuals,  businesses,  and  the  economy,  than  would  be  the  case  under  a  flexible  exchange  rate 
regime. 
In economies where domestic wages and prices are not perfectly flexible, it's not only central bankers 
who face constraints under a fixed exchange rate regime. Controls on financial transactions will often 
be  required, and eventually,  controls  over  parts  of  the  real side of  the  economy  may  be  needed  to 
maintain the fixed nominal exchange rate. Authorities who ignore these constraints, or who lack the 
fiscal  discipline  required  by  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  can  end  up  creating  uncertainty  and  the 
very volatility that they were trying to avoid.  
Economic benefits of a flexible exchange rate  
Let me just say that the greatest benefit Canada has found with a floating currency is the way in which 
it helps the economy deal with economic shocks. Perhaps this is a good time for me to take a moment 
and explain in more detail just how the floating exchange rate system now fits into Canada's monetary 
policy framework. Our monetary policy aims to protect the domestic purchasing power of our currency 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2007
by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  We  aim  to  keep  inflation,  as  measured  by  the 
consumer price index, at a 2 per cent target. By doing so, we support the conditions necessary for 
strong, sustainable economic growth.  
Of  course,  there  will  always  be  economic  shocks  that  require  a  response  and  adjustment.  As  a 
medium-sized, open economy and an important producer of commodities, our terms of trade can shift 
significantly as the relative prices of commodities, manufactured goods, and services change. Such 
changes in relative prices are a signal to shift real resources out of sectors with declining profitability, 
and into sectors where profits are rising. Under a floating rate regime, movements in the currency help 
to smooth that process and to minimize the adjustments in other areas of the economy.  
This all serves to demonstrate why it has been very important to us to maintain our flexible exchange 
rate, rather than fix our currency to the U.S. dollar. The United States is certainly our closest neighbour 
and by far, our largest trading partner. But the structures of our two economies are very different. This 
means that each of us often requires different adjustments and different policies in reaction to shocks. 
Canada's  floating  exchange  rate  facilitates  these  adjustments  without  forcing  our  economy  through 
some very difficult changes in the overall level of output, wages, and prices. 
Let me put this in more concrete terms and, in so doing, share a valuable lesson learned from the 
Asian crisis of 1997. As a commodity-producing nation, we were hit pretty hard by the dramatic fall in 
commodity prices. Our floating dollar fell sharply and thus, helped with the significant but necessary 
adjustment.  With  the  decline  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  our  non-commodity  sectors  saw  their 
competitive positions improve. They were therefore able to absorb some of the resources that were 
being quickly shed by the commodity producers. Our floating exchange rate allowed us to achieve a 
decline in real wages without a decline in nominal wages and to hold inflation near our target. 
Let  me  give  you  another  example.  In  recent  years,  the  demand  for  and  the  prices  of  Canadian 
commodity  exports  have  been  rising  sharply.  This  has  helped  to  create  an  economic  boom,  and 
investment flows into Canada have increased. Our floating dollar has appreciated sharply and thus, 
has  forced  some  necessary  adjustments.  As  their  competitive  positions  improved,  our  commodity 
producers  have  been  able  to  absorb  some  of  the  resources  that  were  being  shed  by  the  non-
commodity sectors, which have seen their competitive positions deteriorate. As a result, we've seen a 
shift in relative wages without fueling inflation. Thus, the flexible exchange rate has again helped the 
economy to absorb shocks and has allowed the Bank of Canada to keep inflation near the 2 per cent 
target. Adjustment is never easy, but on balance, a flexible exchange rate regime has definitely helped 
Canada  to  maintain  production  close  to  full  capacity  and  to  minimize  the  effects  of  the  boom-bust 
cycles in various sectors.  
A  floating  exchange  rate  can  bring  a  number  of  important  benefits,  but  as  I  said,  there  are  other 
important  components  of  a  sound  policy  framework.  A  well-functioning  domestic  financial  system  is 
crucial to achieving efficient domestic allocation of capital and to dealing with external shocks. That is 
why  policy-makers  around  the  world  have  been  putting  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  improving  domestic 
banking and financial systems. Organizations such as the G-7, the G-10, and the Financial Stability 
Forum have all examined ways to improve financial system stability. And for his hard work in this area, 
I'd like to congratulate Tim Geithner of the U.S. Federal Reserve, who is also your next speaker. With 
all of these efforts, we have seen some real improvements in financial system stability in recent years.  
Since the 1990s, countries have also found that it's very important to develop domestic markets for 
debt, for their own protection, as well as for the good of the global economic system. And in this area, 
we  have  also  seen  some  real  signs  of  progress.  A  decade  ago,  with  the  peso  crisis  still  fresh  in 
people's minds, who would have believed that Mexico would be in a position today to issue long-term, 
fixed-rate, peso-denominated bonds at such narrow spreads over U.S. Treasuries?  
Fiscal  policy  is  also  important.  Governments  must  behave  in  a  fiscally  responsible  manner.  That 
doesn't mean that the books must be perfectly balanced each and every year. But it does mean that 
governments must maintain, and be committed to maintaining, a manageable debt-to-GDP ratio and 
avoid running up debt that will tie the hands of future governments. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by going back to where I started my remarks. I have spoken about how a liberalized, 
global trade and financial order is important for promoting economic growth and prosperity. And I have 
focused on the importance of a floating exchange rate regime, which is a key element in promoting 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 3
good performance, both domestically and globally. For systemically important countries, we should be 
promoting floating rates supported by well-developed and well-functioning domestic financial markets. 
But it has to be acknowledged that it can take some time for emerging-market economies to put these 
well-developed markets in place. And along the way, some management of capital flows and a degree 
of  intervention  in  foreign  exchange  markets  may  be  needed,  in  these  economies.  These  capital 
controls  and  foreign  exchange  interventions  are  awkward,  and  over  time,  they  can  lead  to  a  lot  of 
problems.  So  they  must  be  eliminated  as  quickly  as  possible.  But,  to  the  extent  that  countries  are 
making  progress  towards  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes,  those  of  us  with  well-developed 
markets already in place will have to have some tolerance for this awkwardness. And those of you in 
the ACI will have to continue to trade in this somewhat awkward environment. 
In the meantime, I can say that we at  the Bank of Canada will be doing all that we can to provide 
assistance  and  to  persuade  countries  in  transition  to  move  as  rapidly  as  possible,  to  facilitate  the 
desired convergence.  
4 
 BIS Review 44/2007
