Vittorio Corbo: Monetary policy in emerging countries – the view from Chile 
Speech  by  Mr  Vittorio  Corbo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Rome, 
18 June 2007.  
Prepared for presentation at Banca d’Italia. I thank Marcelo Ochoa and Ivonne Vera for assistance and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel 
and Andrea Tokman for suggestions and comments. 
 Emerging  economies  have  recorded  major  progress  in  the  conduct  and  results  of  monetary  policy 
during  the  last  two  decades.  This  achievement  is  due  to  implementation  of  more  robust  and 
transparent  monetary  regimes,  complemented  by  adoption  of  flexible  exchange  rates,  sustainable 
fiscal policies, and stronger financial systems. Among emerging economies, Chile’s experience is of 
particular  interest.  It  shows  that  monetary  stability  can  be  attained  as  a  result  of  coherent  policies, 
overcoming decades of macroeconomic instability and weak credibility. 
This  presentation  documents  the  improvement  of  monetary  policy  conduct  and  results  in  emerging 
economies  in  general  and  Chile  in  particular.  Section  1  summarizes  the  overall  trend  and  specific 
components of macroeconomic adjustment observed in emerging economies. Chile’s transition toward 
its  current  monetary  policy  framework,  based  on  full-fledged  inflation  targeting,  is  described  next. 
Section 3 analyzes and documents the results of improved monetary policy in emerging economies 
and in Chile during the last two decades. Brief conclusions close the presentation. 
Macroeconomic adjustment in emerging economies 
1.  
Macroeconomic management in emerging markets has improved substantially in the last decade. In 
particular, the very favorable world economic conditions that have resulted in important terms of trade 
gains have been associated this time to fiscal prudence, complementing monetary and exchange-rate 
policies aimed at achieving and maintaining price stability. 
Four areas of macroeconomic adjustment: Fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies, and 
the financial system 
The  main  changes  that  have  taken  place  are  in  four  key  areas:  (i)  adoption  of  sustainable  and 
responsible fiscal policies, reflected in declining fiscal deficits in most emerging economies (figure 1); 
(ii)  adoption  of  floating  regimes  or  hard  pegs,  moving  away  from  intermediate  exchange-rate  (ER) 
regimes; (iii) shift of monetary policy (MP) anchors from ERs or monetary aggregates to an inflation-
targeting (IT) anchor, particularly in Latin America; and (iv) these changes have been accompanied by 
the  strengthening  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  systems,  supporting  strong  financial 
development. 
Shift toward more flexible ER regimes 
The  world  shift  toward  more  flexible  ER  regimes  has  been  pronounced.  The  evidence  shows  a 
significant shift away from intermediate regimes. In 1990, nearly 70% of all countries were pursuing 
some variant of intermediate ER regimes, a share that dropped to 41% by the end of the 1990s, and 
further to 30% in 2004 (figure 2)1. 
Exits  from  intermediate  regimes  were  more  frequently  towards  floats  rather  than  to  hard  pegs.  The 
share of floaters increased from 15% in 1990 to 45% in 2004 while, on the other extreme, the share of 
hard pegs rose from 15% to 26% during the same time span. The latter increase in hard pegs reflects, 
to some extent, the establishment of the European Monetary Union in 1999. The share of countries 
with crawling pegs – a very popular regime among higher-inflation economies – dropped from 14% in 
                                                      
1   A new IMF database of de facto ER regimes adopted by IMF member countries allows to classify countries into three broad 
ER regimes: hard pegs (formal dollarization, currency union, and currency boards), intermediate regimes (conventional fixed 
pegs,  crawling  pegs,  crawling  bands,  and  tightly  managed  floats),  and  floating  ER  regimes  (managed  float  with  no 
predetermined ER path and independently floating rates). 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 1
1990 to 6% in 2001. In contrast, countries with a crawling band or a tightly managed float rose from 
10% at the beginning of the 1990s to 31% by the year 2001. Crawling bands offer – at least in the 
short-term  –  more  flexibility  in  coping  with  volatile  capital  flows  and  avoiding  extreme  ER 
misalignments, than rigid ER regimes. Tightly managed floats, on the other hand, keep the anchoring 
role of the exchange rate without committing to any explicit target parity. 
The  transition  of  ER  regimes  has  come  with  a  shift  of  MP  regimes  based  on  an  ER  or  monetary-
growth anchor to an IT framework, particularly in emerging economies. The number of countries under 
IT rose from 8 in 1999 to 21 in 2004 (tables 1-2), and many more are considering to adopt IT in the 
near future. This transition in MP regime has been more pronounced in Latin America. While in 1994 
twelve  countries  in  the  region  had  in  place  an  ER  anchor,  and  four  others  had  a  monetary  growth 
anchor, by 2004 only three countries remained with an ER anchor. The transition of policy frameworks 
during  1994-2004  led  to a  significant  rise  in  the number of  Latin  American countries with a  floating 
regime  (from  three  to  twelve  countries)  and  an  inflation  targeting  framework  (from  one  to  five 
countries). 
Chile’s transition to its current monetary policy framework 
2.  
The macroeconomic institutional and policy framework of Chile has been transformed radically in the 
last  25  years,  from  one  that  made  stabilization  an  exceptional  result  to  one  that  has  facilitated 
achieving price stability. 
Chile’s current macroeconomic framework is based on four pillars: (i) an autonomous Central Bank 
with the explicit mandate of safeguarding stability of prices and payments; (ii) a low public-debt to GDP 
ratio and a fiscal policy rule anchored to a structural fiscal surplus; (iii) a robust financial system, with a 
dynamic, competitive, and well capitalized banking industry, appropriately regulated and supervised; 
and (iv) a full-fledged inflation targeting monetary framework, complemented by a floating ER regime. 
Substantial progress was made in CBC autonomy since the 1980s, when autonomy was very weak, 
even at lower levels than in the average emerging economy. The granting of legal independence in 
1989 through constitutional law, led to a much improved position in the international ranking of central 
bank autonomy. Particularly economic independence of central banks – the freedom of taking policy 
decisions  independently  of  political  interference  –  places  Chile  well  above  the  average  level  of 
independence of both emerging and developed economies in 2003. 
Chile has shown a responsible fiscal policy, which has contributed significantly to successful monetary 
policy. During the 1990s, the fiscal balance averaged a surplus of 1.5% of GDP. The above-mentioned 
structural  fiscal  surplus  rule  stabilizes  government  spending  over  time,  by  linking  it  explicitly  to 
permanent government revenue. Therefore fiscal dominance of monetary policy is ruled out in Chile, 
as a result of central bank autonomy and Chile’s sound fiscal policy. 
Public debt has shown a substantial decline since the 1990s, as a result of prudent fiscal policy. The 
share of consolidated gross public debt has been reduced from 76% of GDP in 1990 to 20% of GDP in 
2006, whereas the consolidated net public debt position turned from 34% of GDP in 1990 to -6% in 
2006 (figure 3).  The successful  performance  of  the  fiscal  position  has been  enhanced  by  the  fiscal 
balance rule applied since 2001 (figure 4). 
Chile’s good growth performance, complemented by a market-based incentive structure, appropriate 
regulation and sound supervision of the financial system, has resulted in a safe and sound financial 
system and deep capital markets. 
As  a  result  of  the  major  banking  crisis  that  came  with  the  deep  1982-1983  recession,  the  1986 
Banking Law enhanced regulation and supervision of the financial system. Since then, the financial 
system has developed around a well-managed and capitalized banking sector that is both healthy and 
competitive.  This  feature  also  rules  out  financial  dominance  of  monetary  policy  in  Chile.  The  CBC 
shares  normative  attributions  with  a  specialized  public  institution,  focusing  on  the  formulation  of 
financial regulations applicable to monetary markets. 
Chile’s financial system strength has been acclaimed by international credit rating agencies. Moody’s 
Financial  Strength  Ranking  places  Chile’s  financial  strength  close  to  the  top  of  industrial  countries 
(figure 5). 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2007
Monetary policy framework: Central Bank charter and its objectives 
Although the road to CBC autonomy began in the mid-1970s, the 1989 Constitutional Law of the CBC 
specified the Bank’s objectives and granted CBC the necessary instruments to comply with its legal 
mandate. Since 1989, the CBC is an autonomous, technical institution, governed by the Constitution, 
with full legal capacity, control of its equity, and of indefinite duration. 
The  constitutional  law  establishes  two  objectives  for the  CBC.  The  first  objective  is  to  preserve  the 
stability of Chile’s currency. This means avoiding loss of purchasing power due to inflation. The latter 
objective is achieved through ensuring that inflation remains low and stable. The second objective of 
the CBC is to ensure the normal functioning of domestic and external payments, by safeguarding the 
financial sector’s primary functions of credit and savings intermediation, provision of payment services, 
and proper risk allocation by financial markets. 
CBC’s  Constitutional  Law  prohibits  CBC  credit  to  the  government.  In  order  to  contribute  to  policy 
coordination and  information  sharing,  and  minimizing  potential conflict  between  fiscal  and  monetary 
authorities as a consequence of CBC autonomy, the Constitutional Law mandates participation of the 
Finance  Minister  at  monetary  policy  meetings,  without  voting  rights  but  with  the  temporary  right  of 
suspending a Board decision. Furthermore, the Law states that CBC policy decisions must take into 
account the government’s general economic policy orientation. 
Overview of the evolution of MP framework 
The Chilean experience with IT can be split into two periods. The first one – from 1991 to 1999 – falls 
short in many aspects of a full-fledged inflation targeting framework. This first phase featured more 
than one anchor (an ER band, in addition to the inflation target) and low levels of MP transparency 
and communication. The second phase – from 2000 to the present – features a single inflation target 
and an active communication strategy for MP. 
In the context of reporting the annual monetary program to the Congress, the CBC announcement of 
an annual inflation target arose as a natural response to the legal mandate for price-level stability. In 
1991,  the  first  official  target  –  at  a  15%-20%  annual  target  range  –  was  publicly  announced  in 
September 1990 for the Dec. 1990–Dec. 1991 rate of annual CPI inflation. From 1990 to 1996, targets 
were set annually as target ranges in September for the subsequent calendar year, and from 1997 to 
1999  as  target  points  (figure  6).  Between  1991  and  2001,  annual  targets  were  lowered  by  1.5 
percentage points per year on average. 
Inflation performance improved considerably during this period, achieving a reduction from 20%-30% 
annually to low single-digit rates. However, independence and effectiveness of the MP were hindered 
by conflicts between the exchange-rate-band, annual inflation targets, and capital controls. 
Transition  to  a  full-fledged  IT  framework  was  implemented  when  inflation  was  converging  to  3%, 
monetary policy was strengthened by attainment of inflation targets, the ER band was replaced by a 
floating ER regime, and capital controls were fully abolished. 
From 2000 to 2006, the target was defined for annual CPI inflation at a range of 2% to 4%, and the 
monetary  policy  horizon  was  defined  as  12  to  24  months.  Since 2007,  the  MP  objective  is  to  keep 
annual CPI inflation rate most of the time at around 3%, within a symmetric tolerance range of one 
percentage point, focused on a policy horizon of around two years. This target redefinition strengthens 
the 3% level as the nominal anchor of the economy, while recognizing that inflation can temporarily 
deviate from the 3+/-1% range to accommodate transitory shocks. In parallel, the horizon for monetary 
policy was extended to around two years. The latter changes were largely an explicit acknowledgment 
of how monetary policy had been conducted during preceding years. 
Transparency and communication 
In the last decade, central banks around the world have significantly improved their communication 
with the public and the markets. This provides institutional legitimacy and substantive accountability. 
More transparency and better communication also improve MP effectiveness, contributing to a better 
understanding of MP by the private sector. MP affects spending decisions, output, and prices more 
through its effects on market expectations on the future course of monetary policy, rather than through 
the direct effects of a change in the short-term MPR. 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 3
Since 2000 the CBC has made a large effort to deliver more and better information to the markets and 
to explain how its IT regime operates. A series of communication devices were developed, including 
disclosure  of  relevant  data  with  a  minimum  time  lag  and  making  information  available  on  the  CBC 
website, a significant number of technical publications, including the Monetary Policy Report (with a 
four-monthly frequency, since May 2000); the Financial Stability Report (semi-annual, since 2004); the 
Monetary  Policy  Framework  document  (updated  in  January  2007,  previous  in  May  2000),  and 
Projection Models book (since 2003). The CBC publishes monthly MP meeting dates six months in 
advance (since 2000), the summary of MP minutes with the Board members’ voting decisions (since 
2000), and background information on MP minutes (since July 2005). The time lag for the release of 
the minutes was lowered first from 90 to 45 days, and then to five days before the next monthly MP 
meeting. 
3.  
Monetary policy results in emerging economies and in Chile 
Convergence of inflation to developed-country levels 
There  are  several  empirical  studies  exploring  how  emerging  economies  in  general,  and  Chile  in 
particular, have benefited from implementation of an IT regime. The evidence shows that IT has been 
very  helpful  in  bringing  inflation  down  to  low single-digit  levels  in  emerging  economies.  It  has  been 
shown  that  the  adoption  of  IT  has  played  a  leading  role  in  emerging  economies’  successful 
convergence  to  inflation  levels  observed  in  developed  economies  (Mishkin  and  Schmidt-Hebbel, 
2007). 
Small deviations of inflation from target in Chile 
It has been shown also that IT countries are more successful in attaining their inflation targets than 
non-IT countries (Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2007). The introduction of IT has also helped Chile to 
attain  levels  of  inflation  closer  to  target  levels.  Albagli  and  Schmidt-Hebbel  (2004)  provide  an 
international comparison of inflation performance and deviations from targets for 21 IT countries. They 
consider  the  average  relative  deviation  of  inflation  from  targets  since  the  beginning  of  IT  in  each 
country. The results show that Chile is the second most accurate IT country in hitting its inflation target 
(figure 7). 
Since adoption of full-fledged IT by Chile in 2000, average annual inflation has been 2.9%, remaining 
around 75% of the time within the target range. Only 10% of the time did inflation rate rise above the 
upper target bound, and 15% of the time inflation fell below the lower bound (figure 8). 
Inflation targeting and credibility 
Adoption  of  IT  has  also  contributed  to  the  buildup  of  credibility  of  monetary  policy  in  IT  countries. 
Several authors show that the IT regime has helped in anchoring inflation expectations at levels close 
to  inflation  targets  and  inflation  expectations  are  more  stable  than  in  the  U.S.  (Ramos  et  al.,  2007; 
Gürkaynak et al., 2007). 
In Chile, the distance of inflation expectations from inflation targets was closed as targets converged 
toward the stationary 3% level and the Central Bank showed strong commitment to attaining targets 
(Céspedes and Soto, 2005). During the past five years, inflation expectations have remained close to 
the mid-point of the inflation target range, reflecting high credibility of the IT regime (figure 9). 
Inflation targets and stability 
Emerging economies have experienced reductions in the volatility of both inflation and output (figure 
10).  However,  volatility  reductions  have  been  more  pronounced  in  IT  countries  than  in  non-IT 
countries. Volatilities of growth and inflation have fallen very significantly in Chile, even in comparison 
to other IT countries. 
Two factors explain most of the volatility reduction in IT countries: smaller shocks hitting the economy 
and improvements in monetary policy efficiency (Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2007). 
Figure 11 depicts the estimated average efficiency frontier of MP for emerging economies before their 
adoption of IT (orange schedule) and the observed pair of output and inflation volatilities (red point). 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2007
The figure also depicts the estimated average efficiency frontier of MP for emerging economies after 
IT adoption, for the period of stationary inflation targets (blue line) and the observed pair of output and 
inflation  volatilities  (green  dot).  On  one  hand,  the  shift  of  the  efficiency  frontier  toward  the  origin 
reflects the smaller shocks faced by emerging economies since they have had stationary IT in place. 
On the other hand, the observed combination of output and inflation volatilities has moved closer to 
the efficiency frontier, revealing the corresponding improvement in monetary policy efficiency. In this 
case, the smaller shocks explain 58% of the current performance, while the improvements in monetary 
policy explain 42% of the decline in volatilities. 
Chile also records massive improvements in monetary policy management. Not only does Chile face 
smaller shocks, as reflected by the inward shift of the MP efficiency frontier, but also MP efficiency has 
improved  significantly,  as  reflected  by  the  closer  position  of  observed  volatilities  to  the  efficiency 
frontier (see figure 12). 
Contribution of central bank policy to macroeconomic stability 
Emerging  economies  have  improved  MP  practices.  However,  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to 
macroeconomic  performance  still  is  low.  The  annual  Report  on  Competitiveness  prepared  by  the 
Institute for Management Development (IMD) shows that the positions of emerging economies in the 
country ranking of the contribution of central bank policy to development has not changed significantly 
since 1998. 
However,  Chile  has  recorded  major  improvements  during  the  past  decade.  In  1998,  the  CBC  was 
ranked 25 among 60 countries, while reaching the first place in the world ranking in 2004, holding this 
place in the subsequent years (figures 13-14). 
Conclusions 
4.  
Macroeconomic conditions have improved significantly in emerging economies since the early 1990s. 
Emerging  economies  show  major  progress  in  fiscal  responsibility  and  sustainability;  adoption  of  a 
framework  of  central  bank  autonomy,  monetary  regimes  based  on  IT,  and  larger  exchange-rate 
flexibility; and achievement of financial system strength. 
Adoption  of  more  flexible  exchange  rates  and  an  IT  regime  has  contributed  to  lower  output  and 
inflation volatility, and stronger credibility of central bank policies. 
Macroeconomic stability is often accomplished gradually. Chile adopted the IT regime in two distinct 
phases and implemented a solid macroeconomic framework based on central bank autonomy with a 
clear  focus  on  price  stability.  This  was  supported  by  a  solvent,  responsible,  and  predictable  fiscal 
policy and a solid and well-regulated financial system. 
Chile’s  good  record  of  attaining  inflation  levels  close  to  the  target  has  strengthened  private  sector 
confidence  in  the  CBC  and  raised  MP  effectiveness  and  credibility.  Low  inflation  and  a  credible 
monetary policy represent an essential macroeconomic achievement. 
By 
communication, the CBC has laid a major foundation to Chile’s macroeconomic stability. 
Yet  the  conquest  and  predictability  of  inflation  are  not  guaranteed.  The  CBC  will  remain  vigilant, 
improving  its  policy  framework  as  needed  to  continue  delivering  high  levels  of  macroeconomic 
stability. 
framework,  supported  by  strong 
transparency,  accountability,  and 
its  policy 
improving 
References 
Albagli, E. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel (2004), “By How Much and Why do Inflation Targeters Miss Their 
Targets?”, Mimeo, Central Bank of Chile. 
Céspedes, L. and C. Soto (2005), “Credibility and Inflation Targeting in an Emerging Market: Lessons 
from the Chilean Experience”, International Finance 8 (3): 545-75. 
Gürkaynak R., A. Levin, A. Marder and E. Swanson (2007), “Inflation Targeting and the Anchoring of 
Inflation  Expectations  in  the  Western  Hemisphere,”  in  Monetary  Policy  Under  Inflation  Targeting, 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 5
Series on Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies Vol. XI, edited by K. Schmidt-Hebbel and 
F. Mishkin, Central Bank of Chile. 
Institute for Management Development (2006), World Competitiveness Yearbook, several years. 
International Monetary Fund (2007), International Financial Statistics. Data on CD-ROM, April. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel (2007), “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?” in 
Monetary  Policy  Under  Inflation  Targeting,  Series  on  Central  Banking,  Analysis,  and  Economic 
Policies Vol. XI, edited by K. Schmidt-Hebbel and F. Mishkin, Central Bank of Chile. 
Moody’s Investors Service (2006), “Monthly Ratings List. Bank Credit Research”. 
Ramos-Francia, M., D. Chiquiar, and A. Noriega (2007), “A Time Series Approach to Test a Change in 
Inflation Persistence: The Mexican Experience”, Working Paper N° 2007-01, Banco de México. 
World Bank (2007), World Development Indicators 2007. April. 
 
 
 6 
  BIS Review 68/2007
  BIS Review 68/2007 
   7
   8 
 BIS Review 68/2007
   BIS Review 68/2007 
 9
  10 
   BIS Review 68/2007
    BIS Review 68/2007 
 11
 12 
   BIS Review 68/2007
    BIS Review 68/2007 
 13
 14 
 BIS Review 68/2007
