Zamani Abdul Ghani: The SME sector in Malaysia 
Speech by Mr Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Signing 
of Strategic Alliance Agreement between Credit Guarantee Corporation Malaysia Berhad (CGC) and 
Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Kuala Lumpur, 3 July 2007. 
 Yang Berbahagia Datuk Wan Azhar Wan Ahmad 
Chief Executive Officer 
Credit Guarantee Corporation Malaysia Berhad  
Mr. William Lim Wah Liang 
Group Executive Director 
Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) Malaysia and Singapore  
Distinguished guests,  
Members of the media, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalammualaikum w.b.t. and Good Morning  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  to  officiate  and  witness  yet  another 
milestone of progress for the Credit Guarantee Corporation Malaysia Berhad. I would also like to take 
this opportunity to thank both CGC and Dun & Bradstreet Malaysia Sdn. Bhd. for the invitation to be a 
part of this significant occasion. The forging of this strategic alliance between CGC and D&B is indeed 
timely. In the long run, we believe this initiative would bring much benefit to the financial sector and 
contribute greatly towards the development of the SME sector, especially in enhancing SMEs' access 
to financing as well as market penetration and awareness on the importance of SMEs. 
The SME sector has been and shall remain one of the key drivers of the nation's economic growth. 
Accounting  for  99.2%  of  the  total  business  establishments  in  the  country,  there  is  vast  potential  to 
enhance the SMEs' contribution to the economy. In view of both their significance and potential, the 
Government  has  given  due  recognition  and  allocated  significant  amount  of  funds  and  resources  to 
further  enhance  the  growth  of  this  sector.  Various  initiatives  undertaken  by  the  financial sector  had 
also led to the SMEs enjoying a high level of financing from the financial system. In 2006, banking 
institutions approved RM39.6 billion to more than 84,000 SME accounts, an increase of 10.7% from 
the previous year. Meanwhile, outstanding loans to SMEs expanded by 4.2% on an annual basis to 
RM104.6 billion at end 2006, accounting for 45% of total outstanding business loans. 
In spite of these priorities and efforts, certain segments of the SME sector continue to lament the lack 
of financing access, which is deemed as a major challenge that hinders their growth and development. 
Interestingly, this is not unique to Malaysian SMEs, but rather a worldwide phenomenon. According to 
the Asian Banker's 2005 Report, it was estimated that only about 5%3 of the world's 500 million low-
income entrepreneurs have access to financial services. The main reasons for the financial constraints 
faced by SMEs are quite generic, and high on the list is the perception that SMEs are historically a 
high risk group lacking in financial discipline and unable to provide trustworthy financial track records. 
To  overcome  this  perception,  there  should  be  adequate  and  reliable  credit  information  mechanism, 
such as an SME credit bureau, that serves the needs of both the SMEs' and the potential lenders'. 
The establishment of a proposed SME Credit Bureau under this strategic alliance between CGC and 
D&B would complement other initiatives of the Government and the financial sector to further enhance 
SMEs' access to financing. One of the most important roles of the Bureau is to make available SME 
information,  which  includes  their  operational  and  financial  status  to  potential  lenders.  In  addition  to 
relevant  and  timely  information,  potential  lenders  could  also  take  comfort  that  the  information  is 
independently  provided,  hence  increasing  its  reliability.  The  importance  of  a  credit  bureau  in  the 
current  environment  cannot  be  over-emphasized.  A  World  Bank  report  stated  that  a  good  credit 
information infrastructure can contribute significantly towards assisting SMEs' access to capital. The 
report  further  highlighted  that  small  firms  with  access  to  credit  bureaus  have  a  40%  chance  of 
obtaining a loan, whereas firms without access to credit bureaus have only a 28% chance of receiving 
a loan. Therefore, significant opportunities exist to increase lending activities to SMEs in Malaysia with 
the establishment of an SME credit bureau. 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 1
Currently, information available for lenders to assess the creditworthiness of Malaysian SMEs is quite 
fragmented. Although there are a number of parties providing information on SMEs, the information 
are  mostly  tailored  towards  specific  requirements  and  does  not  add  the  necessary  values  required 
from the perspective of potential lenders. To bridge this information gap, the SME Credit Bureau would 
effectively  consolidate  the  fragmented  information.  This  convergence  of  data  from  various  sources 
would  be  enhanced,  resulting  in  a  convenient,  timely  and  efficient  access  to  SME  information  and 
credit ratings to assist the potential lenders to make a more objective evaluation of loan applications. It 
is our ardent hope that the SME Credit Bureau will become an integral component towards enabling 
SMEs to gain access to financing.  
The  SME  Credit  Bureau  also  aims  at  promoting  greater  transparency,  professionalism  and  sound 
credit culture among SMEs. SMEs can be assured that their good track records would be captured 
and  evaluated  by  an  independent  third  party,  which  in  turn,  would  assist  them  to  increase  their 
financing and business opportunities. The credit reports would serve as a convenient tool for SMEs to 
carry out a self evaluation in identifying areas that needs improvement.  
This strategic alliance represents a meeting of the common objective of CGC and D&B to bridge the 
gaps in the availability and access to SME credit information in the country. The SME Credit Bureau is 
a big step towards a more sophisticated and transparent financing environment for SMEs in Malaysia. 
Both CGC, which is in the business of providing credit enhancement to Malaysian SMEs; and D&B, a 
global operator and provider of credit bureau services, are well equipped to drive this initiative forward.  
On this note, I would like to congratulate CGC and D&B Malaysia Sdn. Bhd. in making this initiative 
possible. I am also confident that this will open up a new chapter in the history of credit bureaus and 
enable these entities to play an even greater role in the future development of the financial industry in 
Malaysia. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2007
