Rakesh Mohan: Statistical system of India – some reflections 
Inaugural  address  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  on  the 
Statistics Day and Annual Conference on Financial Statistics, Reserve Bank of India, Department of 
Statistical Analysis and Computer Services, Mumbai, 29 June 2007. 
Assistance of A K Ray and Abhiman Das in preparing the speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 I  am  delighted  and  honoured  to  be  at  this  auspicious  occasion  of  the  first  Statistics  Day  and  to 
inaugurate first Annual Conference on Financial Statistics. As a member of the statistics community, it 
is  matter  of  great  pride  that  June  29,  birth  anniversary  of  (late)  Professor  Prasanta  Chandra 
Mahalanobis, has been declared by the Government of India as Statistics Day. I am particularly happy 
that Professor Parikh is here who began his professional life in the ISI Statistical Unit in the Planning 
Commission and had a great deal of interaction with Professor Mahalanobis. 
Statistics in simple terms is defined as the study of the “laws of chance”. On this Statistics Day, let me 
however not take a chance to talk about field statistics. In the preface to his book on “Statistics and 
Truth”, C.R.Rao (1989) writes, which I thought is worth quoting at length, 
“Statistics as a method of learning from experience and decision making under uncertainty must have 
been  practiced  from  the  beginning  of  mankind.  But  the  inductive  reasoning  involved  in  these 
processes have never been codified due to the uncertain nature of the conclusions drawn from given 
data on formation. The breakthrough occurred only in the beginning of the present century with the 
realization  that  inductive  reasoning  can  be  made  precise  by  specifying  the  amount  of  uncertainty 
involved in the conclusions drawn. This paved the way for working out an optimum course of action 
involving  minimum  risk,  in  any  given  uncertain  situation,  by  a  purely  deductive  process.  Once  this 
mechanism  was  made  available,  the  floodgates  opened  and  there  was  no  end  to  the  number  of 
applications impatiently awaiting for methods which could really deliver the goods. From the time of 
Aristotle  to  the  middle  of  the  19th  century,  chance  was  considered  by  scientists  as  well  as 
philosophers  to  be  an  indication  of  our  ignorance  which  makes  predictions  impossible.  It  is  now 
regarded that chance is inherent in all natural phenomena, and the only way of understanding nature 
and making predictions (with minimum loss) is to study the laws (or the inner structure) of chance and 
formulate appropriate rules of action. Chance may appear as an obstructor and an irritant in our daily 
life but chance can also create. We have now learnt to put chance to work for the benefit of mankind. 
All knowledge is, in the final analysis, history. All sciences are, in the abstract, mathematics and all 
methods of acquiring knowledge are essentially statistics.” 
What  has  been  the  historical  development  of  statistical  system  in  India?  Who  have  been  its  main 
architects? What has been the role of the Reserve Bank in the national statistical system? I thought 
these questions will be of interest to the audience assembled here today. 
Historical developments 
Let me go back in history. India has a long historical tradition of collection and use of various kinds of 
statistics. Kautilya’s Arthasastra (321-296B.C.), one of the greatest treatise of economics, indicates a 
system of census and data collection relating to agriculture, population and other economic activities, 
covering villages and towns. In addition, the concept of cross-checking and validation by independent 
agents  was  very  much  part  of  the  data  collection  system.  Thus,  early  evidence  established  the 
coexistence of economics and statistics, and their application for the welfare of the states. Subsequent 
historical anecdotes based on Huen Tsang’s writings (dated late seventh to early eighth century) give 
a  detailed  description  of  the  plan  of  cities,  construction  of  houses,  and  an  account  of  common 
products  of  India  and  data  on  the  area  of  kingdoms  and  the  distances  between  them.  During  the 
Moghul period, evidence and application of statistical knowledge was prominent in Ain-i-Akbari by Abul 
Fazal. Documentary evidence includes the system of legalised measurements, land classification and 
crop yields by season, etc. The system of land tenure and land revenue, followed during the Moghul 
period, had enough empirical basis. 
The  statistical  system  was  strengthened  during  the  British  period.  During  this  period,  the  statistical 
development  was  geared  towards  administration,  tax  collection,  revenue,  trade  and  commerce  and 
related  activities  as  might  be  expected.  With  a  view  to  rationalize  and  establish  a  sound  system  of 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
in  Council 
the  Governor-General 
the  Secretary  of  State  ordered 
revenue collection, the East India Company in 1807 emphasized the need of a statistical survey of the 
country. A small department of statistics was founded in the India House in 1847. In 1848, the first 
census relating to the area and revenue of each in North-West Provinces was released. In 1853, the 
department released the first series of statistical papers on India. Impressed by the trend in statistical 
activities, 
to  prepare  a 
“comprehensive and coordinated scheme of statistical survey” for each of the twelve great provinces 
of the then British India and Dr. W.W. Hunter was appointed as Director-General of Statistics in India 
in 1869, who can perhaps be regarded as the original precursor to the Chief Statistician of India today. 
The  Statistical  Account  of  Bengal  (the  present  Bangladesh,  West  Bengal,  Bihar  and  Orissa)  was 
published in 20 volumes. For each district there were details on topographical data, ethnic pisions and 
creeds, agricultural situation, commerce, working of district administration and finally the sanitary and 
health  aspects.  Although  censuses  of  Calcutta  were  undertaken  in  the  year  1822  and  in  1847,  the 
operation of a decennial census for the whole country started in 1881 and is continuing ever since. 
The report on the Census of British India taken in 1881 was published in three volumes. 
The  need  for  timely  and  accurate  collection  of  agricultural  data  was  felt  by  the  Indian  Famine 
Commission and agricultural departments were organised in various provinces which resulted in the 
publication of “Agricultural Statistics of British India” in 1886. To scrutinise and summarise the data 
collected  by  the  agricultural  departments,  a  statistical  Bureau  was  formed  at  the  centre  in  1895  to 
coordinate  the  agricultural,  foreign  trade,  prices,  wages  and  industrial  statistics.  During  1905,  a 
separate  body  Directorate  General  of  Commercial  Intelligence  and  Statistics  (DGCI  &  S)  was 
constituted to collect/publish commercial and trade statistics and to help trade and business. The first 
issue of Indian Trade Journal was released in 1906 and first price statistics based on a survey was 
released  in  1910.  The  Economic  Enquiry  Committee  set  up  in  1925 under  the  Chairmanship  of Dr. 
Visweswarayya  and  more  importantly  the  Bowley-Robertson  Committee  set  up  later  in  1934,  were 
mainly responsible for the government’s decision to set up an Inter-Departmental Committee with the 
Economic  Adviser  to  the  Government  of  India  as  the  chairman.  The  Inter-Departmental  Committee 
recommended the formation of a Central Statistical Office for coordination, institution of a statistical 
cadre, establishment of State Bureaus at State Head Quarters and maintenance of important statistics 
for the entire country. 
Architect of modern statistical methods in the Indian subcontinent 
The developments in statistics that took place between 1930 and 1960 are quite remarkable and in 
some sense unique. No other discipline in India recorded such growth and development during the 
same period in India. There were several important ingredients. In statistics, unlike other disciplines, 
India was not a late starter. Indeed, much of the development even in the United States came later. 
Only Britain had started earlier. This helped creation of an Indian school of statistics with its own mix of 
theory and applications. The architect of modern statistical methods in the Indian subcontinent was 
undoubtedly Professor Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis. He was helped by a very distinguished group 
of scientists that included R.C. Bose, S.N. Roy C.R. Rao, S.S. Bose, K.R. Nair, D.B. Lahiri and many 
others.  There  were  others  like  P.V.  Sukhatme,  and  V.G.  Panse  who  worked  independently  of 
Mahalanobis.  The  history  of  statistics  is  basically  a  history  of  some  of  these  persons  as  well  as  a 
history of institutions and interactions between persons and institutions. The institute around which all 
these development took place is none other than the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), Calcutta. Looking 
back at the history, one observed that 1950s was inarguably the golden period of ISI. Besides, Prof. 
Mahalanobis and C. R. Rao, the faculty of ISI included R.R. Bahadur, D. Basu, G. Kallianpur, D.B. 
Lahiri, M. Mukherjee, R. Mukherjee and many other distinguished luminaries. Some of them studied 
abroad and subsequently joined ISI as a faculty. D. Basu joined the ISI as a student and later became 
a  Professor  as  well  as  the  first  Dean  of  Studies.  D.  B.  Lahiri  was  a  self-taught  mathematician, 
contributed  significantly  on  sample  survey  methods.  Between  them  Rao,  Bahadur,  Basu  and 
Kallianpur  and  a  new  group  of  brilliant  students  including  K.R.  Parthasarathy,  R.  Ranga  Rao,  V.S. 
Varadarajan, S.R.S. Varadhan made fundamental contributions to probability and classical inference 
during this period which were as important as the earlier contributions of Bose and Roy to design of 
experiments and multivariate analysis. Among the other earlier students of the Institute who achieved 
international reputation are G.P. Patil, T.N.Srinivasan, R.G. Laha, J. Roy, Sujit Kumar Mitra, D.K. Roy 
Choudhury,  and  others.  I  may  also  mention  that  S.R.S.  Varadhan,  currently  a  professor  of 
mathematics at New York University and only Indian ever, won the prestigious Abel prize (which is 
perhaps equivalent to a Nobel Prize) in mathematics this year.  
2 
 BIS Review 77/2007
Professor P.C. Mahalanobis and statistics 
As the Statistics Day is being celebrated in honour of the birth anniversary of (late) Professor Prasanta 
Chandra Mahalanobis, I thought a brief sketch of his life will be appropriate at this juncture. Born on 
June  29  1893  in  a  well-to-do  progressive  Brahmo  family,  he  passed  away  on  June  28,  1972.  He 
graduated in physics from Presidency College, Kolkata and went on to study in Cambridge in 1913 
and in 1915 finished his Tripos in Natural Science with a first class. His first encounter with Statistics 
was  also  a  chance-event,  when  his  tutor  Macaulay  drew  his  attention  to  some  bound  volumes  of 
Biometrika.  He  got  so  interested  that  he  bought  a  complete  set  of  Biometrika  volumes  towards  his 
journey  back  to  India.  Mahalanobis  set  up  the  Statistical  Laboratory  in  the  Presidency  College 
sometime in the 1920s. His contribution to statistics is enormous. During the 1920s and until the mid-
1930s, all or nearly all the statistical work done in India, was done single-handedly by Mahalanobis. 
The early statistical studies included analyses of data on stature of Anglo-Indians, meteorological data, 
rainfall  data, data  on soil conditions,  etc.  Some  of  the  findings  of  these  early  studies  were  of  great 
impact in the control of floods, development of agriculture, etc., and led to the recognition of Statistics 
as a key discipline. His passion and conviction was truly guided for the solutions of applied problems. 
His further work on anthropological data resulted in new methodology for classifying or distinguishing 
populations  characterized  by  such  measurements  called  Mahalonobis  D-square.  Another  very 
important initiative undertaken by Professor Mahalonobis was the initiation of Crop Cutting Surveys to 
estimate  agricultural  production  in  India,  which  was  a  novel  idea  of  that  time.  These  surveys  have 
continued till today and continue to be important in the estimation of agricultural production. 
The Indian Statistical Institute was founded in a small room in the Presidency College as a society on 
17  December,  1931.  Sankhya,  the  Indian  Journal  of  Statistics,  was  founded  two  years  later. 
Mahalanobis'  influence  was  so  ubiquitous  that  even  students  of  Physics  began  to  take  interest  in 
statistics.  Later,  several  talented  young  scholars  joined  to  form  an  active  group  of  statisticians. 
Mahalanobis continued to be the nucleus. Theoretical research in Statistics began to flourish in all the 
areas of statistics including design of experiments, statistical quality control, operations research, etc. 
Research on large scale sample surveys won Mahalanobis a Fellowship of the Royal Society. Design 
and analysis of agricultural experiments also bloomed and led to some international contacts, notably 
with Sir Ronald A. Fisher. At the request of the Government of India, a draft of the second Five Year 
Plan was prepared at the Indian Statistical Institute in 1954 by Mahalanobis. The second plan pattern 
of  industrial  investment,  with  its  marked  shift  in  favour  of  capital  good  industries,  was  deeply 
influenced by the two-sector growth model developed by Mahalanobis. The substantial contributions of 
the  Institute  to  theoretical  and  applied  work,  its  training  and  promotional  activities  culminated  in 
recognition  by  the  Government  of  India.  The  Parliament  passed  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute  Act, 
1959 which declared the Institute as an “Institution of National Importance” and empowered it to award 
degrees  and  diplomas  in  Statistics.  The  first  computer  of  the  country  was  installed  in  ISI  in  1960. 
Subsequently,  ISI  made  significant  contributions  to  the  development  of  advanced  numerical 
algorithms. Mahalanobis’ mastery over empirics was exemplary as illustrated in using the method of 
fractal graphical analysis of consumption data, which was published in Econometrica (1960). It is also 
understood  that  the  concept  of  interpenetrative  sub-sampling  and  pilot  survey,  pioneered  by 
Mahalanobis, essentially form the basis of sequential analysis and modern bootstrap methods. 
Evolution of the statistical system after independence 
After independence in 1947, the country saw an urgent need for a statistical framework suitable for 
economic and social development. Mahalanobis was appointed as an Honorary Statistical Adviser in 
1949 to the Government of India and Central Statistical Unit was setup under his technical guidance 
which was later named as Central Statistical Organization (CSO) in 1951.This organization was setup 
mainly to coordinate the statistical work done in various ministries and other government agencies and 
to advise them, to maintain standards with regard to definitions, concepts and procedures, to provide 
consultancy,  to  liaison  with  international  statistical  organizations,  to  prepare  and  publish  a  Monthly 
Statistical  abstract  and  an  Annual  Statistical  Abstract  and  to  inform  annual  statistical  information  to 
public. In India, prior to 1947, the estimation of national income was attempted by inpidual economists 
and scholars for specific years. Among these, the most systematic work was that of V.K.R.V. Rao in 
his book National Income in British India 1931-32 (London; MacMillan 1940), which formed the basis 
of  national  income  estimation  in  the  post-independence  period.  In  1949,  the  Government  of  India 
formed  the  National  Income  Committee  (NIC)  under  the  Chairmanship  of  P.C.  Mahalanobis,  with 
V.K.R.V. Rao and D.R. Gadgil as members. From then onwards the national income estimation has 
been  steadily  strengthened.  NIC  recommended  the  holding  of  an  annual  conference  on  national 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 3
income and wealth. The First Indian Conference on Research in National Income was organised by 
the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) in early 1957. In 1964, this conference was converted into 
the Indian Association for Research in National Income and Wealth (IARNIW). Dr. V.K.R.V Rao was 
the first President of IARNIW. He is credited with the building of IARNIW as an independent research 
body under the aegis of the Central Statistical Organization.  
In order to improve the quality and fill up the gaps in statistical information, it was decided to establish 
a  National  Sample  Survey  Organisation  (NSSO).  This  organization  had  four  pisions:  Survey  design 
and research, Field operations, Data processing, and Economic Analysis. The national sample survey 
(NSS) is the largest multi-purpose socio-economic survey. 
The coverage and scope of data collection and dissemination of CSO has increased manifold in recent 
times.  Its  current  activities  include  National  Income  Accounting,  conduct  of  Annual  Survey  of 
Industries,  Economic  Censuses  and  its  follow  up  surveys,  compilation  of  Index  of  Industrial 
Production,  as  well  as  Consumer  Price  Indices  for  Urban  Non-Manual  Employees,  Human 
Development Statistics, Gender Statistics, imparting training in Official Statistics, Five Year Plan work 
relating  to Development  of  Statistics  in  the  States  and  Union  Territories;  dissemination  of  statistical 
information,  work  relating  to  trade,  energy,  construction,  and  environment  statistics,  revision  of 
National Industrial Classification, etc.  
The  National  Statistical  Commission  (NSC)  set  up  by  the  Government  in  January  2000  under  the 
Chairmanship  of  Dr.  C.  Rangarajan  reviewed  the  statistical  system  and  the  entire  gamut  of  Official 
Statistics  in  the  country.  Core  functions  of  NSC,  inter  alia,  include  identification  the  core  statistics 
which  are  of  national  importance  and  are  critical  to  the  development  of  the  economy,  to  evolve 
national  policies  and  priorities  relating  to  the  statistical  system  and  to  evolve  standard  statistical 
concepts,  definitions,  classifications  and  methodologies  in  different  areas  in  statistics  and  lay  down 
national quality standards on core statistics. One of the key recommendations of this Commission was 
to establish a permanent National Commission on Statistics to serve as a nodal and empowered body 
for  all  core  statistical  activities  of  the  country,  evolve,  monitor  and  enforce  statistical  priorities  and 
standards and to ensure statistical co-ordination among the different agencies involved. In line with the 
above  recommendations,  the  Government  of  India  ordered  the  setting  up  of  a  permanent  National 
Statistical  Commission  (NSC)  on  1st  June  2005.  The  present  setup  of  NSC  is  a  type  of  umbrella 
organization covering both CSO and NSSO.  
National statistical system and the role of the Reserve Bank 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  collects  and  analyses  statistics  on  various  economic  transactions  of 
banking and other financial institutions in the process of implementing its policies towards achieving its 
implicit twin objectives of growth and price stability. A major part of the statistics in RBI is collected 
through  either  statutory  or  control  returns,  which  are  exclusively  used  for  monetary  policy  and 
supervision. In the field of information generation and analysis we adhere to international standards 
and  practices.  To  collect  supplementary  statistics,  RBI  conducts  surveys  in  the  fields  of  credit  to 
rural/urban households, industrial outlook, inflation expectations, different aspects of banking sector, 
external sector and the private corporate sector.  
At present, the surveys conducted by RBI can be broadly classified into five categories:  
(a) 
external sector including (1) survey of foreign liabilities and assets for corporate, insurance 
& mutual fund sectors, (2) coordinated portfolio investment survey, (3) survey on software 
export, (4) unclassified receipt survey used for BoP, (5) survey on balances in Nostro/Vostro 
account used in BoP, and (6) survey on non-resident deposits;  
banking sector  including  (1)  survey  on  distribution  of  credit,  deposits  and  employment  in 
banks,  (2)  survey  on  composition  and  ownership  of  deposits  with  scheduled  commercial 
banks,  (3)  survey  on  investment  portfolio  of  scheduled  commercial  banks,  (4)  survey  of 
debits  to  deposit  accounts  with  scheduled  commercial  banks,  (5)  survey  on  international 
assets and liabilities of banks and (6) survey of small borrowal accounts; 
corporate  sector  including  survey  of  performance  of  private  corporate  business  sector, 
conducted since 1951-52; 
monetary policy including (1) industrial outlook Survey, (2) inflation expectation survey for 
households and (3) survey of inventories, order books and capacity utilization; 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2007
ad hoc: Census of non-banking financial companies not accepting public deposits. 
(e) 
In  addition  to  the  abovementioned  surveys,  recently  RBI  has  initiated  steps  to  make  use  of  survey 
methods  for  various  operational  purposes,  e.g.,  to  assess  the  extent  of  success  and  realities  of 
implementation  of  financial  inclusion.  You  may  be  aware  that  in  India,  Government  as  well  as  the 
central bank attach enormous importance towards financial empowerment of the rural poor and RBI 
has taken steps for financial inclusion and spread of Self Help Groups. In support of monetary policy, 
we propose to introduce survey of professional forecasters, as done in most of the central banks in 
developed countries. In addition, it may be necessary to collect necessary information for compiling 
housing starts, in view of the increasing importance of housing construction in the economy.  
However,  in  view  of  the  current  state  of  data  availability  with  local  authorities,  this  will  need 
considerable  additional  work  before  any  significant  progress  can  be  made.  Other  Central  Banks 
conduct  a  number  of  other  surveys,  both  ad  hoc  and  regular  ones,  in  order  to  help  more  informed 
monetary  policy  meeting,  and  other  needs  as  they  arise.  As  we  improve  the  technical  basis  of  our 
monetary policy apparatus we will need to keep innovating in this area. 
Traditionally RBI is directly involved in national accounts compilation, especially in savings estimation 
and  flow  of  fund  compilation.  Basic  information  on  household  and  corporate  savings  is  provided  to 
CSO for preparing the final estimates. Besides, data on output of banking system in GDP is imputed 
from  the  data  supplied  by  us.  RBI  also  has  a  long  tradition  of  conducting  important  surveys  in 
collaboration of NSSO. The first comprehensive survey conducted by RBI is known as All-India Rural 
Credit Survey, with 1951-52 as the reference period. The objective of the survey was to collect such 
data/information  as  would  assist  the  RBI  and  the  Government  of  India  in  formulating  an  integrated 
credit policy for rural credit and to assess the extent of indebtedness of rural households to financial 
institutions in the organized and unorganized sectors. Findings of this landmark survey subsequently 
changed  the  entire  landscape  of  Indian  banking  and  culminated  in  introducing  the  world’s  biggest 
social banking experiments in the form of rural credit and priority sector lending. Such All-India surveys 
were conducted decennially and the latest survey pertained to the year 2002-03. While the 1951-52 
and  1961-62  surveys  covered  only  rural  households,  the  subsequent  surveys  covered  urban 
households  also.  The  surveys  of  1971-72  and  1981-82  were  conducted  jointly  with  NSSO, 
Government of India, whereas those of 1991-92 onwards were conducted entirely by NSSO.  
The other area, which has direct consequence with RBI activities, relates to measurement of output 
and  price.  As  member  of  the  Technical  Advisory  Committee  of  National  Accounts  Statistics  (NAS), 
Statistics on Prices and Cost of Living (SPCL), revision of WPI and CPI series, etc., RBI has been 
playing  a  critical  role.  Let  me  highlight  a  few  recent  initiatives.  The  procedure  of  converting  current 
price  estimate  into  constant  price  followed  earlier,  especially  for  estimating  the  output  of  financial 
sector,  resulted  in  some  kind  of  anomalies.  In  some  cases,  while  estimate  at  current  price  was 
negative,  constant  price  estimate  was  positive  and  increasing.  However,  in  the  last  GDP  revision 
(1999-00 series), this problem was corrected after a series academic discussion with CSO. Similarly, 
treatment  of  some  of  the  financial  intermediaries  like  mutual  funds  was  not  defined  clearly  in  SNA 
1993. And treating mutual funds similar to banks was conceptually not correct. Recently, CSO set up a 
committee  in  RBI  to  look  into  this  matter  and  the  recommendations  of  the  committee  has  been 
accepted  by  TAC  of  NAS.  Besides,  RBI  is  also  working  in  close  collaboration  with  CSO  for 
implementing the ensuing changes of SNA revision due this year. 
Let  me  cite  an  example  of  RBI’s  recent  involvement  in  price  measurement  issues.  The  need  for 
integration CPIs is nothing new. The National Statistical Commission (2001) recommended, inter alia, 
that the current CPIs do not provide changes in the prices for the entire rural and urban population 
since they are designed to measure the changes in the prices of goods and services consumed by 
specific segments of the population and hence there is a need to compile the CPI separately for the 
entire  rural  and  urban  population.  In  this  context,  a  Sub-Group  set-up  in  RBI,  recommended  the 
compilation  of  separate  CPIs  for  whole  rural  and  urban  population  and  provided  a  roadmap  for 
compilation. I happy to note that TAC on SPCL has finally accepted this and shortly we shall have 
CPI(U)  and  CPI(R).  Needless  to  mention  that  these  price  indices  will  be  very  useful  for  monetary 
policy purposes.  
Application of statistical methods in RBI: need for further work 
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  outline  a  few  areas  of  work  in  RBI  where  statisticians  can  contribute 
significantly. First, as monetary policy formulation largely depends on the forward-looking behaviour of 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 5
the economy, the use of forecasting techniques automatically comes in the forefront. While traditional 
time  series  techniques  are  useful,  we  need  to  build  up  expertise  on  forecasting  using  calibrated 
models. Such models have definitive advantage of incorporating economic agents utility, requires less 
data and can be maneuvered easily with different alternatives. Second, RBI incurs a huge expenditure 
on management of currency through out the country. Operations research techniques could be utilized 
effectively in the areas of inventory, transportation, etc., so as to develop an efficient and cost effective 
currency management systems. Third, risk analysis under a statistical framework is a pre-requisite for 
implementing  Basel  II  norms.  Fourth,  innovative  sample  surveys  in  the  area  of  financial  inclusion, 
development  of  leading  indicators  like  house-start  index,  inflation  expectation,  etc.,  could  be  very 
useful tools. Fifth, we do not have an appropriate measure of potential output. It is not an easy task; 
however, efforts should be made to devise a suitable methodology for estimating potential output at 
the earliest.  
Finally, let me conclude by saying that knowledge building is an ongoing activity. Frontiers are shifting 
upwards  consistently  and  thus  demanding  a  persistent  catching  up  with  the  advanced  knowledge. 
Central  banking  today  is  more  challenging  than  ever  and  accurate  information  is  the  key  to 
supplement policy decisions. I hope the Statistics Day and the conference on financial statistics pave 
the platform of knowledge sharing and understanding of advanced frontiers.  
6 
 BIS Review 77/2007
