Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Immigration and the inflation moderation debate  
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Symposium “The 
Phillips curve and the natural rate hypothesis”, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel, 3 June 2007.  
 Introduction  
It is a pleasure to be here today at this Symposium in such distinguished company.  
The  organisers  have  put  together  an  impressive  programme  on  a  key  topic  for  policymakers  and 
central bankers in particular. As you know, the relationship between inflation and economic activity has 
always been at the heart of the macroeconomics discipline. And theoretical developments in this field 
have had a significant and direct influence on actual monetary policymaking.  
We  are  currently  in  a  unique  situation.  For  an  unusually  long  period,  in  the  context  of  high  global 
growth, inflation has remained low and stable.  
Many  commentators  –  and  not  only  central  bankers  –  would  agree  that  better-managed  monetary 
policy has had a lot to do with this favourable inflation performance. And there is a lively debate about 
which  specific  aspects  of  monetary  policymaking  have  been  responsible  for  it.  Let’s  look  at  three 
questions this debate has raised. First, do central bankers now have better knowledge of the economy 
and  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and,  consequently,  are  adopting  more  effective  decisions? 
Second, have monetary policy regimes shifted towards making price stability a more prominent target? 
And  third,  have  structural  changes  in  the  world  economy,  such  as  the  globalisation  of  capital, 
production and labour, made the job of central banks easier?  
I will deal with all three questions today, but particularly with the effects of globalisation. I will focus 
mainly on labour market aspects, taking the immigration we have seen in Spain in recent years as an 
example of the positive effects that globalisation can have on inflation.  
What is behind the recent success of central banks’ in combating inflation?  
Recent studies have given the credit for reducing the high inflation of the '70s and early '80s to the 
central banks’ better knowledge of the economy. In my view, these studies have got it right. We have 
to admit that, at least in some countries, monetary policy didn’t do all it could in the '70s to contain the 
oil shock-induced inflation of that time. Perhaps at that time, central banks lacked understanding of 
how supply shocks affect the output gap, as well as of the role of inflation expectations, and how these 
relate to monetary policy actions.  
But I don’t think that insufficient knowledge of the economy was the only factor explaining the rise in 
inflation during those years. Indeed, political will – or rather a lack of political will – could have been 
even  more  important.  Germany  is  a  good  counter-example  here,  as  a  recent  paper  by  Stephen 
Cechetti and others shows. After Bretton Woods, Germany realised that price stability was possible 
with a stable nominal anchor – a monetary target – that would prevent excessive accommodation of 
the  supply  shock.  The  Bundesbank’s  success  made  history.  If  others  did  not  follow  Germany’s 
example,  it  was  probably  because  they  were  not  willing  to  put  the  same  emphasis  on  reducing 
inflation. Simply, policy priorities were not the same in all countries.  
I would therefore side with those who think that inflation moderation is largely thanks to a change in 
attitudes at central banks. A number of central banks, notably the US Fed, had already changed their 
reaction  functions  in  the  80’s,  placing  greater  emphasis  on  minimising  inflation  deviations  from  an 
implicit target. And then, into the '90s, we saw a trend towards governments granting independence to 
central banks. Many central banks immediately adopted explicit inflation targets, thus making a clear 
commitment  to  price  stability.  If  inflation  is  now  lower  and  more  stable  than  before,  it  is  because 
central banks have decided to become less tolerant of it, and have been allowed to do so.  
But  these  central  bank  changes  were  not  a  historical  accident.  Different  countries’  experience  in  a 
tackling  inflation  has  helped  prove  the  theory  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  long-term  inflation-
unemployment  trade-off.  We  now  accept  that  persistent  inflation  –  even  if  it  is  low  –  involves  a 
misallocation  of  resources  with  potentially  heavy  medium  and  long-term  costs.  At  the  same  time, 
academics have shown how the short-term output costs of price stability can be kept down if central 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 1
banks adopt credible and transparent targets. I will mention here the New-Keynesian theory of price 
determination,  which  convincingly  relates  current  inflation  to  future  expected  inflation,  providing  a 
yardstick for monetary policy actions and communication. In the ECB Governing Council, we are proud 
that  we  have  been  able  to  continue  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  our 
definition of price stability.  
But there is no room for complacency. The recent inflation success story and the central bank changes 
behind it need continuing social support. The public must have a clear-cut idea of what inflation means 
for  their  future  income  and  job  prospects.  But  while  people  appreciate  the  benefits  of  low  inflation, 
differing national situations and economic conditions can alter preferences over time and from country 
to country.  
Let’s go back to monetary unification in Europe in the 90’s. We could argue that European citizens 
were not exactly clamouring at that time for a fully independent central bank tasked with maintaining 
price stability for the euro zone as a whole. What is more, some critics viewed the fact that would-be 
EMU  members  had  to  meet  nominal  convergence  criteria  as  a  costly  economic  sacrifice  that  was 
justifiable only on political grounds, if at all. Yet in some countries, and certainly in Spain, countering 
inflation  with  tight  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  led  to  a  virtuous  circle,  once  convergence  became 
credible.  Convergence  went  hand  in  hand  with  a  sizable  expansion  in  output  which  persists  today. 
Thanks 
from 
macroeconomic stability.  
But while the economic outlook is currently quite bright, this has not always been the case for the euro 
area economy as a whole in the period since EMU began. We are all aware that the blame lies not 
with an unduly tight monetary policy, but rather with adverse cyclical developments and, particularly, 
with  structural  rigidities  that  have  cramped  growth  and  employment  in  some  euro  countries.  With 
growth subdued, it is more difficult for the public to see how a single monetary policy geared to price 
stability, contributes to their well-being.  
Perhaps then, widespread support for the goals of independent central banks will not always be there 
unless central banks and other authorities insist on the right messages. The Eurosystem has recently 
launched  very  successful  educational  initiatives  in  this  regard.  But  politicians  should  also  be  key 
players, making clear the role of monetary policy in increasing social welfare.  
this,  Spanish  citizens  now  undoubtedly  appreciate 
the  benefits  deriving 
to 
Globalisation  
Going back to the debate on inflation moderation, I believe that international competition is helping to 
contain inflation as it guests favourable political economy effects. In particular, market globalisation is 
strengthening  the  public’s  aversion  to  inflation.  Higher  wages  and  prices  immediately  erode 
competitiveness  punishing  output  and  employment,  and  thus  people  see  the  damages  of  inflation 
more  clearly  than  before.  Also,  as  prices  become  more  closely  tied  to  global  rather  than  domestic 
conditions,  the  perception  of  any  trade-off  between  inflation  and  domestic  unemployment  weakens. 
Thus  we  can  expect  to  see  globalisation  triggering  public  support  for  central  banks’  price  stability 
goals,  which  in  turn  would  become  more  credible,  enhancing  the  monetary  authorities’  ability  to 
deliver.  
Structural  considerations  aside,  there  is  an  ongoing  debate  about  whether  globalisation  is  already 
pushing inflation down. I would say cheaper imports would normally affect inflation favourably, though 
the scale and persistence of this type of effect is uncertain.  
But globalisation is not just about greater trade flows or about the effect of worldwide competition on 
goods  and  services  markets.  As  far  as  wages  and  prices  are  concerned,  the  effects  of 
internationalisation  on  the  labour  market  are  probably  more  important.  If  workers  fear  that  their 
companies will move abroad, this can affect their wage demands, which can in turn temper the growth 
of production costs and consumer prices. Immigration acts in a similar way, easing demand pressure 
in the labour market and thus containing wage increases.  
As I see it, labour market globalisation has already had a visible effect on wages in Europe and in 
other industrialised areas. Wage restraint has helped subdue inflationary pressure in the euro zone, 
despite recurrent supply shocks. The result has been an accommodative policy stance for much of the 
life  of  the  monetary  union,  as  at  present.  As  you  can  imagine,  on  the  ECB  Governing  Council  we 
closely track labour negotiations in several countries, as the outcomes can directly affect the prospects 
for price stability.  
2 
 BIS Review 59/2007
Immigration  
In  several  euro  zone  economies,  and  notably  in  Spain,  it  is  immigration  that  has  had  the  biggest 
economic impact. Immigration to Europe has surged and taken several forms. Sometimes you will see 
workers move permanently from one country to another. In other cases, they move back and forth. 
What is happened is that immigrants have not only increased the labour force in the euro area; they 
have also brought more flexibility and dynamism to our labour markets.  
Since  the  turn  of  the  century,  Spain’s  immigration  rate  has  been  the  highest  in  Europe.  Once  an 
emigration country, Spain’s foreign resident population rose from just over 900,000 in the year 2000 to 
4.2 million in 2006. As a result, Spain’s population has increased by a number roughly equivalent to 
the total population of Ireland in just six years, as a result of immigration. The proportion of immigrants 
in other Western European countries may be bigger yet, but it is hard to find examples in recent times 
of such a large influx of immigration in such a small period of time. Clearly, what has attracted the 
immigrants to Spain rather than to other euro-zone countries has been the long economic upturn that 
has already lasted thirteen years.  
To give you another idea of what immigration has meant for the Spanish economy, let me tell you that 
foreign residents accounted for nearly the entire growth of the working age population between 2001 
and 2006. What is more, as immigrants have a higher propensity to work, they have also helped to 
increase the aggregate employment rate through a composition effect. If we simply combine these two 
direct  effects,  immigration  accounts  for  almost  one-third  of  Spain’s  notable  GDP  per  capita  growth 
since  the  turn  of  the  century.  This  figure  would  be  even  larger  if  we  took  other  indirect  effects  into 
account.  For  instance,  immigrants’  readiness  to  take  jobs  caring  for  children  and  the  elderly  has 
pushed up the participation rate and the productivity of native female workers.  
Let  me  add,  that  despite  Spain’s  inflation  differential  with  the  euro  zone,  which  is  now  standing  at 
around  half  a  percentage  point  over  the  euro  area  average,  immigration  has  helped  ease  the 
inflationary pressure that results from buoyant domestic demand.  
How does immigration affect inflation? In two ways.  
First, an increasing labour force raises growth potential, which helps reduce the feed-through of strong 
demand pressures to inflation. Usually, any boost to output is followed by a rise in real wages and, 
thus, marginal costs, which translate into higher inflation. But this feed-through need not take place if 
rising labour demand is met with rising labour supply from abroad, as we have seen in Spain in the 
last few years.  
And second, as immigrants are much more mobile than natives – both across and within borders – 
labour supply becomes more responsive to changes in economic conditions. This helps reduce labour 
market  tightness  in  the  presence  of  positive  demand  shocks,  and  softens  upward  wage  and  price 
adjustments. Therefore, the higher mobility of immigrants across countries, sectors and occupations 
gives  a  better  output-inflation  trade-off.  In  other  words,  we  can  sustain  bigger  and  longer-lasting 
expansions with more moderate effects on inflation.  
But  the  cross-border  mobility  of  immigrants  is  greatly  affected  by  how  strict  the  receiving  country’s 
immigration  policies  are.  Immigrants  will  return  home  more  willingly,  or  move  temporarily  to  an 
alternative  destination,  when  re-entry  is  easier.  Governments  should  take  this  into  account  when 
designing immigration policies, and co-ordination among European countries in this area also needs to 
be stepped up.  
I believe that cross-country labour mobility brings sizeable benefits for global economic prosperity. But 
high  immigration  also  poses  many  challenges,  not  least  the  social  assimilation  of  the  new  foreign 
residents. Here we need effective policies to hold the rate of immigration at the right level.  
There is little doubt that immigration cannot carry on increasing indefinitely at high rates. And we must 
not  forget  that  the  favourable  effects  on  inflation  may  gradually  fall  off  as  inward  flows  of  foreign 
workers diminish.  
As  immigrants  are  more  willing  to  substitute  consumption  for  leisure,  we  might  expect  their 
participation rates and the number of hours they wish to work to be higher than those of the native 
population.  At  the  same  time,  as  most  would  already  try  to  work  to  the  maximum  extent  possible 
immediately after arriving, each of them will have limited availability to further increase their working 
hours. The labour supply of each immigrant will then become rather insensitive to changes in wages. 
The  result  of  this  is  that  after  a  positive  shock  for  economic  activity,  wages  will  have  to  increase 
substantially  in  order  to  convince  a  given  set  of  foreign  workers  to  satisfy  the  additional  labour 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 3
demanded by employers. This means that once immigration stabilises at more moderate levels than 
those we have recently seen in Spain, it could be more difficult for labour supply to respond to higher 
demand, and we’d have higher wage and price pressures. But I think the slowdown in immigration in 
Spain is still some way off, so we can expect new arrivals to continue having a favourable influence on 
output and inflation for some time to come.  
I am more worried about the risk that the beneficial effects of immigration could weaken the political 
will to reform the labour market. As we have seen, the arrival of workers with higher participation rates 
and lower reservation wages normally helps to increase employment and ease wage growth, at least 
for some types of workers. And that might leave us with a notion that the labour market is more flexible 
and efficient than it really is. There is a danger that policymakers become over-complacent. In fact, 
reforms will enhance the gains from immigration, as there is some evidence that immigration offers 
most benefits in those countries with more flexible labour markets.  
Let me finish by recalling the words of Mr. Kofi Anan, the former United Nations Secretary-General, 
from a speech delivered to the European Parliament: “Migrants need Europe. But Europe also needs 
migrants. A closed Europe would be a meaner, poorer, weaker, older Europe. An open Europe will be 
a fairer, richer, stronger, younger Europe – provided you manage migration well”. It is hard to disagree 
with  him.  Managing  migration  well, will  be  very  good  for social  and  economic  stability  and  will  help 
make our job of maintaining moderate inflation easier.  
4 
 BIS Review 59/2007
