Lucas Papademos: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview  with  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  on 
19 February 2007 by Mr Beda Romano, Il Sole 24 Ore. 
 What type of recovery are we seeing? 
According to the latest estimates, growth in the euro area was 2.8% in 2006 almost double the growth 
rate  recorded  in  2005.  The  economic  recovery  was  mainly  driven  by  aggregate  demand  –  both 
domestic  and  international.  Private  investment  –  both  business  and  residential  –  rose  strongly  and 
private consumption growth also strengthened. Gross exports increased substantially and played an 
important role in stimulating domestic demand, but the contribution of net exports to GDP growth in the 
euro area as a whole was marginal, as imports also rose at a fast pace. On the supply side, there 
were positive signs of structural improvements in the labour market and these are reflected in a further 
rise in employment. Over the past eight years, the average annual increase of employment was 1.2%, 
four times higher than the corresponding figure in the eight years before the start of Monetary Union. 
In this context, it is encouraging that productivity growth also increased. 
Is the increase in productivity structural or cyclical? 
It is still too early to say with certainty. However, it seems to me that the increase in productivity mainly 
reflects cyclical factors, although there is evidence, including suggestive anecdotal evidence, that in 
some sectors of the European economy and in some countries of the euro area gains in efficiency 
have been achieved that are of a structural or permanent nature. These gains are the result of the 
introduction  of  economic  reforms,  for  example  the  deregulation  of  markets,  and  of  the  efforts  of 
companies to be more competitive in the increasingly globalised economy. 
Why such caution in assessing the increase in productivity growth? 
Several facts suggest caution: first, labour productivity in the euro area increased at an annual rate of 
1.2%  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2006,  which  is  approximately  equal  to  the  average  annual  rate 
recorded during the past fifteen years. Second, much of the increase occurred in industry, primarily for 
cyclical reasons, while in the services sector – which today represents 70% of the European economy 
– productivity growth remained sluggish. Indeed, in the third quarter of 2006, it declined to just 0.3%, 
year-on-year.  
What explains this divergence? 
It is mainly due to the fact that in services competition is relatively limited, unlike in industry, which is 
much more exposed to the challenges of globalisation. An excess of regulatory obstacles and a variety 
of  barriers  impede  free  competition  and  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  in  services,  including 
segments of the market for financial services. Such limited competition has not facilitated the adoption 
of  new  productivity-enhancing  technologies,  especially  information  and  communication  technologies 
which, in recent years, has played a decisive role in boosting productivity growth in the United States. 
But Europe is indeed making increasing use of information technology. 
That  is  true,  but  particularly  in  the  production  of  goods,  much  less  in  the  services  sector.  The 
environment  within  which  the  services  sector  functions  has  not,  in  general,  been  conducive  to  the 
efficient use of new technologies. 
What can be done in this situation? 
It is important to complete the creation of the Single Market in Europe by removing legal, regulatory 
and other barriers to competition in the services sector. More competition will bring about an increase 
in  overall  efficiency  and  labour  productivity  through  various  channels,  including  the  more  extensive 
and effective use of new technologies. The financial markets provide a good example. Improving the 
efficiency and development of the financial sector will not only raise that sector’s productivity but it can 
contribute  to  the  better  and  faster  allocation  of  capital  and  foster  innovation  and  the  productivity 
performance of the whole euro area economy. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 1
There  is  much  discussion  of  non-inflationary  potential  growth.  It  is  considered  to  be  an 
indicator for assessing the flexibility and degree of competition of an economy. Has potential 
growth increased in Europe in recent years? 
In 1999, the estimates by international organisations of non-inflationary potential growth in the euro 
area ranged between 2.0% and 2.5%. In 2004-2005, the same organisations considered that potential 
growth was close to the lower limit of this range and even slightly below 2.0%. However, I believe that, 
in the light of recent developments in the labour market, the increase in the rate of utilisation of the 
labour force, and indications of a slight pick-up in trend productivity growth, the potential growth of the 
euro area economy over the next couple of years might be somewhat higher, but only marginally: it 
remains close to, though possibly slightly above 2.0%. 
Therefore, the 2.8% growth recorded in 2006 is not sustainable? 
In  the  absence  of  further  economic  reforms  to  enhance  market  flexibility  and  adaptability  and  raise 
labour  utilisation  and  productivity  at  a  faster  pace,  the  growth  seen  last  year  cannot  be  sustained 
without  causing  inflationary  pressures.  The  euro  area  economy  is  reaching  peak  levels  of  capacity 
utilisation,  and  the  rate  of  unemployment  is  today  7.5%  –  a  level,  which,  according  to  various 
estimates, is considered as consistent with non-inflationary long-term growth. Taking into account the 
current  structure  and  functioning  of  the labour  market,  a  tighter  job  market could  exert  pressure on 
wages and therefore on prices. 
So are new labour market reforms needed? 
Precisely,  to  enable  the  economy  to  further  reduce  unemployment  in  a  sustained  manner,  that  is, 
without creating inflationary pressures. However, I should point out that much has been done in recent 
years to improve the functioning of the labour market. A 7.5% unemployment rate is three percentage 
points  lower than  the  level  reached  in  the  mid-1990s.  And  job  creation  in  the eight  years  since  the 
launch of the euro has been substantial, as I noted earlier. Nevertheless, we cannot be content with 
the  current  level  of  unemployment:  it  is  nearly  three  percentage  points  higher  than  in  the  United 
States. 
The picture that you have painted so far is partially positive. Italy has also recorded better than 
forecast growth in 2006, at 2.0%. How should we see the Italian recovery? 
Following years of stagnation or very low growth, the performance of the Italian economy last year was 
very  encouraging.  The  recovery  is  due  in  large  part  to  increased  aggregate  demand  from  the  euro 
area and the rest of the world. There are also signs of improvement on the supply side and of a revival 
of  investment.  However,  based  on  the  available  data,  productivity  growth  seems  to  have  remained 
rather low in 2006. 
Can you be more precise? 
Some  data  on  Italy  have  surprised  me.  The  fall  in  Italian  competitiveness  is  not  predominantly  the 
result  of  excessive  wage  growth,  as  is  sometimes  argued,  but  rather  of  a  very  low  increase  in 
productivity. While the latter increased in the euro area by an average of 1.1% per annum between 
1999 and 2005, in Italy it rose by just 0.4%. With regard to wages and salaries, the average annual 
increase  in  the  same  period  was  2.6%  in  the  euro  area  and  3.0%  in  Italy.  The  poor  productivity 
performance and the cumulative effect of higher wage increases compared to the rest of the euro area 
over a fairly long period of time have resulted in a substantial loss of price competitiveness. 
What should Italy do to increase its productivity? 
The goal is to introduce more competition. This is a challenge not only for Italy, but also for Europe. 
Bear in mind that, as a result of population ageing and a projected increase in the “dependency ratio”, 
without  further  improvements  in  productivity  and  the  degree  of  labour utilisation,  potential  growth  in 
Europe is estimated to fall from 2.0% to 1.5% in the decade 2010-2020. This would be a considerable 
drop. This risk forces us to continue our efforts to make the European economy more efficient and 
competitive. 
Let  us  now move  on  to  interest  rate  developments.  The  markets  expect  a  further  rise  in  the 
cost of money in March, to 3.75%. What will influence monetary policy in the coming quarters? 
The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  will  assess  the  outlook  for  inflation  over  the  medium  term  and  the 
potential risks to price stability in order to prevent the upside risks on the horizon from materialising. 
The  key  words  are  “medium  term”  and  “potential  risks”.  The  emphasis  on  the  medium  term  is 
particularly  important:  in  the  short  term,  inflation  is,  in  fact,  likely  to  fall  in  the  coming  months  as  a 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2007
result of the effects of special factors; subsequently, however, inflation is expected to rise again in the 
course of the year, as the favourable influence of these factors dissipates. 
What are the risks as far as prices are concerned? 
There are a number of upside risks. The fall in the price of oil may prove to be temporary; the danger 
that past increases in the price of oil and other commodities will have a stronger pass-through into 
consumer  prices;  the  likelihood  of  overly  generous  increases  in  wages,  not  in  line  with  productivity 
gains, at a time of robust economic growth and as the unemployment rate is reaching a level that can 
generate inflationary pressures; and, lastly, continuing strong money and credit growth. 
The ECB maintains that monetary policy is still accommodative. In what sense? 
I will underline three factors: interest rates – both short and long-term interest rates – are still relatively 
low; liquidity is ample as a result of rapid monetary expansion since mid-2004; and the fact that, in 
spite  of  the  increase  in  the  ECB’s  policy  rates  from  2.0%  to  3.5%  between  December  2005  and 
December 2006, money and credit growth remain strong. 
In this context, which is positive as far as growth is concerned, and less so for productivity, 
what should financial markets expect? 
I will only say that the ECB’s Governing Council stands ready to do what is necessary and act pre-
emptively so as to ensure that the above-mentioned risks to price stability do not materialise.  
BIS Review 17/2007 
 3
