European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 12 April 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  press 
conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by the President of 
the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to  increase  interest  rates  in 
March. It has also confirmed that the medium-term outlook for price stability remains subject to upside 
risks, so that very close monitoring of all developments is warranted. Indeed, it is essential to ensure 
that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will contribute to ensuring that 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing 
contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Given 
the  favourable  economic  environment,  our  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  on  the  accommodative 
side, with the key ECB interest rates moderate, money and credit growth vigorous, and liquidity in the 
euro  area  ample  by  all  plausible  measures.  Therefore,  looking  ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely 
manner to ensure price stability in the medium term is warranted.  
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  recent  information  has  underpinned  our  assessment  of 
ongoing robust economic growth dynamics in the euro area. Eurostat’s second estimate has confirmed 
quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2006 at 0.9%. Over the whole year 2006, 
real GDP grew by 2.7% in the euro area, unadjusted for the number of working days. On the basis of 
the latest data, survey releases and various indicator-based estimates, it appears that robust growth is 
continuing in the first half of 2007.  
Looking  further  ahead,  the  conditions  are  in  place  for  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  solidly.  As 
regards the external environment, global economic growth has become more balanced across regions 
and, while moderating somewhat, remains strong. External conditions thus continue to provide support 
for euro area exports. Domestic demand in the euro area is also expected to maintain its relatively 
strong  momentum.  Investment  should  remain  dynamic,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of 
favourable  financing  conditions,  balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong 
corporate earnings, and gains in business efficiency. Consumption should also strengthen further over 
time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  increasingly  supported  by  employment 
growth and improving labour market conditions. 
The  risks  surrounding  this  favourable  outlook  for  economic  growth  are  broadly  balanced  over  the 
shorter term. At longer horizons, downside risks remain, stemming mainly from the external side. They 
relate to fears of a rise in protectionist pressures, the possibility of further increases in oil prices and 
concerns about possible disorderly developments owing to global imbalances.  
As  regards  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  was 
1.9% in March 2007, compared with 1.8% in the first two months of the year. A detailed breakdown of 
the March HICP data is not yet available. Looking ahead, barring further increases in oil prices, last 
year’s  volatility  in  energy  prices  will  lead  to  significant  base  effects,  thereby  affecting  the  profile  of 
annual  inflation  rates  this  year.  On  the  basis  of  the  current  level  of  oil  prices  and  oil  price  futures, 
annual inflation rates are likely to fall in the months to come, before rising towards the end of the year 
to hover again at around 2%.  
Over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, the outlook for price developments remains subject to 
upside  risks.  These  relate  to  the  possibility  of  further  oil  price  rises  and  additional  increases  in 
administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  beyond  those  announced  and  decided  thus  far.  More 
fundamentally,  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  developments  could  pose  significant  upward 
risks to price stability, not least in view of the favourable momentum in labour markets observed over 
the  past  few  quarters.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities.  In  this  context,  wage  agreements  should  take  into  account  price  competitiveness 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
positions,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many  economies,  as  well  as  productivity 
developments.  The  Governing  Council  monitors  the  wage  negotiations  in  euro  area  countries  with 
particular attention. 
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  increased  further  to  10.0%  in  February,  from  9.9%  in  January.  At  the 
same time, the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector, while remaining very strong at 10.3% 
in February, showed some further signs of moderation. Whereas in previous months this moderation 
reflected  a  decline  in  the growth  rate of  household borrowing  in an  environment  of  rising mortgage 
lending  rates  throughout  the  euro  area  and  a  slowing  increase  in  house  prices  in  some  regions,  in 
February  it  was  due  to  a  moderation  in  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations.  When 
assessing such developments, it should be borne in mind that monthly figures can be influenced by 
temporary factors and should thus not be overstated. Indeed, the strong growth in private sector credit 
reflects the continuation of the strong trend in the growth of borrowing by non-financial corporations 
seen since mid-2004.  
When put in perspective, the latest data continue to point to vigorous dynamics in the underlying rate 
of  broad  money  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  The  continued  robust  expansion  of  money  and  credit 
reflects  the  low  levels  of  interest  rates  over  a  prolonged  period  of  time  and  the  strengthening  of 
economic activity in the euro area. Rising short-term interest rates, in combination with low long-term 
interest  rates,  have  had  an  impact  on  developments  in  the  individual  components  of  monetary  and 
credit aggregates, but have thus far had only a limited influence on the overall strength of monetary 
developments. Following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation in the euro 
area is ample by all plausible measures. In this environment of ample liquidity, the continued vigorous 
expansion of money and credit points to upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
Monetary developments therefore continue to require very careful monitoring, particularly against the 
background  of  a  solid  expansion  in  economic  activity  and  continued  strong  property  market 
developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look through any short-term volatility in inflation 
rates. The relevant horizon for monetary policy is the medium term. Risks to the medium-term outlook 
for price stability remain on the upside, relating in particular to stronger than currently expected wage 
developments in a context of ongoing robust growth in employment and economic activity. Given the 
vigorous monetary and credit growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of 
the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Accordingly,  the  Governing 
Council  will  continue  to  monitor  very closely all  developments.  Indeed,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that 
risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. This will support the solid anchoring of 
medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area at levels consistent with price stability. 
Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price stability in the medium 
term remains warranted.  
Concerning other policy areas, the Governing Council welcomed the recommendations addressed to 
the euro area countries in the 2007 update of the Integrated Guidelines, which was endorsed by the 
European Council at  its  meeting  on  8 and  9 March,  particularly  to  speed up  fiscal  consolidation,  to 
improve  the  quality  of  public  finances,  to  foster  competition  and  integration,  and  to  promote  labour 
market reforms. Indeed, as regards fiscal policy, it is of the utmost importance to use the momentum 
of  the  improved  economic  situation  and  to  press  ahead  vigorously  with  budgetary  consolidation. 
Government  deficit  and  debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  euro  area  countries  in  2006  have  turned  out  to  be 
significantly better than anticipated. But this positive outcome largely reflects buoyant tax revenues in 
the context of a favourable macroeconomic environment, offsetting in some cases higher than planned 
public expenditure. The better than expected fiscal outcomes in 2006 should lead to more ambitious 
targets  for  2007  and  beyond,  allowing  revenue  windfalls  to  be  fully  allocated  to  deficit  and  debt 
reduction.  Furthermore,  procyclical  fiscal  policies  should  be  avoided  in  all  countries.  This  is  of  vital 
importance  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability  in  preparation  for  the  impact  of  ageing  populations  and  is 
fully in line with the revised Stability and Growth Pact. Reviewing public expenditure and taxation so as 
to  improve  the  quality  of  public  finances  would  additionally  foster  economic  growth  and  fiscal 
sustainability.  We  also  support  ambitious  structural  reforms,  which  would  further  contribute  to  the 
smooth  functioning  of  Monetary  Union  and  support  growth  potential  and  job  creation.  In  particular, 
improving labour market flexibility to better align wage and productivity developments and facilitating 
labour  mobility  would  further  strengthen  the  resilience  of  countries  to  shocks  and  ensure  their 
competitiveness. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
