Timothy F Geithner: Asia, the world economy and the international financial 
system  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Society  of  Singapore  2007  Annual  Dinner,  Singapore, 
13 June 2007. 
 Good  evening.  I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to  join  you  tonight.  The  past  decade  has  been  one  of 
remarkable achievement in Asia. This is a testament to the resilience and dynamism of this region, 
and yet the memories of the financial crises remain vivid and still exert a powerful influence on policy 
today. Tonight, I want to reflect on what policymakers learned from the crises, to review the extent of 
the progress since and to examine some of the challenges ahead.  
The Asian financial crises of the late 1990s were exceptional in many respects. Described at the time 
by some as the first crises of the 21st century, they were commonly regarded as without precedent 
and fundamentally different from previous emerging market financial crises. Here were countries with 
a remarkable record of rapid economic growth over several decades, substantial rates of investment, 
with  low  inflation  and  relatively  strong  fiscal  positions.  Most  conventional  indicators  of  economic 
performance and financial strength did not suggest acute underlying vulnerability. 
Yet the crises erupted with remarkable speed and force. The sudden collapse of confidence led to a 
sharp reversal of capital flows to the region. On the eve of the crises, net capital inflows to the Asian 
crisis  countries  were  equal  to  almost  6  percent  of  their  GDP.  Over  the  next  two  years,  the  flow  of 
capital  more  than  fully  reversed.  Income  and  output  contracted  abruptly:  in  the  worst  affected 
countries, GDP shrank by more than 10 percentage points from peak to trough and in one case, the 
contraction was closer to 15 percent. By any standards, these financial crises were unusually severe. 
The  crises  marked  a  sudden  and  dramatic  break  with  the  past,  and  brought  a  new  sense  of 
vulnerability to economies perceived as strong and successful. 
Yet though some of the characteristics of the Asian crises distinguished them from other episodes of 
financial  turmoil,  they  shared  several  important  features  in  common  with  crises  in  countries  with 
modern,  market-oriented  financial  systems.  They  were  largely  unanticipated.  A  rise  in  borrowing 
created vulnerability to a shift in asset prices. Uncertainty about the scale and nature of the underlying 
vulnerability magnified the problem. Contagion spread rapidly. Markets overshot. 
The fundamental economic and financial weaknesses that were the source of vulnerability were the 
consequence  of  the  interaction  between  weak  domestic  financial  systems,  selective  liberalization of 
controls on capital flows and fixed exchange rate regimes. 
Banking  systems  combined  relatively  weak  supervision  with  broad  government  guarantees,  some 
explicit,  but  more  commonly  implicit,  reflecting  a  tradition  of  public  sector  intervention  to  protect 
troubled  companies  and  banks  from  failure.  Tax  and  regulatory  incentives  promoted  short-term 
borrowing in foreign currency through the banking system. Capital inflows, largely through the banking 
system, helped finance a boom in investment and real estate. Distortions in the financial system led to 
a  misallocation  of  resources  so  that  high  rates  of  private  investment  did  not  generate  substantial 
improvements in productivity. Exchange rate regimes where the domestic currency was fixed to the 
dollar  generated  false  expectations  of  stability,  and  the  resulting  increase  in  unhedged  borrowing 
generated large exposures to changes in the exchange rate or interest rates. 
By 1997, the short-term external debt of the private sector had risen substantially, relative to GDP and 
to reserves, and this created conditions similar to a classic bank run, when the crises hit. 
The initial spark for the loss of confidence is still not fully clear, as is often the case in financial crises. 
And although the particular dynamics differed across the countries in the region, the basic pattern was 
common, with a rapid and sustained effort by domestic and foreign investors to reduce their exposure 
to further losses. The initial effects of this behavior made the exchange rate commitments untenable, 
and when those commitments were broken and currencies fell, the panic became self-reinforcing. 
Uncertainty  and  lack  of  information  fed  the  run.  Market  participants  were  unable  to  judge  whether 
deteriorating  developments  reflected  temporary  liquidity  problems  or  deeper  solvency  issues.  They 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 1
reacted by assuming the worst. These shifts in market sentiment risked becoming self-validating, with 
liquidity problems transformed into solvency problems with broader risk of default. 
The capacity of policymakers to restore stability was constrained by the depth of the balance sheet 
problems.  In some  cases,  where  the  scale of  external  borrowing  was  less  acute,  policymakers had 
more  room  to  act.  But  in  most  cases,  policy  options  were  very  limited.  Initially,  governments  were 
reluctant  to  let  exchange  rates  move  too  far,  because  of  fears  that  this  would  force  banks  and 
companies  that  had  borrowed  in  dollars  or  yen  into  default  on  a  scale  that  could  further  damage 
growth. At the same time, the authorities were reluctant to tighten monetary policy as a way to help 
stabilize the exchange rate because of concern it would hurt growth and perhaps exacerbate the flight 
from domestic assets. 
This dilemma made the initial policy response in the crisis countries look halting and tentative. And, 
uncertainty  about  the  strength  and  continuity  of  political  leadership  further  hampered  government 
efforts to recover credibility. In the countries hit hardest by the crisis, looming issues of succession and 
elections compounded the problem of confidence. 
The  crises  prompted  a  searching  reassessment  of  the  conventional  economic  wisdom  and  a  new 
appreciation  of  the  challenges  that  come  with  financial  integration.  The  classic  measures  of 
macroeconomic stability and policy prudence, in fiscal positions and measured inflation rates, could 
mask  substantial  structural  weaknesses,  and  these  same  structural  weaknesses  could  ultimately 
undermine 
reasonably  conservative  macroeconomic  policy 
management. Partial capital account liberalization, which encouraged the accumulation of short-term 
debt  obligations,  brought  substantial  risk,  magnifying  weaknesses  in  domestic  financial  systems. 
Exchange  rate  commitments  provided  less  stability  than  had  been  assumed.  The  rise  in  capital 
mobility increased exposure to shifts in sentiment. Markets could now adjust much faster than policy 
could typically react. 
These judgments precipitated major changes in policies and a sustained investment in improvements 
to the institutional framework of domestic financial systems across the region. And these changes in 
turn  laid  the  foundation  for  recovery  and  for  the  very  substantial  improvements  in  economic  and 
financial strength now evident across the region.  
the  achievements  of  otherwise 
Achievements since the crises 
Although it took some time for policy to begin to restore confidence, recovery was stronger and more 
rapid than had been typical in other emerging market financial crises. Barely 18 months after the crisis, 
for example, Korean GDP had returned to pre-crisis levels, and this was true for all the Asian crisis 
countries by 2003. Growth has been relatively strong and stable since, though at a pace somewhat 
below the unsustainable rates of the decade prior to the crises. 
The  balance  sheets  of  the  region  have  been  transformed  from  weakness  into  strength.  Current 
account  balances  are  generally  in  surplus.  External  debt  of  the  banking  and  corporate  sector  has 
fallen.  Banking  systems  are  now  much  less  exposed  to  liabilities  in  foreign  currencies;  and  the 
currency  mismatches  that  made  economies  so  vulnerable  as  the  crises  erupted  have  been  greatly 
reduced. Official reserves have risen to levels without precedent in modern financial history. 
Fiscal positions have strengthened. After rising initially with the substantial costs associated with bank 
recapitalization programs, in recent years public debt ratios have generally been declining as a share 
of GDP. 
Monetary  policy  regimes  have  become  more  mature,  with  some  progress  toward  greater  de  facto 
independence for central banks, with clearer mandates for price stability. 
Exchange rate regimes in the crisis countries have become somewhat more flexible, providing greater 
scope for monetary policy to sustain the domestic conditions for price stability. 
Financial  systems  are  substantially  stronger.  Bank  capital  ratios  now  provide  a  significantly  larger 
cushion  against  potential  losses  –  though  capital  ratios  in  Asian  banking  sectors  are  still  generally 
lower  than  those  in  other  emerging  economies.  The  quality  of  bank  assets  has  improved.  Non-
performing loans, estimated to have peaked at between one-quarter and three-quarters of total loans 
in  the  crisis  countries,  are  now  under  10  percent  of  total  loans.  Financial  institutions  that  required 
government  intervention  have  largely  been  restored  to  private  ownership.  Domestic  capital  markets 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2007
are an increasingly important channel of intermediation in financial systems that had historically been 
dominated by banks. 
These are impressive achievements by any measure. And the changes that have taken place provide 
a strong foundation for future growth and they make it much less likely that these economies will be 
vulnerable to the type of crises of a decade ago. This progress is reflected in a broad range of financial 
market  indicators  of  risk.  Risk  premia  in  domestic  interest  rates  markets  are  low.  Spreads  on 
remaining dollar-denominated debt have fallen to levels that reflect little concern about future financial 
stress. 
It is important to bear in mind that some of the most dramatic changes in the performance of Asian 
and  other  emerging  market  economies  have  taken  place  in  an  unusually  benign  economic 
environment. The past four years have marked the strongest sustained period of growth for several 
decades.  Global  interest  rates  have  been  relatively  low.  Asset  prices  in  many  markets  have  been 
rising for a sustained period of time. Volatility in equity, interest rate and foreign exchange markets has 
fallen  to  unusually  low  levels,  and  although  we’ve  seen  the  occasional  sharp  correction  in  some 
markets, recovery has typically been quick. 
These  favorable  conditions  make  everything  look  somewhat  better  than  it  otherwise  would.  But  the 
improvements  in  Asia  are  real,  and  they  will  make  the  region  more  resilient  in  the  face  of  future 
challenges. 
The challenges ahead 
Even with the relative prosperity of the recent past, policy in much of the region reflects substantial 
ambivalence about the risks that come with financial openness. The memory of the trauma of the crisis 
explains much of this ambivalence. The difficulties in managing this more recent period of substantial 
capital  inflows  provides  an  additional  source  of  unease.  Policy  regimes  across  the  region  are  to  a 
significant  degree  directed  at  providing  some  insulation  for  the  domestic  economy  from  what  is 
considered a volatile global financial environment. 
This impulse reflects itself in many different ways. It is manifested in exchange rate regimes that still 
permit  relatively  limited  variability  against  the  dollar.  It  is  manifested  in  the  extent  of  reserve 
accumulation,  in  part  the  consequence  of  resistance  to  exchange  rate  appreciation.  And  it  is 
manifested in the remaining controls on capital movements and the occasional experimentation with 
the introduction of new controls. 
The search for durable insurance against future volatility is an understandable response to the searing 
experience of the crises of a decade ago. But there is risk in this as well. And the incomplete embrace 
of integration could contain the seeds of future vulnerability. 
In this sense, the policy agenda needs to move from a focus on creating stronger defenses against 
crisis  to  building  a  greater  ability  to  adapt  to  change.  This  requires  strong  institutions  for  the 
management of macroeconomic policy so that the monetary and fiscal policies are able to respond to 
shocks  in  a  credible  manner.  It  requires  strong  financial  institutions  with  a  substantial  capacity  to 
absorb losses and cope with volatility. It requires regulatory policies that encourage competition and 
innovation,  with  strong  protections  for  property  rights,  low  barriers  to  entry  and  effective  financial 
supervision.  And  it  requires  investments  in  a  nation’s  human  capital,  in  education,  healthcare  and 
pension  provision.  This  complement  of  policies  improves  the  prospects  for  producing  the  mix  of 
flexibility and resilience necessary for sustained growth in a more integrated world economy. 
In emerging Asia, two key areas where there is the need and opportunity for further progress are in the 
financial system and in the monetary policy framework. 
The financial sector plays an important role in the flexibility and adaptability of economies to change, in 
the  resilience  of  economies  and  in  the  capacity  of  the  monetary  authorities  to  respond  to  adverse 
shocks to asset prices or demand. Although much has been achieved in Asia over the past decade, as 
the damage inflicted by the crises has been repaired, further reform will be important to the capacity of 
these economies to innovate and grow and to live more comfortably with openness to capital flows. 
This  requires  stronger  banks  and  more  developed  capital  markets.  Thus  far,  we  have  seen  more 
progress on the former than the latter, but both are important and there remains considerable scope 
for broadening and deepening capital markets in emerging Asia. The extent of financial innovation in 
the  industrial  economies  makes  it  possible  for  Asian  countries  to  take  advantage  of  huge 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 3
improvements in the efficiency of financial intermediation. Embrace of these reforms will help ensure 
that  high  levels  of  domestic  savings  are  deployed  more  efficiently,  that  companies  and  financial 
institutions are able to manage risks more effectively and that the financial system is more resilient in 
the face of future stress. 
Monetary  policy  regimes  in  much  of  Asia  are  burdened  by  two  different  types  of  constraints  on 
independence.  The  first  relates  to  the  institutional  relationship  between  the  central  bank  and  the 
government and the second to the multiple objectives assigned to the central banks. 
All the evidence points to improved long-term inflation performance when monetary policymakers are 
freed from institutional constraints that hamper their freedom of maneuver and given full operational 
independence. Such independence is best achieved by enshrining it in an institutional framework that 
provides  for  legal  independence  from  the  government,  with  accountability  for  achieving  a  clearly 
defined mandate focused on price stability. Few Asian central banks yet enjoy full legal independence, 
though most now have greater de facto independence than they once had. 
Fixed,  or  partially  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes,  of  course,  also  constrain  the  independence  of 
monetary policy. As capital accounts become progressively more open, few countries can sustain over 
time a commitment to exchange rate stability without risking price stability. Eventually central banks 
will  run  up  against  limits  on  their  capacity  to  sterilize  the  effects  of  exchange  market  intervention 
designed  to  limit  the  pace  and  extent  of  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate.  Although  measured 
inflation  in  emerging  Asian  economies  remains  relatively  low,  the  pace  of  credit  growth  and  the 
behavior  of  asset  prices  provide some evidence  of a  growing  tension  among  competing  objectives. 
The  longer  this  policy  conflict  persists,  the  greater  the  distortions  building  up  in  the  economy,  the 
greater the risk of future inflation and the greater the risk of a bumpy future. 
Reserves in emerging Asia recently passed the $2.5 trillion mark, double their size at the end of 2003. 
Given the levels that have been reached in many countries, it may no longer be appropriate to view 
rising reserves as a source of increasing strength against future volatility. They are, increasingly, signs 
of  the  allocative  distortions  that result  from  the  exchange  rate  regime.  And  they  are  in a sense  too 
much of a good thing. 
Conclusion 
The economic and financial transformation of the crisis economies has been extraordinary. The policy 
reforms  adopted  in  the  wake  of  the  crises  have  made  those  economies  less  vulnerable  and  more 
resilient. And these changes justify substantial confidence about Asia’s economic future. 
Asia’s success fundamentally changes the international economic and financial system. It is no longer 
tenable to view the world as divided between a dominant core of mature industrial economies and a 
smaller periphery of emerging economies. Asia is now so closely integrated with the rest of the world, 
so large in relative terms, and growing so rapidly that the policy choices made in this region will have a 
much greater impact on the rest of the world. And it means that Asia will need to prepare for a future in 
which it relies more on the strength of growth at home rather than on the strength of growth in the rest 
of the world. 
As Asia makes further progress in financial reform and toward more flexible exchange rate regimes, it 
will be in a better position both to deal with the inevitable challenges that come with economic and 
financial integration, and to make the necessary transition to stronger domestic demand led-growth, 
which will prove a more sustainable foundation for future improvements in living standards. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2007
