Guy Quaden: CashSSP – the cash single shared platform 
Remarks by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, on the occasion of signing 
the Cash Single Shared Platform contract between Bank of Finland and the central banks of Belgium, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands, Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 16 March 2007. 
 Dear Governor, dear Erkki,  
Dear colleagues,  
First of all, let me thank you for your kind invitation and for organising this event.  
The Eurosystem is an entity which has no equivalent anywhere in the world. For me, the creation of 
the  ECB  did  not  raise  any  doubts  on  the  usefulness  of  the  NCBs.  In  fact,  the  reverse  is  true. 
Luxembourg, the only country which did not have its own central bank, had to create one just before 
the transition to the single monetary policy.  
Nevertheless, our integration into the Eurosystem has obviously influenced the life of our institutions. I 
think on two changes which are not necessarily apparent to the outside world.  
The first is due to the fundamental change in the actual role of our NCBs, which now participate in the 
management  of  the  world's  second  most  important  currency.  The  decisions  taken  in  Frankfurt  are 
taken on a collegiate basis by the Governing Council. This means that every governor of an NCB must 
be properly prepared to deal with all the issues considered at that level. They concern not only the 
single monetary policy but also the Eurosystem's other spheres of activity, such as financial stability 
and payment systems.  
In recent years, our NCBs have therefore extended and strengthened their analysis capacity. A large 
proportion  of  our  staff  is  nowadays  involved  at  various  levels  in  the  preparation  of  these  decisions 
"taken in Frankfurt". The investment in resources is substantial, and so is the resulting enrichment of 
the job content of our employees.  
The second change concerns operational aspects. One of the Eurosystem's basic operating principles 
is a high degree of decentralisation. Our NCBs remain the contact points between financial institutions 
or economic agents of our countries and the Eurosystem. However, the concept of decentralisation 
has evolved since the Eurosystem was first formed.  
To quote the words of the Eurosystem's mission statement: "We are committed to good governance 
and to performing our tasks effectively and efficiently, in a spirit of cooperation and team work". This is 
further  elaborated  in  the  Organisational  Principles,  which  state  "that  potential  synergies  and 
economies of scale shall be identified and exploited to the extent feasible". Furthermore the Council 
Task  Force  of  which  Erkki  is  a  member  has  been  mandated  by  the  Governing  Council  "to  prepare 
proposals  for  discussion  and  decision  on  issues  related  to  the  role,  objectives,  functions  and 
operational modalities of the Eurosystem". In my view, it has a crucial role to play as an independent 
think thank.  
Having said that I believe that if the time is not ripe for a top-down decision, there should be room for 
NCBs  –  and  in  particular  for  medium-sized  NCBs  –  to  initiate  voluntary  collaboration  in  the 
development of joint projects and the exploitation of synergies following a bottom up approach. I think 
also  that  the  long  term  vision  for  the  Eurosystem  calls  for  a  shift  from  the  pure  centralisation  and 
decentralisation  models  that  have  been  applied  in  the  past  towards  models  of  pooling  and 
consolidation. In my view, the CASH SSP partnership fits perfectly into this framework. 
The introduction of euro banknotes provided an excellent opportunity for the NBB to modernise and 
reengineer its IT-application for cash handling. The goal was twofold: first of all, to manage cash flows 
more efficiently, both within the central bank and between the central bank and its main customers, 
financial  institutions  and  cash  transport  firms;  and  secondly,  to  improve  the  security  of  these  cash 
transactions.  
The successful implementation of this new cash application inspired the Bank's cash department to 
start thinking about the possibility of promoting it to international scale, starting with the neighbouring 
central  banks.  So  in  2006  CASH  SSP  was  formally  born  and  the  first  agreements  were  signed 
between  the  Dutch  central  bank,  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  and  the  NBB.  Today  the 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 1
partnership is extended to a fourth partner, which shows that the scope of the business case is larger. 
Also  on  behalf  of  the  Dutch  central  bank  and  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  let  me  warmly 
welcome you as a full and equal partner in the group.  
We find it very important that standards are being developed, because this shows to the commercial 
banks active in several countries, that we exploit a number of synergies of the single currency for cash 
handling and maybe, dear friends, could you use your privileged relationship with the Baltic countries 
to see whether other central banks would be interested in such type of collaboration.  
From our side, we will continue at the NBB to try to play a pro-active role in promoting collaboration 
between  central  banks  within  the  Eurosystem  also  in  other  fields  like  collateral  management  and 
statistics.  This  also  implies  that  the  NBB  is  open  to  support  or  participate  in  initiatives  launched  by 
other NCBs in other fields of activity.  
A last remark. It is often said that "IT should follow the business". I agree, but both sides should be in 
permanent contact with each other and look for efficiency gains on the IT side and on the business 
side,  too.  Open  communication  between  business  and  IT  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  CASH  SSP 
partnership as it results in transparency and mutual trust between all partners. In the move towards 
closer collaboration between Eurosystem central banks, transparency and mutual trust are of utmost 
importance  in  promoting  a  genuine  Eurosystem  team  spirit.  This  is  something  that  should  be 
supported and it calls for an improved governance framework in order to fully realise efficiency gains 
for the whole Eurosystem.  
Dear colleagues,  
The Eurosystem has established itself as a sound system capable of taking well-founded monetary 
policy decisions. On the operational level, it is now moving towards more specialisation. Tomorrow, 
our central banks will probably not be performing all the same tasks anymore. Some decisions will be 
taken following a top-down approach, others will grow from the bottom up. I am convinced that within 
the  Eurosystem,  there  is,  and  there  should  continue  to  be,  an  important  role  for  each  and  every 
member.  
Erkki, let me conclude by once again thanking the Bank of Finland for the warm welcome I have been 
given here in Helsinki, and that is not just because of the warm winter weather we are having these 
days.  Let  me  also  thank  you  once  more  for sharing  the  vision  that  the CASH  SSP  partnership  can 
boost  collaboration  between  Eurosystem  central  banks,  building  on  the  expertise  and  know-how 
available across the whole system, something that is fully in line with the team spirit promoted by the 
ECB Governing Council.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2007
