Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The cornerstones of a thriving economy 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2007  Awarding  Ceremony  for  BSP 
Stakeholders, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 4 July 2007. 
 Members of the Monetary Board, distinguished guests; heads, chief executive officers and 
personnel of our partner firms; my colleagues at the BSP; ladies and gentlemen: 
Magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat!  
On  behalf  of  the  members  of  the  Monetary  Board  as  well  as  the  men  and  women  of  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I thank all our stakeholders, the media, and other special guests 
for joining us this morning.  
Today, we give recognition to our partners from the business and government sectors who 
regularly invest time and effort to provide complete and reliable information to us. These are 
vital  statistics  and  information  that  guide  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  in  formulating 
appropriate and timely policies and programs.  
Indeed,  one  cannot  overemphasize  the  importance  of  having  complete  and  accurate 
information  as  basis  for  making  decisions  that  can  significantly  affect  a  big  number  of  our 
people.  In  fact,  the  cornerstones  of  a  thriving  economy  are  reliable,  timely  and  complete 
information. Otherwise, it would be garbage in, garbage out.  
Gaining public recognition for the importance of statistics and information that we produce, 
monitor  and  disseminate  therefore  is  a  continuing  undertaking  with  you  as  our  information 
providers.  
I am pleased to report that the dividends from our partnership have been highly encouraging. 
Among  others,  this  partnership  has  allowed  the  Bangko  Sentral  to  be  forward-looking  and 
information-intensive in the formulation of monetary and financial policies.  
As a result, we have been doing quite well insofar as our monetary policy is concerned. In 
fact, even as oil prices are hitting historic high levels, we manage to tame inflation at low and 
stable rates: in June 2005, for instance, our inflation rate was 7.6%; last May, it had dropped 
to 2.4%, a level comparable to those in developed countries.  
It is also significant to note that even as we continue to experience solid and broad-based 
economic growth, we have been able to keep the lid on inflation, maintained interest rates at 
low levels, and the peso stronger. Meanwhile, the Bangko Sentral this year gave a grant of 
P50 million to the export sector to enhance its competitiveness; this is our second grant to 
the export sector.  
I  am  also  pleased  to  report  that  our  banking  system  continues  to  strengthen,  while  our 
domestic capital market continues to develop and deepen as a result of our reform agenda.  
Ladies and gentlemen, these happened because your cooperation as information providers 
empowers the Bangko Sentral to craft responsive policies that, in turn, benefit you as well. In 
other words, we have good synergy at work here.  
For  this  reason,  we  are  committed  to  elevate  our  partnership  with  you  to  a  deeper 
engagement,  to  include  consultations  on  your  needs,  both  as  data  providers  and  users  of 
official statistics.  
This is the fourth year of our Stakeholders Awards Program which rewards best respondents 
to BSP surveys such as the: 1) Business Expectations Survey; 2) Cross Border Transactions 
Survey;  3)  Foreign  Direct  Investment  Survey;  and  4)  Coordinated  Portfolio  Investment 
Survey. Our Awards Program also recognizes exporters that generate significant net foreign 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
exchange  earnings,  as  well  as  commercial  banks  that  facilitate  the  reporting  and  inflow  of 
overseas Filipinos’ remittances.  
This  year,  the  BSP  will  start  giving  awards  to  institutional  partners  that  provide  valuable 
information support for the BSP’s analysis on monetary developments and policies. I am also 
pleased to report that two survey respondents who are three-time awardees will be elevated 
to the Hall of Fame. They become our first Hall of Famers.  
Our  awardees  will  receive  trophies,  aptly  given  the  name  “Ambition”,  that  symbolize  our 
partnership and joint commitment to foster a better economic environment for our country. To 
the awardees, our congratulations.  
To  all  our  stakeholders,  we  thank  you  for  your  continuing  support  and  cooperation  for  the 
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  our  economy.  Remember,  our  partnership  is  a  critical 
element  in  weaving  the  success  story  of  our  country’s  balanced  and  sustained  economic 
growth.  
Marami pong salamat. Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
