Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Migration, remittances, economic development and 
the role of banks 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 13th Meeting of the World Savings Bank Institute Asia-Pacific Regional 
Group, Manila, 15 March 2007. 
 Distinguished  organizers  led  by  Mr.  Jose  Antonio  Olavarrieta  Arcos  of  the  World  Savings  Bank 
Institute,  WSBI  Asia  Pacific  Group  President  Mr.  Asvinvichit,  Mr.  De  Noose,  Chairman  of  the 
Management  Committee,  Undersecretary  Jun  Paul  of  the  Department  of  Finance,  guests  and 
participants to the 13th Meeting of the WSBI Asia-Pacific Regional Group, good morning and to our 
foreign guest, welcome to the Philippines!  
I must say that the decision of WSBI to hold this year’s meeting in our country is most timely indeed, 
given  the  conference  theme  “Economic  Development  and  Migration:  A  new  Challenge  for  Savings 
Banks.” I therefore congratulate the Philippine Postal Savings Bank headed by its Chairman, Justice 
Lapeña, and its President & CEO Rolando Macasaet for taking the lead in hosting this event.  
Indeed, migration and remittances are significant factors in our economy.  
According to the World Bank, the Philippines ranks fifth globally in terms of remittances received from 
its overseas workers. The World Bank report was based on 2004 figures, with India reported to have 
received $22 billion, China $21 billion, Mexico $18 billion, France $13 billion and the Philippines $10 
billion.  
Latest  available  data  from  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  indicate  that  in  2006,  remittances  of 
overseas Filipino workers coursed through banks reached a record high level of $12.8 billion. Another 
$1.2  billion  was  estimated  to  have  been  remitted  through  informal  channels.  The  total  amount  is 
equivalent  to  10.9%  of  our  Gross  Domestic  Product!  This  is  a  huge  resource  that  offers  a  lot  of 
opportunities. 
The increase is due mainly to higher deployment of Filipino workers, abroad more and more in the 
skilled and professional categories, and a more aggressive campaign to encourage a greater number 
of overseas workers to channel their remittances through our banking system.  
To our banking sector in general and savings banks in particular, remittances averaging $1 billion a 
month from our 8 million overseas Filipinos represent tremendous opportunities.  
As of Sept 2006, for instance, the country’s 85 thrift banks had total deposits of roughly $6.1 billion, up 
19.8% from the year ago level. This is about 15% of consolidated deposits of the banking sector. If our 
savings  bank  can  capture  more  deposits,  it  will  have  more  funds  for  lending,  and  have  better 
opportunities to improve its profitability.  
The  first  challenge  for  our  banks,  therefore,  is  to  find  innovative  and  more  cost-efficient  ways  to 
provide financial services as well as to expand their network and upgrade their infrastructure to reach 
an even greater number of our workers and their beneficiaries.  
Most of our workers’ remittances come from the United States, Saudi Arabia, Canada, Italy, the United 
Kingdom, Japan, the United Arab Emirates, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan. 
So far, so good. Banks and non-bank remittance companies have been heeding our challenge to have 
faster, safer and more efficient remittance delivery. In fact, the Philippines is credited to have launched 
one of the world’s first mobile phone-based remittance service.  
Specifically,  we  now  have  improved  platform  for  remittances  through  the  adoption  of  advanced 
systems  and  new  technologies  such  as  internet/on-line  banking,  phone  banking  and  through  short 
messaging.  
Furthermore,  we  now  have  enhanced  and  expanded  financial  products  and  services  including  bills 
payment  arrangements,  international  money/cash  cards,  remittance  network  expansion,  as  well  as 
new correspondent remittance agreements with host countries.  
To  promote  the  efficient  delivery  of  competitively-priced  remittance  services  by  banks  and  other 
remittance  service  providers,  the  BSP  issued  a  circular  requiring  banks  and  non-bank  financial 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 1
institutions to post the charges for their various remittance products, including classification of costs. 
This  disclosure  requirement  also  provides  the  necessary  information  for  the  worker  or  his/her 
beneficiary to make a more informed decision in bank selection. 
The  OFWs  as  bank  clients  also  benefited  from  the  improvements  in  the  country’s  payments  and 
settlement  systems,  such  as  the  full  interconnection  of  the  three  major  automated  teller  machine 
(ATM)  networks;  and  the  continuing  approval  by  the  Bangko  Sentral  of  alternative  mechanisms  for 
sending  money,  such  as  SMS-based  applications  for  remittances.  The  interconnection  of  the  three 
networks  facilitates  greater  accessibility  as  more  ATMs  can  now  serve  the  withdrawal  needs  of 
depositors.  More  importantly,  it  reduces  the  cost  of  transactions  since  it  eliminated  fees  associated 
with the use of international “switch” to connect the three networks.  
Moving forward, our goal is to have further improvements so that we will have a remittance system 
based on transparency, efficiency, security and fair prices.  
The second challenge for our banks is to help in the national effort to encourage overseas workers 
and their beneficiaries to channel a higher percentage of their money to deposits and other productive 
activities  possibly  linking  this  to  microfinance  and  small  enterprise  lending.  As  other  speakers 
mentioned earlier, there is a full range of banking services that can be offered to overseas workers 
and their families.  
In line with its ongoing advocacy programs, the Bangko Sentral is undertaking a nationwide financial 
literacy campaign to help channel remittances to development activities and to promote a culture of 
saving among OFWs and their families. The financial literacy program emphasizes the importance of 
savings  and  introduces  the  participants  to  alternative  opportunities  for  their  remittances,  such  as 
placements in financial instruments and investments in business ventures.  
In summary, the Philippine central bank’s initiatives to further improve the environment for overseas 
Filipino workers’ (OFWs) remittance flows will continue to be anchored on five principles, namely:  
1. 
enhancing  transparency  and  promoting  competition  in  the  remittance  market  to  lower 
remittance charges;  
improving the country’s payments and settlement systems to facilitate faster, safer and more 
efficient transfer of funds to beneficiaries;  
3. 
improving access to financial services;  
4. 
encouraging OFWs and their families to increase savings and investments; and  
5. 
promoting advocacy programs to cultivate financial literacy among OFWs and their families.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  BSP  recognizes  the  valuable  contribution  of  OFWs  in  expanding  the 
foreign  exchange  available  for  meeting  the  economy’s  requirements,  as  well  as  the  efforts  of 
institutions that help improve the remittance environment, including remitting banks, private remittance 
companies, and other government agencies. 
We are therefore looking forward to a fruitful exchange in this meeting of the WSBI to help us provide 
better, faster and more cost-efficient services to our overseas workers who have helped empower our 
countries to grow at a healthy rate, on a more sustained basis.  
May you have a successful conference and a happy stay in our country. Thank you all and Mabuhay!  
2. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2007
