Caleb M Fundanga: Winning with leasing 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  “Winning  with  Leasing” 
seminar, Lusaka, 21-23 February 2007. 
 • Mr Chairman 
• Chief Executives and representatives of Banks and Leasing Companies 
• Representatives of businesses organizations; 
• Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
Let me first express my sincere gratitude for being invited to officiate at this important regional Leasing 
Seminar. It is my hope that this interaction will give us a better understanding and appreciation of the 
important  contributions  that  the  Leasing  sector  has  made  and  continues  to  make  to  the  economic 
growth of this country. As the title of the seminar “Winning with Leasing” suggests, it is only by winning 
in all our efforts that we will provide meaningful contributions to the development of this country. 
Mr Chairman, before I talk about your role in the growth of the economy, allow me to first give a brief 
account of the macroeconomic developments in Zambia in the recent past. I know that many of you 
have  been  following  the  economic  developments  in  the  country.  The  economy  has  performed 
relatively well in recent years, with positive real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth and inflation as 
well as interest rates coming down. 
During the period 2001-2005, growth in real GDP averaged around 5% per annum. More recently, in 
2006, it is estimated that the economy grew by close to 6%, marking the eighth consecutive year of 
positive  real  growth  in  output.  This  positive  economic  growth  has  been  broad-based,  extending 
beyond the recovery of the mining sector and has withstood adverse shocks, such as, droughts and 
increases  in  oil  prices.  For  example  in  2006,  real  GDP  growth  was  largely  driven  by  the  mining, 
construction,  and  transport  sectors.  Other  sectors  that  registered  positive  growth  were  agriculture, 
tourism, manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade and the services sectors. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, bringing inflation down to single digits has been Government’s goal for a long 
time. Therefore, it is pleasing to note that last year inflation fell to its lowest level in 30 years. At end 
December 2006, the annual rate of inflation had fallen to 8.2 % compared to the annual target of 10% 
and the 15.9% outturn in 2005. In January 2007, it remained in single digit level of 9.8%.  
These  unprecedented  developments  in  inflation  have  been  due  to  continued  implementation  of 
prudent monetary and fiscal policies, coupled with increased food supply. 
In  line  with  lower  inflation  and  yields  on  Government  securities,  the  average  commercial  banks’ 
lending rate declined further to around 28 % in December 2006 from about 34 % in December 2005. 
In January 2007, it slightly declined to about 27 %. 
Mr Chairman,  clearly,  there  is a  need  for commercial  banks  to  do  more  to  reduce  lending  rates  in 
order to influence a substantial expansion of private sector credit. Lower lending rates will contribute to 
the reduction in the cost of doing business in Zambia. The current environment of low inflation and 
relatively stable exchange rate offer a good opportunity for lowering commercial banks lending interest 
rates. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Zambia’s  external  position  continues  to  score 
remarkable improvements as reflected in the build-up of gross international reserves to 2 months of 
import  cover  in  2006  from  1.6  months  of  import  cover  in  2005.  Furthermore,  the  preliminary 
assessment is that Zambia’s surplus trade balance increased to US $1,176.0 million in 2006 from a 
trade surplus of US $10 million in 2005. Similarly, the current account deficit as a percentage of GDP, 
excluding grants, reduced from 11.8% in 2005 to 2.3% in 2006. This improvement has been due to 
increased export receipts arising from record high copper prices and increased export volumes. 
In  addition,  the  historic  debt  relief  received  in  2006  and  the  increased  budget  support  from  our  co-
operating  partners  has  helped  to  strengthen  the  external  position.  Preliminary  information  indicates 
that  the  country’s  external  debt  position  stood  at  US  $635  million  as  at  end  of  December  2006  ,  a 
reduction of about 87% from the end-2005 debt stock of US $4.5 billion. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 1
to accelerate pro-poor economic growth; 
to reduce and stabilise inflation; and 
to sustain a viable balance of payments and external and domestic debt position. 
In  2006,  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  characterized  by  general  depreciation  of  the  Kwacha 
against  major  currencies.  In  order  to  moderate  exchange  rate  volatility  and  maintain  stability  in  the 
external value of the Kwacha, the Bank of Zambia intervened by way of purchasing and selling foreign 
exchange. 
In the banking sector, there have been no bank failures in the recent past, reflecting stability in the 
financial sector 
Mr  Chairman,  the  Government  has  shown  commitment  to  continuing  the  economic  reform 
programme. To this end, measures are being taken to ensure that the macroeconomic gains attained 
so far will be consolidated in 2007. Accordingly, Government is targeting Real GDP growth of 7.0% 
and inflation of 5.0%. Pursuit of these objectives is within the context of the long-term development 
objectives well articulated in the national long term vision, 2030. Part of this vision is enshrined in the 
Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP) from 2006-2010 whose broad macroeconomic objectives for 
the plan period are as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
At this juncture, Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to share with you my understanding of the role of 
the leasing sector in economic growth. Clearly, the remarkable economic gains that I have outlined 
above would not have been possible without the leasing sector’s contribution. Leasing companies are 
specialized  lenders  that  provide  asset-backed  finance.  The  assets  financed  by  leasing  companies 
include plant and machinery and motor vehicles. Traditionally, these assets have excluded chattels or 
personal moveable assets. 
Though the leasing sector has existed in Zambia since independence, the formal supervision of the 
leasing sector by the Bank of Zambia only began in the 1990s. It is pleasing to note that the leasing 
sector has a bright future in Zambia as evidenced by its growth. Since the liberalisation of Zambia’s 
financial  sector,  the  contribution  to  private  sector  credit  of  leasing  companies  has  increased.  In  the 
period December 2001 to December 2006, total leases increased from K67,161 million to K206,972 
million,  representing  an  average  annual  growth  rate  of  about  25.2  %.  At  the  same  time,  the 
performance  of  the  leasing  sector  was  satisfactory  as  on  average,  leasing  companies  maintained 
adequate  capital  and  reserves  relative  to  their  risk  profiles  and  the  sector  has  been  consistently 
profitable. 
Notwithstanding  this  improved  performance  of  the  leasing  sector,  I  am  aware  of  a  number  of 
constraints the financial sector in general is facing, including the low financial intermediation, limited 
access  to  financial  services  for  the  rural  population  and  low-to-middle  income  earners,  high  cost  of 
funds,  lack  of  product  diversity  and  underdeveloped  money  and  capital  markets.  To  redress  these 
impediments  to  economic  growth  and  as  an  integral  part  of  the  pro-poor  growth  strategy,  the 
Government’s objective is to enhance financial intermediation and improve access to financial services 
both in urban and rural areas. To this end, a five year Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) was 
prepared in 2004. This Plan aims at promoting the development of a financial system that is stable, 
sound and market-based to support efficient resource mobilization, which is necessary for economic 
diversification, sustainable growth and poverty reduction. Currently, the key recommendations of the 
FSDP are under implementation. 
Mr  Chairman,  learning  from  others,  some  of  the  obstacles  facing  the  leasing  companies,  include 
inability to attract funding and lack of adequate leasing expertise, can be overcome through formation 
of synergies and partnership with other industry players. I understand in the USA, for example, over 
70%  of  leases  are  actually  written  through  lease  intermediary  companies  or  brokers,  who  use  their 
specialised skills to structure lease transactions in the best way possible for the benefit of both the 
lessee  and  the  lease  underwriter.  Lease  syndications  and  funding  partnerships  with  bigger  players 
should also be encouraged as these help to spread risk and reduce pressures on balance sheets of 
individual leasing companies. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  there  is  vast  untapped  potential  of  leasing 
activities in this country. There is need to develop this line of business further. A developed leasing 
sector is characterized by a diverse range of financial services that include factoring and trade finance, 
term  lending,  corporate  finance  and  investment  advisory  services,  and  corporate  restructuring, 
treasury  management  as  well  as  traditional  leasing  activities.  But  this  is  not  the  case  in  Zambia  at 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2007
present.  Currently,  the  leasing  sector  is  restricted  primarily  to  the  traditional  leasing  activities.  This 
seminar  has  thus  come  at  the  right  time,  as  the  lessons  learnt  are  vital  to  complement  the 
Government’s efforts not only to develop the leasing sector, but the financial sector as a whole. I am 
particularly delighted that this seminar will address the need to “match products to user needs”. This is 
indeed  key  to  the  success  of  any  service  oriented  industry  and  therefore  inevitable  in  meeting  the 
needs of a growing economy such as ours. Without overemphasizing this point, I would like to implore 
you to ensure that you develop products suitable to your clients as a good and useful product is only 
one that meets the needs of the market. 
As I have already noted, on its part the Government is committed to resolving the various constraints 
identified in the country’s financial system through implemention of the FSDP and related initiatives. 
Key  among  the  strategies  includes  the  development  of  appropriate  regulations  and  improving  the 
capital adequacy base for the leasing and finance companies. Adequate capitalization of commercial 
banks and financial institutions is important if there is to be stability in the financial sector. It is for this 
reason that the Bank of Zambia, effective January 2007, increased the minimum paid-up capital for 
commercial banks from K2 billion to K12 billion. In the same vein, the start-up capital for the deposit 
taking leasing institutions was increased to K1.5 billion from K250 million. I wish to urge all leasing 
companies to make sure that they take steps to meet the required minimum capital. 
Let  me  conclude  by  paying  tribute  to  the  organisers  of  this  seminar,  Sapitwa  Finance.  Mr  Sudhir 
Amembal the principal resource person is a renowned authority in leasing, having undertaken various 
leasing consultancies and training worldwide and being an author of various leasing publications and 
books. I am very grateful that he has found time to come to Zambia and share his vast experiences 
with us. 
I  am  glad  to  note  that  this  seminar  has  brought  together  key  players  in  the  economy  and  other 
stakeholders. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 3
