Randall S Kroszner: Globalization and capital markets – implications for 
inflation and the yield curve  
Remarks by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the Center for Financial Stability (CEF), Buenos Aires, 16 May 2007.  
 I am delighted to be back in Argentina. Today I want to talk about some important macroeconomic and 
financial developments around the world. Inflation rates and interest rates are at historically low levels, 
and  yield  curves  are  relatively  flat  nearly  everywhere.  In  addition,  until  recently,  many  emerging-
market countries simply did not have yield curves because there was effectively no market for debt 
issued in the domestic currency beyond a very short term. I believe that the taming of inflation and the 
improved  credibility  of  monetary  policy  have  been  crucial  to  the  deepening  of  domestic  capital 
markets,  which  is  typically  associated  with  higher  economic  growth.  I  will  explore  some  possible 
explanations  for  these  developments,  focusing  on  the  prospects  for,  and  risks  to,  the  long-term 
inflation outlook, particularly in emerging-market economies. Before I continue, please note that the 
opinions  I  express  here  today  are  my  own  and  not  necessarily  shared  by  my  colleagues  on  the 
Federal Open Market Committee.1  
In  brief,  I  argue  that  globalization,  deregulation,  and  financial  innovation,  in  part  spurred  by  the 
experiences of high inflation in the 1980s, have fostered currency competition that has led to improved 
central bank performance and, hence, the recent reduction of worldwide inflation. Writing in the 1970s, 
Friedrich  Hayek  advocated  greater  competition  among  currencies,  arguing  that  it  would  produce  a 
race to the top rather than a race to the bottom.2 In practice, regardless of what one might think of 
Hayek's policy  proposals,  we  have seen  increased  competition  among currencies  issued  by  central 
banks owing to technological change in a globalized and competitive marketplace.  
The  increased  competition  among  currencies  has  changed  the  ability  and  the  incentives  of 
governments  and  central  banks  to  pursue  high-inflation  policies.  Such  changes  have  allowed 
improvements in central bank governance and credibility, thereby leading to better inflation outcomes, 
especially  in  many  emerging-market  economies.  In  addition,  greater  central  bank  credibility  has 
allowed  the  development  of  long-term  bond  markets  in  many  countries  and  flattened  yield  curves 
around the globe as concerns about future inflation risks have declined. Deeper bond markets with a 
wider  range  of  available  maturities  encourage  long-term  planning  and  investment  and  thus  convey 
lasting  gains,  particularly  in  emerging  markets.  The  important  issue  is  whether  the  reduction  of 
worldwide inflation will persist or be a temporary phenomenon. 
The worldwide decline in inflation 
From  the  1950s  until  the  late  1960s,  inflation  rates  were  relatively  contained,  and  episodes  of  high 
inflation  were  rare.  Then,  especially  following  the  early-1970s  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  fixed-
exchange-rate system, inflation became a worldwide phenomenon. Even in Germany, which had the 
most stable prices of any country in the world, inflation eroded purchasing power by more than half 
between 1972 and the launch of the euro, in 1999. In terms of cumulative inflation, $480 would be 
required today in the United States to purchase $100 worth of goods and services at 1972 prices. For 
most countries reporting data to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), cumulative inflation has been 
even higher than that experienced in the United States. Here in Argentina, the price level is now about 
177 billion times higher than it was in 1972. But Brazil takes the prize for greatest inflation of the post-
                                                      
1   Joseph E. Gagnon, of the Board's Division of International Finance, contributed to this speech, portions of which draw on 
Randall S. Kroszner (2006), "The Conquest of Worldwide Inflation: Currency Competition and Its Implications for Interest 
Rates and the Yield Curve," speech delivered at the Cato Institute Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, November 16, 
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20061116. 
2   Friederich A. von Hayek (1976), Denationalisation of Money: The Argument Refined: An Analysis of the Theory and Practice 
of Concurrent Currencies (London: Institute of Economic Affairs). 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 1
World War II era: The price level in Brazil is approximately 500 billion times higher today than it was in 
1972.3  
Since the early 1990s, however, worldwide inflation has significantly declined. Indeed, the April 2006 
issue of the IMF's World Economic Outlook shows that, on average, inflation rates in the advanced 
economies as well as in the developing countries in recent years have been at their lowest levels since 
at least the early 1970s. The April 2007 issue forecasts inflation in both regions to remain near these 
recent lows through 2008.  
But is this lower inflation regime likely to persist? One way to approach this issue is to investigate what 
market participants think by examining measures of expected inflation. Overall, these surveys suggest 
that  market  participants  do  expect  relatively  low  inflation  to  continue  in  most  major  industrial  and 
emerging-market countries. In the industrial countries and a few Asian emerging-market economies, 
for example, long-term inflation expectations dropped below 5 percent a decade or more ago and are 
currently around 2 percent to 3 percent.4 In Brazil and Mexico, long-term inflation expectations have 
declined from a range of 7 percent to 10 percent a decade ago to a fairly steady 3 percent to 4 percent 
in recent years. In Argentina, long-term inflation expectations are around 7 percent.  
In addition, the risks of high inflation appear to have decreased as well. In particular, the volatility of 
inflation  has  declined  notably,  especially  in  many  emerging-  market  countries.5  On  occasion  in  the 
early  to  middle  1990s,  the  standard  deviation  of  inflation  exceeded  30  percent  in  Mexico  and  100 
percent in Argentina and Brazil. In the current decade, however, the standard deviation of inflation has 
been relatively stable in Brazil, at around 5 percent, and it has been declining in Mexico, where it is 
now around 2 percent. In Argentina, inflation volatility is currently around 15 percent. 
Factors behind the taming of worldwide inflation 
My  brief  review  of  worldwide  inflation  performance  suggests  that  in  general,  over  the  past  decade, 
inflation  has  become  substantially  lower  and  less  volatile,  and  expectations  of  future  inflation  have 
also  become  substantially  lower.  In  understanding  the  key  factors  behind  this  change,  we  can  also 
shed further light on the question of whether this low-inflation regime will persist. 
In a nutshell, I believe that the factors of globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation, arising 
partly in response to episodes of high inflation, have effectively eroded the central bank monopoly on 
the provision of monetary services and have enhanced global competition among currencies. These 
changes  have,  in  turn,  altered  the  incentives  for  central  banks  to  behave  badly  and  for  finance 
ministries to use central banks as "piggy banks" to finance their fiscal policies. The resulting constraint 
on monetary policy, combined with increased public understanding of the costs of inflation, have led to 
institutional  changes  in  central  bank  governance  that  bolster  their  credibility  for  maintaining  price 
stability in the future. Thus, improved central bank performance and credibility are the consequences 
of this combination of factors. 
To develop this explanation in more detail, I will start by describing how globalization, deregulation, 
and innovation can alter the ability and incentives of a government to pursue a high-inflation policy.6 
These  factors  are  closely  related  and  mutually  reinforcing  in  many  respects.  Many  countries  have 
                                                      
3   Data for Germany based on 1972-88 changes in consumer prices, and data for the United States, Argentina, and Brazil 
based on 1972-2006 changes; IMF (various years), International Financial Statistics (Washington: IMF). 
4   Long-term forecasts refer to forecasts six to ten years ahead from the April and October surveys of Consensus Economics, 
www.consensuseconomics.com. 
5   Volatility is defined as the twenty-quarter rolling standard deviation of annualized inflation. 
6   This section draws on aspects of Randall S. Kroszner (2003), "Currency Competition in the Digital Age," in David E. Altig 
and Bruce D. Smith, eds., Evolution and Procedures in Central Banking (New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 275-
99; and Randall S. Kroszner (2006), "Why Are Yield Curves So Flat and Long Rates So Low Globally?" speech delivered at 
the Institute of International Bankers, New York, June 16, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060615. 
Kenneth Rogoff has proposed another effect of globalization on inflation. According to Rogoff, greater competition leads not 
only to lower but also to more-flexible prices. When prices are more flexible, a central bank's ability to temporarily influence 
output is diminished, and its influence on inflation is enhanced. Thus, more-competitive markets naturally help central banks 
achieve  price  stabilization.  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  (2003),  "Globalization  and  Global  Disinflation  (237  KB  PDF),"  in  Monetary 
Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City, Jackson Hole, Wyo. (Kansas City: the Reserve Bank), pp. 77-112. 
 2 
 BIS Review 50/2007
turned  increasingly  to  private  markets  and  trade  to  deliver  growth  and  progress.  The  resulting 
deregulation  and  greater  openness  has  boosted  innovation  and  has  helped  increase  global 
competition,  or  globalization,  by  shrinking  the  barriers  of  time  and  distance.  Accordingly,  trade  and 
financial linkages between countries have soared to record levels in recent years. 
How does this affect inflation? When governments resort to printing money to finance their spending, 
inflation rises and nominal assets lose their value. This loss of value is also known as the inflation tax. 
Globalization,  deregulation,  and  innovation  make  it  easier  for  citizens  to  move  their  wealth  out  of 
nominal assets in the domestic currency should their government resort to an inflation tax. When the 
tax  base  shrinks  in  response  to  inflation,  governments  have  a  reduced  incentive  to  resort  to  the 
inflation tax.  
The specific channels by which globalization, deregulation, and financial innovation affect competition 
among  currencies  are  many.  Increased  circulation  of  banknotes  in  dollars  or  other  hard  currencies 
enable citizens to conduct transactions and store liquid wealth without holding inflationary currency. 
The  fraction  of  U.S.  currency  estimated  to  be  held  in  foreign  countries  rose  dramatically  over  the 
1980s and 1990s, from less than 20 percent to about 60 percent, and it has remained near this high 
level even as inflation rates have come down globally.  
Substantial financial innovations – including advances in electronic payment and trading systems as 
well  as  more  widespread  credit  card  networks  and  increased  use  of  mutual  funds  –  have  enabled 
consumers, investors, and banks to shift wealth cheaply and quickly away from currencies and assets 
subject to inflation and related risks.  
Given  the  stronger  competition  among  currencies,  a  government  that  pressures  a  central  bank  to 
pursue an inflationary policy gets much less benefit from increased inflation because people can more 
rapidly and conveniently switch out of the domestic currency. Indeed, the website of the Central Bank 
of Brazil explicitly acknowledges the role of inflation in driving financial innovations that enabled firms 
and households to economize on cash balances in that country. It states that, "Prior to the mid-1990s 
[when inflation was stabilized], changes in the payment system in Brazil were motivated by the need to 
cope with high inflation rates. During that time, the system achieved significant technological progress, 
especially aimed at enhancing the speed of processing financial transactions."7  
In  addition  to  encouraging  financial  innovation,  the  painful  experience  of  high  inflation  helped  to 
educate  the  public  and  economists  about  the  costs  of  inflation.8  Although  the  specific  experiences 
differed  across  countries,  public  opinion  almost  everywhere  eventually  reinforced  the  trend  against 
inflationary policies. Economists and central bankers also devoted great attention to understanding the 
causes  and  consequences  of  inflation,  providing  the  intellectual  underpinning  to  policies  oriented 
toward price stability.  
The fundamental forces I have described today – globalization, deregulation, financial innovation, and 
public  understanding  about  the  costs  of  inflation  –  provided  the  impetus  for  fighting  inflation  and 
opened  the  path  for  policies  that  enhance  central  bank  credibility.  As  the  benefits  of  stable  prices 
accrue  and  as  financial  markets  deepen  and  become  more  sophisticated,  the  benefits  of  sound 
economic  policies  will  help  create  support  for  institutional  reforms  that  make  returning  to  inflation 
harder – albeit not impossible – for future governments. 
Implications of low inflation for bond markets 
What are the implications of low inflation and low inflation volatility for interest rates and yield curves? I 
believe that market confidence in continued low inflation has helped drive down the slope of the yield 
curve around the world by reducing the premium demanded for holding long-term nominal assets. The 
taming of inflation also has extended bond maturities and yield curves further into the future than ever 
before, most notably in many emerging-market countries. 
                                                      
7 
 www.bcb.gov.br/?PAYSYSREFORM  
8   This hypothesis was raised in the discussion of Rogoff, "Globalization and Global Disinflation (237 KB PDF)," pp. 119-30. 
Evidence that voters in Latin America in recent years have punished politicians for bad inflation outcomes is in Eduardo Lora 
and Mauricio Oliveira (2005), "The Electoral Consequences of the Washington Consensus," Economia, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 
1-61. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 3
The current low level of long-term yields in the United States and other advanced economies is widely 
acknowledged as somewhat of a puzzle, or, as some have called it, a conundrum.9 Of course, flat and 
even inverted yield curves in advanced economies are nothing new – we know that the short end of 
the yield curve is dominated by monetary policy and cyclical factors.  
To  abstract  from  the  potential  effect  of  cyclical  factors  on  the  yield  curve,  consider  the  pattern  of 
forward rates many years into the future, at which point the effects of current cyclical shocks would be 
expected  to  have  dissipated.  The  yield  on  a  ten-year  bond,  for  instance,  can  be  thought  of  as  an 
average of a series of consecutive forward rates. If you could borrow and lend at the same rate as the 
U.S.  Treasury,  then  you  could  lock  in  a  three-month  loan  ten  years  from  now  by  borrowing  for  ten 
years and three months and simultaneously lending the same principal for ten years. The difference 
between  the  interest  you  pay  and  the  interest  you  earn  on  this  transaction  determines  the  implied 
forward  rate  ten  years  from  today.  The  forward  rate  reflects  not  only  the  market  expectation  of  the 
future short-term interest rate but also a "term premium" to compensate for the risk of a commitment to 
extend credit so far in the future, including the risk of future inflation.  
At any point in time, then, we can calculate the short-term forward rate ten years ahead using the yield 
curve of U.S. Treasury coupon securities. This "far forward" rate has hovered around 4-1/2 percent to 
5 percent over the past two years, a level about 2 percentage points below its average since 1990. 
Far-forward  rates  in  other  advanced  economies  have  also  declined  over  the  past  decade  and  are 
currently at or near historic lows.10  
To  some  extent,  low  forward  rates  may  reflect  a  persistent  decline  in  expected  future  real  rates  of 
interest  or  in  the  real  term  premium. Chairman  Bernanke has suggested  that  an  excess of  ex  ante 
global saving relative to global investment has held down real interest rates around the world.11 Some 
of the factors behind this excess of saving over investment include the surge in revenues of oil and 
commodity  exporters,  a  retreat  in  Asian  investment  demand  from  the  boom  that  preceded  the  late 
1990s, and a reduction in fiscal deficits in some Latin American countries. But these low bond yields 
also have a nominal aspect. The declines in inflation rates, in the volatility of inflation, and in long-term 
inflation expectations all point to a reduction in the compensation required by investors for the effects 
of future inflation on the returns to holding long-term bonds. 
This development is particularly remarkable in many emerging-market countries, in which longer-dated 
fixed-coupon bonds issued in domestic currencies had ceased to exist during the inflationary 1970s 
and 1980s. The recent lengthening of maturities of domestic-currency debt has, in many cases, not 
only  extended  the  yield  curve  but  –  and  this  is  one  of  the  key  results  of  the  taming  of  inflation  – 
effectively created a domestic-currency yield curve that previously did not exist. 
Since 2000, ten-year nominal fixed-coupon bonds in the domestic currency have been introduced in 
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, and Russia. Korea and Thailand introduced ten-year fixed-
coupon bonds in their respective currencies in the 1990s. Last year the government of Mexico issued 
a thirty-year fixed-coupon bond in pesos for the first time. The proportion of domestic-currency debt in 
Mexico maturing within one year was nearly 90 percent in 2002 and is now less than 75 percent.12 
The Korean government continues to increase the proportion of its domestic-currency debt in longer 
maturities,  with  the  one-year-and-under  segment  falling  from  roughly  one-half  in  1999  to  less  than 
one-fifth  by  the  end  of  last  year.  Moreover,  maturity  extension  is  not  limited  to  emerging-market 
countries. France and the United Kingdom, for example, issued fifty-year bonds in 2005. 
Besides  the  fact  that  yield  curves  have  been  extended  in  many  countries,  they  have  also  been 
relatively low and flat worldwide, at least in part because of the decline in inflation. The flattening or 
slight inversion of yield curves in the major industrial economies, such as the United States, Japan, the 
euro area, the United Kingdom, and Canada is well known. For example, ten-year yields in the euro 
                                                      
9   Alan Greenspan (2005), statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 
16, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2005/february/testimony.htm. 
10   Although far-forward rates in yen are up about 1 percentage point from the historical lows associated with the Japanese 
deflation scares of 1998 and 2003, they are obviously still low in historical context. 
11   Ben S. Bernanke (2005), "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," Sandridge Lecture at the Virginia 
Association of Economics, March 10, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102. 
12   I have included floating-rate debt in the one-year maturity category. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2007
area  are  less  than  25  basis  points  higher  than  three-month  yields,  and  the  yield  curve  is  currently 
downward sloping in the United Kingdom.  
At  the  same  time  that  maturities  have  been  extended,  bond  yields  in  the  domestic  currencies  of 
emerging-market countries have also declined. It is perhaps not surprising that, given the high rates of 
saving and generally high level of development in their economies, the governments of Hong Kong 
and Korea can borrow at levels close to those in the advanced economies. More notable, however, is 
that  the  Mexican  government  can  borrow  in  pesos  at  a  thirty-year  maturity  at  roughly  8  percent. 
Although Mexico is perhaps the most striking example, it is not alone. Other middle-income emerging-
market countries with single-digit yields on fixed-rate ten-year bonds in the domestic currency include 
Chile, Colombia, Malaysia, Russia, South Africa, and Thailand, to name but a few. The computation of 
forward rates for most of these countries is difficult because of the relative sparseness of the maturity 
distribution, but for those countries in which five-year forward rates can be computed, they have been 
declining and have reached very low levels in the past year or so. 
Overall,  the  combination  of  lower  and  less  volatile  inflation  worldwide  has  reduced  inflation 
expectations  and  perceived  inflation  risk  and  resulted  in  a  lower  premium  in  long  rates  for  inflation 
uncertainty. I believe that these factors have been key contributors to the lower long-term yields and 
the flattening of yield curves, particularly in emerging markets. The establishment of markets for long-
term nominal government and corporate debt in countries in which they did not exist a decade ago is 
powerful evidence of the faith that investors place in a future environment of price stability. 
Broader economic benefits 
The  economic  benefits  of  price  stability  are  too  numerous  and  well  known  for  me  to  cover  here  in 
detail. Long-run price stability certainly is essential for achieving maximum employment. However, I 
would  like  to  underscore  some  often-overlooked  benefits  related  to  the  development  of  markets  for 
long-term bonds.  
Price stability boosts growth by deepening financial markets. Given stable prices, savers and investors 
have more confidence about the ultimate value of their investments and are more willing to enter long-
term  financial  contracts.  A  number of  studies have concluded  that  the  development  of banking and 
financial  markets  is  a  key  driver  of  economic  growth.  Thus,  greater  central  bank  credibility,  which 
permits  more  development  of  local  financial  markets,  can  have  an  economic  benefit  beyond  the 
financial sector.13  
The increasing issuance of local-currency bonds is leading to an improved distribution of risk. When 
emerging-market  countries  borrowed  mostly  in  dollars  or  other  foreign  currency,  they  bore  the 
exchange rate risk while lenders bore default risk. This was a key reason why currency crises of the 
past  few  decades  were  so  costly:  Sharp  depreciations  of  the  exchange  rate  boosted  the  domestic-
currency value of foreign debt and wreaked havoc with government finances and corporate balance 
sheets. With reduced reliance on foreign-currency borrowing, emerging-market economies should be 
able to weather future storms with less disruption than in the past. 
The development of long-term domestic-currency bond markets is one of the factors that help lower 
the  costs  of  long-term  planning  and  enhance  the  ability  to  undertake  long-term  investments  In 
particular, investment decisions are less likely to be constrained by having only short-term financing 
available for longer-term projects, thereby allowing improved decisionmaking for governments, firms, 
and individuals. These improvements enhance the prospects of economic development.  
Higher and more-stable growth combined with a better ability to undertake long-term plans can also 
improve the fiscal outlook for a country. A better fiscal outlook, in turn, increases confidence, facilitates 
financial market development, and thus further boosts growth. And, in a virtuous cycle, it reinforces 
prospects for continued price stability. More-prudent fiscal policies, including lower deficits, longer debt 
maturities,  and  reduced  foreign-currency  debt  can  reduce  the  likelihood  and  potential  severity  of 
financial  crises.  These  policies  make  the  financial  positions  of  emerging-market  governments  less 
                                                      
13   Refer to Ross Levine (2005), "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence," in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., 
Handbook of Economic Growth (New York: Elsevier); and Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Regulation 
and  Deregulation  of  the  U.S.  Banking  Industry:  Causes,  Consequences,  and  Implications  for  the  Future,"  unpublished 
paper. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 5
vulnerable to movements in interest rates and exchange rates. A reduction in the perceived risk that a 
government may not be able to service its debts makes changes in investor sentiment and financial 
contagion less likely, thereby reducing financial market volatility.  
Maintaining progress 
I  have  argued  that  globalization,  deregulation,  and  financial  innovation,  in  part  spurred  by  recent 
experiences of high inflation, have fostered currency competition that has led to improved central bank 
performance and, hence, the reduction of inflation worldwide. The resulting enhancement of central 
bank  governance  and  credibility  has  allowed  the  development  of  long-term  bond  markets  in  many 
countries and the flattening of yield curves around the globe.  
I  want  to  conclude  by  returning  to  the  question  of  whether  these  phenomena  are  likely  to  persist. 
Globalization  and  innovation  are  genies  that  may  prove  difficult  to  put  back  in  their  bottles. 
Nonetheless,  although  I  am  an  optimist,  I  would  be  remiss  if  I  did  not  point  out  some  risks.  In 
particular,  deregulation  and  global  competition  may  be  subject  to  change.  The  difficulty  of  reaching 
agreement in the Doha Round of trade negotiations highlights the risk of renewed protectionism and 
backtracking  on  deregulation.  Trade  barriers  and  regulations  are  anathema  to  globalization  and 
competition. Barriers to the free flow of goods, services, capital, and technology would also diminish 
the force of innovation that has been so beneficial in the struggle against inflation. Transaction taxes 
and  administrative  barriers  may  hinder  the  development  and  liquidity  of  bond  markets,  and  much 
progress that is still required in many emerging-market countries on these fronts. 
High  inflation  can  destroy  an  economy  and  result  in  enormous  hardship  for  everyone  involved,  as 
Argentina painfully experienced not long ago. The benefits achieved through more-stable prices are 
substantial. Fortunately, economic forces have led to better central bank behavior around the world 
during the past decade. If citizens and politicians lose sight of these benefits, and the forces that have 
led to enhanced currency competition are thwarted, these gains could prove fleeting. I believe that we 
must  continue  to  work  hard  to  lock  in  the  gains  achieved  so  far.  The  lessons  of  the  high-  inflation 
episodes are too important to forget.  
6 
 BIS Review 50/2007
