Jean-Pierre Roth: “A franc remains a franc” – 100 years of National Bank policy 
in support of monetary stability 
Address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the official ceremony 
of the 100th anniversary of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 22 June 2007. 
 Honoured President of the Swiss Confederation 
Honoured Prime Minister of the Principality of Liechtenstein 
Honoured members of the federal parliament 
Honoured representatives of the cantonal governments 
Honoured governors of fellow central banks 
Honoured guests 
Almost  to  the  day  100  years  ago,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  opened  its  doors at  the  head  offices  in 
Berne  and  Zurich  and  the  branch  offices  in  Basel,  Geneva  and  St  Gallen.  This  marked  the  end  of 
around 16 years of parliamentary work that had followed the acceptance, in 1891, of a constitutional 
article leading to the establishment of a central note-issuing institution for the whole of Switzerland. 
This prolonged process can definitely be explained by the fact that our countrymen, at the end of the 
19th century, did not see any urgent need for the establishment of a central bank. In fact, the political 
debates prior to 1907 mainly focused on questions relating to the organisation of the bank and the 
distribution of its profits; the regulatory role that the new institution was to assume was hardly touched 
upon. The new National Bank was expected to gradually take over the activities of the former note-
issuing institutions and to bring some welcome order to the payment system. At the time, the value of 
the  Swiss  franc  was  defined  in  gold  and  silver,  the  precious  metal  content  of  the  coins  was  fixed 
accordingly and banknotes could be exchanged for gold. 
Nowadays,  the  SNB’s  responsibility  in  matters  of  monetary  stability  is  uncontested.  In  fact,  it  is 
explicitly  mandated  by  law  to  preserve  price  stability  while  taking  economic  developments  into 
account. Moreover, economic theory stresses the special responsibility of central banks in this area. 
The  goals,  methods  and  instruments  of  monetary  policy  have  thus  undergone  profound  changes. 
Nevertheless, the principles that have guided our activity over the past century have been remarkably 
enduring, and this is exemplified by the history of the National Bank. 
Pursuit of stability 
From  the  outset,  the  National  Bank  recognised  that  its  role  as  the  national  note-issuing  institution 
would extend far beyond the harmonisation of payment systems. 
The  first  steps  were  difficult.  During  the  First  World  War,  the  SNB  actively  participated  in  financing 
military expenditures through its loans. This undisciplined lending policy pushed up inflation, thereby 
contributing to the social unrest of 1918. This sparked a broad debate on the SNB’s responsibility for 
the massive price rise. These events, along with the subsequent tragedy of German hyperinflation, left 
a strong mark on the National Bank. It must have been at that time that the SNB fully realised the 
complexity of its task. In particular, it recognised how important it was to preserve the country’s good 
monetary health – and this was long before the law made price stability a priority goal within the SNB’s 
policy. 
Since  then,  and  even  during  the  most  turbulent  phases  of  the  20th  century,  the  determination  to 
ensure  monetary  stability  has  emerged  as  a  guiding  principle  for  the  National  Bank’s  activity.  In  its 
quest for stability, the SNB strove to apply the rules of the gold standard consistently, accepting the 
Federal Council’s decision to devalue the Swiss franc in 1936 reluctantly, as a trial imposed upon it 
from outside. Also, when Switzerland found itself isolated in the Second World War, the SNB tried to 
avoid  repeating  the  mistakes  made  during  the  First  World  War  so  as  not  to  further  aggravate  an 
already  difficult  situation  through  monetary  instability.  Preserving  domestic  stability  and  maintaining 
the country’s ability to meet international payments were thus accorded priority. After the War, the new 
order  established  at  the  Bretton  Woods  conference  was  intended  to  ensure  international  monetary 
stability.  However,  this  goal  was  not  achieved.  In  Switzerland,  the  disequilibrium  in  the  balance  of 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
payments became even more exaggerated, and the fight against inflation called for the joint efforts of 
the Federal Council and the National Bank. In 1973, the National Bank decided to stop intervening on 
the  foreign  exchange  market  and  to  float  the  Swiss  franc.  This  measure  was  also  designed  to 
safeguard  monetary  stability,  which  was  jeopardised  by  the  massive  inflow  of  speculative  funds. 
Maintaining the internal balance in a highly unstable international environment was the main focus of 
the  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  years  that  followed.  In  Switzerland,  price  stability  has  been 
ensured since 1994, but it was only ten years later that it was also made a statutory goal of our policy. 
Central bank autonomy 
This constant pursuit of monetary stability would not have been possible if the National Bank had not 
been able to act independently – an essential advantage – since the day it was founded. 
The principle of central bank autonomy is widely recognised nowadays. Price stability can be better 
ensured if the institution responsible for conducting monetary policy has a clear mandate and can act 
independently of third-party instructions. This realisation has led to many central banks being granted 
independence during the last 20 years. 
In Switzerland, the debate on the status of the future National Bank took place at the end of the 19th 
century. In 1897, a project for the establishment of a state bank located in Berne and placed under the 
direct control of the Federal Department of Finance was adopted by parliament, but the proponents of 
an independent note-issuing bank to be domiciled in Zurich launched a referendum, and the law was 
rejected in a popular vote. As a compromise, the legal status of the new central bank was situated 
somewhere between that of a public and a private sector institution and it was given two head offices, 
one in Berne and one in Zurich. From the beginning, it thus occupied a special place in Switzerland’s 
political landscape. 
This  special  status  has  hardly  changed  over  the  years.  In  the  1930s,  when  devaluations  and  the 
abandonment of the gold standard often resulted in tighter government controls over central banks, 
the  National  Bank  Act  remained  unchanged.  Likewise,  at  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War,  when 
many  central  banks  were  nationalised,  the  SNB  remained  a  stock  company  open  to  private 
shareholders, and it has maintained this status to this day. Since 1973, following the abolition of fixed 
exchange  rates  and  the  introduction  of  an  autonomous  monetary  policy,  the  circumstances  under 
which this principle of independence is implemented have changed progressively. A growing need for 
transparency vis-à-vis the public and the authorities has emerged. This is why we have developed a 
strategy of active communication, and our relationship with the federal authorities has been gradually 
institutionalised.  Nowadays,  transparency  and  accountability  have  become  principles  of  good 
governance for all independent central banks. In Switzerland, the revised National Bank Act of 2004 
obliges  the  SNB  to  present  an  annual  accountability  report  on  the  execution  of  its  mandate  to 
parliament. 
Application of rules 
Independence  is  not  merely  a  theoretical  concept,  it  must  be  lived  constantly.  Very  early  on,  the 
National Bank realised that it could defend its autonomy and strengthen confidence in the Swiss franc 
by adopting rules of conduct. From the start, it strove to adhere to the rules of the gold standard and 
maintained this policy until the system of fixed exchange rates collapsed in 1973. With the Swiss franc 
losing its traditional anchor, the SNB was forced to adopt new rules. This was achieved 18 months 
later with the publication of annual growth targets for the money supply, a strategy which was pursued 
until  1999.  Since  2000,  our  interest  rate  decisions  have  been  based  on  our  medium-term  inflation 
forecast  and  our  definition  of  price  stability,  which  we  consider  achieved  if  annual  inflation  remains 
below 2%. 
The second constant in the National Bank’s activity over the past 100 years has been its adherence to 
the rules of monetary discipline. This strategy has allowed us, as it did our predecessors, to conduct a 
coherent monetary policy over all these years while shielding our institution from all kinds of demands, 
both economic and political. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
Willingness to adapt 
Given the strong disruptions in the international environment in the past 100 years, pursuing a policy 
of stability and applying the rules of monetary discipline has not been an easy undertaking. Let us not 
forget  the  obstacles  we  encountered  in  adhering  to  the  rules  of  the  gold  standard  and  the  fixed 
exchange rate system in times of war or during major international upheavals. Let us also remember 
the difficulties that money supply targeting caused in the context of financial market deregulation in the 
past  20  years.  Quite  often,  the  implementation  of  our  policy  was  undermined  by  a  highly  unstable 
international environment. The ability to adapt, therefore, became crucial. 
Our  predecessors  demonstrated  this  willingness  to  adapt  to  new  developments  time  and  again,  for 
example, when Switzerland had to be reintegrated in the international system of payments in the post-
war period, in the fight against speculative capital inflows in the 1960s, in managing the volatility of the 
Swiss franc in the 1970s or curbing inflation in the late 1980s. Apparent in all these phases were the 
same determination to ensure monetary stability, the same commitment to apply rules and the same 
necessity of having to take an often hostile environment into account. The direction was always clear, 
but many obstacles had to be overcome along the way. 
We  are  celebrating  the  100th  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  in  quite 
exceptional  circumstances.  Indeed,  Switzerland  enjoys  great  prosperity:  We  are  close  to  full 
employment, price stability has been maintained for almost 13 years, and the economic prospects are 
favourable in almost all respects. 
This  enviable  situation  could  not  have  been  achieved  without  our  economy  striving  for  greater 
efficiency  or  without  its  ability  to  take  on  new  challenges  and  make  the  most  of  the  international 
environment. All this has not been easy, neither for the companies nor for the employees. 
The good economic situation can also be attributed to the country’s sound financial health. National 
savings are high, the external accounts are solid, and public finances are on the way to recovery. 
The National Bank has contributed to this success by ensuring confidence in the Swiss franc – a key 
factor for the smooth functioning of the economy. As I have pointed out, this commitment is not new, 
but has been a constant throughout our history. As our predecessors, we are honouring it by following 
rules that are as clear as possible, while knowing that the uncertain environment in which we operate 
requires the ability to adapt. 
Mistakes  have  certainly  been  made  in  the  100  years  of  the  National  Bank’s  existence.  It  must  be 
acknowledged, in retrospect, that certain situations were not analysed correctly, that certain decisions 
were taken too late or were simply inadequate. In some instances, the SNB opted for strictly following 
the rules rather than searching for solutions that would have been better suited to the realities of the 
moment. 
Nevertheless,  the  outcome  has  been  positive  overall.  Switzerland  has  been  spared  the  monetary 
problems that afflicted so many other countries. However, the purchasing power of the Swiss franc 
has  not  been  preserved  as  successfully  as  one  might  have  wished.  The  general  price  level  has 
increased by an average of 2.5% a year since 1907, although this is still only half a percentage point 
above the range we now equate with price stability. 
Our currency was created in 1850, and the coins of that time were in circulation in 1907, when the 
National Bank started operations. We still use these coins today for our day-to-day payments. This is 
tangible proof of our country’s monetary stability. 
“A franc remains a franc,” declared the President of the Swiss Confederation in a radio address one 
day after the 1936 devaluation, in an endeavour to reassure the Swiss people about the abolition of 
the gold standard. I am pleased to be able to say today – 100 years after the National Bank started 
business – that a franc has indeed remained a franc. 
All this could not have been achieved if our policy did not enjoy broad support in our country. I would 
therefore  like  to  conclude  by  expressing  sincere  thanks;  first  of  all  to  the  federal  and  cantonal 
authorities for the support that they have given us, particularly in difficult times when we had to make 
unpopular  decisions  for  the  sake  of  monetary  stability.  Second,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  business 
community for its understanding of our policy, even at times when we assessed the situation differently 
or  when  monetary  constraints  necessitated  painful  adjustments.  And,  finally,  my  thanks  go  to  the 
Swiss  people  for  their  unwavering  confidence  in  our  institution  and  their  support  for  our  monetary 
autonomy over the last 100 years. 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 3
May the National Bank continue to enjoy such broad support! Through its actions, it will continue to 
uphold the trust which has been placed in it thus far. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2007
