Ardian Fullani: Regional cooperation in South East Europe 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the conference organised 
by the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo, 13-14 September 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  and  engage  in  this  discussion  on  strengthening  regional 
cooperation. This meeting in Bosnia builds upon other important activities in which we have 
come  together  to  discuss  similar  issues.  It  is  one  thing  to  organize  one  activity  where  the 
governors of all central banks come together to share their views and agree upon importance 
of regional cooperation, but it is completely another thing to have them to bind themselves to 
continue the institutional dialogue. Today, we present another proof of such commitment and 
show that regional cooperation in SEE is not a slogan but a real process with real results and 
products.  
Why cooperation? 
II.  
In general the nature and the character of any form of cooperation is shaped by the most 
important  problems  that  central  banks  deal  with.  Therefore  the  stage  of  economic 
development,  and  economic  and  social  challenges  faced  by  our  economies  are  bound  to 
play an important role in this cooperation.  
Common challenges 
a.  
While the overall region seems to experience macroeconomic stability, issues that the central 
banks  face  today  in  their  respective  jurisdictions  with  their  main  partners  bear  striking 
resemblance. Most importantly we share the same partners. We have all accepted the same 
challenges and set similar priorities which converge to the same objectives. Dealing with a 
much  faster  globalization  of  financial  sector  than  the  rest  of  the  economy,  guarding 
macroeconomic and financial stability in face while this is happening, and the challenge of 
European  integration  define  similar problems  across  the  region.  Structural  reforms  I  would 
consider as the main future challenge. Building a stable financial system, enhancing financial 
infrastructure,  improving  financial  markets,  deepening  and  broadening  through  innovative 
initiatives provides fundamental ground for such cooperation. 
The  memories  of  the  latest  episodes  that  have  trembled  financial  markets  in  the  western 
hemisphere,  and  the  architecture  of  the  financial  system  that  is  developing  in  our  region 
(meaning the same banks becoming major players in each country) should make us aware of 
the potential risks. They indicate that each financial market remains highly exposed toward 
negative phenomenon that could develop in any of the region’s economies.  
Common destination 
b.  
In  this  respect,  I  see  enormous  possibility  for  cooperation  and  policy  coordination  in  the 
direction  of  information  sharing,  institution  building,  modification  of  the  legal  infrastructure 
and lobbying in European structures. Facing these problems in group rather than separately 
will allow to benefit and embrace the positive effects of “economies of scale”. I also invite the 
ECB  and  EC  to  explore  the  possibility  of  adopting  a  “party”  treatment  for  the  entire  SEE 
region, by adopting a specific program for a specific group of countries.  
The process of mergers and acquisitions has incorporated financial system of the region into 
the  bigger  European  market.  This  market  driven,  business  initiative  of  the  financial 
community, calls for institutional integration as well. Bringing central banks of the region into 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 1
the  appropriate  European  structures  has  the  potential  to  minimize  the  probability  of 
dangerous drifting apart into worthless initiatives and create positive energy.  
I  encourage  foreign  partners  as  well  as  donor  agencies  to  adopt  the  same  logic  of 
coordination in the process of the compilation and implementation of technical assistance in 
areas of integration, institutional building, and financial stability process. This approach and 
will benefit the region in several ways but most importantly it will avoid major economic and 
social disparities between our economies, which in the long run have the potential to develop 
into serious threats to stability. 
On the other hand, several differences emerge in certain areas of developments. Yet, this 
provides further room for cooperation. It is a fact that our economies have adopted diverse 
approaches  toward  establishing  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  We  are  at  different 
stages of integration. It is probably due to these diverse characteristics that contagion has 
not been a prevailing phenomenon in SEE region. Along the path of transition our economies 
have encountered distinct problems in different moments. Just to point out a few examples:  
• 
Credit has penetrated deep in the culture of some economies in the region while it 
still remains a fast growing new phenomenon in a few others;  
Some of us have experienced high capital inflows while the others expect to have in 
the future; 
Some pegged their currencies to Euro; the others have not. 
• 
For the rest of the region it is very important to know what triggered such different choices. 
How did authorities respond to such problems, what to expect, how to react? Due to these 
different  paths  that  we  have  taken  and  nature  of  the  problems  that  each  economy  has 
encountered, we are positioned in different parts of the learning curve. There is a great deal 
of learning by doing experience we have accumulated during this period of existence, and I 
believe that this knowledge must be shared. 
 Common achievements 
c. 
We have succeeded to establish a network of communication with all central banks in the 
region among governors. I have noticed that they have always expressed their enthusiasm to 
intensify regional cooperation in this context. I am also happy to say that during my contacts 
with respective international organizations, they have highly endorsed our cooperation and 
have promised their support with regard to specific problems that characterize financial and 
economic  development  of  our  region.  I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  my  dear 
colleagues (friends I should say) and the institutions that they lead for the significant efforts 
and  distinguished  contributions  provided  in  several  important  activities  that  are  or  will  be 
organized by the Bank of Albania in the context of financial stability, monetary policy decision 
making, foreign reserve management and economic research. 
How to cooperate? 
III.  
On personal grounds I can also identify other important areas of fruitful cooperation which 
bear common benefits. I would like to encourage the establishment of an annual SEE Central 
Banks Forum. This forum could discuss in details topics such as financial stability, statistics, 
payment  systems,  economic  research,  and  why  not  human  resources.  I  would  like  to 
encourage active participation of the second and third level Central Banks’ managers in this 
“Forum – to be”. They  must follow the example of their governors and engage in a closer 
cooperation.  They  should  not  only  follow  up  issues  discussed  and  decided  amongst 
governors, but they can open a dialogue and exchange opinions, identify the best business 
practices and standards and then adopt those in their daily work.  
2 
 BIS Review 104/2007
Conclusion 
IV.  
I do not know how many times I might have mentioned the word “cooperation” today, but I 
hope that you will still tolerate me to close my discussion by saying that I strongly believe in 
the regional cooperation. I will never stop promoting this important process among financial 
systems of the Balkans.  
Dear governors, we have all spent enough time and energy on this important topic, to know 
that you share the same opinion as I do. The regional countries are on the right track, leaving 
behind  the  status  of  transition  countries  and  joining  the  community  of  developing  market 
economies. The central banks in the region need to play their irreplaceable role in order to 
sustain their countries in their path to common progress and reforms.  
So let’s keep up such attitude toward cooperation, it will build confidence in the region and 
enhance our efficiency. 
I  wish  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  success  and  prosperity  for  the  many 
years to come. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 3
