Timothy F Geithner: Liquidity and financial markets  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 8th Annual Risk Convention and Exhibition, Global Association of 
Risk Professionals, New York, 28 February 2007. 
 We have been in a period that market participants have characterized as one of exceptional liquidity. 
This  is  both a  reflection  of,  and  has contributed  to,  the  ongoing  expansion  in  the  world  economy.  I 
want to focus my remarks today on the role of liquidity in markets, and what supervisors and market 
participants can do to make markets more robust against the shocks that we know will occur from time 
to time. These remarks are directed to a general phenomenon related to developments in the financial 
markets in recent years, and not to the specific conditions of the moment.  
Liquidity plays a central role in the functioning of financial markets. Structural changes in the financial 
system  that  have  been  underway  for  some  time  increase  the  importance  of  market  liquidity.  The 
allocation of capital increasingly relies on securities markets, where funds for investment in the real 
economy  are  raised  through  the  direct  issuance  of  securities  to  investors.  A  greater  diversity  of 
financial institutions, institutions other than banks, now play a more active role in the provision of credit 
and liquidity.  
Liquidity can mean many different things. One dimension of liquidity is the availability of credit or the 
ease with which institutions can borrow or take on leverage. This is generally referred to as funding 
liquidity.  
Another dimension of liquidity is the ease with which market participants can transact, or the ability of 
markets to absorb large purchases or sales without much effect on prices. This is what is generally 
called market liquidity.  
Although these two concepts are distinct, they are closely related and are often mutually reinforcing. 
Fundamentally this is so because when funding liquidity is abundant traders have the resources with 
which to finance trading positions that smooth price shocks and make markets liquid.  
In  practice,  this  mutually  reinforcing  behavior  is  driven  by  a  complex  array  of  factors,  including  the 
degree  of  leverage  embedded  in  the  markets  at  any  given  time,  the  difficulty  that  lenders  face  in 
discerning whether a surge in volatility is driven by a transitory shock of some kind or a permanent 
shock to fundamentals, and risk management practices.  
Institutions manage the credit risk in their trading-related exposure by requiring some counterparties to 
post collateral or margin. Typically, institutions require of hedge fund counterparties both initial margin 
against potential loss and variation margin, which requires payment to cover any decline in the value 
of the position. If the position declines in value, the counterparty will have to meet margin calls. If it 
does not have enough liquidity on hand to meet those calls, it will have to liquidate other positions to 
raise the requisite cash. The failure to satisfy such a margin call could lead to the liquidation of the 
position.  
This approach to risk management can transform credit risk into liquidity risk. In most circumstances, 
the impact of this is unexceptional. Other institutions will find the new prices attractive and step in and 
buy.  In  exceptional  circumstances,  however,  as  creditors  and  counterparties  seek  to  reduce  their 
exposure to future losses, actions intended to limit individual exposure to risk may instead increase 
overall risk.  
We do not know very much about what makes markets more or less vulnerable to this type of acute 
shock. This is in part because liquidity itself is not easy to measure.  
A broad range of indicators tells us something about funding liquidity, including growth in monetary 
aggregates,  in  financial  assets and  different  forms of  borrowing or credit.  Other  measures,  such as 
movements in bid-ask spreads, the level of interest rates, changes in asset prices and risk premia, 
along  with  the  level  of  volatility  and  expectations  of  future  volatility,  and  turnover  volume  or  other 
measures of market depth, help us evaluate market liquidity.  
Yet none of the measures provides a reliable way of judging how vulnerable markets are to a reversal, 
or the scale of damage that might accompany a reversal.  
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
These measurement limitations are similar to those that make it difficult to judge when, and by what 
magnitude, asset prices deviate from fundamental values at any given point in time.  
In  the  case  of  liquidity,  the  shortcomings  of  our  analytical  tools  are  magnified  by  the  difficulty  of 
measuring  leverage  or  identifying  potential  concentrations  in  the  financial  system.  This  has  always 
been  challenging,  but  the  growth  in  the  overall  size  of  private  pools  of  capital  and  the  degree  of 
embedded leverage that exists in many derivative instruments makes this more challenging today.  
When  market  liquidity  and  funding  seem  abundant,  this  is  likely  to  be  observable  in  things  we  can 
measure, like interest rates and credit spreads. And when liquidity ebbs, the effect is conspicuous in a 
range of observable market prices and volumes. But we do not have, and probably never will have, a 
set of indicators that offers the promise of predicting when liquidity conditions will reverse, or when 
markets are particularly vulnerable to a more acute decline in liquidity.  
In  this  sense,  liquidity  is  like  confidence.  And,  like  confidence,  liquidity  plays  a  critical  role  both  in 
establishing the conditions than can lead to a financial shock, and in determining whether that shock 
becomes acute, threatening broader damage to the functioning of financial and credit markets.  
What role can policy play in reducing the vulnerability of markets to this type of dynamic?  
Of course, central banks have a range of instruments they can use in the event of a crisis. By injecting 
liquidity into the system, and thus strengthening confidence, they can reduce the risk that temporary 
liquidity  problems  will  result  in  default  by  otherwise  solvent  institutions,  or  damage  to  the  payment 
system or credit process.  
But what can policy makers do ex ante to limit the risk of crisis? The most powerful instruments we 
have  are  those  that  affect  the  strength  of  the  basic,  fundamental  shock  absorbers  in  the  financial 
system.  When  capital  and  liquidity  cushions  at  the  major  institutions  are  strong,  then  markets  as  a 
whole  are  less  vulnerable  to  the  adverse  spiral  of  asset  price  declines,  increased  volatility,  and 
declining  liquidity.  And  when  the  operational  infrastructure  is  robust,  markets will  be  able  to  absorb 
larger shocks and sharper changes in risk appetite with less risk of broader contagion. These shock 
absorbers are substantially stronger today than they have been in even in the relatively recent past.  
These  issues  are  the  principal  focus  of  day-to-day  supervision  and  market  oversight  in  the  major 
financial  centers  around  the  world.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  actively  involved  in  a  range  of  efforts, 
working closely with the primary supervisors of the major global financial institutions and the critical 
parts of the financial infrastructure, to encourage further progress.  
In this context, we are working to put in place a stronger regulatory capital regime and to strengthen 
the  capacity  of  firms  to absorb  losses  in  stress conditions.  We are encouraging  more sophisticated 
and  more  conservative  management  of  credit  exposures  in  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  and 
structured  financial  products,  as  well  as  of  exposures  to  hedge  funds.  And  we  are  encouraging  a 
range  of  efforts  to  modernize  the  operational  infrastructure  that  underpins  the  OTC  derivatives 
markets, and to improve the capacity of market participants to manage adversity.  
These  efforts  will  all  contribute  to  a  more  resilient  system,  one  that  is  better  able  to  withstand  the 
effects of a major decline in asset prices or deterioration in credit.  
Are there other tools that policy makers and market participants could use to address this risk?  
Some policy makers have argued that public disclosure of information could help reduce the risk of 
future systemic financial crisis, by preventing the buildup of "excessive" leverage or concentrations of 
risk.  
The  principal  focus  of  attention,  as  in  the  immediate  wake  of  the  failure  of  Long  Term  Capital 
Management, has been on two quite different types of public disclosure.  
The first is information that would make it easier to evaluate the overall leverage or risk profile of major 
hedge  funds  and  their  counterparties,  and  thereby  judge  their  vulnerability  to  a  sharp  movement  in 
asset prices. The second is information about the actual positions of individual funds or institutions: 
information that would make it easier to identify concentrated exposures to specific risk factors, and 
thereby assess more accurately the potential impact of the failure of a major fund or institutions on the 
market as a whole.  
These  pose  very  different  challenges  and  offer  different  benefits.  There  are  a  number  of  crude 
measures of overall risk profile that, if disclosed to the market, would give counterparties information 
they do not now typically get about the risk of failure of the fund. One example is data on the size of 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2007
daily  variations  in  net  asset  value,  VAR,  or  profit  and  loss  over  the  previous  quarter.  This  type  of 
information  would  not  reveal  proprietary  information  about  trading  strategies  or  otherwise  create 
substantial disincentives to risk taking. Although these would provide some information on the overall 
risk  profile  of  the  fund,  they  would  be  lagging  indicators,  and  they  would  carry  the  usual  risk  of 
providing false comfort in some circumstances and excessive concern in others.  
Adopting  such  measures  would  give  the  institutions  that  provide  financing  and  leverage  to  hedge 
funds  a  somewhat  greater  capacity  to  judge  their  direct  risk  to  those  funds.  But  that  is  not  their 
principal challenge. The institutions already know the positions they are financing, and they can use 
the usual range of tools to measure the potential exposure, net of collateral, in those positions. And 
where they do not feel they have adequate information to evaluate the overall risk profile of the fund, 
they can manage that risk by taking less exposure, by requiring more margin, or by building a greater 
cushion of protection against overall risk. So the potential gains from a disclosure regime of this type 
would be limited, at least as compared with the cost of trying to put such a regime in place on the 
global scale that would be necessary to make it effective.  
By far the greater challenge is to assess the potential impact of the failure of a major hedge fund on 
the firm's other exposures and other counterparties. This is a question about how correlated the firms 
other  positions  are  to  the  risks  the  hedge  fund  is  taking.  It  goes  beyond  the  firm's  direct  credit 
exposure to the hedge fund, to the fund's overall risk profile. Large hedge funds typically use multiple 
prime brokers, and they are, of course, reluctant to disclose to those institutions real time information 
on their overall positions and trading strategies. So the banks and investment banks do not generally 
know what their overall exposure to credit and market risks might be in the event that a large fund is 
forced to liquidate positions.  
This knowledge gap has led many to advocate the provision of information on actual positions of the 
major funds, perhaps aggregated by a third party. According to the proponents, this would help market 
participants and regulators to identify potential concentrations or crowded trades, and that knowledge 
would help diffuse them before they became a problem.  
This type of transparency has understandable and enduring appeal, but it is unachievable. There is no 
feasible  way  to  try  to  capture  in  real  time  the  rapidly  changing  exposures  of  different  institutions  to 
different risks in any meaningful fashion. No one with access to that information could make sensible 
judgments about the level and nature of actual concentrations and whether the risks are excessive.  
We continue to explore ways in which the provision of greater information to counterparties and to the 
markets  more  generally  could  help  reduce  vulnerability  to  financial  crises.  For  now,  though,  the 
practical  limitations  on  achieving greater  transparency  underscore  the  importance  strengthening  the 
robustness of the shock absorbers in the financial system. We are not likely to ever be in a position 
where  we  have  the  capacity  to  identify  the  source  and  estimate  the  probability  of  future  financial 
shocks.  And  policy  makers  are  unlikely  to  ever  be  in  a  position  to  diffuse  concentrations  of  risk  or 
crowded trades ahead of a crisis. The most sensible thing we can do is to improve the capacity of the 
core of the financial system to handle adversity, and this requires continued focus on improving the 
strength of the capital and liquidity cushions, as well as the market infrastructure.  
Let me end with a few quick thoughts on the role of monetary policy in this context. Can monetary 
policy play a pre-emptive role in reducing the vulnerability of financial markets to the type of dynamic 
we saw in 1987 and 1998?  
Central banks cannot realistically hold out the prospect of using monetary policy to prevent asset price 
bubbles, conditions of "excess" leverage in parts of the financial system, or other factors in markets 
that might lead to the types of positive feedback dynamics that were at the heart of some past crises.  
And yet many of the observations made about liquidity and market conditions over recent years have 
potential  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Changes  in  risk  premia,  the  level  of  asset  prices,  credit 
spreads, and interest rates, and in realized and expected volatility of asset prices – these can all affect 
the pace at which overall demand grows, and can therefore potentially affect future inflation.  
In discharging their responsibilities for the maintenance of price stability, central bankers need to be 
eclectic  in  looking  at  a  range  of  different  ways  of  measuring  the stance  of  monetary  policy,  and  its 
effects on the future path of growth and inflation. No indicators of liquidity or overall financial conditions 
provide  a  ready  guide  to  judgments  about  monetary  policy.  But  all  these  indicators  merit  careful 
attention,  and  they  strengthen  the  argument  against  narrow  or  mechanistic  approaches  to  thinking 
about the monetary and broader economic outlook.  
BIS Review 19/2007 
 3
Ultimately, though, ex ante judgments about leverage, concentrations and liquidity risk will continue to 
prove  elusive.  Our  principal  focus  should  therefore  be  not  in  the  search  for  the  capacity  to 
preemptively diffuse conditions of excess leverage or liquidity, but in improving the capacity of the core 
of  the  financial  system  to  withstand  shocks  and  on  mitigating  the  impact  of  those  shocks.  And,  as 
always,  central  banks  need  to  stand  prepared  to  make  appropriate  monetary  policy  adjustments  if 
changes in financial conditions would otherwise threaten the achievement of the goals of price stability 
and sustainable economic growth.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2007
