Toshihiko Fukui: Inflation dynamics and monetary policy  
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Conference on Inflation Dynamics, hosted by Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo, 28 June 2007. 
 It is my great pleasure to be invited to speak before such distinguished economists from both Japan 
and overseas. The theme of this conference, "Inflation Dynamics," is, without any question, one that 
cannot be ignored by any central banker pursuing the most desirable monetary policy. Presumably it is 
the interest in a central banker's perspective on this key topic that explains why I have been given the 
privilege of speaking to you today. Accordingly, I would like to take this opportunity to give my thoughts 
on the subject. 
The issue of inflation dynamics has been studied for a long time, yet remains as relevant today as 
ever. The year I joined the Bank of Japan, 1958, was the year when the seminal paper by Professor 
Alban W. Phillips was published. Half a century on, the basic idea behind the Phillips curve has been 
considerably  extended,  and  many  related  theories  have  evolved  in  connection  with  the  role  of 
expectations, the mechanisms that bring about price rigidity, and so forth.  
For monetary  policy  to  achieve  its  objective  of  price  stability,  it  is  extremely  important  to accurately 
understand the dynamics of inflation. These dynamics, however, may change along with changes in 
the economic structure, and it is often difficult to detect such changes in a timely manner. This often 
becomes a source of anxiety to central bankers conducting monetary policy in the real world. In recent 
years, especially, the biggest challenge facing central bankers may be the conduct of monetary policy 
in  the  face  of  the  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  and  increase  in  uncertainty  with  regard  to  inflation 
dynamics.  
With a flatter Phillips curve and given a situation where the inflation rate is within the desirable range, 
small economic fluctuations will not cause the inflation rate to shift outside the range. On the other 
hand, a flatter Phillips curve means that, once inflation shifts outside the range, bringing it back is that 
much harder, since the output gap or the change in the output gap necessary to raise or lower the 
inflation rate becomes correspondingly larger.  
For  example,  in  the  United  States,  Governor  Mishkin  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  in  his  speech 
delivered  in  April,  stated  that  "returning  inflation  too  quickly  to  levels  consistent  with  price  stability 
might  unnecessarily  exacerbate  the  economic  weakness.  Instead,  while  restoring  price  stability 
remains  critical,  the  central  bank  should  do  so  at  a  pace  that  does  not  do  undue  harm  to  the 
economy."  
In Japan, we are experiencing a similar problem, although the direction is quite the opposite. Japan's 
economy has been growing at a rate above its potential for some time. Utilization of resources such as 
production  capacity  and  labor  has  been  increasing,  and  the  estimates  of  the  output  gap  are 
suggesting tighter supply and demand conditions. On the other hand, the response of prices to this 
situation has been very weak, leaving the current inflation rate near 0 percent. In a situation like this, 
the extent of the output gap needed to raise the inflation rate in a short period of time becomes not 
only very large but also subject to significant uncertainty. An abrupt widening of the output gap may 
bring about larger swings in the economy and risk the sustainability of the economic expansion. The 
alternative,  safer  route  is  to  focus  on  securing  sustained  economic  growth  and  minimizing  swings, 
generating  corresponding  expectations  of  a  moderate  and  gradual  rise  in  the  inflation  rate.  As  you 
might expect, it is this latter approach that is behind the Bank of Japan's current gradual adjustments 
in the level of interest rates.  
Historically,  inflation  dynamics  have  often  exerted  considerable  influence  on  central  banks'  policy 
frameworks  and  their  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Experience  of  high  inflation  up  to  the  1980s,  for 
example,  encouraged  the  development  of  monetary  policy  frameworks  focusing  on  prices,  such  as 
"inflation  targeting"  regimes.  Since  then,  prices  have  tended  to  stabilize  and  the  Phillips  curve  has 
become flatter. Such changes in inflation dynamics have made it necessary for central banks to look at 
the broader picture in their pursuit of price stability. To be more specific, with a flatter Phillips curve, 
imbalances  in  the  economy  do  not  easily  translate  into  movement  in  prices.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
possible that imbalances may make themselves felt on the real side of the economy or in asset prices 
before  they  are  translated  into  instability  in  general  prices.  This  has  indeed  induced  central  banks, 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
including those that have adopted inflation targeting, to gradually shift their attention to achieving price 
stability in the longer run through flexibly responding to economic developments as well as prices. The 
framework for the conduct of monetary policy that the Bank of Japan adopted when it terminated the 
quantitative easing policy in March 2006 was constructed with these inflation dynamics in mind, and in 
full awareness that they may evolve further in the future.  
As  I  just  mentioned,  inflation  dynamics  may  change  in  the  future,  and  such  uncertainty  is  another 
crucial point that should be taken into consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. Specifically, no 
one knows whether the flattened Phillips curve will be a lasting phenomenon. In our Outlook Report 
published in April, we pointed out that the shape of the Phillips curve may change along with changes 
in inflation expectations or labor cost restraint by firms. Moreover, there is more than one hypothesis 
competing to explain the flattening of the Phillips curve: for example, some point to decrease in firms' 
control over prices as a result of the stiff competition following deregulation and globalization, while 
others  refer  to  the  decreasing  frequency  of  price  revisions  by  firms  in  response  to  disinflation. 
Inevitably, the outlook for the future differs depending on the hypothesis favored.  
Actual economic developments always entail uncertainty, and not only for the reasons I just stated. 
Just as with other economic challenges, a final resolution to the problems posed by inflation dynamics 
may be too much to ask for. Yet in spite of this, central bankers must keep up with the cutting-edge 
ideas  and  insights  of  their  time  and  reflect  them  in  their  policy  management.  As  one  such  central 
banker, I am very much looking forward to seeing our understanding of inflation dynamics deepened 
thanks to the research efforts stimulated by conferences such as this.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
