Jean-Pierre Roth: Central bank policy and developments on the real estate 
market 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 
8th International Symposium of the Group of Fifteen, Zurich, 1 February 2007. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The Swiss National Bank takes considerable interest in the real estate market for a number of different 
reasons.  Movements  in  real  estate  prices,  on  which  it  focuses  in  particular, can  have  a bearing  on 
private  consumption,  investments  and  bank  lending  in  addition  to  directly  influencing  the  consumer 
price  index  through  the  rent  component.  The  SNB’s  monetary  policy  is  aimed  at  maintaining  price 
stability,  as  measured  by  changes  in  consumer  prices.  Therefore,  if  it  had  reason  to  expect  that 
developments in the real estate market could jeopardise price stability in the economy as a whole, the 
SNB would definitely adjust its monetary policy.  
The Swiss real estate market has shown a very positive performance over the last few years and has 
made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  upturn  of  the  economy.  According  to  the  National  Bank's 
assessment,  the  housing  market  in  particular  is  currently  well-balanced.  The  present  situation  thus 
gives  no  cause  for  concern.  The  SNB  will,  however,  continue  to  monitor  developments  closely, 
particularly  those  factors  that  might  boost  demand  for  residential  space  in  the  future.  As  the  Swiss 
economy is on the upswing, income is rising, as are the prices of assets. Demographic changes could 
also  add  to  the  pressure.  For  instance,  immigration  of  well-qualified  persons  with  high  purchasing 
power has increased quite steeply since the agreement on the free movement of persons entered into 
force almost five years ago. These factors all tend to drive up demand for residential space. So far, 
supply has been able to keep pace with the increasing demand. Nevertheless, with supply adjusting 
only slowly, a higher level of demand could well accelerate price increases in the real estate market. It 
would  then  be  the  SNB’s  responsibility  to  ensure  –  under  these  more  difficult  circumstances  –  that 
price movements in the real estate market did not threaten price stability as a whole. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
