Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Inequality, poverty and development 
Inaugural address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
Annual Sessions of the Sri Lanka Economic Association (SLEA), Colombo, 10 August 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Invitees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At  the  outset,  I  wish  to  congratulate  the  Sri  Lanka  Economic  Association  (SLEA)  for  their 
initiative  at  organizing  this  important  and  timely  event,  the  Annual  Session  focusing  on 
Inequality, Poverty and Development. This forum would give a wonderful opportunity to all 
the participants to share their valuable thoughts and eventually enable them to contribute to 
the prosperity of this country and the well-being of our people. I am also delighted to have 
been invited to deliver the inaugural address to this distinguished audience and I must say 
that I consider it a great honour and a privilege.  
The SLEA has been organizing events of this nature for many years and at most such events 
I have been an active participant. I have myself benefited immensely from these fora, and I 
know most of you academics, and professionals have also gained from these well balanced 
sessions and fruitful discussions. Further, the themes that have been selected by SLEA and 
the calibre of the resource persons they have invited during the past prove their willingness 
to make an important contribution to the development in this country.  
As we are aware, the world’s focus and attention has been to usher in an economic order 
that  ensures  high  economic  growth  and  an  advanced  level  of  development.  In  this 
endeavour,  the  widely  discussed  topics  include  liberalization,  globalization,  IT  revolution, 
poverty  alleviation,  trade  co-operation,  political  inclusion,  regionalization,  and  many  other 
buzz topics. Amongst these topics, “inequality and poverty” has maintained an important 
position, and it has therefore been discussed for years.  
Let  us  then  ask  ourselves  the  question:  What  do  we  really  mean  by  inequality  and 
poverty?  
Inequality  means  the  lack  of  or  fair  treatment  in  the  sharing  of  wealth  or  opportunities 
between different groups in society; and  
Poverty is the condition of being extremely poor.  
What do those who are stricken by poverty and inequality feel? Simply, they suffer the 
lack of material well being and lack of opportunities to succeed. Such feelings are often the 
root causes of political, economic and social upheaval, tension and revolution.  
Mr.  Chairman,  poverty  and  inequality  are  very  closely  linked.  There  is  also  ample 
empirical evidence to suggest that inequality and poverty seriously affect development. 
Inequality  often  leads  to  poverty  while  poverty  hinders  development  and  prosperity. 
Addressing  inequality  issues  would  undoubtedly  have  a  positive  impact  on  poverty 
alleviation.  We  would  also  probably  unanimously  agree  that  alleviating  poverty  is  vital, 
considering its many economic, social, cultural and even more importantly, the human costs. 
Therefore, addressing the issue of inequality and deprivation while expanding the economy, 
has today become a great challenge to economic planners across the globe, and indeed to 
those in Sri Lanka as well. In other words, poverty alleviation has to become an integral part 
of the development process if true prosperity is to be ushered.  
That  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  at  the  Central  Bank  do  not  only  track  the  traditional 
macro-economic  fundamentals.  We  also  track  the  indicators  that  tell  us  whether  or  not 
“wealth” is reaching the ordinary people of our country. In that context, let’s take a quick look 
at some of the fundamental indicators as well as discuss some other trends to assess as to 
how inequality, poverty and development is progressing in our country.  
BIS Review 88/2007 
 1
 Strong GDP growth and investment 
GDP growth (%)
Investment
(%GDP)
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007F
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
-2.0
23
18
13
Net NPL
 
 
  Banking system health strengthening 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003
2002
-2
8
3
2004
Return on Assets
2005
2006
31.0
29.0
27.0
25.0
23.0
21.0
19.0
17.0
15.0
 2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2 
 BIS Review 88/2007
Unemployment declining (%) 
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Public debt declining (% of GDP) 
External Government Debt
Domestic Government Debt
58
45
59
60
46
45
58
47
50
44
53
40
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007F
 BIS Review 88/2007 
 3
As you may have noted, just yesterday, Standard & Poors revised the outlook for Sri Lanka 
from negative to stable and that is indeed a useful confirmation of the success of the manner 
in which the economy is progressing. At the same time, we see some interesting social and 
economic indicators as well which disprove the Perception/claim that people do not feel 
the present economic growth. Let’s look at some of these facts too: 
• 
• 
• 
Number of registration of motor vehicles and motor cycles continue to rise sharply. 
The usage of mobile phones is expanding rapidly. 
The number of new apartment buildings and individual housing units are increasing 
and selling fast – almost every road and by land now has some construction activity 
going on! 
Super market chains are expanding rapidly. In 2006, the per capita imported food 
intake was Rs.145/- per day. 
The number of banking outlets is increasing sharply. In the first 5 months of 2007 
alone, 46 new units were added to our Banking system.  
The number of household appliances being sold, is increasing rapidly 
The number of new EPF accounts is increasing. 
The  number  of  people  going  abroad  on  holiday  is  increasing  –  Just  look  at  the 
queues  outside  the  Indian  High  Commission  of  people  who  are  hoping  to  go  on 
pilgrimage. 
The per capita incomes are rising. 
More people are sending their children abroad for studies. 
The  number  of  “Wanted”  advertisements  is  increasing  rapidly  in  almost  all 
newspapers. 
    Nevertheless,  the  global  picture  of  poverty  and  inequality  is  still  quite  gloomy. 
According  to  the  World  Development  Report  of  the  United  Nations,  of  the  world’s  6  billion 
people, 2.8 billion (almost half) live on less than two dollars a day, and 1.2 billion (a fifth) live 
on less than a dollar a day. Also, the average income in the richest 20 countries is 37 times 
the  average  in  the  poorest  20,  a  gap  that  has  doubled  in  the  past  40  years.  Hence,  the 
distribution of global gains is extraordinarily unequal.  
Worldwide  inequality  persists  even  on  the  socio-human  front.  Although  in  general, 
human  conditions  have  improved  more  in  the  past  century  than  in  the  entirety  of  previous 
history, particularly in health and technological capabilities, several inequalities still exist. For 
example,  in  the  poorest  countries,  only  4  out  of  5  children  live  to  celebrate  their  fifth 
birthdays, while in rich countries this ratio is over 99 per cent. While in rich countries fewer 
than 5 per cent of all children under five are malnourished, in poor countries as many as 50 
per  cent  are.  Hence,  there  is  a  huge  imbalance  and  inequality  in  distribution  of 
socio-economic gains as well.  
In this context, it is also heartening to note that strategies of reducing poverty have 
evolved over the past several decades in response to broadened understanding and 
rethinking of the complexity of development.  
As we are aware, in the 1950s and 60s, many economic and political planners viewed large 
investments in physical capital and infrastructure as the primary means of development.  
By the 1970s, policymakers realized that physical capital was not enough, and that health 
and education were equally important. 
By  the  1980s,  emphasis  was  placed  on  improving  economic  management  and  allowing 
greater  functioning  of  market  forces.  By  the  1990s,  a  three-fold  strategy  evolved:  first, 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2007
labour-intensive  growth 
through  economic  openness;  second, 
intensive 
promoting 
investment in infrastructure, and third, providing basic services to poor people in health and 
education through a solid welfare net.  
The  model  for  2000’s  went  further and  took  an  even  wider  approach.  In  September  2000, 
189  member  states  of  the  United  Nations  adopted  the  Millennium  Development  Goals. 
That  declaration  endorsed  a  strong  commitment  to  the  right  to  development,  peace  and 
security,  gender  equality,  and  the  eradication  of  the  many  dimensions  of  poverty.  It  also 
mainstreamed a set of 8 inter-connected and mutually reinforcing development goals and 18 
related  targets  into  a  global  agenda.  As  of  now,  Sri  Lanka  has  achieved  some  of  the 
goals of the Millennium Declaration while others are being pursued quite diligently. 
The first goal is poverty eradication. For international comparison, the poverty line is set at 
US dollar 1 per day. As you know, the proportion of population whose income is less than the 
poverty threshold is known as the poverty head-count ratio. As measured by this indicator, as 
at 2002, about one fifth of the household population in Sri Lanka was living in poverty. Many 
efforts are now being taken to reduce this further.  
The  second  goal  is  to  achieve  universal  primary  education.  Sri  Lanka  has  already  made 
much progress in this regard. 
Promoting  gender  equality  and  empowering  women  is  the  third  MDG.  Sri  Lanka  has 
already eliminated gender disparity in both primary and junior secondary education, with the 
parity index being nearly 100 per cent in 2002.  
Goals 4 and 5 are to reduce child mortality and maternal mortality. The current trends 
indicate  that  Sri  Lanka  is  on  track  to  achieving  child  and  maternal  mortality  goals.  Other 
goals  such  as  combating  HIV/AIDS,  malaria  and  other  diseases,  and  ensuring 
environmental sustainability are also amongst our priorities. The final goal, developing a 
global partnership for development is also being pursued diligently.  
We are aware that, our country is, by and large, on track on the achievement of most of the 
goals. However, there remain considerable challenges. The critical challenge is that one-fifth 
of Sri Lanka's population is still living below the national poverty line and we need to take 
proactive and practical measures in that regard.  
Mr. Chairman, at this stage, as a precursor to the wider discussion that will take place on 
tomorrow,  I  would  like  to  share  some  thoughts  on  the  subject  in  the  Sri  Lankan  context. 
Where  do  we  stand?  Sri  Lanka  is  now  a  lower  middle  income  country  with  a  per  capita 
income of around US dollars 1,355. The per capita income is projected to increase further to 
around  US  dollars  1,500  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  is  expected  to  continue  to  increase 
during the coming years. So, there is a clear indication that we are growing amidst several 
challenges and that people are enjoying the gains of the growth although some may 
tend to down play or disregard these national gains for whatever reason.  
With increased personal incomes, we also observe that living conditions of the people are 
improving. I already spoke about it. But, at the same time, we would be the first to admit that 
a lot more needs to be done. We have to attempt to double our per capita income every 6-7 
years  from  now  onwards.  We  must  also  aim  at  increasing  the  per  capita  incomes  in  the 
provinces from the present levels of between US dollars 700-800 to at least US dollars 1500 
in  the  next  6-7  years.  That  is  not  a  dream.  It  can  be  done.  Towards  this  objective,  the 
government  has  clearly  identified  as  a  priority,  the  importance  of  having  quality 
infrastructure  facilities  in  the  country.  In  that  regard,  mega  infrastructure  projects, 
particularly  in  the  areas  of  power  and  energy,  highways,  rail  roads,  ports  and  aviation  are 
currently  being  implemented.  In  fact,  the  government  has  given  the  highest  priority  in  its 
public  investment  programme  to  complete  these  projects  as  early  as  possible  so  that 
development process would be accelerated.  
The government has also identified the need to focus on developing regional infrastructure 
facilities in order to stimulate economic activities in the regions as well as to quickly distribute 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 5
the  gains  of  higher  economic  growth  to  the  people  who  are  living  in  remote  areas.  The 
ongoing  “Maga  Neguma”,  “Gama  Neguma”  and  “Neganahira  Navodaya”  programmes  are 
particularly aimed at fulfilling this need.  
In the meantime, the Central Bank, in collaboration with the Finance Commission has 
initiated a new approach to examine new ways of maximizing the Provincial Councils’ 
contribution in the regional development process. We have observed that even after the 
existence of Provincial Councils for about two decades, the inequalities among the provinces 
still  prevail  and  in  fact  have  widened  over  the  years.  Hence,  it  is  clear  that  we  have  to 
introduce a new and innovative strategy to develop our provinces.  
In line with this objective, as the first step of this new initiative, the Central Bank and Finance 
Commission,  along  with  several  other  stakeholders,  are  in  the  process  of  identifying  the 
issues,  difficulties  and  potential  of  the  respective  Provincial  Councils  to  improve  the 
provincial  contribution  towards  achieving  balanced  regional  development.  Finding  ways 
and means to increase the private sector participation in the development process without 
solely depending on government funds is the key feature of this new approach.  
Not surprisingly, there will always be an intense debate about the trade-off between the 
growth  momentum  of  an  economy  and  the  equitable  distribution  of  benefits.  Almost 
always,  in  any  country  the  benefits  of  growth  do  not  reach  the  deprived  segments  of  the 
society, quickly. The fact that over 50 per cent of the GDP is still concentrated in the Western 
Province and the fact that the share of the poorest 20 per cent of country in total household 
income is less than 4 per cent, shows that this situation is true in our country as well. The per 
capita  income  of  the  Western  Province  is  over  US  dollars  1,900  whereas  in  the  other 
provinces  it  is  around  US  dollars  700-800.  Further,  the  Gini  coefficient  of  per  capita 
consumption in Sri Lanka had increased at an annual rate of 2 per cent, from 1990 to 2000, 
higher than comparable countries in East Asia. These facts support the view that reducing 
inequality  and  alleviating  poverty  should  be  a  main  policy  concern  that  has  to  be  pursued 
with  a  pro-active  strategy.  That  is  probably  why  the  Mahinda  Chantana  has  identified 
several policy measures to fast track this shift, that the Western Province’s GDP contribution 
could  continue  on  a  downward  trend  as  evidenced  by  the  marginal  decline  in  contribution 
from 50.9% in 2005 to 50.1% in 2006. 
In the meantime, the alternate view in this debate suggests that the more affluent persons of 
a country usually benefit faster when the economy grows rapidly and that even without any 
specific policy actions being implemented to address this situation, such gains will ultimately 
spill over to the deprived segments also, albeit at a slower pace. While this theory too may 
be  somewhat  true,  it  would  certainly  not  provide  too  much  comfort  to  the  person  who  is 
suffering from inequality and poverty, if he/she were to find out that such a policy was being 
followed. That is why it is vital that the current Sri Lankan policy which is a pro-active one to 
consciously  support  the  trickle  down  of  economic  benefits  quickly,  should  be  implemented 
fast, since it will surely help to reduce the social tension that would otherwise build up. 
Mr.  Chairman,  notwithstanding  all  our  current  efforts,  we  still  have  to  accept  that 
significant disparities remain despite the remarkable achievements that we have made 
so  far.  Hence,  the  challenge  before  policymakers  is  to  continue  to  find  ways  to  minimize 
disparities in wealth distribution without disturbing the overall efficiency in resource utilization 
or retarding the growth momentum. This is not a simple task, but is surely possible to do so. 
However, the common syndrome of this country is that many begin by saying: “we can’t”, or 
“we are too small” or “we are not in a position to do that” or some other negative claim. We 
have to, as a matter of urgency get out of that negative mentality. As we know, the Sri 
Lankan Government has embarked on the pro-poor pro-growth policy with a focus on 
balanced regional development.  
The Government has committed itself to improving socio-economic conditions of the entire 
Island with a mix of infrastructure development, human capital development, and enterprise 
development while providing a safety net to the needy segments. To do so, the Government 
6 
 BIS Review 88/2007
is attempting to direct investments beyond the centre, focusing on public-private partnerships 
and  promoting  the  utilization  of  resources  in  the  provinces.  In  that  way,  both  the  private 
sector and the public sector will have to become engines of growth and development!  
In all these endeavours, our ultimate goal has to be the provision of better living conditions 
for our people. That is one reason why the Statistics Department of the Central Bank is in 
the  process  of  constructing  a  Prosperity  Index  to  ascertain  national,  provincial  and 
district-wise economic prosperity Once in place, the new index will be able to track regional 
performance,  and  we  are  hopeful  that  it  would  serve  as  a  measure  and  a  catalyst  to 
encourage poverty reduction and to induce a faster trickle down effect.  
At the same time, we believe that there is great role for academics and professionals in 
the development of our country. In fact, the Central Bank has consciously recognized 
the importance of professionals’ contribution and has made efforts to gain from their 
expertise  and  knowledge  as  well.  For  example,  in  January  2007,  a  Monetary  Policy 
Consultative  Committee  was  established  in  the  Bank,  comprising  of  professionals,  experts 
and representatives from other stakeholders in order to obtain their views on monetary policy 
implementation. Your own Chairman, Prof. A D V de Indraratne, chairs such Committee and 
we have benefited immensely from the insights and advice rendered by such Committee. 
In a similar manner, I am certain that the research findings that will be presented by you at 
the conclusion of this very timely conference, together with the professional views expressed 
at the technical sessions would help policymakers immensely to reshape their policy focus 
appropriately.  
In conclusion, let me emphasize our deep commitment to your theme by referring to our own 
Mission at the Central Bank. The Vision of the Central Bank is that of being a credible 
and dynamic Central Bank contributing to the prosperity of Sri Lanka. As set out in our 
Strategic Plan, the term prosperity has a wider connotation: i.e., the enhancement of the 
quality  of  life  of  people  through  sustainable  wealth  creation  and  inclusion  of  all 
segments  of  the  society  in  enjoying  the  benefits  of  development.  The  Central  Bank 
expects to facilitate this process by ensuring price stability and financial system stability 
while  providing  prudential  and  pro-active  policy  recommendations,  as  the  Advisor  to  the 
Government on Economic Affairs.  
We  have,  so  far,  taken  a  pro-active  stance  in  the  delivery  of  prosperity  and  we  are 
encouraging the key stakeholders in our country also, to implement the necessary strategies 
towards such end. We see the Sri Lanka Economic Association as being a key partner in the 
delivery  of  prosperity  in  our  country  and  we  commend  you  for  your  commitment  and 
dedication. We are confident that you, together with other stakeholders would overcome the 
various challenges and someday soon, we would all be in a position to truly state that we 
have ushered in development with equality. 
I wish your Conference all success. 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 7
