Sheryl Kennedy: Dealing with uncertainty in the conduct of monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sheryl  Kennedy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Montréal  CFA 
Society, Montréal, 12 April 2007.  
 Bonjour.  It's  great  to  be  here  to  give  you  my  best  wishes  as  you  begin  preparations  for  the  CFA 
Institute's sixtieth anniversary celebrations. 
I want to speak to you today about dealing with uncertainty. I know you need to deal with uncertainty 
in your work as CFA charter holders. Uncertainty is also a fact of life for central bankers. To quote 
Alan Greenspan, "uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is 
the defining characteristic of that landscape."1  
In my remarks today, I'll discuss the uncertainty inherent in monetary policy-making, and explain the 
strategies we at the Bank of Canada use to deal with that uncertainty. I should emphasize that the 
uncertainty  I'll  be  speaking  about  relates  to  the  models,  indicators,  and  data  we  use  to  conduct 
monetary  policy,  not  to  what  we  call  "risks"  to  the  economic  outlook  –  that  is,  possible  outcomes 
around our "base-case" projection. To make my remarks concrete, I'll refer to how we estimate the 
potential output of the economy. But first, I think it would be useful to provide a brief sketch of what 
monetary policy aims to achieve.  
What monetary policy aims to achieve 
The  main  goal  of  monetary  policy  is  to  help  the  country  achieve  strong,  sustainable  economic 
performance, and, in doing so, to contribute to rising living standards for Canadians. Experience has 
shown that the best way for a central bank to meet this goal, given the instruments at its disposal, is by 
keeping inflation low and stable. Low and stable inflation increases confidence in the future value of 
money,  and  allows  for  clear  price  signals.  These  benefits,  in  turn,  help  consumers,  savers,  and 
investors to make sounder economic decisions. The Bank of Canada has a clear inflation objective, 
and that is to keep the annual increase in the consumer price index as close as possible to 2 per cent. 
That  objective,  together  with  our  transparent  framework  for  how  we  go  about  achieving  it,  helps  to 
anchor inflation expectations, and adds a significant amount of certainty to the economic and financial 
environment. 
An important element of controlling inflation and promoting sustainable growth is keeping the economy 
operating in line with its production capacity. For the central bank, this means getting a good reading 
on  this  capacity,  which  we  call  the  economy's  potential  output.  Potential  output  is  not  directly 
measurable.  And  it  changes  over  time  with  changes  in  productivity,  the  capital  stock,  and  the 
composition of the labour force. So, as we try to keep demand in balance with the economy's capacity 
to produce at a sustainable pace, the Bank is dealing with variables that are both hard to measure and 
evolving. 
When  aggregate  demand  pushes  the  economy  beyond  its  capacity  limits,  thus  threatening  to  raise 
inflation  above  target,  the  Bank  will  –  all  things  being  equal  –  raise  its  policy  interest  rate.  And,  in 
symmetric fashion, when unused capacity puts downward pressure on inflation, threatening to push it 
below the target, the Bank will – all things being equal – lower the policy rate.  
Of course, there's a lot packed into that phrase, "all things being equal."  
One  complication  involves  persistent  movements  in  relative  prices,  which  can  affect  inflation.  For 
instance, a trend reduction in the prices of imported consumer goods puts direct downward pressure 
on inflation, since the prices of these goods are included in the consumer price index. This, in turn, 
provides scope for the economy to operate at a higher level than would otherwise be the case.  
                                                      
1   A.  Greenspan.  "Monetary  Policy  under  Uncertainty."  Remarks  made  at  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
at: 
Bank 
Wyoming, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/Speeches/2003/20030829/default.htm. 
Available 
Jackson 
Kansas 
August 
2003. 
Hole, 
City 
of 
in 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
A second complication is the time lag between a policy action and its effects. While a change in the 
policy rate can begin to affect output fairly quickly, it typically takes 18 to 24 months for the full effects 
to be felt on inflation, and that means that the Bank has to be forward looking and base its decisions 
on projections of future pressures on inflation. It also means that a large part of what we're doing as 
we  deliberate  on  the  appropriate  interest  rate  setting  is  trying  to  look  through  the  "noise"  of  the 
moment  to  get  a  sense  of  the  underlying  trends.  We  need  to  look  through  short-term,  temporary 
volatility that will have disappeared by the time our actions have an effect on inflation.  
A third and related complication arises when a shock hits the economy. Beyond the initial element of 
surprise,  there  can  be  uncertainty  about  the  magnitude  of  the  effects  of  the  shock,  about  how  the 
economy will be affected, and about how long the shock will last.  
Try  to  imagine  steering  a  ship.  The  ship's  captain  needs  to  regularly  ascertain  the  ship's  current 
location by means of various instruments and readings, scrutinize the charts to see whether there are 
any  obstacles  ahead,  and  then  apply  judgment  to  determine  the best course  to  arrive safely  at  the 
destination. In like fashion, a central bank cannot directly see everything ahead, and so it must rely on 
models, data, and indicators, and then apply judgment to determine the best course for meeting the 
monetary policy objective. And the economy, like a large ship, takes time to respond to a change in 
course.  
But  unlike  the  precise  instruments  and  readings  available  to  the  captain,  our  models,  data,  and 
indicators  provide  only  approximate  information.  Models,  data,  and  indicators  are  invaluable  in 
informing monetary policy, but a good deal of uncertainty is inherent in them. By definition, models are 
simplifications  of  reality,  and  never  entirely  reflect  the  complexity  of  a  dynamic  economy.  Our  main 
indicators are derived from data, but the data we use are often subject to a good deal of revision. And 
for certain variables that are fundamental to conducting monetary policy – potential output is a good 
example – there are no direct measures at all. Our destination, however, remains clear: achieving the 
2 per cent inflation target. 
So, how do we at the Bank of Canada deal with the uncertainty inherent in the models, indicators, and 
data we use when conducting monetary policy?2  
Responding to uncertainty 
As  CFA  charter  holders,  you'll  be  aware  of  Peter  Bernstein's  writings  on  risk.  His  advice  is  to  treat 
uncertainty as a "friend" – "with care, consideration, and attention to consequences."3 And that's the 
bottom line for the Bank of Canada, too. We treat uncertainty about our models and data – and the 
risks to the outlook as well – with care, consideration, and attention to consequences.  
Again, consider the captain of a ship. Like the captain, we need to know first where we are now. That 
means knowing, among other factors affecting inflation, the current level of output relative to potential. 
To do this, we first run our models for potential output with the most recent data and revisions, which 
brings us up to date on recent history. But we also look at a range of other data and indicators before 
coming up with a judgment about our current situation. Then we have to determine what lies ahead, 
which  means  that  we  try  to  determine  the  growth  of  potential  output  going  forward,  as  well  as  the 
future growth rate of the economy and the trend for inflation. We use judgment to decide on a course 
of action, keeping in mind that the "ship" of the economy responds slowly to a change in the policy 
interest rate, and that there could be headwinds or tailwinds to deal with. And because we get monthly 
data on inflation and output, we can correct our course, if necessary, on subsequent policy interest 
rate announcement dates. 
Let me expand on this. In conducting monetary policy, the Bank uses three main strategies to reduce 
uncertainty. 
First,  we  use  a  variety  of  models  to  produce  economic  projections  and  to  examine  alternative 
assumptions  about  key  variables.  The  use  of  multiple  models  helps  to  provide  comprehensive 
                                                      
2   For  further  details  on  uncertainty  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  see  P. Jenkins  and  D.  Longworth.  2002.  "Monetary 
at: 
Uncertainty." 
(Summer 
Available 
Canada 
Review 
2002). 
Policy 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/2002/longworth_e.pdf. 
Bank 
and 
of 
3   P.L.  Bernstein.  2006.  "Risk:  The  Hottest  Four-Letter  Word  in  Financial  Markets."  In  Global  Perspectives  on  Investment 
Management: Learning from the Leaders, 221, edited by R.N. Sullivan and J.J. Diermeier. Charlottesville, VA: CFA Institute. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
information and analysis, and helps to guard against policy errors that could result from relying on a 
single  economic  model.  The  models  we  use  range  from  single-equation  indicator  models  to  multi-
equation reduced-form models to dynamic stochastic general-equilibrium models, such as our newest 
model of the Canadian economy, ToTEM.4  
The  second  strategy  we  use  to  reduce  uncertainty  is  to  bring  together  a  variety  of  information  and 
indicators before we make an interest rate decision. These include both quantitative and qualitative 
measures covering international and domestic economic developments, the regional business outlook, 
monetary and credit conditions, and the views and expectations of financial market participants. As we 
sift through this information, we try to look through the noise and discern fundamental trends. We look 
carefully at both corroborating and non-corroborating evidence. 
Finally, we apply judgment. The Bank of Canada does this by means of a committee that debates the 
issues and comes to a decision. Interestingly, research suggests that the composition of a committee 
and the structure of a meeting can affect the quality of decision making, both in central banking5 and 
elsewhere.  The  Bank's  committee  is  called  the  Governing  Council.  It  consists  of  the  Governor,  the 
Senior Deputy Governor, and four Deputy Governors. The Governing Council is advised by staff and 
by a Monetary Policy Review Committee, which looks at the evidence and the projections, and raises 
issues. Open discussion and debate are encouraged. Decisions benefit from the exchange of differing 
views among members – what James Surowiecki calls the "wisdom of crowds."6 These differing views 
arise largely from different weightings of various aspects of the analysis presented by Bank staff. The 
Bank's clear goal – meeting the inflation target – helps to focus the deliberations. And with decisions 
made  every  six  to  eight  weeks,  there  are  frequent  opportunities  to  take  new  soundings  and  adjust 
course. 
A good example of how we apply these strategies is the way we estimate potential output. Potential 
output is important in understanding inflation dynamics over time, but, as I said earlier, it cannot be 
measured directly. We're not sure that our models fully capture potential output, especially when the 
economy is undergoing significant structural change. To add to the challenge, some of the data used 
in these models are frequently revised. 
So,  in  addition  to  the  readings  we  get  from  our  models,  we  also  consider  a  number  of  alternative 
indicators of pressure on capacity. These indicators include the rate of capacity utilization, measures 
of labour shortages, building vacancy rates, reports from our quarterly regional surveys of firms, and 
the  recent  behaviour  of  inflation  relative  to  expectations.  Of  course  we  also  consider  more  direct 
influences on inflation such as import prices, cost pressures such as wages relative to productivity, 
and inflation expectations.  
I  should  also  mention  that  we  meet,  on  a  regular  basis,  with  a  wide  variety  of  business  people  to 
discuss  their  investment  and  hiring  intentions,  their  costs  and  their  pricing  decisions,  and  any 
constraints they may be facing. The information we obtain from these meetings helps us to interpret 
the numbers and better informs our judgment. 
Of course, the strategies I have mentioned complement one another. Taken together, they help the 
Bank to arrive at a comprehensive and balanced view of developments in the Canadian economy, the 
outlook  for  inflation,  and  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  action  to  keep  inflation  on  target  over  the 
medium term.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  In  my  remarks  today,  I've  described  how  the  Bank  of  Canada  deals  with  the 
uncertainty that underlies the conduct of monetary policy. The task of monetary policy is, and is sure to 
remain, a challenging one, given the limits of understanding something as complex and dynamic as 
the modern, globally integrated economy. 
                                                      
4   See  the  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Autumn  2006)  for  several  articles  on  models  used  by  the  Bank.  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/rev_autumn2006.html. 
5   See, for example, P. Maier. 2007. "Monetary Policy Committees in Action: Is There Room for Improvement?" Available at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/wp/2007/wp07-6.html. 
6   J.  Surowiecki.  2004.  The  Wisdom  of  Crowds:  Why  the  Many  Are  Smarter  Than  the  Few  and  How  Collective  Wisdom 
Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Nations. Toronto: Doubleday. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 3
While  dealing  with  uncertainty  is  a  challenge  for  all  central  bankers,  Canadians  no  longer  have  to 
worry about one form of uncertainty that plagued us in the 1970s and early 1980s: that of high and 
variable inflation. Canadians can be certain that the Bank of Canada will continue to direct its policy 
actions at meeting the 2 per cent inflation-control target, and thus contribute to the sustainable growth 
of the Canadian economy. 
Uncertainty  may  indeed  be  the  "defining  characteristic"  of  monetary  policy,  but  our  clear  inflation 
target, and our success in meeting it, give us solid ground on which to stand. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2007
