Timothy F Geithner: Liquidity risk and the global economy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 2007 Financial Markets Conference –
Credit Derivatives, Sea Island, Georgia, 15 May 2007. 
 Thank you for giving me the chance to join you today. Although this is a conference primarily about 
credit derivatives, I am going to talk about some of the broader changes we are seeing in financial and 
credit markets, and their implications for policy. 
You  are  meeting  during  a  period  of  remarkable  change  and  exceptional  conditions  in  financial 
markets. 
Financial markets over the past several years have been characterized by an unusual constellation of 
low forward interest rates, ample liquidity, low risk premia and low expectations of future volatility. In 
some markets, asset prices have risen substantially, and credit growth has expanded rapidly. In credit 
markets  more  generally,  spreads  have  declined  to  levels  that  reflect  very  low  expectations  of  near 
term losses and credit standards have weakened. 
It would not be accurate to say this is a world without volatility, for we have had a series of episodes of 
sharp declines in asset prices and increases in volatility. But these episodes have been contained and 
short  lived,  with  markets  recovering  relatively  quickly  and  with  little  appreciable  effect  on  global 
economic activity. 
These conditions are global in nature, though they take somewhat different forms in different markets. 
The forces behind all this are complex and not well understood, and this complicates any judgment of 
how enduring they will prove to be. 
The main candidates in terms of fundamental explanations involve change in economic conditions and 
in the structure of financial markets. 
There has been a marked improvement in global economic performance, with strong growth, relatively 
low inflation, and less volatility in both growth and inflation. This seems to have reduced concern about 
future  fundamental  risk,  in  terms  of  the  potential  damage  of  future  shocks  and  in  the  ability  of 
governments and central banks to both avoid the policy errors of the past and to competently manage 
some daunting longer-term policy challenges. 
The  global  trend  toward  independent  central  banks  with  clearer  mandates  for  price  stability  has 
contributed  to  this  confidence,  as  has  the  improvement  in  national  balance  sheets  in  emerging 
markets,  with  stronger  fiscal  positions,  higher  reserves,  and  less  exposure  to  foreign-currency 
denominated debt. 
Changes in financial markets, including those that are the subject of your conference, have improved 
the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation  and  improved  our  confidence  in  the  ability  of  markets  to 
absorb stress. In financial systems around the world, the capital positions of banks have improved and 
capital  markets  are becoming  deeper  and  playing a  larger  role  in  financial  intermediation.  Financial 
innovation  has  improved  the  capacity  to  measure  and  manage  risk.  Risk  is  spread  more  broadly 
across countries and institutions. 
Technological change and the relaxation of controls have made it possible for capital to move more 
freely across national borders. And the characteristic reluctance of savers to invest outside their home 
market may be diminishing. 
Alongside these longer terms trends, financial markets today also show the effects of other forces. The 
extraordinary growth in earnings of energy and commodity exporters, the substantial rise in wealth that 
has come with rapid growth in China, India, and other emerging markets, together with efforts by many 
of those governments to stem the appreciation of their currencies, has led to a rise in capital flows, 
official and private, into the United States and other major economies. These flows seem large enough 
to have had a material effect on global interest rates and asset prices. 
These changes in economic conditions reinforce each other. The long period of relative economic and 
financial  stability  has  reinforced  expectations  of  future  stability,  reducing  implied  volatility  and  risk 
premia, increasing comfort with higher leverage, and encouraging flows of capital into riskier assets. 
BIS Review 49/2007 
 1
The low level of real interest rates that has prevailed in much of the world through this expansion has 
contributed to relatively accommodative financial conditions. The high levels of reserve accumulation 
by  governments  with  heavily  managed  exchange  rate  regimes  put  downward  pressure  on  forward 
interest rates, potentially distorting asset prices. The increase in size of sovereign wealth funds, the 
shift in assets to hedge fund and private equity managers, and the possible reduction in home bias 
among private savers have increased the amount of mobile capital in search of higher returns. The 
resilience of the market in the face of the latest shocks has increased confidence in future financial 
resilience. In these conditions, market participants face more acutely the classic dilemma of deciding 
whether to follow the market, or to buy more insurance against the risk of a reversal at the expense of 
near term returns. 
This mix of forces operating on financial conditions presents challenges for policymakers and financial 
markets participants, for it makes it harder to figure out what is fundamental and enduring and what is 
temporary  or  transitional,  or  the  result  of  policy  distortions.  Confidence  exists  alongside  concerns 
about sustainability. 
Although  there  is  much  that  is  positive  in  the  world  today,  there  is  little  reason  to  believe  we  have 
entered a new era of permanent stability. Financial innovation and global financial integration do not 
offer the prospect of eliminating the risk of asset price and credit cycles, of manias and panics, or of 
shocks that could have systemic consequences. 
Over the past 25 years or so, we have seen a significant number of episodes of financial shocks, in 
U.S. markets and globally. Although more different than similar in their nature and impact, they had 
some common features. They were unanticipated.  The causes varied, with some associated with a 
substantial deterioration in the real economy, and others not. And they typically involved the dynamic 
in which a sharp change in risk perception results in a fall in asset prices and a sharp reduction in 
market liquidity, and an increase in correlations across asset classes. As market participants move to 
protect themselves against further losses, by selling positions, requiring more margin, hedging against 
further declines, the shock is amplified and the brake becomes the accelerator. 
All  markets  are  vulnerable  to  this  dynamic.  The  degree  of  vulnerability  is  not  something  we  can 
measure with any confidence, for it depends not just on the how market participants behave in the 
event, but on the complex interaction of a number of different factors. The vulnerability depends, for 
example,  on  the  size  of  the  asset  price  misalignment,  the  conditions  that  produced  it,  and  the 
magnitude of the shock to confidence in economic fundamentals. It depends on the scale of leverage 
in the system, and the incidence of leverage or concentration of exposure to different risk factors. It 
depends on the diversity of exposures or positions of different financial institutions. It depends on the 
presence  or  absence  of  distortions  or  market  failures,  moral  hazard  being  the  typical  problem.  It 
depends on perceptions of the capacity for monetary policy and other policies to adjust to mitigate the 
damage. 
The dramatic changes we’ve seen in the structure of financial markets over the past decade and more 
seem  likely  to  have  reduced  this  vulnerability.  The  larger  global  financial  institutions  are  generally 
stronger in terms of capital relative to risk. Technology and innovation in financial instruments have 
made it easier for institutions to manage risk. Risk is less concentrated in the banking system, where 
moral hazard concerns and other classic market failures are more likely to be an issue, and spread 
more broadly across a greater diversity of institutions. 
And yet this overall judgment, that both financial efficiency and stability have improved, requires some 
qualification. Writing a decade ago about the history of the financial shocks of the 1980s and early 
1990s, Jerry Corrigan wrote that these same changes in financial markets we see today, though less 
pronounced then than now, created the possibility that financial shocks would be less frequent, but in 
some contexts they could be more damaging. This judgment, that systemic financial crises are less 
probable,  but,  in  the  event  they  occur  could  be  harder  to  manage,  should  be  the  principal 
preoccupation of market participants and policymakers today.  
What factors might contribute to this risk, a risk that could be described as the possibility of longer, 
fatter tails? One reason is a consequence of consolidation. The major banks are larger and stronger 
today, and it would take a much larger shock to make them vulnerable than was true in the past. But in 
that event, the consequence of their failure could be greater for markets. 
Another reason is the consequence of leverage. Leveraged arbitrage activity, so some of the literature 
suggests, is likely to reduce volatility in normal times and increase it in times of stress, because of the 
greater financial constraints faced by leveraged funds relative to larger, more diversified banks and 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2007
investment banks. Whether this matters in a systemic sense or not depends on the heterogeneity of 
funds and how correlated their exposures are with those of the major banks and investment banks. 
A third reason is the consequence of long periods of low losses and low volatility. When markets have 
been through a sustained period of relative stability and low credit losses, this reduces the estimates 
of potential losses produced by conventional risk management tools. Like gravity, this force is hard to 
counteract.  And  when  we’ve  had  a  long  period  of  low  realized  losses,  rapid  change  in  markets, 
dramatic growth in new instruments, and larger potential leverage, this creates a greater possibility of 
unanticipated  losses,  and  therefore  a  greater  potential  for  the  trend  amplifying,  positive  feedback 
effects that have characterized the major asset price shocks of 1987 and 1998. 
Policymakers  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  eliminate  the  risk  of  excess  leverage  or  asset  price 
misalignments, nor do we have the ability to act preemptively to diffuse them. And yet policy can play 
a very important role in limiting the vulnerability of financial markets to the risk that a shock will pose 
greater  potential  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  to  economic  growth.  A  few  points 
about both monetary policy and supervision in this context. 
It  is  now  the  consensus  of  most  practicing  central  bankers  that  monetary  policy  can’t  do  much 
preemptively  to  correct  an  existing  substantial  asset  price  misalignment.  But  if  monetary  policy  is 
calibrated appropriately to keep aggregate demand growing roughly in balance with aggregate supply 
and to keep inflation low and stable, this reduces the risk that such misalignments will emerge and 
expand. 
This is not always easy. It is especially hard to do in circumstances where the central bank is subject 
to  other  policy  objectives.  The  most  prominent  source  of  conflict  is  an  exchange  rate  objective; 
countries with even modestly open capital accounts will not find it possible to sustain a commitment to 
prevent the exchange rate from appreciating without eventually facing the risk of rising credit growth, 
asset  price  inflation,  and  inflation  in  the  price  of  goods  and  services.  This  challenge  is  becoming 
harder to manage for some large emerging market economies, and it is the principal reason why in 
those countries there is an expectation in the markets that monetary policy will have to be tighter and 
exchange rate regimes more flexible over time. And as this happens it will, among other things, alter 
the balance of forces that have been operating on global capital flows. 
Beyond monetary policy, the principal tools available to policymakers are the province of supervision. 
And in this area, the most important things we can to reduce the risk of systemic financial crisis are to 
strengthen  the  shock  absorbers  in  the  financial  system,  both  in  terms  of  the  financial  cushions 
available to absorb losses and the capacity of the financial infrastructure to manage stress. 
In terms of the financial cushions, the challenge is to sustain a level of capital and liquidity that is large 
enough to withstand a more adverse financial and economic environment than we have experience 
recently.  Here  the  job  of  the  risk  management  discipline  is  to  try  to  compensate  for  failure  of 
imagination, to counteract the gravitational effect on measured exposure produced by recent history, 
and  to  try  to  anticipate  the  adverse  effects  on  market  liquidity  that  may  come  with  a  shock.  This 
requires a healthy skepticism about models, discipline and care in the face of competitive pressures, 
and humility about what we can know about the future.  
In the world of infrastructure, the challenge is not just about the strength of the physical infrastructure, 
the capacity to handle volume, operational resilience, and vulnerability to single points of failure. Here 
the challenge is about the softer infrastructure, as well, such as the arrangements for resolving a credit 
event or the close out or liquidation of a complex fund or institution. 
The Federal Reserve is involved in a range of important initiatives on both fronts, working closely with 
the lead supervisors of the major global financial institutions and market infrastructure operators. Over 
the past few years, we have initiated targeted reviews, aimed at improving the sophistication of stress 
testing practice, counterparty credit risk management in OTC derivatives, structured credit, and hedge 
funds,  and  the  post  trade  processing  infrastructure  in  the  OTC  derivatives  markets.  We  are  also 
looking carefully at liquidity risk management practice and the management of the bridge exposures 
institutions run in leverage lending, leveraged buyout and merger and acquisition financing, and credit 
activities more generally. 
These  initiatives  are  designed  with  several  important  features:  first,  to  bring  more  evenness  to  the 
incentives faced by the major global institutions, through closer cooperation across supervisors within 
the United States and across countries; second, to foster more agility in the supervisory agenda, and a 
capacity to adapt to change that more closely matches the rapid evolution in market developments; 
and third, to try to encourage market-led initiatives, reinforced rather than imposed by supervision. The 
BIS Review 49/2007 
 3
careful work of Counterparty Credit Risk Management Policy Group II led by Jerry Corrigan – with the 
supervisory  initiatives  I  referred  to  is  an  example.  Today,  18  global  banks  outlined  another  set  of 
commitments to reduce settlement risk in the equity derivatives market. 
This approach to supervision is designed to look ahead to try to ensure the adequacy of capital and 
liquidity,  and  the  sophistication  of  risk  management  discipline  relative  to  risk,  over  time  and  at  all 
points in the cycle. I outlined earlier the reasons why monetary policy has only limited capacity to deal 
preemptively  with  financial  bubbles.  Similarly,  I  see  little  prospect  that  supervision  will  have  the 
capacity to identify and address potential concentrations in exposure to individual risk factors, whether 
through changes to capital charges or other means. Focusing on the quality and strength of cushions 
against tail risk is the best way for supervision to be countercyclical rather than procyclical. 
The  subtitle  of  your  conference  is,  I  believe,  “Where’s  the  Risk?”  And  as  this  implies,  there  is  still 
substantial  interest  in  markets  and  official  circles  in  finding  ways  to  use  greater  transparency  to 
improve the capacity of markets, and supervisors, to try to address emerging risks early, to let the air 
out of crowded trades and concentrations of leverage or risk before they reach potentially troubling 
proportions. We will continue to explore ways to improve the quality of public disclosure by financial 
institutions, and other sources of information on financial activity. But we do not have the capacity to 
put  in  place  a  transparency  regime  over  markets  that  would  give  people  a  real-time  picture  of  the 
incidence and magnitude of potential risks. The pace of change is too rapid, the number of positions, 
funds, and institutions too great, and the analytical challenge too complex to offer the promise of that 
type of early warning system. 
The conditions we see prevailing in global financial markets today reflect a range of different factors, 
some  fundamental  and  others  that  are  less  likely  to  be  enduring.  The  most  effective  thing  that 
policymakers  and  market  participants  can  do  in  what  is  a  necessarily  uncertain  world  is  to  work  to 
ensure that the shock absorbers are strong relative to the range of potential economic and financial 
outcomes. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2007
