Savenaca Narube: Brief look at the insurance industry and the economy in Fiji 
Address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Launch  of  Life 
Insurance Corporation of India Fiji Operations’ New Bula Gold product, Suva, 4 July 2007. 
 Mr. N Krishnan, Chief Manager Fiji Operations: 
Distinguished Guests: 
Management and staff of LICI: 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Introductory remarks 
Good evening. 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  the  launch  of  LICI’s  new  insurance  product.  I  always 
welcome  the  opportunity  to  attend  this  type  of  functions  to  launch  new  products  or  services  to  the 
financial system. This helps create a competitive environment and most importantly better address the 
needs of the customer. 
I  congratulate  the  Directors,  Management  and  team  at  LICI  for  this  initiative.  I  am  sure  that  this 
initiative will take you closer to your vision “To be the preferred life insurer of the people of Fiji by 
providing innovative life insurance products and world class service at affordable rates”. 
LICI’s global operations 
LICI has a long and rich history. The other day in preparation for this event I went to their website and I 
was very impressed with what I found. I learnt that LICI came into existence on 1 September 1956 as 
a statutory corporation after the Indian parliament nationalised 200 or so private insurance companies. 
Today, apart from India, LICI operates in over 10 countries such as Nepal, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Fiji, 
Kenya,  Untied  Kingdom, Saudi  Arabia,  UAE and  Oman.  It  is  the  largest  financial  institution  in  India 
with an asset base of US$1.1 billion. 
Let me mention a few other issues on their website. As at 31 March 2006:  
• 
• 
LICI is the world’s largest life insurance company in terms of number of policies served; 
It sold the largest number of policies in the world in a year. LICI sold about 24 million policies 
in 2005 alone; 
LICI has the world’s largest agency force network. LICI has over 1 million agents which is 
more than Fiji’s population; 
It  holds  the  world’s  highest  claims  settlement  record.  Interestingly,  LICI  claims  to  settle  a 
claim  every  time  you  breathe  and  that  is  a  lot  of  claims.  In  2005,  LICI  settled  about  10.3 
million claims to its policy holders or their families; and 
LICI has over 114,000 employees and 2,050 branches worldwide. 
   LICI’s Fiji operations 
From that impressive global record, let me say something about their Fiji operations. It started in 1956 
with the newly formed statutory corporation taking over New India’s life insurance portfolio. So they 
have been in Fiji for over 50 years. I congratulate them on this milestone.  
Statistics show that LICI Fiji: 
• 
• 
• 
Services about 50,000 policies; 
Has total premium income of F$21.85 million in 2005; 
Settled claims totaling F$15.8 million in 2005; 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
Distributed F$5.8 million as bonuses to policy holders in 2005; and 
Has a total asset of F$164.75 million as at 31 December 2005. 
• 
• 
As you can see, LICI has contributed significantly to the growth of the insurance industry in Fiji and to 
the  development  of  the  country.  Insurance  as  you  know  is  an  important  aspect  of  personal  and 
corporate life. I am glad to say that LICI is at the forefront of the industry and I hope will continue to 
play this lead role in the future.  
Insurance industry in Fiji 
As  the  regulator  of  the  insurance  industry  in  Fiji,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  satisfied  with  the  overall 
performance  of  the  industry.  Insurance  companies  are  well  capitalised  and  adequately  meet  their 
solvency  requirements.  As  you  would  expect  of  the  long  term  nature  of  business,  the  bulk  of  their 
assets is invested in Government securities and term deposits with commercial banks. 
But the insurance industry faces several challenges. 
The first is the impact of the economic climate that the country is currently facing. As the economic 
decline  reduces  real  incomes,  policyholders  may  default  on  premiums  and  even  surrender  their 
policies.  This  comes  at  a  time  when  the  risks  to  businesses  may  be  growing.  I  am  informed  that 
insurance companies including LICI have introduced measures to address this challenge. I wish them 
well in this regard. 
The second challenge comes from abroad in the form of natural and man made disasters. The world 
insurance market is still reeling from the impact of the devastation of nine eleven, the hurricane in New 
Orleans and Tsunami in Asia. In addition, the increase in terrorism activities poses a huge challenge 
for the insurance industry. The recent bombings in London and Scotland are a worry. As a result, the 
hardening of world premiums is bound to affect the domestic insurance markets. 
The third challenge is the introduction of new international financial reporting standards. As a result of 
these new standards, we have seen a fall in asset values of insurance companies, which has reduced 
their solvency surplus in 2006. Those affected by this development will need to revalue both sides of 
their balance sheets and take immediate measures to bring their solvency surpluses to the required 
level. 
As the regulator, I must say that the Reserve Bank has enjoyed a very collaborative relationship with 
the industry. We continue to meet once a year with individual companies. The Insurance Task Force 
has helped resolved many issues and I would like this Committee to meet more often in 2007. I am 
glad to say that the insurance industry is sound and the financial system is stable. On our part, the 
Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  develop  new  policies  and  progressively  move  towards  enhancing  its 
supervision based on sound risk assessments. 
The Fiji economy 
On the economy, the Macroeconomic Policy Committee made up of officials from the Reserve Bank, 
Ministry of Finance, Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Commerce, FIRCA and 
the Prime Minister’s Office will review the 2007 projection this month. In this review, the Committee will 
need to take into account the following: 
• 
Firstly, where will the tourist numbers be in 2007? The tourist arrival numbers was down by 
5.5 percent up to March. The good thing is that this number is better than what we expected. 
But we obviously need to have more up-to-date data on this important industry. From our 
selected survey, occupancy rates are still low.  
Secondly, will the trade unions go on strike? If they do, this will have a very significant impact 
on the economy.  
Thirdly, where is inflation heading? At 6.6 percent at the end of May, inflation is at its highest 
level for many years and in my view, we have yet to see the peak. The impact of the recent 
floods on inflation appears to be taking a long time to correct itself. Market food prices have 
remained persistently high due to a growth in supply for export markers. Because of this, we 
are now revising upwards our inflation projection for 2007. We will announce this figure soon. 
BIS Review 77/2007
  2 
  Lastly, what is happening to exports? The Reserve Bank has emphasized numerous times 
that  the  Fiji  economy  needs  to  be  export  led.  In  this  round  of  review,  we  will  need  to 
reassess the trend in exports.  
In summary, economic management has never been as complicated in my experience then what we 
are facing now. I do not for one moment pretend to know all the answers. But a few things that we 
need to keep in mind as we collectively search for solutions: 
• 
First,  we  need  to  develop  a  total  economic  program.  This  holistic  approach  is  extremely 
critical to ensure that all policies are pulling in the same consistent direction all the time. It 
will also bring transparency, certainty and predictability to economic policies. 
Secondly, we have to adopt a medium term view rather than a short term one. We all know 
that  economic  statistics  come  at  a  lag  and  they  do  fluctuate  from  month  to  month.  In  my 
view, we will secure more dividends if we develop a medium term policy approach.  
Thirdly, we need to protect our financial stability at all times. And we have done that in terms 
of  domestic  and  external.  Government  budget  is  stable  and  foreign  reserves  are  holding. 
Sustainability is the key. We should resist the temptation to go for short-term gains, which 
may create more serious problems for us in the future. Building a good economic platform 
takes time. But it will help us in the long term.  
Finally, let us take action where we are clear of what we should do. Often, we know what we 
need to do. Even overseas analysts tell us what we already know. But unfortunately, we take 
our time getting those things done. I believe that we are now in a situation that we must act. 
We need to do all we can to build confidence, remove barriers to investment, raise exports, 
execute reforms, resolve the land tenure issue and so forth. 
   We  are  currently  projecting  an  economic  turn  around  in  2008.  We  should  be  able  to  achieve  this. 
Moreover, we should aim to exceed the 2 percent growth estimated for 2008 and we can easily do 
what we need to do now. 
On  monetary  policy,  as  I  said,  foreign  reserves  have  stabilized.  This  implies  that  our  policies  are 
working to slow down consumption. But it can also be the result of the economic downturn and the 
delay  in  major  investment  projects  which  have  sizeable  import  contents.  Exports  are  still  not 
performing. So we are still concerned about the medium term. In such a time like this we have to be 
pragmatic about what we can do. Our credit ceiling will be in place for some time. We have allowed 
liquidity  to  rise  which  has  led  to  commercial  banks  reducing  their  lending  rates.  And  we  have 
announced that only applications for advance payments for imports more than F$15,000 will require 
Bank approval. The Bank believes that this policy measure will facilitate trade payments and assist 
importers meet their overseas commitments. 
Let me add here that the Bank is not considering any devaluation of the currency. 
New Bula Gold 
Of course, today, we are here to celebrate the launch of the New Bula Gold product. I understand that 
this product has been developed in response to customer demand. Customer, and that is you and me, 
are key to any business these days. It is therefore extremely encouraging that LICI is listening to our 
voice.  
I understand that New Bula Gold is a money-back type of plan. It supplements most of the features of 
LICI Fiji existing money-back plans like the “Money Tree” range of products. But this New Bula Gold 
product goes beyond the existing products. It has three new features. These are auto cover, extended 
term cover and funeral expenses benefit. 
I will end there lest I say something wrong about the product. I will leave Mr Krishnan and his team to 
explain to us all the good features of this new product. They are even ready to sign on customers. I 
wish LICI and Mr Krishnan every success. 
Concluding remarks 
In concluding, I would like to thank Mr. Krishnan again for inviting me here this evening. I congratulate 
you on this initiative and wish you every success. 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 3
Official launching 
I now have much pleasure in launching the New Bula Gold product. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2007
