Tarisa Watanagase: The Thai economy – risks, challenges, and opportunities 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Foreign Bank Association 
Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 28 February 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Distinguished members of the Foreign Banks' Association, 
Fellow bankers, members of the press, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to be here today, and to have this opportunity to share with you some thoughts 
on the challenges and outlook for the economy and our banking sector this year. 
This  forum  has  always  been  one  where  we  can  have  frank  discussions.  And  I  very  much  look 
forward  to  hearing  your  views.  Indeed,  open  communication  is  the  cornerstone  of  a  healthy 
working relationship. 
Today, I would like to focus on three key topics. 
First, the outlook for the economy, 
Second, the immediate challenges for the economy and the banking sector, 
And  third,  prospects  for  the  Thai  economy  and  the  banking  system  in  the  medium  and  longer 
terms. 
Let me begin with the economy. 
Last year was a challenging year for all of us. The economy was buffeted by several negative factors. 
These  included  political  uncertainties,  high  oil  prices  and  severe  flooding  in  many  provinces.  The 
combination of these factors led to increased upside risks to inflation, especially during the first half of 
2006; and downside risks to growth. Domestic demand softened, and robust exports on the back of 
strong global growth helped sustain the momentum of the economy. 
Our  policy  response,  namely  monetary  tightening,  proved  timely.  And  as  a  result,  inflation  and  its 
second  round  effects  have  been  well  contained.  Headline  inflation  came  down  from  a  peak  of  6 
percent in the second quarter, to 3.3 percent in the last quarter, and to 3 percent in January this year. 
Meanwhile,  external  stability  continues  to  improve,  with  current  account  turning  into  surplus,  and  a 
strengthening of international reserves to almost 67 billion US dollars. 
The  economy  proved  to  be  quite  resilient  to  external  shocks.  And  growth  momentum  continued 
satisfactorily at 5.1 percent for the whole of last year. 
But  most  of  you  are  probably  more  concerned  about  prospects  for  this  year  and  the  next.  This  is 
understandable. This year, the economy will continue to face a number of important challenges. 
Economic  uncertainty  has  increased,  as  evidenced  by  declining  investor  sentiment  and  consumer 
confidence. Outside Thailand, the threat of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances still persists. 
At home, the implementation of the reserve requirement and the introduction of the amended Foreign 
Business Act turned out to be unpleasant surprises to investors and the global community. And on top 
of all these, political uncertainty remains a material factor in the private sector's decision to invest. 
The concern that some of you may have is: Can Thailand weather all these challenges well? Are we 
turning  our  back  on  globalization?  A  confluence  of  events  in  the  past  few  months  does  appear  to 
present a cause for concern. But I believe that Thailand will persevere, and that we should continue to 
take all advantages that globalization has to offer for years to come. 
Our  outlook  for  the  Thai  economy  in  the  medium  term  remains  positive.  Our  forecasts,  once 
incorporating the risks I mentioned, show the Thai economy growing by 4-5 percent in 2007 and by 
4-5  percent  in  2008.  The  growth  is  expected  to  come  mainly  from  exports,  given  healthy  global 
conditions,  additional  government  spending,  and  lower  oil  prices.  These  represent  a  respectable 
growth outlook for Thailand in light of the challenges and our focus on stability. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
But a positive outlook by no means allows for complacency. We must constantly work to identify and 
manage the challenges. This leads me to my second point. 
What are the key challenges to the Thai economy in the near term? 
The  first  major  challenge  is  that  of  financial  globalization.  On  the  financial  system  front, 
globalization  brings  complex  financial  instruments  that  require  significant  improvement  in  risk 
management, and the challenge of meeting international standards of Basel II and IAS 39. These are 
the manifestation of the forces of globalization that the Thai banking system is already facing, and will 
continue to face. 
The  overall  effect  is  that  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  may  be  subject  to  heightened 
uncertainties.  And  unless  we  strengthen  our  ability  to  manage  these  risks  and  challenges,  the 
vulnerability can exacerbate, with possible implications for our economic and financial stability. 
This, in my view, is a major challenge for all of us in the financial community. 
The  second  major  challenge  to  the  Thai  economy  is  how  to  cope  successfully  with  volatile 
global financial markets and an appreciating baht. This challenge is the more pressing of the two. 
Let me explain why. 
Thailand,  like  many  emerging  market  economies  with  a  small  and  shallow  financial  market,  is 
particularly vulnerable to fast-moving international capital. Such rapid movements of capital flows, if 
vastly  out  of  line  with  our  ability  to  absorb  it,  can  have  negative  impacts  on  the  export  or  import 
sectors, depending on the direction of the exchange rate movement. In our case, the recent surge in 
speculative  capital  inflows  caused  a  rapid  one-way  appreciation  of  the  baht  relative  to  regional 
currencies. The appreciation momentum hardly reflected our economic fundamentals. Left unchecked, 
it could have presented a clear threat to growth and stability – beginning with export, a current engine 
of growth, trickling down to the real sector, and eventually harming financial stability. 
In  dealing  with  currency  appreciation,  the  prevailing  wisdom  of  "letting  the  market  work"  has  been 
given  a  chance.  Yet  the  baht  kept  rising  against  almost  all  major  and  regional  currencies  at  an 
alarming speed. Letting such rapid appreciation work itself out could have entailed significant risks to 
our agriculture sector, which employs nearly 40% of the labor force, and small and medium-sized firms 
in the labor-intensive manufacturing sector. We recognize that the real sector needs to adjust. But the 
overall economy needed some breathing room to afford a smooth transition. 
After  a  number  of  unsuccessful  capital  account  measures,  we  resorted  to  imposing  a  reserve 
requirement  on  capital  inflows  in  December  to  break  the  rapid  one-way  momentum  and  preserve 
overall stability. To this end, the measure has succeeded in its task. 
To be sure, no measure is cost-free. The reserve requirement has imparted a wide-ranging effect on 
the market and the economy. In response to this, once the appreciation momentum was broken, we 
have  been  carefully  modifying  the  coverage  of  the  measure  to  allow  greater  flexibility  for  business 
operations without compromising the needs to contain excessive volatility. We did this by providing the 
option to hedge fully for loans and inter-company loans. At the same time, significant relaxations on 
capital outflow were undertaken earlier this year to bring about a better balance between inflows and 
outflows. 
Let me be clear that the reserve requirement was designed to preserve market stability and to afford 
the  real  sector,  which  includes  many  SME  operations,  time  to  adjust  to  a  more  volatile  market 
condition. To be clear, the reserve requirement was not designed to maintain a certain exchange-rate 
level. 
While  the  measure  was  necessary,  we  recognize  its  negative  long-term  effects  and  the  adverse 
consequences on investor confidence and financial market development. As such, let me emphasize 
again that the reserve requirement is not a permanent measure; it is temporary. Its need is subject to 
constant review by the Bank of Thailand as the situation develops. A database of capital flows is also 
being  upgraded.  When  we  are  satisfied  that  the  situation  has  normalized  –  that  is,  the  one-way 
speculation has more or less disappeared, and that the exchange rate movement is in line with other 
regional currencies – then we should be able to remove this measure. I will specifically address this 
issue again toward the end of my talk today. 
My  third  and  final  point  has  to  do  with  how  we  should  deal  with  the  challenge  of  global 
dynamism in the medium and longer terms. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
Global dynamism in the form of international competition and the unwinding of global imbalances will 
remain with us for the foreseeable future. During the transition, monetary policy can and must play a 
vital  role  in  supporting  the  economy  in  its  adjustment  to  the  impact  of  global  imbalances.  As  the 
balance of risk shifts from inflation to growth, the Bank of Thailand will ensure that monetary policy will 
continue to focus on stability while supporting growth. On the external stability front, should there be a 
disorderly  unwinding  of  global  imbalances,  we  may  see  rapid US  dollar  depreciation,  which  will put 
greater pressure on the baht. 
Adjusting  to  these  rapid  exchange  rate  movements  is  inevitable.  Last  year,  the  Bank  of  Thailand 
intervened when necessary in the FX  market to smooth the adjustment. This led to the increase in 
international reserves from 52 billion US dollars at the end of 2005 to almost 67 billion US dollars by 
the end of last year. In addition, the forward obligation rose from 3.8 billion US dollars in 2005 to 6.9 
billion US dollars in 2006. These FX interventions and exchange rate movements do have implications 
for our own balance sheet. 
First, the appreciation resulted in the unrealized loss from FX valuation of the international asset we 
hold when marked-to-market in baht. Simply put, the value of our international reserves in baht terms 
has fallen purely due to the falling US dollar and other major currencies vis-à-vis the baht. 
Second,  FX  interventions  lead  to  increased  domestic  liquidity.  As  a  result,  monetary  sterilization  is 
required to remove the resultant liquidity and safeguard price stability. This is a necessary and justified 
cost to central banks for preserving price stability, and safeguarding the economy against excessive 
exchange rate movements. 
Such losses are an unavoidable consequence of central banking operations under a managed floating 
exchange  rate  regime.  As  regional  currencies  have  sharply  strengthened  over  the  past  year,  most 
central  banks  in  the  region  will  also  be  facing  a  similar  challenge.  The  key  point  here  is  that,  our 
foreign assets, measured in foreign currency terms, have not fallen. More importantly, the goal of a 
central bank is to maintain monetary and financial stability. And I want to assure you that the loss will 
not affect the capacity of the Bank of Thailand in delivering its mandate in any way. 
In the final analysis, monetary and financial stability alone can only provide a favorable environment 
for sustainable growth, but it is not sufficient to ensure that Thailand will overcome the challenge of 
global  dynamism  over  the  long  run.  The  critical  challenge  here  is  for  the  Thai  economy  to  make 
sustained gains in productivity through increased flexibility, efficiency, and competitiveness amid ever-
changing global economic conditions and structure. In this respect, we need to continue with financial 
and  real  sector  reforms,  and  pursue  policies  that  promote  macroeconomic  flexibility  and  sustained 
growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I want to turn now to the banking sector and its challenges in the medium and longer terms. 
Despite a challenging year, the banking system turned in a sound and robust performance, recording 
profit for the 5th consecutive year. Strong earnings over the past few years, together with improved 
asset quality and recapitalization efforts have strengthened banks' capital base. The BIS capital ratio 
is at a comfortable level and the NPL ratio has declined. 
Loan  growth  has  moderated  in  line  with  the  economy,  while  borrowers  as  well  as  banks,  have 
exercised caution in light of prevailing uncertainties. Improved financial strength and equally important, 
significant improvement in risk management at banks, have contributed to the resiliency of the system. 
This allows it to withstand the forces of change from globalization and intensified competition in the 
banking industry. 
Banks  will  need  to  further  build  on  this  significant  progress  in  order  to  meet  the  challenges  going 
forward.  These  include  macroeconomic  challenges,  growing  pressure  from  increasing  competition, 
and  the  changing  regulatory  environment.  Obviously,  the  ability  to  meet  these  challenges  varies 
among  banks.  But  we,  as  regulators,  are  well  prepared  to  steer  a  steady  course  for  the  banking 
system as a whole. 
As  you  know,  the  first  phase  of  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  has  been  completed.  We  have 
already seen significant consolidation and increased efficiency of the banking sector. We are moving 
onto  the  second  phase  of  the  Master  Plan,  which  will  further  step  up  the  pace  of  reform.  This  will 
increase the efficiency of the system and ensure that it can meet intensified competition that will come 
with globalization. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
Let  me  emphasize  that  globalization  is  a  pervasive  process.  Given  financial  innovations,  it  can 
transcend national borders even without an explicit market opening. Our liberalization strategy is to 
ensure strengthening of the domestic system, and allow gradual opening of the banking sector. This 
will  mean  new  entries  into  the  system,  as  well  as  more  intensified  competition  between  existing 
players. The phasing of this process will be consistent with continued economic and financial stability. 
The banking system must be prepared for greater competition. 
Improved  risk  management  framework  will  be  the  critical  success  factor  for  banks'  ability  to  meet 
future  challenges.  These  include  the  adoption  of  IAS  39,  currently  underway,  and  the  new  Basel 
Capital Accord at the end of next year. We realize that these reforms pose a major challenge to the 
banking system in Thailand as in the global market. However, the process of policy consultation and 
dialogue with the banking sector has assured us that banks are able to cope, although some more so 
than others. Nevertheless, IAS 39 will improve the transparency and provision buffer against impaired 
assets,  while  Basel  II  has  already  raised  the  standard  of  risk  management  that  will  be  absolutely 
crucial going forward. 
In summary, 
We  are  moving  in  the  right  direction  and  are  in  a  good  position  to  build  on  this  reform  and  to 
consolidate our progress. 
How well-founded is our confidence? 
As you know, we are currently undergoing the Financial Sector Assessment Programme or FSAP 
with  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  which  assesses  the  supervisory  process  and  financial  sector 
soundness. 
Preliminary findings on our compliance to the BIS core principles of banking supervision are favorable, 
with the results mostly fully compliant and largely compliant. All in all, Thailand's supervisory system 
compares well to international best practices. The only exception, as we all know, has to do with the 
inadequacy  of  the  current  legal  infrastructure  that  provides  for  the  Central  Bank's  autonomy  and 
explicit supervisory power in key areas. 
I must thank the tremendous effort and cooperation made by the banking sector throughout 
the whole FSAP process thus far. The next phase of the process will involve the stress test 
analysis of the banking system, which again, will require your cooperation. 
The value of this exercise is not only to confirm our strength, but also to help guide us to areas of 
improvement that can safeguard us against future challenges. You can expect more improvements in 
our supervisory system in the months and years ahead, especially after the new Financial Institutions 
Businesses Act is enacted. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The economy and the banking system have come a long way to reach this point, where we are able to 
remain  resilient  against  many  difficult  challenges.  Such  ability,  to  a  large  extent,  rests  crucially  on 
setting the right policies to safeguard economic and financial stability. 
For  this,  I  have  an  excellent  team  of  people  with  the  knowledge  and  experience  to  help  me  deal 
effectively with the risks and the challenges. On the financial stability side, the team is headed by Dr. 
Bandid  Nijathaworn,  and  on  the  monetary  stability  side,  by  Dr.  Atchana  Waiquamdee,  both  of 
whom  are  here  with  me  today.  And  with  the  excellent  cooperation  from  our  colleagues  in  the 
financial  sector,  I  am  confident  that  the  banking  sector  and  the  economy  will  continue  to  make 
solid and sustainable progress. 
In closing, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to all of you who have contributed to our 
progress through your frank and candid dealings  with us; and the competition  you have infused 
into  the  banking  system  that  has  benefited  consumers  and  served  the  business  community  at 
large. Indeed, orderly market competition is the most potent economic force that fosters progress. 
I hope that we will continue to build on this great relationship. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Tomorrow,  March  the  first,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  implement  a  final  review  of  the  reserve 
requirement  measure  to  give  more  flexibility  to  investors.  Fully  hedged  capital  inflows  for  the 
purchases of bonds, mutual fund shares, and property fund shares will be exempted from the reserve 
requirement.  In  essence,  all  investment  flows  that  are  until  today  subject  to  the  reserve 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2007
requirement will be given a full-hedging option. With this announcement, let me conclude my talk 
this evening. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 5
