Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Nikkei Business Magazine 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  on 
23 April 2007  by  Mr  Yoshiya  Sato  and  Mr  Shun  Tamura,  published  in  Nikkei  Business  Magazine, 
14 May 2007. 
 Fifty years have now passed since the signing of the Treaty of Rome, which established the 
European Union. How would you evaluate what has been achieved since then?
The achievements are remarkable, truly historical. The EU motto, which I like very much, is “United in 
Diversity”, and that is precisely what we have been able to accomplish.  
As you know, the earliest forerunner of the current EU was the European Coal and Steel Community 
(ECSC),  limited  cooperation  set  up  between  six  countries,  namely  France,  Germany,  Italy  and  the 
three  Benelux  countries,  in  1952.  However,  the  actual  concept  of  a  single  market  for  the  EU  was 
affirmed  when  the  Treaty  of  Rome  was  signed  in  1957.  If  we  look  back  at  the  first  half  of  the  last 
century, we see the tragedy of war all too clearly. If I were to summarise the heart of the European 
concept, it would be that of nations wanting to establish definitive peace between them and to work 
together in the pursuit of prosperity for all. 
The  six  have  now  become  27,  and  their  cooperation  is  no  longer  limited  to  coal  and  steel,  but 
encompasses all areas of the economy. We have a European Parliament, a European Court of Justice 
and we have even introduced a single currency, the euro. With the enlargement of the EU, we now 
have a market of around half a billion people and the introduction of the euro means that there is now 
truly a Single Market with a single currency for 318 million European citizens. 
The motto “United in Diversity” seems to hold the key to understanding the EU; would it be 
correct to say that this tolerance of diversity is the driving force behind the European-style of 
reform which may not be rapid but is steady?
The  great  cultural  diversity  of  Europe  is  plain  to  see  and  that  cultural  diversity  is  one  of  the  EU’s 
greatest assets. It is essential for the European identity. I believe that this cultural diversity is a vital 
factor for making the EU an attractive concept. 
When it comes to the economy, the integration on the European continent delivers the economies of 
scale and all advantages you expect from a vast continental economy; this holds particularly true of 
the 13 countries that have adopted the single currency. 
Although some critics say that the EU and the ECB are not able to control these imbalances 
between the regions; it would seem that the EU economy as a whole has been strengthened as 
a result of the free movement of labour between regions. Is that correct?
Speaking only of the euro area, let me give you some figures for the number of jobs created in the 
eight years since the introduction of the euro; about 12 million jobs were created in this period, which 
is slightly more than the number created in the same period in the United States. If we look at the 
figure  for  jobs  created  in  the  eight  years  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  it  is  less  than  three 
million. 
I am not saying that this was solely due to the introduction of the euro; it is also evidence that the 
economic reforms within the EU are progressing steadily. That is precisely why we are in full support 
of the programme of structural reforms, based on the Lisbon Programme which was adopted in March 
2003, that are aimed at achieving economic growth and job creation. 
The European economy is currently performing well. Is this down to the economic cycle or is it 
something more sustainable resulting from the structural reforms?
That is an extremely important question. I would say that in the current situation Europe is benefiting 
greatly from the cyclical effect of the brisk expansion of the global economy, but the effects of the start 
of the structural reforms, which are clear from the job creation figures I touched on earlier, cannot be 
ignored. 
The creation of jobs is a great achievement and it is a result of the boost to internal trade given by 
Monetary Union. We still have work to do on improving labour productivity. The ECB considers the 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
current growth potential of the EU to be around 2.25%, but this could be increased through improved 
labour productivity, which is precisely why the agenda of structural reforms embedded in the Lisbon 
Programme must be implemented. 
What do you think are the reasons that labour productivity has failed to improve? Are there any 
particular  obstacles  to  overcome?  Could  it  be  that  the  diversity  is  actually  working  against 
reform?
No, no, that is definitely not the case. It is simply that we have to continue to reform all our markets – 
the goods, services, labour and financial markets – to make them more flexible.  
One problem that I can cite are the large discrepancies between the different sectors in the economy. 
The  reforms  are  ongoing,  but  –  while  productivity  in  the  manufacturing  industry  has  risen  rapidly 
thanks to the introduction of information technology, etc. – labour productivity progress is much slower 
in  the  service  sector.  If  we  are  to  improve  productivity  in  the  services  sector,  we  have  not  only  to 
increase the flexibility of the labour market, but also to bring about resolutely the rapid integration of 
the  services  sector.  As  regards  the  liberalisation  of  labour  markets,  it  is  essential  to  adapt  to  an 
environment that is changing rapidly as a result of developments in science and technology, and we 
strongly support those reforms. 
As regards the integration of financial markets, in addition to acting as a driving force for economic 
growth,  it  is  also  supporting  the  cohesion  of  the  euro  area:  it  is  an  effective  means  of  absorbing 
possible asymmetric shocks within the euro area.  
What has been the effect on European companies of the introduction of the euro?
First, the introduction of the euro has given European companies access to a financial market of the 
same order of magnitude as in the United States. In addition, the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary 
policy has given companies access to stable financing. It has helped them considerably to benefit not 
only from the single European market, but from the internationalisation of business. 
Going  back  to  financial  integration,  let  me  mention  that  several  initiatives  are  underway.  One  such 
initiative is the TARGET2 project. Since the introduction of the euro, the national large-value payment 
systems have been interconnected through the TARGET system. The next generation of this system 
is called “TARGET2” and will form a single platform for large payments in central bank money, starting 
in November this year. 
In addition, we have proposed the establishment of a single platform for the settlement of securities 
transactions with central bank money in a system we call TARGET2-Securities. 
It  is  important  that  the  ECB  fulfils  its  role  as  a  catalyst  for  economic  activity  through  enhanced 
integration of this kind. 
It has been some time now since the United Kingdom left the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) 
and there are still some northern European countries that have not yet adopted the euro; do 
you think that the euro area will expand further? Will it only be the smaller countries that adopt 
the euro from now on?
Slovenia adopted the euro in January of this year and there are now 13 countries in the euro area, 
representing 318 million inhabitants. Let me also stress that a further seven countries have linked their 
currency to the euro, and that 25 of the 27 countries in the EU do not have an opt-out clause, and are 
thus committed to enter the euro area if and when they meet the criteria for joining. The euro area is 
not a closed shop. There are certain standards, laid down in the Maastricht criteria, that have to be 
met in order to join the euro area. The introduction of the euro in Slovenia was a great success and I 
am sure that the euro area will continue to expand. 
The value of the euro has increased and the central banks of China, Russia and countries in 
the Middle East are increasing their component ratio of euro, and there are now more bonds 
and currency issued in euro than in US dollars; do you think that the euro could replace the US 
dollar as a key currency?
As far as the exchange rate is concerned, I will say what I signed at the meeting of the G7 on 14 April, 
namely  that  “excess  volatility  and  disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  are  undesirable  for 
economic  growth.”  I  will also repeat  that  I  have  noted  that  the Japanese authorities  have said  they 
believe the Japanese economy to be on a sustainable path of recovery and that the exchange rates 
should reflect these economic fundamentals. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
As  regards  the  use  of  the  euro  at  a  global  level,  the  ECB  is  neutral.  We  do  not  campaign  for  the 
international  use  of  the  euro.  That  has  been  our  position  since  the  euro  was  introduced,  and  that 
remains our position.  
Do you think that the rise of the newly emerging countries such as China, India and Russia, 
and the rapid increase in oil money, will make it difficult to maintain the stability of the existing 
global financial systems? What are your views on establishing a new international framework 
such as the “Plaza Agreement”?
First, China already takes part in the G7/G8 meetings when appropriate. And, second, together with all 
our partners of the G7, I believe that “in emerging economies with large and growing current account 
surpluses, especially China, it is desirable that their effective exchange rates move so that necessary 
adjustments will occur.” 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 3
