Svein Gjedrem: The outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the  Bergen 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Bergen, 11 April 2007. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 15 March and in Monetary Policy Report 
1/07. 
 Introduction 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  with  annual  consumer  price 
inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  enterprises  and 
households  with  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations.  Given  that  there  is  confidence  in  the  nominal 
anchor,  monetary  policy  shall  also  contribute  to  stable  developments  in  the  real  economy.  Norges 
Bank therefore operates a flexible inflation targeting regime. This means that weight is given to both 
variability in inflation and variability in output and employment in interest-rate setting. 
Flexible inflation targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is 
to keep inflation on target and provide an anchor for inflation expectations, and the more short-term 
objective of stability in the real economy. 
Low inflation and solid growth in the Norwegian economy 
Inflation in Norway decelerated markedly from the late-1980s to the mid-1990s and has since been 
low  and  stable,  and  fairly  close  to,  but  somewhat  lower  than  the  target  of  2.5  per  cent,  with 
considerably lower variability than earlier.  
Consumer prices show monthly variations. After a period of very low inflation in 2004, inflation was on 
the rise through 2005. Thereafter, domestic inflation showed an unexpected drop in 2006 and is still 
low. So far in 2007, it has edged up, but is still fairly low. Lower electricity prices have contributed to a 
fall in total CPI inflation in recent months. Underlying inflation, i.e. inflation adjusted for tax changes 
and excluding energy products, was fairly stable for a long period and has been estimated at between 
1 and 1½ per cent. The latest inflation figure indicates that underlying inflation is now in the upper end 
of the interval.  
The Norwegian economy is booming after a strong upturn since summer 2003. The upturn followed a 
period  of  slow  growth  from  1998  and  a  mild  slowdown  in  2002  and  into  2003.  Growth  has  been 
stronger than in the cyclical upturn in the mid-1990s. The growth period of recent years has been the 
longest unbroken growth period recorded in quarterly national accounts, which include figures back to 
1978.  Despite  cyclical  fluctuations,  growth  has  been  very  high  for  the  past  15  years.  So  far  in  the 
cyclical upturn, the mainland economy has grown by an average of just over 4 per cent annually.  
Utilisation of production capacity, labour and real capital has increased markedly since summer 2003, 
and  capacity  utilisation  is  now  very  high  in  most  industries.  There  are  reports  of  limited  capacity  in 
most  industries  and  regions  and  labour  shortages  in  almost  every  occupational  category.  In  some 
municipalities,  the  number  of  vacancies  is  higher  than  the  number  of  job-seekers.  There  are  also 
reports  of  shortages  of  other  factor  inputs.  There  are  shortages  of  drivers,  pre-school  teachers, 
supervisors, engineers, carpenters, architects, auditors, accountants, IT personnel and health workers. 
It  has  probably  not  been  since  the  1970s  that  we  find  such  widespread  reports  of  purely  physical 
production constraints, for example now in the form of shortages of rigs and other equipment in the 
petroleum  industry  or  shortages  of  plank,  concrete,  insulation  and  scaffolding  in  the  construction 
industry.  
New national accounts figures show that activity in the Norwegian economy increased at a faster-than-
projected pace in the period 2004 – 2006. The figures also indicate that productivity growth has been 
higher than expected. We interpret this to mean that the permanent level of production capacity has 
also  increased.  An  alternative  interpretation  is  that  favourable  cyclical  developments  are  fuelling 
productivity growth. If that is the case, it may show a marked decline when economic growth slows.  
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
Unemployment  has  fallen  sharply  in  the  past  few  quarters.  The  rate  of  decline  and  level  of 
unemployment are reminiscent of two previous cyclical peaks, the one in the mid-1980s and the other 
that started in the late-1990s and continued into this decade. Both expansions culminated in a sharp 
rise in wage and cost inflation.  
Employment growth was for a long period lower than in the cyclical upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. In 
the early phases of the upturn, output growth primarily reflected a strong increase in the number of 
person-hours worked partly owing to the marked  increase in average working hours when sickness 
absence  fell  in  2004.  A  high  level  of  inward  labour  migration  after  EU  enlargement  in  2004  also 
contributed to increasing economic capacity.  
Historically,  there  has  been  a  close  relationship  between  the  change  in  prices  for  domestically 
produced goods and services and the level of capacity utilisation, here measured by the output gap. 
This  relationship  broke  down  in  2006.  Surprisingly  low  inflation  through  2006,  despite  appreciably 
stronger  output  and  employment  growth,  may  indicate  that  developments  have  been  influenced  by 
conditions on the production and supply side of the economy.  
The present economic expansion differs from previous upturns in that inflation has remained low so far 
despite strong growth and increasing capacity utilisation. There are probably several reasons for this. 
First, low import prices and high prices for our commodity exports have improved Norway’s terms of 
trade  considerably.  Prices  for  oil  and  gas,  shipping,  fish,  industrial  commodities  and  engineering 
products  have  increased  considerably.  Moreover,  Norwegian  importers  have  gained  access  to  new 
markets in central Europe and Asia which offer considerably cheaper consumer goods. The terms of 
trade have improved by about 40 per cent since 2002. A similar situation has not been seen since 
World War I when earnings in the shipping industry and other export industries were exceptionally high 
for a period. 
Second, an ample supply of labour has boosted output growth. A strong increase in the population has 
expanded the growth capacity of the Norwegian economy without a comparable increase in wages. In 
particular, the supply of foreign labour has increased sharply after EU enlargement in 2004. Over the 
past two years, these labour inflows have accounted for over 30 per cent of growth in the labour force 
in Norway. At the same time, this has enabled Norwegian companies to be bolder in accepting new 
assignments  and  investing  knowing  that  they  can  procure  labour  throughout  Europe.  In  addition  to 
increased labour inflows from Poland, Lithuania and other central European countries, we have long 
benefited from inflows of labour from Sweden. Many workers are on temporary assignment and their 
consumption is primarily concentrated in their home country. The Norwegian economy has seen a net 
capacity increase.  
Third, the Norwegian business sector has been quick to integrate new technology. This applies both to 
companies  competing  on  international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the 
domestic market. In comparison with other countries, it is particularly productivity gains in banks and 
other service sectors that stand out. Examples are automated processes and swifter payments in the 
financial industry and improved inventory and management systems in commerce and transport. This 
results in lower production costs. 
Solid  productivity  growth  and  high prices  for  export goods,  and goods  and services supplied  to  the 
petroleum sector have contributed to a fall in the wage share of Norwegian enterprises in recent years, 
despite a low rise in prices for consumer goods and services in Norway. Wage shares have also fallen 
in  many  other  countries.  The  global  supply  of  labour  has  increased  as  result  of  the  integration  of 
China, India and central European countries into world trade. This may have had a permanent effect 
on wage shares. Another possibility is that increased competition for labour will again push up wage 
shares. 
The outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Monetary policy influences the economy with a lag. Norges Bank therefore has to be forward-looking 
in  interest rate  setting. Developments  in  prices  and capacity  utilisation  in Norway  are  influenced  by 
both domestic conditions and economic developments in other countries.  
Growth in the global economy is the strongest recorded in several decades. Continued high growth in 
China  and  India  is  contributing  to  holding  up  growth.  Reforms  in  European  product  and  service 
markets are also expected to lead to higher domestic demand. Growth in the US is expected to slow 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
somewhat. A decline in housing construction and difficulties facing the US automotive industry are two 
of the main factors dragging down growth.   
The turnover time in the US housing market has increased markedly and housing starts have shown a 
considerable  decline.  House  price  inflation  has  levelled  off.  There  is  a  growing  tendency  towards 
mortgage payment problems for households with low debt-servicing capacity and creditworthiness. But 
so far the decline in the housing market has not had major spillover effects on either the wider US 
economy or the global economy.  
Developments  in  international  financial  markets  were  marked  by  unrest  during  the  winter  months. 
Equity prices fell markedly, but are now close to the levels prevailing in February.  
Short-term interest rates in the US are now expected to remain unchanged in the period to summer, 
but to fall somewhat during the latter part of autumn. In the euro area, there are prospects that interest 
rates will stabilise at around 4 per cent. Interest rates are expected to rise gradually in Sweden and to 
peak in the UK in the course of summer.  
Buoyant  growth  in  the  global  economy  has  contributed  to  very  high  prices  for  oil,  gas  and  other 
commodities. Oil prices have averaged USD 59 per barrel so far this year, or close to USD 6 lower 
than the average in 2006. In the past week in particular, oil prices have increased markedly owing to 
the uncertainty surrounding the situation in the Middle East. Global demand for oil continues to grow, 
while production growth forecasts in non-OPEC countries have been revised downwards recently. Oil 
futures prices one to two years ahead are just below USD 70 per barrel.  
Commodity prices rose sharply in the first six months of 2006 and have since remained at a high level. 
The experience of previous periods of wide variations in commodity prices indicate that rising prices 
gradually lead to increased supply and reduced demand. This in turn leads to a fall in prices. Lower 
futures prices than spot prices for several industrial metals indicate expectations of a price fall. 
High oil prices over a longer period have boosted petroleum investment. Increased investment activity 
on the Norwegian continental shelf has accounted for a large share of growth in domestic activity in 
recent  years.  There  is  substantial  uncertainty  associated  with  future  petroleum  investment.  The 
emergence  of  new,  smaller  companies  will  probably  contribute  to  a  steady  level  of  investment  in  a 
number of small and medium-sized projects in the period ahead. Petroleum investment is expected to 
remain at a high level in the years ahead, but growth is expected to be more moderate.  
According  to  the  fiscal  rule,  the  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  over  time  shall  be  in  line  with 
developments in the expected real return on the capital in the Government Pension Fund – Global, 
estimated at  4  per cent.  In  the  National  Budget  for  2007,  it  is  estimated  that  the  real  return  on  the 
Government Pension Fund – Global, measured in NOK, will increase sharply in the years ahead. Oil 
futures prices are higher than assumed in the National Budget. On the other hand, new forecasts from 
the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate show that petroleum production in the next few years may be 
significantly lower than assumed in the National Budget.  
In a situation with a high level of activity in the Norwegian economy, petroleum revenue spending in 
the  period  ahead  will  be  consistent  with  the  fiscal  rule  if  it  increases  at  a  slower  pace  than  the 
expected real return on the Fund. In the next few years, growth in the structural, non-oil budget deficit 
is assumed to be somewhat lower than implied by the 4 per cent rule. However, public sector demand 
is still expected to make a positive contribution to total demand and production.  
The enterprises in the regional network report continued growth in demand and production. Growth 
picked  up  towards  the  end  of  2006  and  has  remained  stable  into  2007.  Suppliers  to  the  petroleum 
industry report the strongest growth, but there is also strong growth in manufacturing and the service 
sector. The market outlook for the next six months is favourable, even though enterprises as a whole 
expect growth to slacken. A lack of spare capacity is an important factor behind expectations of slower 
growth. 
Enterprises  in  both  Hordaland  and  Rogaland  report  that  the  cyclical  upturn  is  continuing.  However, 
many  industries  still  reported  slightly  slower  growth  than  in  the  previous  round.  This  is  true  of 
manufacturing  supplying  the  domestic  market  and  the  petroleum  sector,  the  export  industry  and 
suppliers of services to the household and business sector. Retail trade, on the other hand, stands out 
with very high growth rates. Growth in building and construction is on a par with that prevailing toward 
the end of 2006. The high level of investment and activity in the oil and gas industry, coupled with the 
general boom, continues to generate strong growth impulses to the region. Growth is broad-based and 
there are good prospects of continued growth in the next few months.  
BIS Review 34/2007 
 3
A good half of the enterprises report difficulties in accommodating demand growth. This is a little lower 
than in the previous round. Capacity remains tight in manufacturing supplying the petroleum industry, 
building  and  construction  and  business  services.  The  investment  level  is  expected  to  rise  in  all 
industries.  Profitability  varies  somewhat  between  sectors.  It  is  solid  in  the  supplier  and  export 
industries,  retail  trade  and  services,  and  stable  in  building  and  construction  and  manufacturing 
supplying the domestic market.  
Employment  has  risen  in  all  industries  in  Hordaland  and  Rogaland  over  the  past  three  months. 
Employment has increased over several years in the business sector. In recent months, employment 
growth in the public sector has also picked up. Unemployment in the region is now a little lower than 2 
per cent, which is lower than the average for Norway as a whole. Unemployment began to fall earlier 
in  this  region  than  in  the  country  as  a  whole.  Demand  for  labour  is  expected  to  increase  in 
manufacturing and services in the next three months. In other industries, employment is expected to 
be relatively stable. The tight labour market is reflected in continued high wage growth.  
Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is expected to remain high through 2007. Higher wage 
growth and declining productivity growth are pushing up unit costs. Continued strong competition may 
prevent this cost increase from feeding fully through to prices. However, it is assumed that competition 
will curb inflation to a lesser extent in the period ahead and that high capacity utilisation and higher 
wage growth will gradually push up the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services.  
As  mentioned,  there  are  probably  several  reasons  why  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced 
goods  and  services  is  picking  up  somewhat  later  during  this  cyclical  expansion  than  the  historical 
relationship  between  the  rise  in  these  prices  and  capacity  utilisation  would  imply.  Moderate  wage 
growth  has  contributed  to  low  inflation  in  recent  years.  The  subdued  rise  in  prices  for  imported, 
processed intermediate goods has curbed the rise in prices for goods and services. In recent years, 
competition has increased in many product markets. In many industries, high productivity growth has 
also had a dampening effect on inflation. Some of these factors may continue to influence inflation in 
the period ahead, albeit to a lesser extent than earlier. Inflation is projected to near the inflation target 
of 2.5 per cent as from 2008. 
At  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  meeting  on  15  March,  the  key  policy  rate  was  raised  by  0.25 
percentage point to 4.00 per cent. Furthermore, the Executive Board decided that the key policy rate 
should lie in the interval 4-5 per cent in the period to the publication of the next Monetary Policy Report 
on  27  June  2007,  conditional  on  economic  developments  that  are  broadly  in  line  with  projections. 
According  to  the  Executive  Board’s  assessment,  the  prospects  and  balance  of  risks  suggest  that  it 
would be appropriate to raise the interest rate gradually to about 5 per cent in the course of this year 
and to a somewhat higher level in the period to summer 2008. 
Developments in the krone exchange rate will also influence the pace of interest rate hikes because a 
considerably stronger krone may result in inflation that is too low. Under an inflation targeting regime, it 
is  important  to  be  mindful  of  the  effects  of  higher  interest  rates  on  the  krone  exchange  rate  when 
inflation  is  low.  The  interest  rate  differential  against  trading  partners  may  widen  somewhat  further 
ahead  in  the  projection  period.  Since  such  a  development  is  already  widely  expected  in  financial 
markets, we have assumed that it will have limited effects on the krone exchange rate. However, there 
is considerable uncertainty surrounding the exchange rate projection. 
The projections are shrouded in uncertainty. The projections for inflation, output, the interest rate and 
other variables are based on an assessment of the current economic situation and the functioning of 
the  economy.  We  have  illustrated  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  projections  for  the  interest  rate, 
inflation and capacity utilisation with fan charts. The wider the fans, the more uncertain the forecasts 
are. If economic developments are broadly in line with projections, economic agents can also expect 
interest rate developments to be approximately as projected. On the other hand, the interest rate path 
may shift in relation to the current path if economic prospects change or if the effects of interest rate 
changes on output, employment and prices are different from those projected.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2007
   5
BIS Review 34/2007 
  6 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   7
 8 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   9
 10 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   11
 12 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   13
 14 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   15
 16 
   BIS Review 34/2007
 BIS Review 34/2007 
   17
