Zeti Akhtar Aziz: ASEAN – a dynamic region with diverse strengths 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  International 
Symposium “Ten Years After the Asian Currency Crisis: Future Challenges for the Asian Economies 
and Financial Markets”, hosted by the Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia (CeMCoA), Bank of 
Japan, Tokyo, 22 January 2007. 
 Ten  years  after  the  crisis,  ASEAN  stands  out  as  a  dynamic  region  with  diverse  strengths.  With  a 
growing population of over 550 million, ASEAN remains one of the fastest growing regions in the world 
(2005: 5.6%; world: 4.9%). The combined GDP of the ASEAN economies is expected to exceed USD 
1 trillion in 2007. This growth has been extensive and includes all the developing economies in the 
group. 
The  ASEAN  economies  have  always  been  highly  open  economies,  with  total  trade  accounting  for 
more than 130 percent of GDP and the value of trade flows now exceeding USD 1 trillion. In view of 
this high degree of openness, ASEAN has also always been vulnerable to external developments. The 
ASEAN  economies  have  however  demonstrated,  time  and  again,  their  capacity  to  rebound  from 
adverse  shocks,  and  to  do  so  within  a  short  period  of  time.  While  the  1997  –  1998  crisis  was 
devastating,  most  ASEAN  economies  were  able  to  restore  stability  and  resume  growth  just  after  a 
year. ASEAN has also continued to weather other both regional and international shocks that have 
since occurred. 
While the current global and regional environment has since the last ten years changed dramatically, 
bringing with it new risks and challenges, the region has emerged strengthened with greater economic 
and financial resilience. Strong macroeconomic fundamentals have been sustained, and reinforced by 
enhanced economic flexibility. The financial and corporate sector restructuring and reform that were 
undertaken  during  the  ten  years have also supported  these  developments.  Equally  important  is  the 
aggressive  development  of  the  domestic  financial  infrastructure  and  financial  markets.  The  ASEAN 
economies  have  also  developed  complementarities  with  the  major  regional  economies  in  the  Asian 
region including China, Japan, South Korea and India that has contributed to deepening of regional 
economic  integration,  reinforcing  further  the  strong  trade  and  investment  linkages  that  was  already 
present in the region. 
The  issue  before  us  now,  is  whether  the  South  East  Asian  nations  can  rise  to  the  challenge  of 
sustaining  its  dynamism  and  prospects  in  this  more  challenging  global  environment.  Allow  me  to 
elaborate  on  the  elements  that  have  facilitated  the  ability  of  the  ASEAN  economies  previously  to 
successfully  adjust  to  shocks  and  to  take  account  of  the  recent  developments  that  have  further 
strengthened their capacity and capability to deal with future shocks and thus sustain their dynamism. 
Improved macroeconomic fundamentals 
While  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  were  favourable  just  before  the  crisis,  in  the  current 
environment,  the  external  position  of  the  regional  economies  has  strengthened  further.  The  current 
account balances are in surplus, the foreign currency reserves are at record highs and the external 
debt  levels  are  at  significantly  lower  levels,  with  improved  maturity  profiles.  Government  budget 
positions are broadly stronger with ongoing measures towards consolidation. Inflation has generally 
been contained, despite the recent adjustments due to the high oil prices. More flexible exchange rate 
regimes are also now in place allowing for the potential for smooth adjustments to external shocks. 
In  this  environment,  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  has  also  continued  to  increase  reflecting 
confidence  in  the  ASEAN  economies.  In  2005,  foreign  direct  investment  to  the  ASEAN  economies 
reached USD 37 billion, exceeding the pre-crisis peak of USD 34 billion in 1997. 
Economic flexibility in ASEAN has been enhanced 
Economic flexibility has always been one of ASEAN’s strengths. It has been a major element that has 
facilitated  adjustment  to  the  changing  global  environment  and  to  external  shocks.  This  economic 
flexibility  of  the  ASEAN  economies  has  ten  years  later  been  further  augmented.  This  has  been 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 1
achieved by the increased labour and capital mobility, financial market development, a strengthened 
financial system, and the extensive institutional developments that have taken place. 
Economic  flexibility  has  been  important  in  enabling  the  ASEAN  economies  to  shift  to  new  areas  of 
comparative  advantage.  Significant  changes  in  economic  structures  have  taken  place  and  shifts  to 
new  sectors  have  occurred  in  response  to  the  changing  global  competitive  dynamics.  Diverse  new 
sources of growth have now emerged across ASEAN, with the economies now moving beyond their 
traditional reliance on manufactured exports to expanding the production of resource-based products, 
and  increasingly  to  the  services  sector  and  thus  providing  greater  flexibility  to  respond  to  shifts  in 
external demand. 
There has also been a rebalancing of the sources of growth between domestic and external demand. 
The role of private consumption has strengthened in the ASEAN economies. ASEAN now possesses 
a burgeoning consumer market that is valued at more than USD 330 billion. With high savings rate 
continuing to prevail, there is potential for this trend to be sustained. Consumption demand has also 
been  supported  by  rising  incomes,  with  GDP  per  capita  having  increased  to  over  USD  1,500 
compared to USD 1,157 in 2000. In the long-term, these trends are expected to be reinforced by the 
positive demographic structure in the ASEAN region. ASEAN’s population is not only large but also 
young with 55% at less than 30 years old and becoming increasingly urbanized. 
There  is  also  greater  involvement  of  the  private  sector  in  the  economy  following  the  period  of 
adjustment post-crisis. Private investment which was initially slow to adjust has now shown prospects 
for  a  stronger  recovery.  The  potential  for  greater  investment  is  driven  by  the  rising  infrastructure 
requirements  throughout  the  region  that  is  estimated  at  USD  160  billion  for  the  period  2006-2010. 
There has also been growing interest in resource-based industries. The investment climate has also 
improved amidst the better economic conditions and more efficient functioning systems that have been 
put in place. 
Financial and corporate reforms and restructuring have supported these developments 
An  area  in which  the payoff  has  been  significant  is  the  financial  sector.  The banking  sectors  in  the 
ASEAN region as a whole have increased their resilience and ability to manage risks as reflected by 
their  profitability,  asset  quality  and  capitalization,  all  which  have  generally  strengthened  since  the 
Asian crisis. The renewed strength in the banking sectors have been underpinned by recapitalisation 
programmes,  rationalization  and  consolidation  and  improvements  in  banking  supervision  and 
regulation.  The  implementation  of  financial  reforms  has  not  only  increased  the  capacity  but  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
Similarly,  corporate  balance  sheets  across  the  region  have  strengthened  considerably  with 
significantly improved standards of corporate governance. With the more positive investment climate, 
it has resulted in a resumption of investment activities. A major development since the crisis has been 
the  development  of  the  capital  markets,  in  particular,  the  bond  market.  This  has  led  to  greater 
diversification  of  sources  of  financing  for  the  corporate  sector.  In  Malaysia,  the  bond  market  now 
accounts for almost 90% of GDP with the size of the corporate debt securities market now exceeding 
the  public  debt  securities  market.  There  has  also  been  increased  attention  to  greater  financial 
inclusion, to reduce income disparities and achieve more balance growth. 
The  stronger  domestic  financial  sectors  in  the  ASEAN  economies  have  also  allowed  for  greater 
liberalization  and  deregulation  to  occur.  This  has  not  only  enhanced  the  range  of  business 
opportunities for the financial institutions but also their potential to expand beyond domestic borders 
and building further on regional linkages. 
Increased Asian regional complementarities 
Post-crisis, ASEAN has further increased intra-regional trade and investment linkages within ASEAN 
and with the other major economies in the region. Intra-Asian trade now accounts for more than half of 
the total trade of the region. The emergence of China and India has created new export markets for 
ASEAN, thus diversifying the ASEAN export market from over-concentration in the traditional markets. 
ASEAN is among the few regions to have a significant and growing trade surplus with China, reaching 
about  USD  20  billion  in  2005.  Meanwhile,  the  total  trade  between  the  ASEAN-5  and  India  has 
expanded by more than tenfold from only USD 2 billion in 1990 to USD 21 billion in 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2007
In  investment  activities,  Japanese  investors  have  had  an  early  presence  in  most  of  the  ASEAN 
economies. This has generally reflected the diverse comparative advantage of ASEAN economies that 
range from labour cost advantages to natural resources and the increasingly more deregulated and 
liberalised regimes. Foreign investors have also leveraged their supply chain networks on the ASEAN 
platform  to  take  advantage  of  this  diverse  comparative  advantage.  Even  within  ASEAN,  there  has 
been an increasing trend of outward direct investment especially by Malaysia and Singapore, being 
undertaken to leverage on regional growth opportunities. 
Greater regional financial integration 
While there has been a high level of economic integration, a more recent development has been the 
acceleration of regional financial integration. As high savings economies, this would facilitate a more 
efficient allocation of part of the surplus funds of the region into productive investments in the region. 
This would contribute towards lower financing costs in the region and reducing the risks while at the 
same time promoting the economic potential of the region. 
To  facilitate  financial  integration,  the  liberalization  of  foreign  exchange  rules,  the  harmonization  of 
standards  and  the  removal  of  impediments  to  cross-border  investment  have  been  undertaken.  The 
ASEAN  Roadmap  on  Capital  Market  Development  has  been  formulated  to  foster  alliances  and 
linkages  in  the  equity  and bond  markets  among  ASEAN  exchanges,  including  the  harmonisation  of 
regulations.  In  the  equity  markets,  multiple  listings  are  being  promoted  as  regional  bourses  attract 
domestic  companies  in  the  region  to  list  on  their  exchanges.  The  FTSE/ASEAN  Index  and  the 
FTSE/ASEAN  –  40  Index,  launched  in  2005,  also  serves  to  increase  the  integration  of  the  regional 
bourses and to promote ASEAN as an asset class. In the bond markets, the Asian Bond Funds (ABF 1 
and  ABF  2)  initiated  by  the  central  banks  aim  to  broaden  and  deepen  the  regional  bond  markets. 
Meanwhile,  the  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiatives  (ABMI)  aims  to  enhance  the  infrastructure,  which 
includes plans to develop a regional credit guarantee mechanism, a regional credit rating agency and 
a regional settlement link to facilitate cross-border transactions. Specifically, the ASEAN Roadmap on 
Capital Account Liberalization, launched in 2003, aims to gradually achieve a freer flow of capital over 
the medium-term. Malaysia has since progressively further liberalised its rules for foreign exchange 
transactions culminating in the removal of most of the rules in April 2005. 
Strengthened regional financial cooperation 
During  the  1997/1998  crisis,  Asia  did  not  come  together  to  collaboratively  and  cumulatively  act  to 
contain the crisis and subsequently to facilitate its resolution. Perhaps, it was due to the nature of the 
crisis,  its  severity  on  the  financial  markets  and  the  economies.  Domestic  stability  had  to  be  first 
restored before time could be taken to formulate a holistic crisis management solution. The instability 
in the currency markets lasted for about one and a half years. There was also no entity in the region 
during that period that provided any authoritative assessment on whether the programmes that were 
subsequently being implemented would in fact produce the desired outcomes. 
While efforts to strengthen the domestic economies and the financial systems will continue, this has 
now being reinforced by the improved regional surveillance including on cross border financial flows, 
and by institutional arrangements that would contribute towards crisis containment and management. 
The regional cooperative efforts going forward will continue to gain momentum. These efforts should 
not be seen as attempting to substitute but rather as efforts to complement the existing international 
arrangements. The objective to be achieved is the same, that is, to build the regional capacity to be 
better positioned to prevent, contain and resolve any potential crisis at minimum costs to our financial 
systems and to our economies. 
In conclusion, the cumulative effect of the changes since the Asian crisis has transformed ASEAN – 
opening up new opportunities and making the region resilient and a dynamic centre of growth. The 
ASEAN  “tigers”  are  back,  and  poised  to  leap  on  to  the  next  wave  of  economic  advancement  and 
prosperity. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 3
