Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Overcoming obstacles to agricultural microfinance 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Regional  Experts’  Consultation  Meeting  "Overcoming  Obstacles  to 
Agricultural Microfinance in Southeast Asia", Manila, 1 March 2007. 
 President  Corazon  Aquino,  Dr.  Balisacan,  distinguished  resource  persons,  special  guests,  and 
participants to the Regional Experts' Consultation Meeting on "Overcoming Obstacles to Agricultural 
Microfinance in Southeast Asia." Good morning. 
It  is  a  distinct  honor  to  be  part  of  this  Consultation  Meeting  to  discuss  and  identify  strategies  to 
accelerate the development of agricultural microfinance in our part of the world. In a region like ours 
where the agriculture sector continues to have a significant impact on our economy and the lives of 
our people, this Consultation Meeting is indeed most welcome, and necessary. In the Philippines, the 
agriculture sector accounts for 20% of our Gross Domestic Product, employs around 40 percent of our 
country's labor force, and provides most of the food requirements of our total population of 86 million. 
Given its importance, policies and programs continue to be crafted and implemented to support and 
transform our agriculture sector into a modern, productive, efficient, and competitive sector.  
In 1975 for instance, Presidential Decree 717 was issued to ensure the flow of credit to the agriculture 
sector.  In  particular,  it  mandated  banks  to  set  aside  25%  of  their  loanable  funds  for  agricultural 
agrarian reform credit. For a number of years, bank compliance to this law exceeded 25% of their loan 
portfolio. 
This  changed  with  the  implementation  of  the  Agrarian  Reform  Program,  as  the  profile  of  farm  land 
ownership shifted from vast tracts of land held by a few owners, to many small landholdings owned by 
numerous farmers. Thus, while the number of credit transactions increased with more farm owners, 
the size of the loans was significantly smaller. For small farm owners, as well as landless agricultural 
workers,  microfinance  is  the  key  to  acquiring  much-needed  working  capital.  In  the  Philippines, 
microfinance services are provided mainly by banks, NGOs and cooperatives. 
The  national  framework  for  regulation,  which  encompasses  all  types  of  microfinance  institutions, 
focuses  on  portfolio  quality,  outreach,  efficient  and  sustainable  operations,  and  transparent 
information.  The  basic  premise  of  the  framework  is  that  all  deposit-taking  institutions,  particularly 
banks and cooperatives, are subject to prudential regulation, while microfinance NGOs which collect 
savings greater than the compensating balance should be subject to regulation and supervision.  
Circular 272 issued January 2001 by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas provided the enabling policy and 
regulatory framework for microfinance in the banking sector. Parallel to this, Bangko Sentral mounted 
capacity building programs and sustained information campaigns.  
Microfinance  has  flourished  since  then.  Today,  223  banks  are  involved  in  microfinance  with  a 
combined loan portfolio of about P4 billion lent out to over 660,000 borrowers. Nevertheless, there is 
still much more that we can do. It is fitting therefore that we are addressing the obstacles to gaining 
access  to  agricultural  credit  through  microfinance,  a  methodology  and  technology  that  has  been 
proven successful. It is important to remember that the success of microfinance is anchored on the 
following  fundamental  principles:  First,  microfinance  is  typically  linked  to  households  and  their 
microenterprises. The household is seen as one with diverse activities and multiple streams of income 
and  expenditures.  Microfinance  therefore  looks  at  the  regular  cash  flow  of  the  household  and  the 
microenterprise – not the loan use, in determining the size, term and repayment structure of the loan. 
As a result, microfinance loans are primarily short term loans with frequent repayments.  
Second,  microfinance  loans  are  characteristically  used  for  additional  capital  to  grow  an  existing 
business. The loan amounts are not very large. Some microfinance institutions even use a growth-loan 
process  where  the  clients  start  off  with  a  very  small  loan  and  can  only  access  larger  loans 
incrementally after showing a good repayment record. This has been proven successful in mitigating 
risks and in establishing credit discipline among the borrowers.  
There are several other basic principles of microfinance, but I have focused on these 2 characteristics 
as they are the features that seem fundamentally incongruent to the financing needs of the agriculture 
sector.  In  particular,  cash  flow  lending  and  frequent  repayments  do  not  fit  the  seasonal  nature  of 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
agricultural  incomes.  In  addition,  short  term  financing,  as  well  as  the  relatively  small  loan  amounts, 
result  in  a  lack of  term  financing which  is  important to  particular  types  of  agricultural  activities.  The 
risks for both types of financing are also very diverse. Agriculture finance bears unique risks such as 
price and yield risks.  
Having said this, it does not mean we are dismissing the possibility of combining some of the best 
practices of microfinance with salient features of agriculture finance to create a product that addresses 
the needs of the agriculture sector, specifically the poor farming households. Definitely, there is room 
for complementation.  
First, many clients of microfinance are also engaged in agriculture activities. In the Philippines, it has 
been proven that those who are involved in small agricultural activities also manage other forms of 
enterprises. These agricultural workers usually maintain microenterprises to meet consumption needs 
and other short term expenses of the household. In this regard, microfinance may be extended to this 
worker,  with  some  modifications  on  the  proven  methodology  and  technology  of  microenterprise 
lending.  For  instance,  traditional  client  selection  using  character  and  cash  flow  analysis…  may  be 
supplemented by technical criteria relating to the particular agricultural activity. This way, the selection 
process  is  more  attuned  to  the  intricacies  of  the  household,  its  microenterprise,  as  well  as  its 
agricultural activity.  
Second, the basic feature of flexibility in microfinance can be similarly applied to agriculture finance. 
Flexibility in terms of repayment schedules, delivery channels and even collateral requirements is very 
important.  Some  microfinance  institutions  that  have  successfully  catered  to  the  agriculture  market 
have  created  flexible  repayment  schedules  and  payment  options  that  attract  a  wide  range  of 
agricultural activities. Clients are still expected to have frequent repayments with the option of having a 
certain  percentage  of  the  loan  as  bulk  payment.  While  these  schedules  take  the  crop  cycle  and 
produce sales into consideration, they still emphasize that repayment is expected regardless of the 
results  at  the  end  of  the  crop  cycle.  Flexibility  in  delivery  channels  can  also  be  very  beneficial  for 
agriculture  finance.  Microfinance  institutions,  both  in  the  bank  and  non-bank  sector,  continue  to 
expand their branching networks, thereby enhancing access to finance. Innovations in technology are 
also increasing delivery channels for microfinance. In the Philippines, for instance, the development of 
mobile phone banking and electronic cash platforms have provided the opportunity for both enhanced 
access and lower costs.  
Finally,  flexibility  insofar  as  collateral  requirements  is  also  an  option  for  agriculture  finance. 
Microfinance  institutions  have  proven  that  collateral  substitutes  such  as  group  guarantees,  peer 
pressure or even the use of personal property have been effective in reducing reliance on traditional 
capital and in ensuring repayment. This may be studied further to see what arrangements could be 
flexible,  yet  prudent  enough  for  agriculture  loans.  Risk  mitigating  factors  that  are  applied  by 
microfinance institutions such as portfolio diversification, inclusion of savings and insurance products 
may also be effective for agriculture finance.  
It is important that we remain innovative and open to new ideas to see where we can introduce further 
refinements that we could apply for the agriculture sector. Nevertheless, it is equally important that we 
continue  to  be  prudent  in  the  use  of  microfinance  in  the  agriculture  sector  which  has  its  own 
intricacies, uniqueness and particular risk profile.  
The Bangko Sentral approved the Micro-Agri Product last year is a case in point. With this, we have 
allowed banks with microfinance operations to extend credit to those with small agricultural activities 
using microfinance methodologies. In doing so, these micro-agri loans are given the same regulatory 
treatment  as  microfinance  loans,  even  as  we  set  parameters  to  ensure  that  risks  associated  with 
agriculture finance are properly managed. With this initiative, we expect to see more banks serve the 
unmet needs of small farmers.  
Indeed,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  continue  to  find  more  and  better  ways  of  providing 
access  to  credit  to  our  agricultural  farmers  and  workers.  We  are  therefore  looking  forward  to  the 
success  of  this  Consultation  Meeting  so  that  our  respective  countries  will  be  able  to  facilitate  the 
growth and development our agriculture sector. In this manner, we shall meet the food requirements of 
our people and uplift the quality of life of our agricultural workers.  
Thank you and good morning to all of you. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
