Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Plans for a common platform 
integrating East African financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
opening  of  the  stakeholders’  workshop  on  developing  the  5-year  Financial  Markets 
Development Plan, Kampala, 15 August 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank you for finding time in your busy schedules to 
participate in this one day’s stakeholders workshop. 
Earlier this year the 10th EAC meeting of the Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC) approved a 
Financial  Markets  Development  framework  which  includes  involving  stakeholders  in  the 
development of a 5-year Financial Markets Development Plan in all the entire member states 
of  the  East  African  Community.  The  harmonized  regional  plans  are  intended  to  form  a 
common platform for integration of the East African Financial Markets. The Bank of Uganda 
was  requested  to  take  the  lead  and  co-ordinate  these  efforts  and  the  Executive  Director 
Operations chairs the Financial Markets Development Committee for the region. 
The  original  three  East  African  countries  have  completed  situational  analysis  for  their 
financial markets in line with agreed parameters and have identified issues to be addressed 
in  the  various  fields  such  as  banking  and  capital  markets  reforms,  the  pension  sector 
reforms, strategies for financial markets development in the areas of rural finance, leasing 
and additional financial products which should facilitate improved access to finance. 
This financial sector development plan represents a new approach to trying to address the 
current limitations in the Ugandan financial markets. The small size of the Ugandan financial 
sector is an obstacle to the development of financial systems, resulting in systems that are in 
place  tending  to  be  limited  in  scope,  more  expensive  and  of  poor  quality.  The  Ugandan 
financial  market  has  scope  to  become  larger  because  the economy  is  fully  liberalized  and 
open  to  the  flow  of  capital  to  and  from  foreign  markets,  participation  of  foreign  financial 
intermediaries and now the integration efforts with the East African sister countries. 
You,  as  stakeholders,  must  join  hands  with  the  Bank  of  Uganda  not  only  to  help  in  the 
integration  process  of  the  East  African  financial  markets  but  also  to  do  your  part  in 
developing deepening and widening the financial markets as a way of accelerating economic 
development in Uganda and the East African region as a whole. 
There are several challenges that have to be confronted: 
• 
As  capital  flows  freely  in  and  out  of  the  country,  the  challenge  that  arises  is  the 
maintenance of financial markets stability. 
Increased diversity of financial services and products requires a financially literate 
consumers who can make informed choices. The consumers ought to be equipped 
with the proper information to make informed choices and with proper regulatory and 
legal tools to guide operations and provide redress in case of disputes. 
The  Bank  of  Uganda  exercises  transparency  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in 
order to promote investor confidence in the economy. Indeed, this has resulted in 
investors developing confidence in the economy as evidenced by the recent surge in 
inflows from offshore investors as well as a surge in remittances from Ugandans in 
the  Diaspora.  However,  some  instability  was  experienced  recently  in  the  forex 
market,  which  tended  to  disrupt  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to 
assure you that the Bank of Uganda will continue to pursue its objectives of price 
stability and financial sector soundness rigorously in a transparent manner but will 
deal 
the 
firmly  with  destabilizing  speculative 
that  could  derail 
tendencies 
  BIS Review 93/2007 
 1
achievements already made in the Ugandan economy. This will be done with due 
regard to internationally accepted sound practices. 
We have, therefore, invited you the stakeholders to provide your input in the 5-year strategic 
financial  markets  development  plan  for  Uganda,  which  involves  a  step  by  step  plan  for 
implementing the suggested reforms to remove the impediments that have constrained the 
development of the financial markets. This effort is part of and in line with Bank of Uganda’s 
continuous dialogue with financial sector stakeholders. Similar activities are going on in all 
the other member countries of the East African community. 
I wish you all fruitful deliberations and I declare this workshop open. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2007
