Stanley Fischer: Brief review of economic and financial developments in Israel 
in 2006  
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Press Conference on the 
Publication of the Bank of Israel 2006 Annual Report, Jerusalem, 11 April 2007.  
 I would like to start by congratulating the team that prepared the report, headed by Karnit Flug, director 
of the Research Department, and Michel Strawczynski, Deputy Director of the Research Department. 
The team consisted of staff from the Research, Monetary, and Foreign Exchange Activity Departments 
and the Financial Stability Area.  
This morning I presented the Report to the Acting President of Israel and Speaker of the Knesset, Ms 
Dahlia Itzik; the Prime Minister, Mr Ehud Olmert; and the Minister of Finance, Mr. Abraham Hirchson.  
In economic terms 2006 was one of Israel's most successful years. This was reflected in the high rate 
of growth, the decline in unemployment, the improvement in employment, the impressive surplus in 
the current account, the amount of foreign investment in Israel, and price and financial stability. All this 
took place against the background of rapid global economic growth, but also in a year in which Israel 
was engaged in a war.  
Despite the successes, there are three areas in which, although some progress was made, much work 
still needs to be done: the relatively high unemployment rate, the large share of public debt in GDP, 
and the high incidence of poverty. Helped by the high rate of growth, however, especially in the last 
three years, some improvement was evident in all these areas.  
This  drives  home  the  importance  of  focusing  on  the  main  objective  of  macroeconomic  policy  –  the 
maintenance of a high rate of growth and converting it into a long-term one.  
The  continued  success  of  Israel's  economy  depends  this  year  too  on  three  main  factors:  (1) 
developments in the global economy, over which we have no influence; (2) the geopolitical situation, 
on  which  we  have  some  effect;  and  (3)  the  continuation  of  the  government's  economic  strategy  as 
followed in the last few years, over which we in Israel do have control:  
• 
Current fiscal strategy should persist, mainly the preservation of a low budget deficit, leading 
to  further  lowering  of  the  debt/GDP  ratio,  which  despite  its  reduction  is  still  too  high.  It  is 
important to avail ourselves of the good years we are currently enjoying to persist in reducing 
it. Reducing the share of debt in GDP would make the economy more resilient to shocks, 
release  resources  for  other  important  needs,  and  enable  the  government  to  operate  a 
counter-cyclical policy when necessary.  
The monetary strategy should be continued, acting to ensure price stability, as an intrinsic 
part of economic and financial stability and as a firm base for sustained growth.  
Economic  reforms  should  continue.  The  structural  reforms  in  the  areas  of  privatization, 
education, competition and the infrastructure should be completed; this would help increase 
productivity  and  growth.  Moreover,  further  development  of  the  financial  infrastructure  and 
greater  competition  in  the  capital  market,  particularly  between  the  institutions  that  operate 
vis-à-vis households, is the right path to follow, and would contribute to growth.  
  I would now like to address three specific issues: 1) monetary policy; 2) the economic situation in light 
of the political situation; and 3) Israel's membership of the OECD.  
Monetary policy 
1)  
We  are  currently  at  a  stage  where  the  economy  is  growing  quickly,  and  inflation  is  very  low,  even 
lower than the target, and this is expressed among other things in price rises in the financial markets. 
In operating monetary policy we keep our eye on our primary target – the inflation target – and also on 
the secondary targets, i.e., to contribute to economic activity and financial stability. As every change in 
the interest rate also affects, to some extent, the rate of growth and the prices of financial assets, in 
making our interest rate decisions we have to take into consideration the trade-off between these three 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
factors – inflation, growth and financial stability. This is an essential consideration in the whole issue of 
monetary policy, and it will feature in our future decisions too, as it has till now.  
The economic situation in light of the political situation  
2) 
Whenever I speak to investors or analysts from abroad, they always ask the same question, "How can 
Israel's economic situation be so good despite all the political problems facing the country?" I answer: 
(a)  the  global  economy  is  growing  at  an  impressive  rate;  (b)  the  government  has  maintained  fiscal 
discipline, one of the points on which there is a consensus in Israel; (c) in the last fifteen years we 
have erected a far stronger and more robust economic framework in Israel than existed previously, 
especially in the areas of the foreign currency market and the financial markets in general; and (d) the 
business sector, during the war last summer, showed its ability to carry on functioning well and more 
or  less  meet  its  delivery  dates  for  domestic  and  export  orders,  and  in  so  doing,  contributed  to  the 
economy's resilience.  
Israel's membership of the OECD  
3) 
The  OECD  is  currently  deliberating  on  the  enlargement  of  the  organization,  in  the  run-up  to  its 
Ministerial Council meeting in May of this year. The Bank of Israel, together with relevant government 
ministries,  has  been  engaged  in  a  process  which  we  hope  will  lead  to  Israel's  membership  of  the 
OECD. It is important that this retains its high priority in the work plans of all those in Israel involved in 
this. Israel's acceptance into the OECD would be an important stage in its further integration into the 
global economy, as an open and modern economy. I hope that we will achieve this.  
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
