Tarisa Watanagase: Changes in Thailand’s economic dynamism after the 1997 
crisis 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the International Symposium 
“Ten Years After the Asian Currency Crisis: Future Challenges for the Asian Economies and Financial 
Markets”, hosted by the Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia (CeMCoA), Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 
22 January 2007. 
 At the outset, I would like to thank Governor Fukui and the Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia, 
Bank of Japan, for inviting me to speak at this special international symposium and for the excellent 
arrangements made. It gives me both a great honor and pleasure to meet with many people who are 
genuinely interested in our ASEAN economies. 
In this first session, I have been asked to speak on changes in Thailand’s economic dynamism after 
the 1997 crisis as well as the Bank of Thailand’s view on where the Thai economy is heading. 
Due to the time constraint, I will limit my talk to only three key points. 
The first is that the Thai economy is now back on a firm growth path and has become more resilient. 
 For  nearly  five  years  after  the  1997  crisis,  the  Thai  economy  went  through  a  period  of  substantial 
adjustment. The tough adjustment was unavoidable because the crisis had inflicted a deep wound on 
the  economy.  During  1997-1998,  we  underwent  a  severe  economic  contraction,  thousands  of 
companies  went  bust,  hundred  thousands  of  people  became  unemployed,  and  the  amount  of  non-
performing  loans  in  the  financial  system  skyrocketed.  The  economy  staged  a  rebound  in  1999  and 
2000. But the recovery was cut short by the global economic downturn in 2001, when growth that year 
registered merely 2.2%. 
Things then started to turn in 2002. Despite the continued global slump, the Thai economy expanded 
5.3% that year and has since been on a firm growth path. The resiliency of the economy is evidenced 
by  the  fact  that  during  the  past  two  years  Thailand  has  weathered  several  economic  storms  –  the 
Tsunami, avian flu, political uncertainty, and the recent oil shock – with only a moderate slowdown in 
GDP growth. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 1
The key driver behind the current economic expansion has been a combination of domestic demand 
and exports. The latter, in particular, has always been our main engine of growth. One reason for this 
is that our export structure has become more diversified, both in terms of product and destination. For 
example, over the past twelve years, Thailand’s exports to ASEAN + China as percent of total exports 
has increased from 25 to 30% whereas those to G3 have declined from 51 to 42%. This allows us to 
reap benefit from the growing intra-regional trade, particularly China-related. 
 But perhaps more important from the point of view of the Bank of Thailand is that the current growth 
has been accompanied by a good degree of both internal and external stability. On internal stability, 
despite the recent surge in oil prices, inflation remains well in control. Core inflation, which is the Bank 
of Thailand’s policy target, is comfortably in the target range of 0-3.5%. 
And the unemployment rate, which shot up after 1997, has now returned to the level comparable to 
the pre-crisis period. 
 2 
 BIS Review 46/2007
On external stability, international reserve is now at a historic high of 67 billion USD and covers 3.4 
times of short-term debt. In dollar terms, total external debt now stands roughly at half of its peak in 
1997. Part of this rundown has been supported by the current account which has been in surplus in 
eight  of  the  nine  years  after  the  crisis.  It  is  worth  noting  however  that  external  debt  has  picked  up 
recently, and is being monitored closely. 
 At the micro level, eight years after the crisis we see a strengthening in several aspects of corporate 
financial  performance.  Returns  on  assets  of  listed  companies  are  now  about  twice  its  pre-crisis 
average  while  the  average  debt-to-equity  ratio  has  fallen  to  about  one-to-one.  Higher  returns  and 
falling leverage have contributed to the interest coverage ratio of about 7 times. Nevertheless, the past 
two years have witnessed a squeeze in firms’ gross profit margin as a result of increased competition 
and the appreciation of the baht relative to other regional currencies. 
 BIS Review 46/2007 
 3
And as for the banking sector, which was at the center of the crisis, painful financial restructuring has 
now bore fruits. The banking sector has gained strength, with stronger profitability. The level of non-
performing loans has been cut down by four-fifth from its peak in 1998 to about eight percent in Q3 
2006. And with the BIS ratio of nearly 15%, the banking system appears well cushioned to unexpected 
shocks. 
 Finally, the fiscal sector benefits greatly from the economic upturn. Increasing corporate profits and 
consumption spending have resulted in higher tax revenues, allowing the government to strengthen its 
fiscal position significantly. Public debt to GDP has declined and is currently at only 41% of GDP. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope my account of these selected developments has shown you how far the 
Thai  economy  has  come  since  1997.  The  improvement  was  not  due  to  luck  or  natural  recovery 
process. It took a concerted effort by both the public and the private sectors to enable this turnaround. 
A natural question that follows then is whether this renewed dynamism will be sustained and this leads 
to my second point. 
 4 
 BIS Review 46/2007
That is, despite important challenges both domestically and externally, the medium-term outlook of the 
Thai economy remains positive. 
In  the  medium  term,  the  most  important  challenge  for  the  Thai  economy  is  how  to  cope  with  a 
slowdown in the world economy and a volatile global financial market. Thailand, like many emerging 
market economies with a small and shallow financial market, is particularly vulnerable to fast-moving 
international capital. Such rapid movements of capital flows can cause exchange rate to be vastly out 
of  line  with  the  underlying  economic  fundamentals  and  have  negative  impacts  on  the  export  or  the 
import sectors depending on the direction of exchange rate movement. In our case, the recent surge in 
capital  inflows  has caused  a  one-way appreciation of  the baht relative  to regional currencies  to  the 
point that it may have become detrimental to both competitiveness and the ability to adjust of the real 
sector. 
Sustaining the growth momentum in such an adverse external environment is not an easy task. The 
key is to ensure that the baht does not move further ahead of other regional currencies. But this alone 
will not be enough. We also need help from domestic demand which has been somewhat soft due to a 
number of domestic and external factors during the past year. 
 Whether we shall see a turnaround in domestic demand will depend on a number of factors. Some of 
these  are  fortunately  on  our  side.  First  of  all,  oil  prices,  which  hit  the  economy  very  hard  this  past 
couple years, appear to have settled down around 55 USD. While we cannot rule out another surge in 
oil prices, the possibility of that happening is at the moment not very large. Furthermore, given a high 
base, the relative impact of a price increase will be smaller this time around. 
A potential factor to support Thailand’s medium-term expansion will be a pickup in private investment, 
expected in the second half of this year. Although Thailand’s investment share of GDP has expanded 
gradually since the economic recovery, it remains well below pre-1997 level and thus room for more 
investment. At the same time, the capacity utilization rate has steadily climbed up to the point that, if 
left to their own accords, firms will soon need to make new investments in order to meet demand. 
Facilitating the pickup of private investment growth will be bank’s improved ability and willingness to 
lend as the banking sector’s NPLs are expected to decline to a low single digit this year. This further 
strengthening of banks’ balance sheets will allow banks to lend at lower carrying costs. Furthermore, 
the ongoing preparation for the sector-wide adoption of Basel II at the end of 2008 will help ensure the 
quality of the new private credits. 
An additional economic stimulus will come from the fiscal side. With a strong fiscal position, the Thai 
government this fiscal year has opted for the use of a budget deficit to support economic growth. Key 
infrastructure  investment  projects  include  the  expansion  of  mass  transit  network  in  Bangkok,  water 
resource management, and an integrated logistic system. These public investments will partially take 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 5
up the slack in the first half of the year as well as speed up private investment through a crowding-in 
effect. 
Of  course,  there  remains  the  issue  of  political  incidents  which  can  still  make  things  less  rosy.  This 
would  not  be  under  policymakers’  control;  the  government,  however,  is  doing  its  best  to  take 
necessary safeguard measures in order to assure people of the state of security. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  being  confident  of  the  medium-term  outlook  does  not  mean  that  we  will  be 
complacent. After all, we are in an environment of an ever-increasingly competitive global arena, more 
integrated  financial  markets,  volatile  capital  flows,  more  inter-linkages  between  economies,  and 
increasing  trends  toward  liberalization.  For  policymakers,  this  means  that  the  conduct  of  policy  will 
become more demanding in the periods ahead. 
 This leads to my third and final point. That is, to ensure that growth and stability are sustained in the 
long run, we need policy tools and persistent reforms going forward. 
From  a  long-term  perspective,  the  critical  challenge  for  the  Thai  economy  is  how  to  continuously 
improve  its  flexibility,  efficiency,  and  competitiveness.  In  this  respect,  a  crucial  policy  effort  is  a 
combination  of  financial  and  real  sector  reforms  and  policies  that  promote  a  sound  and  stable 
macroeconomic environment. 
To  mention  a  few,  infrastructure  building  will  continue  to  be  strengthened  particularly  through 
amendments and introduction of a number of legislation. The Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) will 
move onto its second phase, with the review of the plan and emphasis on increased competition and 
consideration on potential entry of new players to further enhance efficiency and resiliency. As a tool, 
the macro-prudential and risk assessment framework which includes development of an early warning 
system model to bolster our financial stability analysis in order to make pre-emptive policy responses 
when appropriate has also been put in place. 
With  regards  to  real  sector  reform,  significant  attempts  have  been  made  to  raise  real  sector 
productivity, promote transparency, and strengthen governance. Nevertheless, there remains more to 
be done on this front. The most important issue here is to keep pressing on with the reform effort and 
not to let reform fatigue get into our way. 
The adoption of a full-fledged inflation targeting regime in 2000 eliminated the inconsistencies among 
monetary  policy,  exchange  rate  policies,  and  capital  flow  policies  that  had  contributed  to  the  1997 
currency  crisis.  This  framework  has  served  us  well,  with  enough  flexibility  to  accommodate  other 
important  policy  objectives  such  as  output  stabilization,  provided  that  inflation  remains  in  check.  In 
fact, the consistent improvement in our monetary policy mechanism and thus its efficacy have given 
me  reasons  to  be  optimistic  about  the  prospect  of  our  present  regime.  Seeing  less  inflationary 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2007
pressure, the Monetary Policy Committee this month turned to an accommodative stance to ensure 
that the economy continues on a satisfactory course. 
Recognizing  that  inflation  targeting  is  not  a  panacea,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has 
supplemented  the  framework  with  a  regular  monitoring  and  assessment  of  seven  key  areas  of 
financial imbalances, where buildup may threaten the macroeconomy and price stability. These seven 
areas are the country’s external position, the real estate sector, bank credit, household and corporate 
financial positions, the financial market, and the fiscal position of the Government.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, despite all these reform efforts and the stronger foundation the Thai economy 
now has, we have to remain vigilant. Today, the change of pace in the global economic environment is 
simply unprecedented. Some of these changes, if left unchecked, may have significant implications on 
a country. While the new global dynamics represents an opportunity for a country like Thailand to leap 
forward,  it  also  entails  increasing  risk  of  economic  instability.  The  evolving  complexity  of  the  global 
economy means that conventional thinking and approaches to deal with economic problems may, at 
times, need to be adapted. The 1997 crisis highlighted this point. Back then, the conventional wisdom 
for a crisis-ridden country is to adopt restrictive monetary and fiscal policies. As we all now know, over-
tightened stance aggravated the already fragile situation and created many unnecessary pains. Only 
when the crisis contagion spread to several countries was it evident that such measure was a wrong 
medicine for Asia, which ultimately led to the abandonment of some of these measures. 
Today we are faced with the major problems of global imbalances and large and volatile capital flows. 
Yet, the conventional wisdom remains an adherence to market mechanisms. This has proved to be 
inadequate, with Thailand’s very recent experience in dealing with the one-way momentum of the baht 
appreciation.  After  a  number  of  unsuccessful  conventional  measures,  we  had  to  resort  to  the 
unconventional measure of imposing a reserve requirement on capital inflows, as you all know, to put 
a  brake  on  the  one-way  momentum.  A  measure  like  this,  by  nature,  is  short-lived.  I  believe  that  in 
order  to  come  up  with  more  sustainable  solutions,  international policy  dialogues  such  as the  Fund-
initiated  Multilateral  Consultation  would  need  to  be  strengthened.  Short  of  a  regional  or  global-
coordinated efforts, some unnecessary and painful adjustments may have to be introduced no matter 
how strongly committed we are to the conventional market mechanism. 
Ladies and gentlemen, to quickly summarize, the Thai economy is now doing much stronger in terms 
of growth and stability with a moderately positive medium-term outlook. Yet we recognize that risks to 
the  economy  evolve  continually  and  come  in  many  forms.  We  therefore  put  a  strong  emphasis  on 
managing  potential  risks  that  could  take  away  our  current  economic  dynamism.  This  includes 
proactive oversight, strengthened stability framework, persistent reforms, and vigilance in dealing with 
complex  challenges.  In  doing  so,  we  hope  to  translate  the  current  momentum  into  long-term 
sustainability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 7
