Axel A Weber: Germany's economic perspectives and European monetary 
policy  
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the annual dinner of 
the German-British Chamber of Industry & Commerce, London, 14 June 2007. 
 Introduction  
1 
Dear  Lord  Mayor,  My  Lord,  Minister,  Dear  Sir  Nigel,  Dear  Mr  Wood,  Dear  Mr  Hoppe,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen.  
First  of  all,  I  want  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  your  annual  dinner.  Being  in  London  is  always  a 
pleasure for me, not least because I spent some time here as a visiting fellow at Queen Mary college, 
the  University  of  London  –  albeit  nearly  20  years  ago.  For  me,  coming  to  London  therefore  means 
coming back to a city I know well and of which I have happy memories.  
Over the next few minutes, I shall be saying some words on both Germany’s economic situation and 
on European monetary policy.  
Germany’s economic situation and prospects  
2  
At the outset, let me briefly recall how Germany’s economy has been performing over the past few 
quarters. In a nutshell: in the course of last year, Germany increasingly began to act as the economic 
engine of the euro area. 
In 2006, German real GDP grew by 3.0% in calendar-adjusted terms, which was the highest rate since 
2000.  This  development  stood  in  stark contrast  to  2002-2004,  when  the  German  economy  put  in  a 
dismal performance overall.  
And, even in 2005, German real GDP grew by only 0.9%, which was not impressive either. But simply 
looking at the annual growth rate in 2005 would mean overlooking the positive tendency during the 
course of that year, with quarterly GDP rates accelerating.  
Regarding  the  current  stage  of  Germany’s  upswing,  one  thing  in  particular  is  worth  mentioning.  In 
comparison  with  the  beginning  of  the  current  upswing,  the  economic  expansion  in  progress  is  no 
longer  being  driven  mainly  by  external  demand  in  the  form  of  strong  exports.  In  fact,  business 
investment has become the main factor fuelling economic growth at present.  
Strong corporate investment, in addition to still buoyant export demand, has been driving Germany’s 
economic expansion over the past few quarters.  
What we have observed so far might be called the “classical pattern” of the German “business cycle 
chain”, which consists of three elements.  
- 
- 
- 
All  in  all,  Germany’s  economic  development  over  the  past  six  quarters  or  so  has  exceeded  most 
analysts’  forecasts  –  including  my  own,  which  was  already  higher  than  those  of  many  market 
participants.  
Against this favourable backdrop, there arises the question of what has actually been the main reason 
for  the  German  economy  rebounding  so  strongly,  especially  given  its  weak  performance  at  the 
beginning of this decade.  
One crucial element in this success story has been wage moderation. Wage moderation can be seen 
as  the  result  of  a  learning  process  that  was  set  in  motion  by  two  factors  –  the  competitiveness 
problems of major industrial sectors, and stubbornly high rates of unemployment. This process was 
accompanied by enterprises’ restructuring efforts, which have led to a falling level of corporate debt 
and a marked decline in the corporate sector’s net interest burden.  
First, an initial demand stimulus in the form of strong exports.  
Second, as a result of this stimulus, a stepping-up of corporate investment.  
Third: an increase (albeit rather slight up to now) in private consumption.  
BIS Review 66/2007 
 1
Both  factors  have  played  a  major  part  in  the  regaining  of  German  industry’s  price  competitiveness, 
which explains the resurgence of Germany’s economy to a large extent.  
Looking into the future, will today’s upward dynamics be of a lasting nature? Will Germany’s economy 
be maintaining its strong momentum in the quarters to come?  
My answer is probably “yes”. I think there are several reasons to be rather optimistic. We are currently 
experiencing an economic upturn with a favourable outlook.  
My positive assessment is based mainly on three likely facts. First: The global economy remains on its 
strong  growth  path.  According  to  IMF  estimates,  in  2007,  global  economic  activity  is  expected  to 
expand above its long-term average for the fifth year in succession.  
German  enterprises  are  well  placed  to  participate  fully  in  this  positive  development  of  the  global 
economy. In many countries, there is a large demand for high-quality capital goods, a market segment 
in which German enterprises have traditionally been strongly represented. Seen in this light, exports 
are likely to continue generating major stimuli for the upswing in Germany.  
Second: With regard to the domestic economy, too, the prospects for a continuation of the upswing 
are promising.  What  is  particularly  important  is  that  business  investment  is  likely  to remain  a major 
factor underpinning economic activity. The current high level of utilisation of industrial plant capacity 
and a considerable need for replacement investment suggest that investment is still clearly on the up. 
In addition, external financing conditions remain favourable. Moreover, firms’ underlying sentiment is 
also very optimistic, which means that not just the recent hard data, but also soft indicators and the 
“psychological factor” signal stronger future capital formation.  
Third:  The  marked  ongoing  improvement  in  the  labour  market  situation  should  support  the 
strengthening  of  private  consumption.  This  means  that  there  is  the  potential  for  a  self-sustaining 
upswing in Germany.  
Overall, German economic growth has not only gained momentum but has also become more broad-
based over recent quarters. Hence, the conditions are in place for the upturn to last for a considerable 
period of time.  
Against this backdrop and not surprisingly, Germany is no longer seen as “the sick man of Europe” as 
was the case at the beginning of this decade. The UK, too, was once stuck with this rather unpleasant 
label, even though that was roughly 30 years ago.  
During the past ten years, however, the UK has been experiencing sustained economic growth while 
inflation has remained largely under control. Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, has 
frequently  referred  to  this  development  as  the  “nice  decade”,  a  pun  in  which  “nice”  stands  for 
“non-inflationary consistently expansionary”.  
Given Germany’s disappointing economic performance on average since the mid-1990s, we certainly 
cannot describe our economic development during this time in a similar manner. While inflation has 
been  contained,  economic  growth  in  Germany  over  the  past  ten  years  just  cannot  be  portrayed  as 
constantly expansionary. On the contrary: on average, growth in the UK over the past 10 years has 
been nearly 2.8% per annum, whereas the German economy has grown, on average, by a mere 1% 
year on year.  
However,  when  comparing  the  economies  of  Germany  and  the  UK,  there  are  two  things,  besides 
differences in growth performance, which are particularly striking. First, during the past ten years, the 
share of Germany’s total industry in economic value added has remained quite stable at roughly one-
quarter. In the UK, by contrast, total industry’s share declined from one-quarter in 1997 to roughly 17 
per cent last year, while added value, especially of the service sector, showed a marked increase.  
Deindustrialisation is a development which reflects a secular trend among most developed countries. 
Within this process, the development in the UK so far has been much more pronounced than it has 
been in Germany.  
Second, during the past ten years, domestic demand in the UK has been by far the most important 
driver of economic growth, while external demand in the form of net exports has played a dampening 
role. In Germany, the picture is somewhat mixed. However, external demand contributed, on average, 
much more to economic growth between 2001 and 2005 than domestic demand, which began setting 
the pace in the course of last year.  
2 
 BIS Review 66/2007
Evidently,  with  regard  to  major  structural  features  as  well  as  growth  drivers,  there  are  substantial 
differences  between  the  UK  and  Germany.  However,  the  current  economic  performance  of  both 
countries clearly shows that enhancing growth and job creation is not necessarily the result of only one 
particular economic pattern. In fact, empirical evidence would seem to suggest that both the British 
and the German developments can yield favourable results.  
Regardless of the differences just mentioned, one feature common to both economies has been that 
both have enjoyed a stability-oriented monetary policy over the past decade. The fact that the “Old 
Lady of Threadneedle Street” – the Bank of England – was granted independence ten years ago is 
certainly  among  the  prominent  factors  explaining  the  UK’s  economic  performance  during  the  past 
decade.  
Let me continue with a brief look at European monetary policy.  
European monetary policy  
3  
Last week, the ECB’s Governing Council decided to raise the key ECB interest rate by 25 basis points 
to 4%. This decision was taken in view of the prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium 
term.  
In  brief,  the  underlying  reasons  for  our  decision  were  the  following:  incoming  information  has 
repeatedly indicated that the euro area is continuing to expand at a pace which is significantly faster 
than was generally expected one year ago. Looking to the medium-term future, the economic outlook 
remains favourable, too.  
Against  the  backdrop  of  supportive  external  and  internal  economic  conditions,  the  most  recent 
Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  foresee  average  annual  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro 
area in a range of between 2.3% and 2.9% this year, and between 1.8% and 2.8% in 2008. 
The  risks  surrounding  this  favourable  outlook  for  growth  are  broadly  balanced  over  the  short  term. 
Over  the  medium  to  long  term,  though,  the  balance  of  risks  remains  slightly  tilted  to  the  downside, 
owing mainly to external factors such as the possibility of further increases in oil prices, the fear of a 
rise  in  protectionist  pressure,  and  concerns  about  possible  disorderly  developments  in  the  wake  of 
global imbalances.  
Regarding price developments, inflation (as measured by the HICP) was 1.9% in May. According to 
Eurosystem staff projections, average HICP inflation is expected to be around 2%, or more precisely 
between 1.8% and 2.2%, this year and between 1.4% and 2.6% next year.  
The risks to the outlook for price stability are predominantly on the upside, mainly due to increasing 
capacity utilisation in the euro area and gradually improving labour markets. This implies, for instance, 
that  pricing  power  in  market  segments  with  low  competition  may  increase  and  that  wage 
developments  might  be  stronger  than  expected.  With  respect  to  oil  prices,  too,  there  is  still  the 
possibility of further increases.  
In  addition,  the  vigorous  expansion  of  money  and  credit  aggregates  in  an  environment  of  already 
ample liquidity is clearly amplifying these existing upside risks to price stability.  
Against  the  backdrop  of  the  positive  economic  environment  in  the  euro  area,  our  monetary  policy 
stance is still on the accommodative side and far from being restrictive. Given that inflation is projected 
to remain above our stability threshold, we remain committed to countering risks to price stability over 
the medium term in order to solidly anchor inflation expectations at levels consistent with our definition 
of price stability.  
When  the  Governing  Council  began  increasing  key  interest  rates  in  December  2005,  there  was 
widespread criticism. The main argument put forward by critics at that time was that the Governing 
Council  was  not  taking  due  account  of  the  economic  environment,  and  that  the  rate  hike  therefore 
came too early.  
Since then, however, most of the critics have had to admit that this decision, although heavily criticised 
at the time, was warranted.  
This  has  important  implications:  in  my  view,  had  we  not  started  increasing  key  interest  rates  in 
December 2005, we would have been “fallen behind the curve”. In such a case, monetary policy runs 
the risk of losing control over inflation expectations, which are only firmly anchored at levels consistent 
with price stability if monetary policy is credibly committed to that price stability target.  
BIS Review 66/2007 
 3
Our  experience  since  December  2005  once  again  underscores  that  monetary  policy  has  to  be 
conducted  in  a  forward-looking  manner  and,  in  turn,  must  not  wait  for  risks  to  price  stability  to 
materialise.  Metaphorically  speaking,  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  cannot  be  conducted  by 
looking  through  the  rear  view  mirror.  Looking  through  the  side  window,  that  is  relying  primarily  on 
current observations of growth and inflation, is not sufficient either, since today’s inflation cannot be 
influenced by current monetary policy decisions, owing to the long and variable lags of monetary policy 
transmission.  
Thus,  the  only  viable  option  for  monetary  policy  is  acting  in  a  forward-looking  manner  in  order  to 
ensure price stability over the medium term.  
Let me sum up: monetary policy in the euro area will do what is necessary to maintain price stability 
and  thus  contribute  to  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area. 
Germany’s  economy  is  back  on  track  and  the  outlook  for  Germany  and  the  euro  area  over  the 
medium-term future remains favourable. Dinner speakers should exhaust their topic, not the audience. 
Therefore: Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 66/2007
