Jean-Claude Trichet: How can we increase growth potential in Europe? 
Speech  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Suomi 
Areena 2007, Pori, Finland, 20 July 2007. 
 Dear Governor Liikanen, 
I  would  first  like  to  thank  you  very  warmly  for  inviting  me  on  the  occasion  of  the  “Suomi 
Areena 2007” event. It is a pleasure and a honour to be here today and to share with you my 
views on “How can we increase growth potential in Europe”.  
In light of the partly disappointing euro area economic performance in the past, it is a major 
policy issue. By contrast, the impressive performance of the Finnish economy,  with output 
and productivity growth over the second half of the 1990s among the highest in the European 
countries,  [Real  GDP  and  hourly  labour  productivity  grew  on  average  by  3.8%  and  2.7% 
respectively  between  1996  and  2006],  offers  a  good  illustration  of  what  could  be  done  to 
increase growth potential in Europe. The transformation of the Finnish economy over the last 
decades represents one of the examples of the “knowledge based-economy” taking hold in 
Europe.  
Against this background, I will first review the past economic growth performance of the euro 
area in comparison to the US and focus on some of the underlying factors of potential output 
growth.  Then  I  will  elaborate  on  the  reforms  which  I  consider  essential  to  increase  the 
potential growth rate of Europe. 
The economic performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s 
Since 1996, the annual growth rate for the euro area has averaged 2.1% per year compared 
to 3.3% in the US. What are the fundamental causes of this unsatisfactory low trend growth 
in the euro area? The answers can be found by looking at the factors that determine potential 
or long-term economic growth, namely1:  
The degree of labour utilisation, 
• 
Productivity growth,  
• 
• 
And the demographic trends. 
- Over the period 1996-2006, the euro area witnessed a slight improvement in the utilisation 
of  labour,  which  increased  on  average  by  0.4%  per  year  (compared  with  0.1%  in  the  US) 
when  defined  as  the  total  annual  hours  worked  divided  by  the  total  population.  Labour 
utilisation  reflects  the  extent  to  which  the  potential  labour  resources  in  an  economy  are 
actually utilised and therefore have a direct influence on output growth. This improvement in 
labour utilisation mainly reflects the significant rise in the euro area overall employment rate 
from  58%  in  1996  to  64.4%  in  2006,  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  the  aggregate 
unemployment rate from 10.7% to 7.9%. 
Although this is a very encouraging fact, which shows that the positive employment effect we 
witnessed over the last ten years has significantly helped us to partly counteract the growth 
differential to the US, one has to remain aware of the inferior starting position of euro area 
countries. Despite the important progress recorded, the overall employment rate in the euro 
area remains low by international standards (64.5% in the euro area compared with 72% in 
                                                 
1   European Commission – AMECO database. Hours worked data from OECD. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 1
the  US  in  2006)  and  the  unemployment  rate  is  still  clearly  too  high  (7.9%  compared  with 
4.6% in the US on annual average in 2006 and 7.0 % to be compared to 4.5 % in May this 
year). It has to be noted that in 2006 the estimated number of annual hours worked in the 
euro area was 1604 compared to 18042 in the US.  
Moreover, while the prime-age male employment rate in the euro area is comparable to that 
observed in the United States, the disparities remain important when we look at the youth, 
female and older worker employment rates. In 2006 the female employment rate was 56.5% 
in the euro area and 66% in the US, the older workers employment rate was 41.7% in the 
euro  area  and  61.8%  in  the  US,  and  youth  employment  was  37.1%  in  the  euro  area  and 
54.2%  in  the  US.  These  features  appear  to  be  consistent  with  an  “insider-outsider” 
characterisation of the European labour market, where structural impediments prevent those 
groups “at the margin” from participating in the labour market.  
The performance of the labour market in Finland has also been quite impressive these last 
years  with  the  overall  employment  rate  increasing  from  62.4%  in  1996  to  69.3%  in  2006. 
However, some problems remain with regard to the institutional settings of the labour market, 
which  may  have  to  some  extent  inhibited  the  full  realisation  of  employment  gains  from 
greater competition and innovation as illustrated by the still relatively high unemployment rate 
7.7% in 20063.  
All in all, the rise in employment did not cancel out structural weaknesses of labour markets 
and  there  is  still  considerable  room  to  increase  the  level  of  labour  resource  utilisation  in 
Europe.  
-  Productivity  is  the  other  major  factor  determining  growth.  Over  the  last  decade,  the 
diverging trend in hourly labour productivity growth has been the main reason explaining the 
growth differential between the euro area and the US. During the 1980’s and the first half of 
the  1990s,  hourly  labour  productivity  in  the  euro  area  grew  on  average  by  2.4%,  then  it 
decelerated  to  1.3%  between  1996  and  2006.  By  contrast,  US  hourly  labour  productivity 
growth rose from 1.3% to 2.1% over the same period. 
At the sectoral level, the gap in labour productivity growth between the euro area and the US 
has  been  mainly  driven  by  some  market  service  sectors  intensively  using  Information  and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) namely the wholesale and retail trade sectors as well 
as the financial sectors. In contrast to the US, in these two sectors, labour productivity growth 
significantly decelerated in the euro area over the last 15 years. In the wholesale and retail 
trade  sectors,  hourly  labour  productivity  significantly  accelerated  in  the  US  from  0.7%  to 
2.6% over the periods 1980-1995 and 1996-2004, while at the same time it decelerated in 
the  euro  area  from  2.3%  to  1.3%.  In  the  financial  sectors,  over  the  same  periods,  hourly 
labour  productivity  growth  has  also  accelerated  in  the  US  and  has  been  roughly  4  times 
higher than the growth rate observed in the euro area over the period 1996-2004. 
Several  causes  have  been  mentioned  to  explain  this  downward  trend  in  the  euro  area. 
Specific policies aiming at increasing employment particularly in the unskilled segment of the 
labour market may have contributed to the observed slowdown in labour productivity growth. 
However, this apparent trade-off between labour utilisation and productivity is likely to be a 
temporary phenomenon that should progressively fade, when the economy reaches a higher 
“equilibrium” labour/output ratio.  
There  is  another  major  reason  that  explains  the  big  difference  in  the  rate  of  labour 
productivity  growth  in  Europe  compared  with  the  US,  which  in  my  view  is  a  major  policy 
issue, namely the fact that the European economy, being more inflexible, does not fully take 
                                                 
2   OECD Employment Outlook. Data for 2006 are partly estimates. 
3   There  is  in  particular  considerable  scope  to  raise  the  employment  rate  of  young  people  and  further  reform 
needs to be undertaken to achieve the more ambitious long-term objective of a 75% overall employment rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2007
advantage of all the opportunities offered by new technologies, including ICT, and by the new 
division  of  labour  initiated  by  globalisation.  Restructuring  of  the  productive  sector  and  re-
engineering  of  the  production  processes  appear  to  be  more  difficult  in  a  less  flexible 
economy like the European one, implying a negative influence on productivity. The structural 
characteristics  of  the  US  economy  –  a  more  flexible  labour  market,  a  higher  degree  of 
competition  in  product  markets  and  lower  barriers  to  entry  for  new  firms  –  were  more 
conducive to exploiting the opportunities provided by new technologies. 
It remains relatively easy to understand that the absence of sufficient flexibility in Europe and 
in the Euro area has not permitted us to take advantage of the new opportunities that were 
offered and therefore that Europe has not benefited from an increase in labour productivity 
(and in total factor productivity) like the United States. What remains hard to explain, is that 
not  only  labour  productivity  growth  in  Europe  did  not  accelerate  but  that  it  slowed  down 
significantly,  by  more  than  what  would  be  accounted  for  by  increasing  employment  in  the 
unskilled segment of the labour market.  
A  conjecture  that  seems  to  me  important  to  test  is  whether  in  periods  of  very  rapid 
technological and structural transformations not only less flexible economies are not taking 
advantage  of  the  situation  but  they  might  paradoxically  behave  less  properly  than  in  more 
“normal” times. That could be due to the fact that the degree of rigidity of the economy would 
augment  in practice under  the  economic  “stress”  of  the  much  more  rapid  changes  of  their 
environment. The fact that total factor productivity, which is one of the proxies for the pace of 
structural transformation over years has dropped from 0.7% before 1995 down to 0.3%4 after 
1995 seems to give some credit to this conjecture.  
- Finally, let us not forget the demographic change occurring on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Indeed, Europe’s long term growth performance has also been constrained by the low rate of 
population growth and the ageing of its society. Since the mid 1990’s, population in the euro 
area has been growing at a yearly rate of just 0.4% compared to 1.1% in the US. However, 
what  is  worrisome  is  that  at  the  same  time,  the  gap  in  population  growth  has  been  even 
larger with regard to growth in the working age population the working age population grew 
on average by 0.3% per year in the euro area over the period 1996-2006 compared to 1.4% 
in the US , which manifests that Europe has a more acute problem of population ageing.  
The need for further structural reforms in Europe 
This brief assessment of the underlying causes of Europe’s relatively disappointing longer-
term  growth  performance  provides  a  mixed  picture  of  the European  economy.  The  lack  of 
structural reforms is, in my view, a major cause of the difference in the growth potential in 
Europe compared with the US and with some other advanced industrialized economies. The 
structural reforms identified in the Lisbon agenda have the potential to increase both labour 
productivity growth and labour utilisation, and therefore the long-term growth potential of the 
European  economy.  The  experience  of  European  countries  which  have  undertaken  some 
courageous and successful reforms show that it pays off. For instance, since the beginning 
of the EMU in 1999 the euro area has witnessed an increase of more than 12 million in the 
number of people employed, while from 1990 to 1998, the number of people employed only 
increased by around 3 millions.  
It is clear that major structural reforms are not easy to achieve, but pursuing resolutely such 
reforms  is  especially  needed  in  the  current  environment,  where  the  European  economy  is 
facing a number of important challenges, including rapid technological change, accelerating 
globalisation  as  well  as ageing  populations.  According  to  the  European  Commission’s  and 
                                                 
4   Source EUKLEMS. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 3
ECB projections, the impact of ageing populations alone could reduce on average potential 
output growth in Europe by nearly half by 2040, if structural reforms are not carried out5.  
There  is  today  a  unique  opportunity  for  European  governments  to  take  advantage  of  the 
present favourable growth developments to push ahead with the structural reforms that have 
been  already  agreed  upon  but  are  still  far  from  being  achieved.  Without  aiming  to  be 
exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of the key priorities for reform in three main areas, 
namely:  
• 
• 
• 
Getting more people into work,  
Increasing competition, 
And finally, supporting an innovative environment. 
Getting more people into work 
First  of  all,  well-functioning  labour  markets  are  indispensable  in  fostering  higher  economic 
growth. The differences in labour market developments, especially with regard to the level of 
labour utilisation, between the US and Europe has prompted some economists to suggest 
the  existence  of  a  “European  model”  and  a  “US  model”,  related  to  the  trade-off  between 
labour and leisure6. One view is that the lower levels of GDP per capita in Europe reflect a 
European  preference  for  more  leisure  time.  However,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  lower 
participation rates are not necessarily associated solely with personal preferences, but are 
also triggered by the legal and regulatory environment, tax systems and social institutions.  
Necessary measures to increase labour utilisation or labour supply include the reform of tax 
and benefit systems in order to increase incentives to work. The use of flexible forms of work 
such as part-time and temporary work may also provide further working incentives7. 
High  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro  area  and  in  particular  unacceptable  high  youth 
unemployment rates clearly suggest the need to spur not only labour supply but also labour 
demand.  There  is  a  need  to  reduce  labour  market  rigidities  restricting  wage  differentiation 
and flexibility. Adjustments should be made to employment legislation where it impedes the 
hiring of younger and older workers in particular.  
For instance, Denmark, Ireland and the Netherlands – which, by the way, are all three, de 
jure  or  de  facto  for  Denmark,  in  the  euro  area  –  have  achieved  success  in  reducing 
unemployment  and  stimulating 
job  creation,  despite  significantly  different  economic 
conditions8. In 2006 the unemployment rate in these countries stood below 4.5%, while their 
overall employment rate was above or close to the US level, namely 72 %. To achieve such 
remarkable success, these countries reformed their tax and benefit systems by reducing for 
example  tax  wedges  on  labour  income  and  by  carrying  out  a  stricter  enforcement  of  job 
search  rules  and  a  better  surveillance  of  eligibility.  They  also  increased,  when  and  where 
needed, the flexibility of their labour market.  
                                                 
5   See  “The  economic  costs  of  non-Lisbon:  A  survey  of  the  literature  on  the  economic  impact  of  Lisbon-type 
reforms” by Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission Occasional papers 
No  16,  March  2005  EC.  See  “Demographic  change  in  the  euro  area:  projections  and  consequences”  ECB 
Monthly Bulletin October 2006. 
6   See Blanchard, O. (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, 
pp. 3-26; and also Gordon, R. J. (2004): “Two centuries of economic growth: Europe chasing the American 
frontier”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 4415. 
7   See, for example, Genre, V., R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do(n’t) they 
work”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
8   See  Anthony  Annett  (2006)  “Lessons  from  successful  labour  market  reformers  in  Europe”  IMF  euro  area 
policies: selected issues, August 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2007
Increasing competition 
What all these countries also have in common is a significant reduction of product market 
regulation.  This  leads  to  the  second  prerequisite  for  higher  medium  to  long-term  growth: 
increasing competition towards establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets. 
Most studies point to the potential that improving competition has to increase employment in 
the medium and long run, and to boost productivity trends by improving production efficiency 
and by enhancing the incentive to invest and innovate9.  
In  the  EU,  some  progress  has  been  made  in  this  regard.  For  example,  several  network 
industries,  like  telecommunications,  are  now  fully  or  largely  open  to  competition  and  the 
hourly labour productivity in this particular sector significantly accelerated from 4.9% to 8.4% 
over  the  periods  1980-1995  and  1996-2004  By  comparison  in  the  US,  hourly  labour 
productivity grew by 3.4% and 4.4% over the same periods in the telecommunication sectors.  
A lot remains to be done, however: the extension and deepening of the EU internal market 
remains a priority in particular as regards further financial market integration, the pursuit of 
effective competition in the energy market and the implementation of the Services Directive. 
Member  States  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  these  tasks.  Unfortunately,  Member 
State's implementation record of Internal Market legislation is worsening and the number of 
Internal Market infringements remains stubbornly high in some European countries. 
Let  me  also  briefly  mention  labour  mobility.  Labour  mobility  is  an  essential  element  of  the 
Internal Market and an important factor of adjustment mechanism in a context of monetary 
union. Evidence however suggests that, overall, cross-border labour mobility is still low in the 
euro area. And we still have formal barriers to labour mobility across the euro area. This is in 
clear contrast to the situation in the United States10. 
All in all, increasing product market competition and labour mobility – at the EU and national 
level, would enable more efficient production structures associated with a more competitive 
price setting. Following the principle of “an open market economy with free competition” is 
pivotal to fostering long-term economic growth. 
Let me now focus more specifically on the financial sectors. Financial integration is indeed of 
key  importance  for  the  ECB,  given  the  relevance  for  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary 
policy.  The  process  of  European  financial  integration  is  gradually  taking  place  and 
considerable  progress  has  been  made  for  instance  in  capital  markets  and  wholesale 
banking.  However,  the  retail  banking  sector  appears  not  yet  to  have  reached  its  potential, 
and competition seems insufficient in this area leaving European consumers unable to take 
full advantage of the benefits of the EMU and the Single Market11. This seems also to have 
constrained to some extent the economic performance and the development of these sectors 
in the euro area as illustrated by their disappointing labour productivity growth performance. 
                                                 
9   See the ECB Occasional Paper Series No 44 “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services 
sector”, by the Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, April 2006. 
10   Although the data available refer mostly to the 15 earliest members of the European Union, the EU15, they 
are still illustrative of the situation in the euro area. In 2000 only 0.1% of the total EU15 population (or around 
225,000  people)  moved  their  official  residence  between  two  Member  States.  Furthermore,  only  a  small 
proportion of individuals – 0.4% of the EU15 population – were known to commute across borders to work, 
and half of this amount was to a non EU15 country. In the United States, geographical labour mobility appears 
to  be  far  higher.  Evidence  suggests  that  around  5.9%  of  the  total  US  population  moved  their  residence 
between US states in 1999. See F. F. Heinz and M. Ward-Warmedinger, “Cross-border labour mobility within 
an enlarged EU”, ECB Occasional Paper No 52, 2006. See also “Action plan for skills and mobility”, European 
Commission, 2002. 
11   See EIB “Financial integration in Europe” (2007). 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 5
More  generally  speaking,  evidence  indicates  that  the  reallocation  of  capital  from  declining 
industries  to  industries with  high  investment  opportunities  and  high  productivity  is  faster  in 
countries  with  developed  financial  markets12.  These  findings  suggest  that  countries  with 
more  liquid  capital  markets  and  a  developed  banking  system  are  growing  faster  on 
average13.  
Supporting an innovative environment 
Finally,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  I  just 
mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  support  innovation  and  technological 
changes.  These  include,  inter  alia,  the  unlocking  of  business  potential  by  creating  an 
entrepreneurial-friendly  economic  environment,  measures  to  support  innovation  through 
higher  investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D)  and  policies  aimed  at  improving 
human capital.  
The performance of the Finnish economy illustrates all the benefits arising from developing a 
“knowledge based-economy” as targeted by the Lisbon agenda. Finland has been ranked by 
the World Bank among the top world and European countries regarding the ease of doing 
business. Moreover, Finland is ahead of most European countries when looking at venture 
capital and R&D investments as well as educational attainment.  
First of all, Europe needs more new and thriving firms willing to reap the benefits of opening 
markets and to embark on creative or innovative ventures for commercial exploitation on a 
larger  scale.  It  is  increasingly  new  and  smaller  firms,  rather  than  large  ones,  that  are  the 
major providers of new jobs14. The contribution from firm dynamic processes to aggregate 
labour productivity growth and innovation also plays a major role, in particular in high-tech 
industries. All in all, an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment would imply less red 
tape  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  to  help  them  develop  at  home  and  across 
borders, as well as positive action to ease access to the finance they need. And Europe is 
significantly  lagging  behind  in  this  field.  For  instance,  venture  capital  financing  in  Europe 
remains only a fraction of what it is in the US relative to the size of their economies.  
Second,  promoting  R&D  investment  is  also  a  major  issue.  While  many  Member  States 
expect to increase their R&D spending, Europe will fall short of the 2010 overall EU target of 
achieving 3% of GDP. In 2005 R&D investment relative to GDP was 1.9% in the euro area 
compared to 2.7% in the US. The efforts of European countries to increase R&D investment 
are  still  insufficient.  Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  increase  public  R&D  spending 
efficiency and more attractive conditions for technology-intensive markets should be created. 
This includes for instance a better use of public procurement and a more innovation-friendly 
regulation.  The  European  Commission  estimated  that  an  increase  in  the  share  of  R&D 
expenditures in GDP from 1.9% in 2004 to 3% by 2010 would result in an increase of 1.7% in 
the level of GDP by 2010. It goes without saying that it is not only a quantitative issue and 
that at the same time the efficiency of research and development in terms of industrialisation 
                                                 
12   See  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and 
innovation for productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper forthcoming. 
13   Some authors have calculated that if the average size of capital markets in the EU was bigger - in the US for 
instance this size is around 450% of GDP instead of 220% in the EU (based on an overall indicator measuring 
total financing in the economy by aggregating bank credit to the private sector, stock market capitalisation and 
the outstanding amount of domestic debt securities issued by the private sector) - then annual GDP per capita 
growth  in  the  EU  could  be  positively  influenced  (see  G.  Favara  (2006),  “An  empirical  reassessment  of  the 
relationship between finance and growth”, mimeo). 
14   See the European Commission’s Green Paper entitled “Entrepreneurship in Europe”, 21.01.2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2007
is crucial. In the longer term, GDP could be up by 4.2% in 2015 and 7.0% in 2020, equivalent 
to an additional growth rate of nearly 0.5% per year15. 
Finally, to make these measures most effective, they need to be accompanied by efforts to 
improve  the  labour  force’s  level  of  education  and  expertise.  Meeting  the  challenges  of 
innovation and its diffusion as well as ensuring the labour force’s employability and flexibility, 
requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to  labour  market  needs  through 
improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. 
The  last  decades  have  already  brought  about  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of 
educational attainment. However, so far investment in human capital in Europe is still clearly 
inadequate  for  a  “knowledge-intensive”  economy.  In  2003,  the  US  annual  expenditure  on 
higher  education  institutions  represented  2.9%  of  GDP,  while  in  the  euro  area  it  only 
represented  1.2%16.  The  gap  is  mainly  a  result  of  greater  private  funding.  European 
universities should be allowed and encouraged for instance to seek complementary private 
sources  of  funding  and  legal,  and  other  barriers  to  public-private  partnerships  between 
universities  and  businesses  should  be  removed.  A  better  and  more  effective  education 
system, as estimated by some research of the European Commission, might add as much as 
0.3 to 0.5 percentage points to the annual EU GDP growth rate17.  
Macroeconomic stability to support higher and sustainable growth 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  supply-side  determinants  of  long-term  growth  that  I  have 
emphasised  should  not  be  understood  as  an  exhaustive  explanation  for  the  growth 
performance of the European economy. We should also look beyond the microeconomics of 
the supply-side and ensure an appropriate macroeconomic framework in Europe.  
First  of  all,  sound  national  fiscal  policies  in  Europe  are  of  the  essence  because  they 
ultimately are supporting growth and stability. Prudent fiscal policies for instance contribute to 
lower  risk  premia  on  long-term  interest  rates  and  thus  to  more  favourable  financing 
conditions, which in turn promotes investment and long-term growth. It is important that all 
governments  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  on  fiscal 
consolidation  in  economic  “good  times”  and  that  all  the  countries  concerned  honour  the 
commitments  they  made  at  the  Eurogroup  meeting  in  Berlin  on  20  April  2007.  Taking 
advantage  of  the  favourable  cyclical  conditions  would  enable  most  euro  area  countries  to 
achieve their medium-term objectives in 2008 or 2009, and all of them should aim for 2010 at 
the latest. 
Beyond that, the “quality” of public finances also matters for growth. It is essential to increase 
public spending efficiency in order to facilitate the reorientation of public expenditure towards 
productivity-enhancing  physical  and  human  capital  accumulation.  The  ECB  therefore 
welcomes the emphasis placed by the ECOFIN Council on measures to improve the quality 
and efficiency of public finances. 
Monetary policy plays a key role in fostering sustainable economic growth in Europe through 
maintaining price stability. A central bank must avoid the negative effects of the uncertainty 
caused  by  high  inflation  on  long-term  growth  as  well  as  the  adverse  impact  of  uncertainty 
due to variable and unanticipated inflation. Variability of inflation increases uncertainty and 
exerts a major negative influence on investment and thus on potential output as well as on 
                                                 
15   European Commission, 2004, “A 3% R&D effort in Europe in 2010: an analysis of the consequences”, study 
prepared by the Research Directorate General of the European Commission. 
16   OECD Education at a Glance 2006. 
17   European  Commission,  2003,  “Chapter  3  -  Education,  training  and  growth”,  in:  The  EU  Economy:  2003 
Review 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 7
other components of aggregate demand. The environment of price stability, the credibility of 
the ECB in delivering price stability over time and therefore the solid anchoring of inflation 
expectations, are paving the way for sustainable economic activity. 
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to conclude by stressing a few points.  
Monetary Union has been effective – and very successful – in supporting growth. In 2006, 
real GDP in the euro area grew by 2.9%, which is the highest rate since 2000. This positive 
development is very encouraging, but this is no time for complacency. Europe still has some 
way to go to fully benefit from globalization and meet the challenges of rapid technological 
changes and ageing population. We should also keep in mind that in a context of monetary 
union,  not  only  fiscal  policies,  but  also  price  competitiveness  and  unit  labour  cost 
developments across countries should be continuously and closely monitored.  
That said, structural reforms are decisive to raise the long-term speed limit of the European 
growth.  We  have  the  tool  in  our  hands  to  address  the  challenges  I mentioned:  the  Lisbon 
strategy,  as  refocused  and  reaffirmed  by  the  European  Council.  If  all  European  countries 
summon  up  their  strength  and  reinforce  their  push  forward  with  structural  reform,  the 
improvement in economic activity presently observed in Europe will be broadened and made 
sustainable in the long run. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 82/2007
