Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 28 March 2007.  
 Chairman  Schumer,  Vice  Chairman  Maloney,  Representative  Saxton,  and  other  members  of  the 
Committee, thank you for inviting me here this morning to present an update on the outlook for the 
U.S. economy. I will begin with a discussion of real economic activity and then turn to inflation. 
Economic growth in the United States has slowed in recent quarters, reflecting in part the economy’s 
transition from the rapid rate of expansion experienced over the preceding years to a more sustainable 
pace of growth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of roughly 2 percent in the 
second half of 2006 and appears to be expanding at a similar rate early this year. 
The  principal  source  of  the  slowdown  in  economic  growth  that  began  last  spring  has  been  the 
substantial correction in the housing market. Following an extended boom in housing, the demand for 
homes began to weaken in mid-2005. By the middle of 2006, sales of both new and existing homes 
had fallen about 15 percent below their peak levels. Homebuilders responded to the fall in demand by 
sharply curtailing construction. Even so, the inventory of unsold homes has risen to levels well above 
recent  historical  norms.  Because  of  the  decline  in  housing  demand,  the  pace  of  house-price 
appreciation has slowed markedly, with some markets experiencing outright price declines.  
The near-term prospects for the housing market remain uncertain. Sales of new and existing homes 
were  about  flat,  on  balance,  during  the  second  half  of  last  year.  So  far  this  year,  sales  of  existing 
homes  have  held  up,  as  have  other  indicators  of  demand  such  as  mortgage  applications  for  home 
purchase, and mortgage rates remain relatively low. However, sales of new homes have fallen, and 
continuing declines in starts have not yet led to meaningful reductions in the inventory of homes for 
sale. Even if the demand for housing falls no further, weakness in residential construction is likely to 
remain a drag on economic growth for a time as homebuilders try to reduce their inventories of unsold 
homes to more normal levels.  
Developments  in  subprime  mortgage  markets  raise  some  additional  questions  about  the  housing 
sector. Delinquency rates on variable-interest-rate loans to subprime borrowers, which account for a 
bit  less  than  10  percent  of  all  mortgages  outstanding,  have  climbed  sharply  in  recent  months.  The 
flattening in home prices has contributed to the increase in delinquencies by making refinancing more 
difficult for borrowers with little home equity. In addition, a large increase in early defaults on recently 
originated subprime variable-rate mortgages casts serious doubt on the adequacy of the underwriting 
standards for these products, especially those originated over the past year or so. As a result of this 
deterioration  in  loan  performance,  investors  have  increased  their  scrutiny  of  the  credit  quality  of 
securitized mortgages, and lenders in turn are evidently tightening the terms and standards applied in 
the subprime mortgage market. 
Although the turmoil in the subprime mortgage market has created severe financial problems for many 
individuals and families, the implications of these developments for the housing market as a whole are 
less clear. The ongoing tightening of lending standards, although an appropriate market response, will 
reduce  somewhat  the  effective  demand  for  housing,  and  foreclosed  properties  will  add  to  the 
inventories  of  unsold  homes.  At  this  juncture,  however,  the  impact  on  the  broader  economy  and 
financial markets of the problems in the subprime market seems likely to be contained. In particular, 
mortgages  to  prime  borrowers  and  fixed-rate  mortgages  to  all  classes  of  borrowers  continue  to 
perform well, with low rates of delinquency. We will continue to monitor this situation closely. 
Business spending has also slowed recently. Expenditures on capital equipment declined in the fourth 
quarter  of  2006  and  early  this  year.  Much  of  the  weakness  in  recent  months  has  been  in  types  of 
capital goods used heavily by the construction and motor vehicle industries, but we have seen some 
softening in the demand for other types of capital goods as well. Although some of this pullback can 
be explained by the recent moderation in the growth of output, the magnitude of the slowdown has 
been somewhat greater than would be expected given the normal evolution of the business cycle. In 
addition, inventory levels in some industries – again, most notably in industries linked to construction 
and motor vehicle production – rose over the course of last year, leading some firms to cut production 
to better align inventories with sales. Recent indicators suggest that the inventory adjustment process 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
may have largely run its course in the motor vehicle sector, but remaining imbalances in some other 
industries may continue to impose some restraint on industrial production for a time. 
Despite the recent weak readings, we expect business investment in equipment and software to grow 
at a moderate pace this year, supported by high rates of profitability, strong business balance sheets, 
relatively  low  interest  rates  and  credit  spreads,  and  continued  expansion  of  output  and  sales. 
Investment  in  nonresidential  structures  (such  as  office  buildings,  factories,  and  retail  space)  should 
also continue to expand, although not at the unusually rapid pace of 2006. 
Thus far, the weakness in housing and in some parts of manufacturing does not appear to have spilled 
over to any significant extent to other sectors of the economy. Employment has continued to expand 
as job losses in manufacturing and residential construction have been more than offset by gains in 
other sectors, notably health care, leisure and hospitality, and professional and technical services, and 
unemployment remains low by historical standards. The continuing increases in employment, together 
with some pickup in real wages, have helped sustain consumer spending, which increased at a brisk 
pace  during  the  second  half  of  last  year  and  has  continued  to  be  well  maintained  so  far  this  year. 
Growth in consumer spending should continue to support the economic expansion in coming quarters. 
In  addition,  fiscal  policy  at  both  the  federal  and  the  state  and  local  levels  should  impart  a  small 
stimulus to economic activity this year. 
Outside  the  United  States,  economic  activity  in  our  major  trading  partners  has  continued  to  grow 
briskly. The strength of demand abroad has helped to spur strong growth in U.S. real exports, which 
rose about 9 percent last year, and a robust world economy should continue to provide opportunities 
for U.S. exporters this year. Growth in U.S. real imports slowed to about 3 percent in 2006, in part 
reflecting  a  drop  in  real  terms  in  imports  of  crude  oil  and  petroleum  products.  Despite  the 
improvements in trade performance, the U.S. current account deficit remains large, averaging 6-1/2 
percent of nominal GDP during 2006. 
Overall, the economy appears likely to continue to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters. 
As  the  inventory  of  unsold  new  homes  is  worked  off,  the  drag  from  residential  investment  should 
wane.  Consumer  spending  appears  solid,  and  business  investment  seems  likely  to  post  moderate 
gains.  
This forecast is subject to a number of risks. To the downside, the correction in the housing market 
could turn out to be more severe than we currently expect, perhaps exacerbated by problems in the 
subprime  sector.  Moreover,  we  could  yet  see  greater  spillover  from  the  weakness  in  housing  to 
employment  and  consumer  spending  than  has  occurred  thus  far.  The  possibility  that  the  recent 
weakness in business investment will persist is an additional downside risk. To the upside, consumer 
spending  –  which  has  proved  quite  resilient  despite  the  housing  downturn  and  increases  in  energy 
prices – might continue to grow at a brisk pace, stimulating a more-rapid economic expansion than we 
currently anticipate. 
Let me now turn to the inflation situation. Overall consumer price inflation has come down since last 
year, primarily as a result of the deceleration of consumers’ energy costs. The consumer price index 
(CPI) increased 2.4 percent over the twelve months ending in February, down from 3.6 percent a year 
earlier. Core inflation slowed modestly in the second half of last year, but recent readings have been 
somewhat elevated and the level of core inflation remains uncomfortably high. For example, core CPI 
inflation  over  the  twelve  months  ending  in  February  was  2.7  percent,  up  from  2.1  percent  a  year 
earlier.  Another  measure  of  core  inflation  that  we  monitor  closely,  based  on  the  price  index  for 
personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, shows a similar pattern. 
Core inflation, which is a better measure of the underlying inflation trend than overall inflation, seems 
likely to moderate gradually over time. Despite recent increases in the price of crude oil, energy prices 
are below last year’s peak. If energy prices remain near current levels, greater stability in the costs of 
producing non-energy goods and services will reduce pressure on core inflation over time. Of course, 
the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities  are  very  difficult  to  predict,  and  they  remain  a  source  of 
considerable uncertainty in the inflation outlook.  
Increases in rents – both market rent and owner’s equivalent rent – account for a substantial part of 
the increase in core inflation over the past year. The acceleration in rents may have resulted in part 
from  a  shift  in  demand  toward  rental  housing  as  families  found  homeownership  less  financially 
attractive. Rents should begin to decelerate as the demand for owner-occupied housing stabilizes and 
the supply of rental units increases. However, the extent and timing of that expected slowing is not yet 
clear. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
Another  significant  factor  influencing  medium-term  trends  in  inflation  is  the  public’s  expectations  of 
inflation.  These  expectations  have  an  important  bearing  on  whether  transitory  influences  on  prices, 
such  as  changes  in  energy  costs,  become  embedded  in  wage  and  price  decisions  and  so  leave  a 
lasting  imprint  on  the  rate  of  inflation.  It  is  encouraging  that  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be 
contained. 
Although core inflation seems likely to moderate gradually over time, the risks to this forecast are to 
the upside. In particular, upward pressure on inflation could materialize if final demand were to exceed 
the  underlying  productive  capacity  of  the  economy  for  a  sustained  period.  The  rate  of  resource 
utilization is high, as can be seen most clearly in the tightness of the labor market. Indeed, anecdotal 
reports  suggest  that  businesses  are  having  difficulty  recruiting  well-qualified  workers  in  a  range  of 
occupations. Measures of labor compensation, though still growing at a moderate pace, have shown 
some signs of acceleration over the past year, likely in part the result of tight labor market conditions. 
To be sure, faster growth in nominal labor compensation does not necessarily portend higher inflation. 
Increases in compensation may be offset by higher labor productivity or absorbed – at least for a time 
– by a narrowing of firms’ profit margins rather than passed on to consumers in the form  of higher 
prices.  In  these  circumstances,  gains  in  nominal  compensation  would  translate  into  gains  in  real 
compensation as well. Underlying productivity trends appear generally favorable, despite the recent 
slowing  in  some  measures,  and  the  markup  of  prices  over  unit  labor  costs  is  high  by  historical 
standards, so such an outcome is certainly possible. Moreover, if the economy grows at a moderate 
pace for a time, as seems most likely, pressures on resource utilization should ease. 
However, a less benign possibility is that tight product markets might allow firms to pass some or all of 
their higher labor costs through to prices. In this case, increases in nominal compensation would not 
translate into increased purchasing power for workers but would add to inflation pressures. Thus, the 
high level of resource utilization remains an important upside risk to continued progress in reducing 
inflation.  
In regard to monetary policy, the Federal Open Market Committee has left its target for the federal 
funds rate unchanged, at 5-1/4 percent, since last June. To date, the incoming data have supported 
the view that the current stance of policy is likely to foster sustainable economic growth and a gradual 
ebbing in core inflation. Because core inflation is above the levels most conducive to the achievement 
of sustainable growth and price stability, the Committee indicated in the statement following its recent 
meeting  that  its  predominant  policy  concern  remains  the  risk  that  inflation  will  fail  to  moderate  as 
expected. However, the uncertainties around the outlook have increased somewhat in recent weeks. 
Consequently, the Committee also indicated that future policy decisions will depend on the evolution 
of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.  
Thank you. I would be happy to take your questions.  
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
