Caleb M Fundanga: Overview of Zambia’s banking sector 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  on  the  occasion  of  the  10th 
Anniversary of Bank of China (Zambia) Limited, Lusaka, 13 April 2007. 
 • His Excellency – the Chinese Ambassador to Zambia; 
• Vice-President of the Bank of China – Head Office; 
• Chairman of the Board of the Bank of China (Zambia) Limited; 
• Managing Director of the Bank of China (Zambia) Limited; 
• Distinguished invited guests; and 
• Ladies and gentlemen 
Let me first express my sincere gratitude for having been invited to speak on the occasion of the 10th 
anniversary of the Bank of China (Zambia) Limited. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  during  the  last  ten  years,  the  performance  of  Bank  of  China  has  been 
satisfactory with total assets steadily increasing to K391.4 billion in December 2006from K6.4 billion in 
December 1997 and total deposits increasing to K294.2 billion in December 2006 from K2 billion in 
December 1997. On this basis, Bank of China had grown to become the eighth largest bank in Zambia 
albeit operating with only one branch. Bank of China (Zambia) is a 100% subsidiary of Bank of China 
which went through a successful initial public offer (IPO) and has resulted in Bank of China being a top 
tier globally listed bank. 
Over the same period in Zambia, the overall financial performance and condition of the banking sector 
has been satisfactory. The banking sector has maintained adequate capitalization and all the banks 
met the minimum capital requirements of 5% for primary capital and 10% for total regulatory capital. 
However, in January 2007, the Bank of Zambia revised the minimum required capital to start a bank 
from  K2  billion  to  K12  billion.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  anticipates  increased  economic  and  investment 
activity in Zambia in the coming years and so banks operating in Zambia need to stand ready to safely 
provide the required level of financing. It is therefore the expectation of the Bank of Zambia that all 
banks will comply with this requirement by June 2008. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  since  our  two  countries,  Zambia  and  China,  established  diplomatic  ties  43 
years  ago,  the  relationship  has  been  both  cordial  and  beneficial  as  seen  by  the  growth  in  Chinese 
investment  into  Zambia  in  mining,  textile,  construction,  banking, and  agriculture.  Currently,  China  is 
Zambia's third largest investor, after South Africa and the United Kingdom. The expected creation of 
the US$800 million special economic zone on the Copperbelt, the first of its kind in Africa, will show 
case  the  significance  that  the  Zambia-China  relationship  and  further  strengthening  the  existing 
friendship between our two countries. This also provides an opportunity for Bank of China (Zambia) to 
strategically position itself to take advantage of the immense business opportunities that will arise from 
this development. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Zambian  Government  is  committed  to  the  implementation  of  prudent 
economic  policies  aimed  at  economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction,  and  results  are  beginning  to 
show. For instance, Zambia, has successfully managed to stabilize the key macroeconomic variables. 
For the first time in 30 years, inflation managed to fall to its lowest levels while the exchange rate has 
been relatively stable whilst reflecting market fundamentals. Further, the lending interest rates have 
been declining in response favorable macroeconomic environment. 
Notwithstanding the improved macroeconomic environment, the Zambian Government is aware and 
committed  to  resolving  the  remaining challenges  facing  the  banking  and  financial  services  industry. 
Accordingly, Government adopted a 5-year Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP), which aims, 
amongst other things, at promoting the development of a stable, sound and market based financial 
system. One of the key recommendations of the FSDP is establishment of a credit reference bureau in 
order  to  improve  the  credit  culture  in  Zambia.  In  June  2006,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  licensed  one 
company to provide credit referencing services and commercial banks are concluding a service level 
agreement with this company that will allow the bureau to serve as a clearinghouse for credit history 
information  and  promote  the  ability  of  lending  institutions  to  share  both  positive  and  negative  data 
about their borrowing customers. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, this development will address one of key structural problems that the baking 
sector  has  faced  for  a  long  time.  I  therefore  wish  to  implore  Bank  of  China  to  continue  playing  an 
effective  role  and  stimulate  economic  activity  by  providing  well  structured  financial  products  and 
services, especially those aimed at boosting growth in key sectors such as mining, energy, tourism, 
manufacturing and agriculture. However, in order to achieve this, there is need for Bank of China and 
other commercial banks to do more in terms of reducing lending interest rates and influence the safe 
expansion of private sector credit and at the same time contribute to the reduction of the cost of doing 
business in Zambia. The current environment of relatively low inflation and stable exchange rate offer 
a good opportunity for lowering commercial banks’ lending interest rates. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  further  challenging  Bank  of  China  (Zambia)  Limited  to 
expand  beyond  one  branch  and  broaden  its  customer  base  and  operations  swiftly  in  order  to 
consolidate the gains that have been achieved over the last 10 years. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
