Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The challenge for a global Islamic capital market – strategic 
developments in Malaysia 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Sukuk 
Summit  2007,  "The  Challenge  for  a  Global  Islamic  Capital  Market  –  Strategic  Developments  in 
Malaysia", London, 20 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests.  
It gives me great pleasure to be here in London to speak at this landmark sukuk summit. The Islamic 
bond market – the sukuk market – represents a key component of the Islamic financial system. This 
recent  decade  has  seen  the  accelerated  development  of  this  market  and  its  significant  role  in 
strengthening the evolution of Islamic finance. The global development of this market is particularly 
important  in  this  more  challenging  financial  and  economic  environment.  It  has  contributed  to 
enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the mobilisation and allocation of funds within national 
financial systems and in the international financial system. This development is also evidenced by the 
level  of  innovation  and  sophistication  of  the  products  and  services  being  offered  by  the  Islamic 
financial  institutions.  The  encouraging  development  of  the  Islamic  bonds  market  has  also  had  an 
important role in enhancing the linkages between financial markets as it facilitates cross-border flows 
in the international financial system.  
The sukuk market as an important source of financing for large scale investment projects, has a key 
role in facilitating the economic development process. For investors, it provides greater potential for 
diversification into new asset classes. My remarks today will focus on the vast potential of the Islamic 
bond market in the economic development process, in its role in ensuring financial stability and its role 
in promoting greater financial integration in the global financial system. I would also like to take this 
opportunity to share with you Malaysia's experience in the development of this market. The Malaysian 
sukuk market has now evolved into one of the world's largest Islamic bond market.  
Immense role of sukuk market in the economic development 
The  financing  requirements  for  economic  development  are  immense.  The  bond  market  is  key  to 
meeting these funding needs for both the public and private sectors. This is particularly important for 
emerging market economies. In the Middle East and in Asia , two of the fastest growing regions in the 
global economy are taking place following privatisation and implementation of infrastructure projects. 
Asia alone will be spending an estimated USD1 trillion on infrastructure over the next five years, while 
infrastructure  requirements  in  the  Middle  East  are  estimated  to  be  USD500  billion  over  the  same 
period. The challenge is to put in place an intermediation system that will channel the surplus savings 
in both these regions into productive investments. It is in this context that the Islamic capital market, in 
particular the sukuk market will serve as an important avenue to efficiently mobilise longer term funds 
to meet these funding requirements.  
The  global  experience  has  shown  that  the  lack  of  well  developed  bond  markets  brings  with  it 
vulnerabilities arising from over-reliance on financing from the banking sector. This has often resulted 
in funding mismatches with adverse implications on financial stability. The development of the bond 
market  allows  for  access  to  funding  with  the  appropriate  maturities,  thus  avoiding  the  funding 
mismatches. It also allows for the diversification of risks by issuers and investors.  
The central merit of the sukuk structure is that it is based on real underlying assets. The ijarah sukuk 
for example – an Islamic bond which applies a sales and leaseback arrangement – is an asset-backed 
instrument providing continuous security to the investor. This approach discourages over-exposure of 
the financing facility beyond the value of the underlying asset, given that the issuer cannot leverage in 
excess of the asset value.  
In  addition,  Islamic  finance  requires  that  the  financing  must  be  channelled  for  productive  purposes, 
such as for project financing, rather than for speculative activities. The risk exposure is therefore to the 
project and not to the uncertainties or activities that have no real economic benefits. Islamic financial 
intermediation therefore has the potential role of contributing towards financial stability.  
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
In the current environment, the demand for sukuks significantly exceeds the supply. Today, the global 
sukuk market, denominated in international currencies, is estimated to be USD18 billion. If domestic 
sukuk issuance is included, it has now exceeded USD50 billion. Although the size of the market may 
seem  modest  by  global  standards,  the  sukuk  market  has  been  registering  an  impressive  average 
growth of 40 per cent per annum. The phenomenal demand has been spurred by the high levels of 
surplus savings and reserves in Asia and Gulf regions. Asia has a savings rate which is higher than 
any other region in the world and is expected to remain between 30 and 40 per cent of GDP for many 
years to come.  
The sukuk market brings with it many benefits to both issuers and investors. Issuers can benefit from 
the huge increase in liquidity in the Islamic world, and can tap on these new sources of funds. Raising 
funding from the Islamic bond market in the current environment has been 10 to 20 basis points lower 
than mainstream bonds. An increased number of multilateral agencies are issuing sukuks to finance 
development  projects.  In  addition,  both  government  agencies  and  the  corporate  sector  have 
considered the sukuk market as an attractive source of financing.  
From the investor perspective, there are the benefits of diversification. In a sukuk issue in 2005, 48 per 
cent  of  the  issuance  were  subscribed  by  conventional-based  investors.  This  increased  appetite  for 
sukuk reinforced by excess liquidity in the global financial system is part of the reasons sukuks are 
attractively priced for issuers.  
Extending the linkages to other parts of the world 
The  emergence  of  Islamic  financial  products,  in  particular,  in  the  capital  market  has  also  promoted 
greater global financial integration. The bringing together of financial institutions and market players 
across  continents  to  participate  in  this  expansion  of  inter-regional  investment  flows  has  fostered 
financial  linkages  among  the  major  regions.  This  will  not  only  provide  great  synergies  and 
opportunities but will contribute towards facilitating international financial stability.  
Just as the old Silk Road in the 14th century offered a route that facilitated the spice trade from the 
East  to  the  West,  we  can  now  envisage  the  new  Silk  Road  which  financial  flows  across  borders 
between the East and West, thereby promoting international financial integration. In this context, the 
Islamic  capital  market,  in  particular,  the  sukuk  market  has  a  major  role  in  strengthening  this 
interlinkage.  The  essence  of  the  New  Silk  Road  is  to  provide  a  route  for  such  flows  and  promote 
greater financial integration for the benefit of a wider community. The New Silk Road should not be 
envisaged as just a link between Asia and the Middle East but that which extend to Europe and the 
rest  of  the  world.  Indeed,  we  are  already  seeing  the  participation  of  global  investors  and  the 
international  financial  community.  The  participation  of  a  financial  centre  like  London  will  foster  the 
global  growth  and  international  integration  of  this  market.  The  involvement  of  regulators  and 
government agencies is also contributing to accelerating this process.  
Malaysia is one of the key intermediary destinations along this New Silk Road that offers a platform for 
the  origination,  distribution  and  trading of  Islamic capital  market and  treasury instruments,  including 
sukuks. Malaysia is positioning itself as an Islamic investment gateway to Asia , with a niche in Islamic 
fund and wealth management. Malaysia has developed a comprehensive Islamic financial system that 
operates  in  parallel  with  the  conventional  financial  system.  Of  significance,  is  the  inter-connectivity 
within the system that includes the banking and takaful industries, and the Islamic money and capital 
markets – a matrix which mutually reinforces the integrity and stability of the Islamic financial system. 
This is supported by the financial infrastructure, the legal and regulatory framework and the expertise 
to contribute to the growth of Islamic finance.  
Malaysia’s achievements in developing the sukuk market 
Allow me to share the Malaysian experience in developing the sukuk market. The Malaysian Islamic 
bond  market  has  made  significant  progress  since  the  first  sukuk  issue  in  1990  by  a  multinational 
corporation operating in Malaysia . The development of the market involved initiatives to facilitate an 
efficient  issuance  process,  the  price  discovery  process,  the  broadening  of  the  investor  base,  the 
establishment of a benchmark yield, the liquidity in the secondary market and the strengthening of the 
regulatory framework. These initiatives have been reinforced by the legal and Shariah framework and 
the supporting financial infrastructure including the settlement and bond information system.  
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
Following the development of a robust and vibrant domestic market, initiatives have now been taken to 
raise the significance of the international dimension of our Islamic financial system. This has included 
wide ranging liberalization measures including bringing in new Islamic finance foreign players into our 
system  through  the  issue  of  new  licences  and  allowing  for  greater  levels  of  foreign  interest  in  our 
domestic  financial  institutions.  The  liberalisation  has  also  involved  the  potential  for  greater  foreign 
participation in our domestic financial markets.  
In 2002, Malaysia achieved a further significant milestone when the Malaysian government issued the 
first  global  sovereign  sukuk,  raising  USD600  million.  With  this  issuance,  it  became  an  international 
benchmark  for  the  issuance of  global sukuk.  The sukuk  issue  was  listed  on  the  Luxembourg  Stock 
Exchange, Labuan International Financial Stock Exchange and Bahrain Stock Exchange. There has 
since been further sovereign issues in the global capital market.  
In  2006,  the  Malaysian  market  saw  the  launch  of  a  sukuk  using  concepts  such  as  Mudha-rabah, 
Mu-sya-rakah and Ijarah. The issuers included Malaysia's government-linked companies. A landmark 
example was the USD750 million exchangeable sukuk Musyarakah by Khazanah, the government's 
investment corporation for the purpose of selling a stake in Telekom Malaysia . It marked the world's 
first  issue  of  its  kind,  incorporating  full  convertibility  features  common  to  conventional  equity-linked 
transactions.  
Following  these  developments,  the  Malaysian  sukuk  market  has  attracted  a  wide  range  of  lead 
arrangers.  In  addition,  the  rising  demand  and  the  growing  number  of  issuers  and  the  broadening 
investor  base  has  led  to  the  growing  sophistication  of  the  market.  By  January  2007,  Malaysia 
accounted  for  67  per  cent,  about  two-thirds  of  the  global  sukuk  outstanding,  amounting  to  about 
USD47 billion.  
The growth in the sukuk market also reflects the commitment and combined efforts of the Malaysian 
government and regulators. There is a clear articulation of the vision and policies to drive the local 
Islamic capital market. This is reinforced by the implementation of a strong legal, regulatory and tax 
framework.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Securities  Commission  have  worked  closely  on  a  sequence  of  vital 
blueprints: the 10-year Financial Sector Master Plan, the 10-year Capital Market Master Plan and the 
Islamic securities guidelines. The government has reaffirmed all these plans and initiatives with the 
announcement of a range of tax measures in the 2006 budget.  
Another important aspect of the development of the sukuk market is the development of the other key 
components  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  the  money  market,  banking,  and  takaful  sectors.  The 
various  components  are  able  to  meet  the  different  requirements  of  the  economy  including  the 
differentiated tenor for which the funds are required. This includes providing stable long-term funds for 
large investments and development projects. These would allow for a balanced allocation of financial 
and  economic  resources  within  the  economy,  diversifying  the  risks  through  the  Islamic  financial 
system, and enhancing its flexibilities to adjust, thus strengthening its resilience.  
As Malaysia moves to a more liberalised and globalised Islamic capital market, the role of the industry 
in advancing the Islamic financial system becomes increasingly important. The role of the industry has 
been  important  in  spearheading  product  innovation,  branding,  profiling,  promotion  and  marketing  of 
the Islamic capital market products and services. This has contributed to the development of a deeper 
and more liquid, efficient, transparent and effective sukuk market.  
Challenges in the development of the global Islamic capital market 
While much has been achieved, much remain to be done. Let me turn to some of the challenges and 
initiatives taken to address them. A vital ingredient for the development of capital markets, including 
the  Islamic  capital  market,  is  the  creation  of  a  secondary  trading  platform  for  the  capital  market 
instruments. This will provide investors with the flexibility in managing their liquidity requirements. In 
this respect, more needs to be done in terms of the creation of a continuous supply of Islamic papers 
and instruments that would promote the secondary trading of instruments and add greater depth to the 
market.  
There also needs to be greater diversity in the type and maturity of the sukuks in the market for Islamic 
financial institutions and portfolio managers to manage their funds effectively. As part of the efforts to 
address  these  issues,  the  Malaysian  government  regularly  issues  sukuk  with  different  maturities  in 
order  to  create  a  benchmark  yield  curve.  Since  the  year  2000,  the  government  has  developed  an 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 3
auction  calendar  for  both  the  conventional  and  sukuk  government  issues.  In  2005,  the  government 
commenced issuing shorter term Islamic treasury bills and longer-dated sukuk, with a maturity of 10 
years,  to  further  diversify  the  instruments  available  to  investors.  In  the  Malaysian  sukuk  market, 
Islamic private debt securities now account for 50 per cent of the total private debt securities market.  
Another challenge to the growth of the market concerns pricing issues. For the Islamic security to be 
efficiently priced and credible, further initiatives need to be undertaken to develop its own indicator. 
For example, if a sukuk is issued based on the Ijarah principle, and uses the property as its underlying 
asset,  the  actual  rate  of  rental  may  be  explored  to  be  used  to  determine  the  rate  of  return  on  the 
instrument. It would then fluctuate depending on the demand and supply for that property. It will then 
give a true reflection of the price of the underlying asset.  
Shariah  experts,  who  have  a  full  understanding  of  the  mechanics  of  sukuk,  are  key  to  ensuring  its 
proper governance. And shariah decisions, when made, should be transparent and disclosed. This will 
allow  others  to  appreciate  the  juristic  reasoning,  which  in  turn  should  lead  to  wider  acceptance  of 
shariah decisions, particularly if they have implications on cross-border transactions. In relation to this, 
a  guide  for  issuers  and  investors  to  refer  with  regards  to  shariah  decisions  would  facilitate  the 
development of the market.  
Of further importance is the attainment of the convergence of Shariah principles and interpretation to 
ensure  market  confidence  among  investors  from  different  parts  of  the  world.  To  achieve  this,  there 
needs  to  be  continuous  investments  in  intellectual  capital  and  greater  engagement  among  Shariah 
scholars. The regular engagement that is now taking place among the scholars is already producing 
this convergence.  
Similarly for the global acceptance of Islamic finance, the harmonisation of standards and practices is 
important. Full support has to be accorded to the international standard setting organizations such as 
Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) and to the Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic 
Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  to  formulate  appropriate  standards  that  would  strengthen  the  Islamic 
financial system. The IFSB has already formulated the prudential treatment for sukuk investment by 
the Islamic financial institutions as stipulated in the Capital Adequacy Standards. The IFSB has also 
undertaken initiatives to strengthen the framework and practices in the Islamic money market. Further 
work  is  being  undertaken  to  formulate  strategies  for  strengthening  the  liquidity  management 
framework  and  to  identify  measures  to  develop  benchmark  Islamic  securities  that  can  help  to 
determine benchmark rate for system-wide application.  
Global co-operation to develop the Islamic financial markets 
Indeed,  while  there  remains  many  challenges  that  need  to  be  overcome,  the  overall  direction  and 
potential of the global Islamic financial markets are certainly well recognised. Greater engagement and 
interface  between  the  industry,  the  scholars,  and  the  authorities  will  create  greater  awareness, 
understanding and appreciation of the issues and the direction for its resolution. This will provide an 
environment  in  which  the  full  potential  of  Islamic  finance  can  be  realised.  This  is  indeed  a  global 
challenge and it will be the cumulative efforts of the scholars, industry and authorities that will produce 
the best outcome.  
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the organisers in successfully providing a platform at this 
conference  for  all  the  sukuk  stakeholders  ranging  from  the  issuers  to  investors.  I  wish  all  of  you  a 
highly productive and successful conference. Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 74/2007
