Christian Noyer: No moral hazard – the banks are doing their job  
Comment by Mr  Christian Noyer,  Governor of the Bank of France, in the Financial Times, 
18 September 2007. 
 In  recent  weeks,  Central  Banks  in  Europe  and  the  US  have  acted  repeatedly  to  provide 
liquidity  to  interbank  money  markets.  These  interventions  have  raised  some  questions. 
Concerns  were  expressed  that  monetary  authorities  were  bailing  out  speculators,  thus 
creating  the  same  kind of  moral  hazard  that  may  have  led  to  excesses  in  the  past.  There 
were also concerns as to whether the integrity of monetary policy would be compromised. 
These are valid questions. On numerous occasions, in the past, we pointed out the potential 
dangers  that  mispricing  of  credit  risk  posed  for  financial  stability.  We  may  be  now  seeing 
some of the consequences. Excessive risks were taken, and losses will have to be accepted. 
It is important that monetary and financial authorities take no action that would prevent this 
process from running its course, let alone be seeing to be condoning past or future excesses. 
However,  the  logic  behind  recent  interventions  is  different.  Put  very  simply,  financial 
turbulence  and  uncertainty  have  suddenly  triggered  an  upward  shift  in  the  demand  for 
Central  Bank  money.  Faced  with  such  a  shift,  whose  direction  is  apparent  but  amplitude 
uncertain,  the  choice,  for  monetary  authorities,  is  clear:  either  accommodate,  and  provide 
temporary liquidity; or not, in which case, interest rates would have to rise to restore balance 
in the interbank market. 
Standard  economic  theory  dictates  that,  in  such  circumstances,  exogenous  changes  in 
money demand should indeed be accommodated. In a seminal article going back to 19701, 
William  Poole  showed  that,  when  there  is  uncertainty  about  money  demand,  the  optimal 
response is to stabilize the interest rate, thus letting money supply adjust. Since short-term 
interest rates are, for all Central Banks, the main policy tool, an increase in interbank rates 
over and above the official rate would indeed be tantamount to a shift in monetary policy. In 
contrast, liquidity provision by Central Banks has ensured that the overall policy stance has 
remained  unchanged.  A  clear  distinction  has  been  –  and  will  be  –  maintained  between 
temporary liquidity provision, on the one hand, and medium term oriented monetary policy, 
on the other. 
Should liquidity be provided at a penalty rate, as some have argued, to avoid moral hazard? 
The  answer  is  clearly  positive  if  and  when  liquidity  assistance  is  targeted  at  specific 
institutions. But there is no reason, for Central Banks, to significantly depart from prevailing 
policy  rates  if  their  main  objective  is  to  respond  to  an  exogenous  and  general  increase  in 
demand for central bank balances. 
In  the  future,  monetary  policy  may  have  to  be  adjusted,  not  for  the  purpose  of  easing 
financial tensions, but according to its own objective and in view of the state of the economy. 
As regards the euro area, the Governing Council has judged that, in the current uncertain 
environment, it was appropriate to gather additional information before drawing conclusions 
for monetary policy, although the overall stance is “still on the accommodative side” and… 
“the medium-term outlook for price stability remains subject to upside risks”. 
Looking  further  ahead,  difficulties  in  the  subprime  mortgage  markets  combined  with  the 
generalized  securitization  of  loans  will  lead  to  losses  whose  localization  in  the  financial 
system remains undetermined. This information problem is currently creating uncertainty and 
                                                 
1   Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model ; The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics Vol. 84, No.2 (May, 1970) 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
turmoil. However, things should be put in perspective. Available data indicate that, unless the 
economy  unexpectedly  deteriorates,  those  losses  will  remain  small  in  comparison  to  total 
available capital in the financial system and should be easily absorbed. Of course, conditions 
remain  fragile  in  many  segments  of  the  capital  markets.  Perverse  dynamics  may  always 
develop. By acting to restore balance and stability in the interbank market, Central banks are 
just doing their job. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2007
