Caleb M Fundanga: Bank of Zambia’s Information Dissemination Programme 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  on  the  launch  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia Information Dissemination Programme, Lusaka, 28 May 2007. 
 Governor, kindly give brief introductory remarks 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia Board, management and staff, and indeed on my own behalf, I wish 
to sincerely thank the Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC) for this opportunity to launch 
the  Bank  of  Zambia  Information  Dissemination  Programme.  This  programme  is  part  of  our 
comprehensive strategy to inform the general public and all our stakeholders on the role of Bank of 
Zambia in the economy. 
What is the primary role of the Bank of Zambia? 
Just to remind the listeners, the Bank of Zambia’s primary role is to formulate and implement monetary 
and supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system stability. Our vision, in this regard, 
is to become a World Class central bank. 
What is your general assessment of the recent performance of the Zambian economy? 
In  the  past  few  years,  the  Zambian  economy  has  performed  relatively  well,  recording  positive  real 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, with inflation and interest rates coming down. 
Specifically, what have been the developments in output? 
During the period 2001-2005, growth in real GDP averaged 5.0% per annum. More recently, in 2006, it 
is estimated that the economy grew by close to 6%, marking the eighth consecutive year of positive 
real growth in output. This positive growth performance has been broad-based, extending beyond the 
recovery  of  the  mining  sector  and  withstanding  adverse  shocks,  such  as  droughts  and  record 
increases  in  oil  prices.  In  2006,  real  GDP  growth  was  largely  driven  by  the  mining,  agriculture, 
construction, transport and tourism sectors. 
Last year, Zambia achieved single-digit inflation in 30 years. What were the main contributing 
factors to this achievement? 
Bringing inflation down to single digits has been Government’s goal for a long time. It is, therefore, 
pleasing to note that last year, inflation fell to its lowest level in 30 years. At the end December 2006, 
the annual rate of inflation had fallen to 8.2 % from 15.9% achieved in 2005 and was well below the 
target of 10%. This positive development in inflation was due to continued implementation of prudent 
monetary and fiscal policies, coupled with increased food supply. This was despite the persistent rise 
in oil prices on the world market. 
This  year  so  far,  inflation  has  been  in  double  digits.  What  are  the  reasons  for  such  a 
development? What is the outlook for inflation at end of the second quarter? 
During the first quarter of 2007, containing inflation pressures was a challenge. Inflation rose to 12.7% 
in March 2007, reflecting both higher food and non-food inflation. Higher food inflation was explained 
by  increased  cost  of  most  fresh  vegetables,  typical  during  this  period.  The  other  contributing  factor 
was a rise in the price of beef, following the ban on transportation of cattle from Southern Province, a 
major  supplier,  to  curb  the  spread  of  the  cattle  disease,  Contagious  Bovine  Pleural  Pneumonia 
(CBPP). 
Higher non-food inflation was due to increased household energy and transportation costs, following 
upward adjustments in prices of petrol and diesel in January 2007. 
During  the  second  quarter  of  2007,  however,  inflation  is  expected  to  slow  down  due  largely  to 
improved food supply. Already in April, inflation slowed down to 12.4% from 12.7% in March. 
What  is  your  assessment  of  the  recent  developments  in  commercial  banks  lending  interest 
rates? 
In line with lower inflation and yields on Government securities, commercial banks nominal average 
lending  rate  declined  to  around  28%  in  December  2006  from  about  34%  in  December  2005.  More 
recently, in April 2007, it declined further to 24%. 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 1
How would you describe the recent performance of the external sector? 
The  external  sector  has  continued  to  score  remarkable  improvement,  as  reflected  in  the  overall 
balance of payments surplus of US $696 million in 2006 compared to a deficit of US $284 million in 
2005. Furthermore, the preliminary assessment is that the current account deficit as a percentage of 
GDP  (excluding  grants)  reduced  to  1.1%  from  11.5%  in  2005.  This  improvement  has  been  due  to 
increased export receipts arising from record high copper prices and increased export volumes. 
In  addition,  the  historic  debt  relief  under  the  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Countries  (HIPC)  initiative  and 
Multilateral  Debt  Relief  Initiative  (MDRI),  as  well  as  the  increased  budget  support  from  our  co-
operating  partners,  further  strengthened  the  external  position.  Preliminary  information  indicates  that 
the country’s external debt position of US $7.1 billion as at end-2004 fell to US $600 million at end-
December 2006. 
The foreign exchange market, in 2006, was characterised by a general depreciation of the Kwacha 
against  major  currencies.  In  order  to  moderate  exchange  rate  volatility,  the  Bank  implemented  a 
number of measures, including purchasing and selling foreign exchange. 
What is your assessment of the financial sector? 
In the banking sector, there have been no bank failures in the recent past, reflecting stability in the 
financial  system.  To  consolidate  this  stability,  in  2006,  Bank  of  Zambia  undertook  a  number  of 
measures,  which  included  increasing  the  minimum  primary  paid-up  capital  for  banks  and  non-bank 
financial institutions. 
What is the economic outlook for the year 2007 and the long-term vision of the Government? 
The Government, on its part, has shown commitment to continuing the economic reform programme. 
To this end, measures are being taken to ensure that the macroeconomic gains attained so far will be 
consolidated in 2007. Accordingly the Government is targeting real GDP growth of 7.0% and inflation 
of 5.0%. Pursuit of these objectives is within the context of the long-term development objectives, well 
articulated in the national long term Vision, 2030. Part of this vision is enshrined in the Fifth National 
Development Plan (FNDP) for 2006-2010, whose broad macroeconomic objectives are as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
Could you now tell us about the Information Dissemination Programme? 
As  mentioned  in  my  introductory  remarks,  the  Information  Dissemination  Programme  is  part  of  our 
strategy  to  inform  the  general  public  on  the  role  of  Bank  of  Zambia  in  the  economy.  The  other 
channels through which the Bank shares information with the general public are through: 
• 
to accelerate pro-poor economic growth; 
to reduce further and stabilise inflation; and 
to sustain a viable balance of payments as well as external and domestic debt position. 
Regular  meetings  with  players  in  the  financial  sector,  e.g.  banks  and  other  1non-bank 
financial institutions; 
Seminars for the media; 
Seminars with senior policy makers, such as Members of Parliament; 
Various  publications,  such  as  the  Statistics  Fortnightly,  Quarterly  Financial  and  Statistical 
report, Monetary Policy Statement and Annual report; and 
Bank of Zambia website, among others. 
• 
In an attempt to widen this platform for information sharing and dissemination, we have once again 
embarked on a radio programme, which will discuss topical issues such as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Exchange rate movements; 
Cost of banking services; 
Developments in the payments system; 
Micro finance regulations; 
Currency awareness; and 
 2 
 BIS Review 55/2007
Establishment of credit reference services, to name a few. 
• 
These issues affect all Zambians and it is our duty to be able to discuss them through a wider forum, 
such as radio to which the majority of our people listen. The Bank also intends to conduct provincial 
sensitisation visits and to localise these visits by way of disseminating information in local languages 
and dealing with matters, which are peculiar to those provinces. 
Governor, kindly give your closing remarks 
It  is  our  hope  and  desire  that  through  this  information  dissemination  programme  and  other  similar 
interventions,  we  shall  increase  the  public’s  awareness  on  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  in  the 
economic development of this country. 
It is my honour to launch this information dissemination programme and I urge you all to listen in and 
actively  participate  in  the  live  phone-in  programme,  which  we  will  hold  at  the  end  of  the  radio 
programme. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 3
