Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: UAE efforts in encountering money laundering 
and combating terrorism financing  
Speech by His Excellency Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of the United 
Arab Emirates and Chairman of the National Anti-Money Laundering Committee, at The Fourth Annual 
Conference  of 
the  National  Anti-Money  Laundering  Committee,  Ras  Al  Khaimah, 
20-21 December 2006. 
 Your Highness, Sheikh Saoud Bin Saqer Al Qasimi, Crown Prince and Deputy Ruler of Ras Al 
Khaimah (May Allah protect him) 
Your Highnesses 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
I would like personally and on behalf of my brothers NAMLC members, to first express my gratitude to 
H.H. Sheikh Saqer Bin Mohamed Al Qasimi, member of the higher council of the Federal, ruler of RAK 
(May Allah protect him), for his continuous support to federal institutions, including our Committee. I 
would  also  like,  on  behalf  of  all  of  you,  to  thank  H.H.  Sheikh  Saoud  Bin  Saqer  Al  Qasimi  for  his 
presence and patronage of this conference. 
Your Highnesses 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
I warmly welcome you to NAMLC fourth annual conference which is held this year in Ras Al Khaimah 
Emirate under the title: 
“Role  of  Economic  Development  Departments,  Free  Trade  Zone  Authorities  and  Customs 
Departments 
Implementing  Laws  and  Regulations  Regarding  Encountering  Money 
Laundering and Combating Terrorism Financing”. 
The  presence  of H.H.  Sheikh  Saoud Bin  Saqer  Al Qasimi with us  today  is considered a support  to 
UAE efforts in encountering money laundering and combating terrorism financing and an incentive to 
develop  our procedures  and  regulations  applied  with  regard  to  encountering money  laundering  and 
combating terrorism financing, in a way that enhances economic development and ensures a suitable 
environment for investment, characterized by transparency and stability in the country. 
Your Highnesses, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
The UAE confirmed, since its establishment, a strategy to continuously combat all types of crime and 
to confront criminals through establishing strict laws, approving preventive penalties as well as setting 
the appropriate legal rules in all areas. 
And with the obvious increase in money laundering activities and terrorism crimes around the globe, 
UAE set as a priority a clearly defined strategy to encounter such dangers. The strategy comprises the 
following: 
1. 
in 
Joining international and regional efforts in encountering money laundering and combating 
terrorism financing. This is manifest in joining and authenticating international and regional 
conventions and initiatives as well as responding to international organization requirements, 
concerned in combating such crimes. 
Executing decisions  of  the  Security  Council and  United  Nations with  regard  to  subjects or 
issues, relating to money laundering crimes or terrorist acts and fighting their finance. 
Implementing the AML (40) Recommendations and the (9) Special CFT Recommendations, 
issued  by  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF),  as  well  as  other  international  AML/CFT 
initiatives and directives.  
Establishing  the  appropriate  legal  frameworks  to  protect  UAE  economic  security  in  a  way 
that ensures co-operation with the international community, within the context of international 
efforts exerted to combat crimes, including AML/CFT crimes. This included establishing laws 
which criminalize such acts, preventive penalties against criminals as well as regulating the 
relationship among relevant authorities in the country and their responsibility with regard to 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
5. 
6. 
these  crimes,  in  a  way  that  ensures  cooperation  and  coordination  among  relevant 
authorities. 
Establishing  the  appropriate  regulations  and  procedures  to  protect  the  financial  and 
commercial establishments as well as individuals in the Society and all its establishments. 
Such  regulations  contain  the  means  necessary  to  encounter  the  dangers  resulting  from 
money laundering or terrorism financing, in addition to issues which require special attention, 
subjecting them to examination and inspection, mechanics of reporting these crimes if they 
occur and verifying and documenting information. 
Emphasizing and supporting international and regional cooperation at all levels, particularly 
with  regard  to  encountering  money  laundering,  terrorist  acts  and  all  types  of  crime  in 
accordance with international and regional conventions, agreements and initiatives. 
Your Highnesses, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
On this occasion, I would like to stress the appreciation of the Central Bank of the UAE for the support 
we  receive  from  H.H.  the  President  (May  Allah  protect  him),  his  brother  Vice  President  and  Prime 
Minister of UAE (May Allah protect him) and the Council of Ministers to encounter money laundering 
and combat terrorism financing, whether regionally or internationally. I would also like to stress that we 
receive cooperation and support from all emirates and from federal and local institutions. 
Maintaining  the  achievement  realized  and  seeking  to  achieve  progress  and  development  of 
legislations, regulations and procedures relating to encountering all types of financial crime, including 
money laundering and terrorism financing, shall ensure economic security and stability to our country 
and the region at large and shall enhance progress and prosperity within framework of cooperation 
and transparency. 
Your Highnesses, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
UAE has set among its priorities holding international, regional and local conferences and seminars in 
order to train experts of all authorities concerned with combating financial crimes in the UAE, GCC 
countries, sister Arab countries and all countries in the region. The number of conferences, seminars 
and  workshops  held  to-date  exceeds  (350).  And  the  UAE  shall  continue  to  support  training  and 
development of skills, with the cooperation of friendly countries. 5 
Due  to  the  huge  achievements  reached  by  the  UAE  in  establishing  the  legal,  organizational  and 
supervisory  frameworks  as  well  as  the  AML/CFT  regulations  and  procedures,  it  has  received 
commendation  from  international  and  regional  organizations  for  such  achievements.  UAE  has  also 
contributed  to  training  staff  of  the  concerned  authorities  responsible  for  encountering  money 
laundering and combating financing of terrorism in some regional countries, in addition to participating 
with (FATF) in the mutual evaluation of some countries. 
Your Highnesses, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  and  gratitude  to  H.H.  Sheikh  Saoud  Bin  Saqer  Al 
Qasimi,  Crown  Prince  and  Deputy  Ruler  of  Ras  Al  Khaimah  (May  Allah  protect  him)  for  his  kind 
presence and patronage of this conference. Thanks extend to his brothers, their Highnesses Sheikhs, 
for their sincere efforts, wishing Ras Al Khaimah more progress and prosperity. 
I would also like to thank our guests, representatives of USA, UK, France, Italy and Spain and to my 
brothers, NAMLC members and to all audience. 
Wishing you success in this conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
