Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The BSP @ 14 – moving with the power of one in the 
service of the Filipino people 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  BSP  14th  Anniversary,  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas, 
Manila, 3 July 2007. 
 Members of the Monetary Board, fellow central bankers, special guests. Magandang umaga 
po at maligayang anibersaryo sa inyong lahat!  
We are celebrating the 14th birthday of our institution. Kaya naman, dapat bati-in muna natin 
ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas ng malakas at masayang, Happy Birthday!!!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Bangko  Sentral,  there  are,  indeed,  many  reasons  why  we 
should be happy.  
Ang pinaka-mahalaga po dito ay ang matagumpay nating pagtupad sa ating tungkulin bilang 
central bankers ng ating bansang Pilipinas!  
To be objective about it, let us evaluate how we performed on the basis of each of the three 
pillars of central banking.  
First, on monetary policy. Did we have a responsive and effective monetary policy? In the 
last  two  years,  we  sharpened  our  inflation  targeting  framework  and  stayed  true  to  our 
mandate  to  maintain  price  stability.  We  enhanced  our  capacity  to  analyze  information, 
increased  transparency  in  our  communication  with  markets,  and  aligned  our  policy 
framework with international norms.  
By any standard, we did quite well insofar as our monetary policy is concerned. In fact, even 
as oil prices breached record high levels, we  managed to tame inflation at low and stable 
rates: In June 2005, our inflation rate was 7.6%; last May, it had dropped to 2.4%, a level 
comparable to those in developed countries.  
Second,  on  banking  supervision.  As  the  central  monetary  authority  of  the  country,  our 
responsibility  is  to  provide  pro-active  leadership  to  bring  about  a  “strong  financial  system 
conducive  to  a  balanced  and  sustainable  growth  of  the  economy.”  Effective  banking 
supervision as well as responsive policies and programs are key to this task.  
Overall, we continue to perform well in this regard. The banking system has been projecting 
overall  soundness:  better  capitalization;  lower  non-performing  loans;  steady  expansion  in 
deposits; and better profitability resulting from more efficient bank operations. For instance, 
return on equity of banks moved up to 10.6% in 2006, compared to 8.8% in 2005. In addition, 
bank lending is now expanding at double-digit rates.  
Beyond  banking  reforms,  the  BSP  has  also  actively  promoted  the  development  of  the 
domestic capital market to provide alternative and more diversified funding sources for the 
economy’s growth requirements. 
Our efforts to promote microfinance also continues to bear fruit. Latest available data indicate 
that outstanding loans of banks engaged in microfinance have reached P4 billion spread out 
to  around  650,000  microentrepreneurs.  Even  more  uplifting  is  the  fact  that  industrious 
microentrepreneurs have become bankable, transforming into savers that have accumulated 
more than P1.4 billion in bank savings!  
Third, on our payments and settlements system. The Bangko Sentral has been operating a 
real-time gross settlements system – which we call PhilPass – that continues to efficiently 
serve the country’s growing financial system. The value of transactions handled by PhilPaSS 
was P54 trillion in 2005, doubled to P122 trillion in 2006, and is set to reach a new record this 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
year, if the first quarter figure of P48 trillion is annualized. Our PhilPass therefore is a vital 
infrastructure for ensuring the credibility and continuous development of our financial sector.  
In other words, fellow central bankers, in spite of some lapses and omissions, we did quite 
well overall, in terms of our principal mandates.  
In addition, continuing profits allowed us to remit, as of May 31 this year, P2.5 billion in cash 
dividends to the National Government.  
Of course, all these did not happen by chance. We were successful because we maintained 
our  focus,  we  were  committed  to  do  our  best,  and  we  were  united  in  serving  our  key 
stakeholder – the Filipino people. Such is the Power of One.  
Fellow central bankers, let us therefore give a big round of applause to the members of our 
Monetary  Board!  the  Executive  Management  Sector!  the  Monetary  Stability  Sector!  the 
Resource  Management  Sector  &  the  Security  Plant  Complex!  and,  finally,  the  Supervision 
and Examination Sector!  
Ladies and gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral. Our economy continued to grow in 2006 and 
expanded by 6.9% in the first quarter of this year, the highest in 17 years! This record growth 
was accompanied by a strong peso as well as historic low inflation and interest rates. We 
can rightfully claim, therefore, part of the credit for our sustained economic growth.  
In  fact,  the  positive  performance  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  has  been  rightly 
recognized and commended by third parties. Among others, the Bangko Sentral continues to 
top the Makati Business Club survey of top performing government agencies; the GSIS gave 
us  an  award  to  recognize  Bangko  Sentral’s  pioneering  advocacy  of  good  governance;  the 
International Association of Business Communicators gave us an award for communications 
management for our advocacy program “Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela”; and in the annual 
assessment of central bank governors by Global Finance of New York, we received a rating 
of A minus, one of only six given an A rating.  
These are clear milestones. Nevertheless, this should not give us cause for complacency; 
rather, this should inspire us to work on our goal to become a world-class monetary authority 
so that we can provide even better service to our country and our people.  
But how do we get there? The answer to this question was forged at the Strategic Planning 
Conference held two weeks ago. We agreed to set strategic objectives and key targets on 
how we can best respond to the needs of our stakeholders – the Government, banks and 
other  financial  institutions,  business  firms,  foreign  investors  and  creditors,  as  well  as 
households.  
In the process of setting these objectives, we matched our central banking pillars with what is 
relevant  to  our  stakeholders.  Addressing  the  first  pillar,  we  shall  continue  to  implement  a 
forward-looking monetary policy anchored on credible forecasts and risk assessments. With 
inflation  targeting  as  our  framework,  we  shall  keep  sharpening  our  forecasting  capability 
through further enhancements of our inflation forecasting models and understanding better 
the  transmission  mechanism  for  monetary  policy  in  a  world  marked  by  globalization  and 
financial innovation .  
For the second pillar, our thrust is proactive regulation and effective supervision of banks as 
well  as  other  supervised  and  regulated  industries.  We  will  continue  with  risk-based  and 
consolidated supervision, while maintaining a flexible and responsive regulatory framework. 
We  will  also  promote  healthy  competition  in  the  delivery  of  banking  and  other  financial 
services to have a wide array of financial products and services accessible to the public. We 
will  also  foster  competition  among  banks  to  reduce  remittance  charges  as  well  as 
transparency to encourage overseas Filipinos to use the banking system.  
We  will  continue  to  push  for  the  development  of  the  capital  market,  the  expansion  of 
microfinance, and the promotion of financial literacy. In this regard, we will continue to work 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
on legislation that are important to the Bangko Sentral – including amendments to our charter 
and the Credit Information System Act.  
For  the  third  pillar,  we  will  continue  to  ensure  that  our  PhilPass  remains  a  safe,  sound, 
reliable, and efficient payments system.  
We have also set strategic objectives to address BSP’s operational efficiency and maintain 
the public’s trust and confidence.  
We are of course aware of the challenges facing us on our way to achieving our objectives. 
For  instance,  inflation  risks  remain,  in  part  due  to  relatively  high  liquidity  growth,  as 
remittances  remain  strong  and  growing  confidence  in  the  economy  brings  with  it  a  steady 
inflow of foreign investments. This is the same “problem of plenty” that faces other countries 
in Asia.  
To address this, we need to be creative and use non-traditional instruments. Last May, for 
instance, we adopted preemptive measures to absorb liquidity. While it is too early to assess 
the effect of these measures, initial results are encouraging, and the inflation outlook remains 
benign even as the economy continues to power ahead.  
There  is  also  no  let-up  in  our  campaign  to  encourage  banks  to  strengthen  their  balance 
sheets through asset cleanup, capital buildup, and consolidation. This month, in parallel with 
other  countries,  the  Bangko  Sentral  starts  implementing  Basel  II,  which  requires  that 
regulatory capital reflect the risks the banks are exposed to.  
We  will  also  continue  to  innovate  and  adapt  to  the  changing  environment.  For  instance, 
electronic  rediscounting  has  reduced  processing  time  for  credit  applications  of  banks, 
including fund releases, from 3 to 5 days to just 5 minutes.  
We will also continue to implement our economic and financial literacy program to educate 
and empower more Filipinos to benefit from the opportunities economic development brings. 
Our  program  aims  to  cover  millions  of  our  entrepreneurial  poor  through  our  microfinance 
advocacy; millions of students through the integration of saving and money management in 
our  elementary  curriculum  in  cooperation  with  the  Department  of  Education;  millions  of 
OFWs and their families on growing their money through investments or entrepreneurship; 
and the general public through a network of economic and financial literacy centers that the 
Bangko  Sentral  shall  set  up.  Later  today,  we  will  have  the  symbolic  launch  of  our  first 
economic and financial center at the lobby of our Five-Storey building.  
Indeed, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas have a long list of things we need to do in the 
service of our people.  
But beyond central banking, I am particularly proud of the men and women of the Bangko 
Sentral who have always been generous with their time and resources to help others who 
are in need.  
One central banker who exemplified this generosity of spirit and genuine concern for others 
was  Governor  Rafael  Buenaventura.  To  honor  him  and  the  qualities  that  make  a  good 
BSPer,  the  Monetary  Board  has  approved  a  donation  of  P5  million  to  the  Rafael  B. 
Buenaventura Foundation which will support early detection and treatment of indigent cancer 
patients.  
The generosity of the men and women of the Bangko Sentral is also the reason why, this 
morning, we are able to turn over to the Gawad Kalinga more than P3 million in donations 
from the hearts and pockets of BSPers.  
And because you have been a blessing to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, to our country, 
and to our people, I will now give you the good news you have been waiting for! First, we 
now have new facilities for BSPers and a new exhibit at our Money Museum. Please take 
time to enjoy all these.  
BIS Review 79/2007 
 3
Second,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  yesterday,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the 
institutionalization of an annual Performance and Salary Review in lieu of the Merit Increase 
Award starting 2007, with two components:  
Component 1 – annual one step adjustment in the salaries of all employees and officials with 
performance rating of at least “Satisfactory” in previous year effective January 1 of the year. 
Component 2 – Performance bonus in the form of a one-time cash award for those with at 
least “Commendable” rating in the previous year. 
In addition, the Monetary Board also approved the grant of two steps adjustment in salary 
effective 1 January 2007, in addition to Component 1 of the Performance and Salary Review, 
limited to the year 2007 grant. 
I suggest you call your friendly HR personnel to help in your computation. 
Ladies  and gentlemen  of  the  Bangko  Sentral ng  Pilipinas.  One  thing  I  can  say  is this:  the 
Monetary  Board  and  senior  management  will  always  be  fair  in  terms  of  granting  the 
compensation  and  benefits  you  deserve  as  central  bankers  imbued  with  the  values  of 
patriotism, integrity and excellence.  
Keep the faith in your management. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2007
