David Dodge: Demographics, labour input, and economic potential – 
implications for monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  St.  John’s  Board  of  Trade, 
St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, 13 June 2007. 
 Good afternoon. I'm very happy to be here in St. John's and to have the opportunity to address the 
Board of Trade. Once a year, the Bank of Canada holds a meeting of its Board outside of Ottawa. 
There  are  several  reasons  why  we  hold  these  meetings  outside  Ottawa,  but  perhaps  the  most 
important is that it gives us the opportunity to meet with, and to listen to, business and labour leaders 
from various parts of the country. I certainly hope that we will have time for a good discussion following 
my  remarks.  It  is  very  important  for  us  to  hear  and  to  understand  your  perspectives  and 
preoccupations.  This  information  helps  us  in  our  task  of  gauging  the  country's  economic  prospects 
over  the  medium  term  and  setting  monetary  policy  so  that  our  economy  can  deliver  the  maximum 
sustainable growth of employment and incomes over the long term. 
Of course, with the passage of time, the "long term" turns into the "near term." And in my remarks 
today, I want to discuss an issue that has gone from being a long-term, theoretical question to being a 
near-term, practical consideration for monetary policy; that is, the impact of Canada's aging population 
on our economic potential. The Bank addressed this subject in the April edition of its Monetary Policy 
Report and, today, I want to elaborate a bit on this topic. I plan to talk about how we see trends in the 
labour force evolving in the future, and about the implications of these trends for monetary policy, in 
particular, and for the economy in general. Then, I'd like to take a few minutes to discuss the current 
state  of  the  Canadian  economy  and  its  prospects,  before  opening  the  floor  to  your  questions  and 
comments. 
Labour and potential output 
So,  let  me  begin  by  talking  about  demographics  and  trends  in  the  labour  force.  I  should  start  by 
explaining  how  this  topic  fits  into  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  concepts  involved  are 
reasonably straightforward, but things can get pretty complicated rather quickly. My aim is to give you 
a clear and accurate description of the issues without burying you in jargon or complex details.  
Over the years, we at the Bank of Canada have learned that the best contribution that monetary policy 
can make to the economic welfare of Canadians is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. We 
try to keep the annual increase in consumer price inflation at 2 per cent, which is the middle of a 1 to 3 
per cent inflation-control range. If inflation expectations are well anchored, an environment of low and 
stable  inflation  can  be  sustained  when  the  economy  is  operating  at  its  production  potential;  that  is, 
when  the  economy  is  generating  the  maximum  amount  of  output  that  it  can  without  sparking 
inflationary  pressures.  Economists  call  this  amount  of  production  the  "potential  output"  of  the 
economy. If the economy operates above its production potential, this can lead to upward pressure on 
future  inflation.  Similarly,  if  the  economy  operates  below  its  potential,  this  can  lead  to  downward 
pressure on future inflation. 
Unfortunately for central bankers, there is no way to directly measure an economy's potential output; it 
must be estimated. Nevertheless, we do know that growth in potential output does vary from year to 
year. How fast it grows essentially depends on two things: growth in the hours that our population can 
spend at work, and growth in the productivity of that work. The greater the number of people in the 
labour force, and the greater the time that they spend at work each week, the greater the output that 
can  be  produced  without  triggering  inflation.  And  the  higher  the  level  of  investment  in  machinery, 
equipment,  and  structures,  again,  the  greater  the  output  that  can  be  generated  without  leading  to 
inflation. Of course, there is more to productivity than just the quantity of labour and capital. Quality 
matters  as  well.  Improved  education  and  training  of  the  labour  force  can  make  a  big  difference  in 
terms of the productivity gains that can be realized over time, as can the way a company organizes 
itself to get the work done. 
But in the interest of keeping things simple, let me focus on my main point; that growth in potential 
output equals the growth in the total hours supplied by the labour force – what economists call "trend 
labour input growth" – plus the growth in trend labour productivity. Over the past several years, the 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 1
Bank  has  estimated  trend  labour  input  to  be  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  1  1/4  per  cent, 
although the actual growth has been a bit higher over roughly the past 4 years. And, based on long-
term trends, the Bank has assumed the annual growth of trend labour productivity to be 1 3/4 per cent, 
although over the past 4 years, average productivity growth has come in well short of this figure.  
The evolution of trend labour input 
I'll say a few words about productivity in a few minutes. But my focus today is on trend labour input, so 
let me spend a bit of time on this issue. Just over half of Canada's economic growth since 1980 can be 
attributed  to  growth  in  labour  input.  Much  of  this  rise  in  labour  input  has  come  from  the  fact  that 
Canada's working-age population is continuing to grow. But we have known for some time that our 
population is aging and that this will have a profound impact on labour input, as members of the baby 
boom generation begin to retire, over the next few years. 
It's  difficult  to  overstate  the  importance  of  the  changing  age  profile  of  the  workforce.  According  to 
Statistics Canada, 40 years ago, the median age in Canada was about 25, which means that there 
were as many people younger than 25 as there were older than 25. Twenty years later, the median 
age  had  risen  to  about  31,  and  last  year,  the  median  age  climbed  to  almost  39.  Statistics  Canada 
projects that, under a medium population-growth scenario, the percentage of working-age Canadians 
– that is, Canadians aged 20 to 64 – is expected to peak in about 2011, and then fall off fairly sharply, 
even as our total population continues to increase. 
But  if  the  percentage  of  working-age  Canadians  is  still  approaching  its  peak,  and  only  the  leading 
edge of the baby boom generation is approaching retirement age, why is that a concern for monetary 
policy today? It's because we know that participation in the labour force tends to change over time: 
Participation is typically low in the early working years, from age 15 to 24, because a large portion of 
these  individuals  are  still  attending  school.  Participation  then  increases  and  stabilizes  in  the  prime 
working years of 25 to 54, before declining in the late fifties and beyond, as people make the transition 
out of the labour market and into retirement. So, with the first of the baby boomers now older than 60, 
and many more of this generation right behind them, we know that the shifting age distribution of the 
population has begun to have, and will continue to have, a direct impact on the supply of labour in the 
economy, and thus, on the growth of our economy's potential output. 
Of course, we cannot directly measure how much labour Canadians want to supply to the economy. 
We have to infer this measure by looking at actual participation rates and the hours actually worked 
each week. But these two variables tend to fluctuate with the ups and downs of the economic cycle. At 
the Bank, we try to look through these fluctuations to get a sense of the trend of labour input over time. 
I mentioned earlier that growth in labour input has been an important factor in overall economic growth 
in  recent  decades.  Where  has  this  growth  come  from?  Besides  the  continued  increase  of  the  total 
working-age population, the employment rate of women has risen sharply, more than offsetting a small 
decline in the rate for men. While these two factors have increased labour input, there has also been a 
small declining trend in the average number of hours worked per week. All told, as I noted, the Bank 
has estimated that trend labour input has been growing at an annual rate of 1 1/4 per cent in recent 
years. 
But because of the labour force's changing age profile, which I just mentioned, we can expect that the 
growth  of  trend  labour  input  will  start  to  drop  significantly  below  this  current  estimate.  Indeed, 
demographic and economic models suggest that annual growth of trend labour input will fall to about 1 
per cent in 2010, and that it will continue to fall to about 0.6 per cent in 2015.  
Of  course,  there  is  always  an  element  of  uncertainty  involved  in  forecasting  anything,  particularly 
people's behaviour. Several factors could serve to slow the projected decline in the growth of trend 
labour  input.  Chief  among  these  is  the  possibility  that  the  participation  rate  of  older  workers  might 
increase. Why might this occur? The reasons include the fact that the nature of work is changing: it's 
becoming less physical and more service-oriented. And people are remaining healthier later in life. As 
life  expectancy  increases,  people  may  want  to  remain  in  the  workforce  longer.  In  addition,  strong 
demand for labour in the economy might make it more attractive for older workers to remain in the 
labour force. These are all uncertainties. But what we can be certain about is that, over the next few 
years, as the baby boom generation reaches – and passes – the previous traditional retirement age, 
the proportion of older workers who choose to remain in the labour force will have a significant impact 
on the growth of trend labour input in the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2007
It's worth noting at this point that changes in immigration are not likely to have any major impact on 
trend labour input. While immigration of workers with skills in short supply can, at the margin, increase 
labour input, this is unlikely to have any significant impact on the population's age structure. 
In sum, it seems clear that growth in trend labour input will decline, and contribute less to the growth of 
potential output in future years. In the April Monetary Policy Report, we said that we expect the growth 
rate of trend labour input to decline by 0.1 percentage points in 2009. But from 2011 to 2020 we will 
see  a  more  significant  slowdown,  as  population  growth  continues  to  slow  and  the  decline  in  the 
employment  rate  accelerates.  Remember  that  if  there  is  a  slowdown  in  trend  labour  input  and  the 
trend rate of productivity growth remains unchanged, the growth rate of potential output will also slow 
down. In other words, the economy will not be able to grow as quickly without sparking inflationary 
pressures. 
So  it  will  be  increasingly  important  that  our  economy  uses  the  labour  that  is  available  in  the  most 
efficient way. What does this mean for policy-makers? To begin with, it means that we must remove 
any unnecessary barriers either to labour force participation or to labour mobility. Governments should 
remove  barriers  to  older  workers  remaining  in  the  workforce.  In  this  regard,  we  have  seen  some 
encouraging  signs  recently.  Mandatory  retirement  provisions  have  been  eliminated  in  a  number  of 
provinces.  And  last  year,  British  Columbia  and  Alberta  reached  an  accord  to  harmonize  labour 
credentials  and  business  regulations  and  standards  by  early  2009.  These  are  just  a  couple  of 
examples  of  positive  policy  moves.  Canada's  labour  force  has  shown  remarkable  strength  and 
flexibility, much more so than in previous decades. But more can be done to boost the flexibility of our 
labour markets.  
Let me now talk briefly about productivity. The need for Canada to focus on productivity is certainly not 
new. Trend productivity growth has been subdued since the late 1970s and, unlike that of the United 
States,  has  failed  to  post  a  meaningful  increase  on a  consistent basis  over  the  past  decade  or  so. 
There are a number of potential causes. Canada appears to have taken less advantage of information 
and communications technologies and has invested less, not just in physical capital per worker but 
also in research and development, workplace reorganization, and worker training. And, most recently, 
the  movement  of  labour  and  capital  to  take  advantage  of  high  prices  for  resources  and  strong 
domestic demand has likely led to some adjustment costs in the form of slower productivity growth.  
But  while  we  don't  fully  understand  the  causes  behind  Canada's  productivity  performance,  it  is 
absolutely clear that the record of the past few years has been very disappointing. On average, the 
annual growth in productivity since 2003 has fallen well short of our assumed rate of 1 3/4 per cent. 
For this reason, in our October 2006 Monetary Policy Report, we lowered our assumption for annual 
trend labour productivity growth to 1 1/2 per cent. The combination of our views on the growth of trend 
labour input and trend labour productivity led to our projection for potential output growth of 2.8 per 
cent this year and 2008, and 2.7 per cent in 2009. This compares with the 3 per cent assumption for 
annual growth of potential output that the Bank had been using earlier this decade.  
That's a quick look at how the Bank sees developments in trend labour input and trend productivity. 
We'll continue  to  work on  these  important  issues,  and  will have more  to say about  them  in  coming 
months. In August, in the summer edition of the Bank of Canada Review, we will publish articles on 
trend labour input and past productivity performance, and we'll return to the issue of the outlook for 
productivity growth in our October Monetary Policy Report. 
Recent developments in the Canadian economy 
Let me now turn to developments in the Canadian economy since the time of the April Monetary Policy 
Report. In that document, we said that we judged that the Canadian economy was operating at a level 
just above its production potential in the first quarter of this year, and that this had been contributing to 
higher-than-expected inflation. And we projected that with average annual real GDP growth of 2.2 per 
cent  this  year,  the  Canadian  economy  would  move  back  down  to  its  full  production  potential  in  the 
second half. Core inflation was projected to move down to 2 per cent in 2008, and total inflation was 
projected to return to target by mid-2008. 
Since that time, economic developments in the rest of the world have been essentially in line with the 
expectations we had in April. However, economic growth in Canada has come in stronger than we had 
been expecting. Indeed, the national accounts indicated that the Canadian economy grew by 3.7 per 
cent in the first quarter of this year – more than a full percentage point higher than we projected in the 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 3
April  Report.  So,  the  economy  is  now  judged  to  be  operating  further  above  its  production  potential 
than was earlier thought to be the case.  
Inflation in Canada has also been stronger than we anticipated in April. Inflation for services prices 
continues to run well above 2 per cent, and inflation for goods prices – particularly semi-durable goods 
– has been higher than anticipated. Some of this strength may prove to be temporary. Nonetheless, 
there is an increased risk that future inflation will persist above the 2 per cent inflation target. 
The base-case projection in our April Report was developed using a number of assumptions, including 
an assumption that the Canadian dollar would continue to trade within a range of 86.5 to 89.5 cents 
U.S. But since that time, the Canadian dollar has moved well above that range. Indeed, since the April 
Report, the Canadian dollar has been significantly stronger than other major currencies against the 
U.S.  dollar.  Much  of  this  appreciation  can  be  linked  to  factors  such  as  the  strength  of  demand  for 
Canadian  goods  and  services,  continuing  firm  prices  for  commodities,  and  a  positive  outlook  for 
Canadian economic growth. But over this period, the overall response of the Canadian dollar to these 
factors appears to have been stronger than historical experience would have suggested.  
So,  since  April,  we  have  seen  two  things:  an  increased  risk  of  future  inflation  and  a  rise  in  the 
Canadian dollar that appears to have been stronger than historical experience would have suggested. 
At our last fixed announcement date, we said "that some increase in the target for the overnight rate 
may be required in the near term to bring inflation back to the target." As we prepare for our next fixed 
announcement date on 10 July, we will look at all the available evidence. And, in our Monetary Policy 
Report Update on 12 July, we will publish an updated analysis of our outlook for growth and inflation, 
including trends and risks.  
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. Canada's aging population has been an issue of interest for a number of years. 
But as the leading edge of the baby boom generation begins to retire, this is no longer an abstract 
issue  for  policy-makers.  The  projected  decline  in  the  growth  of  trend  labour  input  has  real 
consequences for the conduct of monetary policy. Declining growth in trend labour input implies lower 
growth of potential output. And if the trend rate of productivity growth remains unchanged, this means 
that inflationary pressures can begin to build at a lower rate of economic growth. 
What  should  policy-makers  be  doing?  First,  we  should  minimize  constraints  on  labour  mobility  and 
participation, so that there are no artificial barriers to prevent people who want to work from doing so. 
Second, we should concentrate on increasing productivity, so that we can have sustainable economic 
growth and rising standards of living in the future. And finally, from the Bank of Canada's perspective, 
we will have to continue to take into account the evolution of Canada's labour market as we continue 
to conduct monetary policy with a view to keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2007
