Ben S Bernanke: GSE portfolios, systemic risk, and affordable housing  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the Independent Community Bankers of America's Annual Convention and Techworld, 
Honolulu, Hawaii (via satellite), 6 March 2007. 
 The subject of my remarks today is the regulation and supervision of two large financial companies: 
the Federal National Mortgage Association (known familiarly as Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home 
Loan Mortgage Corporation (or Freddie Mac). Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were created by acts of 
the  Congress  and  are  thus  known  as  government-sponsored  enterprises,  or  GSEs.  The  Congress 
chartered  these  two  companies  with  the  goal  of  expanding  the  amount  of  capital  available  to  the 
residential mortgage market, thereby promoting homeownership, particularly among low- and middle-
income  households.  Although  they  retain  their  government  charters,  Fannie  and  Freddie  were 
converted (in 1968 and 1989, respectively) to private, publicly traded, for-profit companies.1  
Fannie and Freddie are regulated by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO), 
with  additional  oversight  by  the  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (HUD).  The 
regulatory framework under which the GSEs operate has two principal objectives: first, to support the 
GSEs’ mission of promoting homeownership, especially access to affordable housing; and second, to 
ensure  that  these  two  companies  operate  in  a  financially  prudent  manner.  For  various  reasons, 
including recent problems with accounting and internal controls at the GSEs, a consensus appears to 
exist that the regulatory and supervisory framework needs to be strengthened, and the leaders of the 
banking committees in the Congress have expressed optimism that agreement on legislation can be 
reached this year. 
The Federal Reserve Board concurs that a stronger regulatory framework for the GSEs is needed, and 
we hope to see a bill passed this year that addresses the important public policy issues raised by the 
operations  of  these  entities.  Because  of  its  responsibility  to  help  ensure  financial  and  economic 
stability, the Federal Reserve Board must be concerned with any potential financial difficulties at the 
GSEs  that  might  have  broader  systemic  implications.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board 
recognizes the great value that the Congress attaches to the GSEs’ affordable-housing mission. In my 
remarks today, I will offer some thoughts on how GSE regulatory reform could reduce the systemic 
risks  posed  by  these  organizations  while  increasing  their  institutional  focus  on  promoting  access  to 
affordable housing.  
Public policy issues raised by GSE operations 
I will begin by discussing GSE operations and some issues of public policy raised by these activities. 
Broadly  speaking,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  each  run  two  lines  of  business.  Their  first  line  of 
business  involves  purchasing  mortgages  from  primary  mortgage  originators,  such  as  community 
bankers;  packaging  them  into  securities  known  as  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS);  enhancing 
these MBS with credit guarantees; and then selling the guaranteed securities. Through this process, 
securities that trade readily in public debt markets are created. This activity, known as securitization, 
increases the liquidity of the residential mortgage market. In particular, the securitization of mortgages 
extended to low- and middle-income home purchasers likely has made mortgage credit more widely 
available. 
The GSEs’ second line of business is the main focus of my remarks today. It involves the purchase of 
mortgage-backed securities and other types of assets for their own investment portfolios. This line of 
business has raised public concern because its fundamental source of profitability is the widespread 
perception by investors that the U.S. government would not allow a GSE to fail, notwithstanding the 
fact  that  –  as  numerous  government  officials  have  asserted  –  the  government  has  given  no  such 
guarantees.  The  perception  of  government  backing  allows  Fannie  and  Freddie  to  borrow  in  open 
capital markets at an interest rate only slightly above that paid by the U.S. Treasury and below that 
                                                      
1   Frame and White (2005) provide a general description of GSEs and the associated policy debates. 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 1
paid  by  other  private  participants  in  mortgage  markets.  By  borrowing  at  this  preferential  rate  and 
purchasing assets (including MBS) that pay returns considerably greater than the Treasury rate, the 
GSEs can enjoy profits of an effectively unlimited scale. Consequently, the GSEs’ ability to borrow at a 
preferential  rate  provides  them  with  strong  incentives  both  to  expand  the  range  of  assets  that  they 
acquire and to increase the size of their portfolios to the greatest extent possible. 
The GSE portfolios have been the subject of much controversy. First, analysts disagree about whether 
the  GSE  portfolios  serve  any  public  purpose.  The  GSEs  themselves  argue  that  their  purchases  of 
MBS provide additional support to the mortgage market, particularly during periods of financial stress. 
In contrast, research at the Federal Reserve Board and elsewhere has found that the GSE portfolios 
appear to have no material effect on the cost or availability of residential mortgages.2 At the margin, 
the GSEs finance their purchases of MBS by issuing equal amounts of debt, and thus the net supply 
to  the  market  of  housing-related  debt  is  unchanged  by  GSE  purchases.  Thus,  standard  economic 
reasoning  does  not  predict  large  effects  from  these  purchases  on  the  mortgage  market.3  Indeed, 
contrary to what would be expected if GSE portfolios lowered the funding costs of mortgages, over the 
past  decade or so  the  spread  between  yields on  thirty-year  fixed-rate mortgages  and  Treasuries  of 
similar  duration  has  tended  to  rise  in  periods  in  which  the  GSEs  have  increased  the  share  of  the 
single-family residential mortgages held in their portfolios and to fall when the GSE share has fallen.4 
All that being said, for the purpose of the policy recommendations that I will make today, I will stipulate 
that GSE portfolios may serve to enhance liquidity and reduce costs in the mortgage market in some 
circumstances.  In  particular,  the  GSE  portfolio  purchases  may  create  benefits  for  home  purchase 
mortgages  extended 
first-time 
homebuyers, and to buyers of homes in lower-income neighborhoods. These are all mortgage markets 
in  which  the  private  sector  might  have  greater  difficulties  making  mortgage  credit  more  widely 
available and thus for which the case for government support may be stronger. 
A second element of the controversy surrounding the GSE portfolios arises from the fact that they are 
not only large but also potentially subject to significant volatility and financial risk (including credit risk, 
interest-rate  risk,  and  prepayment  risk)  and  operational  risk.  Many  observers,  including  the  Federal 
Reserve Board, have expressed concern about the potential danger that these portfolios may pose to 
the broader financial system; that is, the GSE portfolios may be a source of systemic risk (Greenspan, 
2005a). Systemic risk is the risk that disruptions occurring in one firm or financial market may spread 
to  other  parts  of  the  financial  system,  with  possibly  serious  implications  for  the  performance  of  the 
broader economy.  
Financial crises are extremely difficult to anticipate, and each episode of financial instability seems to 
have unique aspects, but two conditions are common to most such events. First, major crises usually 
involve  financial  institutions  or  markets  that  are  either  very  large  or  play  some  critical  role  in  the 
financial system. Second, the origins of most financial crises (excluding, perhaps, those attributable to 
natural  disasters,  war,  and  other  nonfinancial  events)  can  be  traced  to  failures  of  due  diligence  or 
“market discipline” by an important group of market participants. 
Both  of  these  conditions  apply  to  the  current  situation  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  (Eisenbeis, 
Frame, and Wall, forthcoming). The two GSEs are certainly large, having a dominant presence in U.S. 
mortgage  markets  and  a  substantial  role  in  other  financial  markets,  particularly  in  public  debt  and 
derivatives markets. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the GSEs began to rapidly increase the quantity of 
low-  and  moderate-income 
lower-income  households, 
to 
to 
                                                      
2   See  Lehnert,  Passmore,  and  Sherlund  (forthcoming).  There  is  also  much  debate  about  whether  GSE  activities  more 
generally lower the cost of mortgage credit, with estimates of the GSEs’ overall effect on fixed-rate mortgages ranging from 
zero  to  around  25  basis  points  (see  Ambrose,  LaCour-Little,  and  Sanders,  2004;  Geradi,  Rosen,  and  Willen,  2006; 
Passmore, Sherlund, and Burgess, 2005; and Passmore, Burgess, Hancock, Lehnert, and Sherlund, 2006). 
3   The  corporate  debt  issued  by  the  GSEs  has  somewhat  different  risk  characteristics  than  MBS  –  less  exposure  to 
prepayment risk, for example. However, the GSEs attempt to hedge most of the risks of MBS that they hold through callable 
debt and the use of derivatives, so those risks ultimately end up in the broader market as well. 
4   As  discussed  later,  the  combined  portfolios  of  the  GSEs  grew  more  than  tenfold  between  1990  and  2003;  their  market 
shares peaked in 2003 at slightly more than 22 percent. GSE market shares have fallen over the past three years to about 
14 percent, partly as the result of the companies’ accounting and internal control problems, which resulted in agreements 
with OFHEO to limit portfolio growth (presumably on a temporary basis). The spread between mortgage rates and Treasury 
yields rose during the second half of the 1990s, peaked in late 2002 and 2003, and has declined since, implying that higher 
mortgage spreads are associated with higher GSE market shares. Lehnert, Passmore, and Sherlund (forthcoming) find that 
a similar result obtains over shorter periods; using monthly data, they show that the mortgage spread appears to rise when 
GSE purchases rise and contract when GSE purchases contract. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2007
mortgages and other assets that they purchased and retained in their portfolios. From the end of 1990 
until the end of 2003, the combined portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac grew more than tenfold, 
from  $135  billion  to  $1.56  trillion,  and  the  share  they  hold  of  outstanding  residential  mortgages 
increased from less than 5 percent to more than 20 percent.5 Moreover, to finance their own holdings 
of MBS and other assets, in 2005 the two GSEs together issued almost $3 trillion in debt. Today, the 
two companies have $5.2 trillion of debt and MBS obligations outstanding, exceeding the $4.9 trillion 
of  publicly  held  debt  of  the  U.S.  government  (Lockhart,  2007).  The  activities  of  the  GSEs  are  not 
confined to debt markets; because the GSEs engage in extensive hedging activities, these companies 
are among the most active users of derivative instruments. Thus, by any measure, the GSEs have a 
significant presence in U.S. financial markets.6  
In  most  situations,  policymakers  can  rely  on  market  forces  to  constrain  the  risk-taking  behavior  of 
privately owned financial organizations. Market discipline is effective because, normally, the creditors 
of  private  firms  have  powerful  incentives  to  monitor  the  risk-taking  and  risk-management  activities 
conducted by these organizations. In particular, if creditors believe that an organization is taking on 
increased risk, they will reduce their exposure to the organization or demand greater compensation for 
bearing the additional risk. These market responses act as a brake on an organization’s risk-taking 
behavior and consequently reduce the likelihood that the company will fail. 
Unlike other private firms, however, the GSEs face little or no market discipline from their senior debt 
holders  because  of  the  belief  among  market  participants  that  the  U.S.  government  will  back  these 
institutions under almost any circumstances. As a result, increased risk-taking by the GSEs does not 
significantly increase their cost of funding or reduce their access to credit, as it would for other private 
firms. Indeed, as I have already noted, GSE debt trades at a narrow spread over U.S. Treasury debt 
and at spreads below those of other highly rated financial institutions, including the largest U.S. bank 
holding  companies.7  Moreover,  the  spread  of  GSE  debt  over  Treasuries  has  been  remarkably 
unresponsive to the recent problems of the GSEs (including the turnover of senior management and 
the inability of either company to provide current financial statements), suggesting that investors’ faith 
in an implicit government guarantee remains unshaken. 
As I have also noted, their low cost of borrowing gives GSEs an advantage over market participants in 
profitably financing the acquisition of just about any market-priced asset (other than U.S. Treasuries), 
and it creates a strong incentive for these companies to look for new types of assets to acquire and to 
find new lines of business to enter.8 These ingredients – the large presence of the GSEs in financial 
markets, the lack of market discipline exercised by investors in GSE senior debt, and the incentives for 
continued portfolio growth – led the Federal Reserve Board to conclude that while the GSEs do not 
seem to pose an immediate risk of financial difficulty, their portfolios continue to represent a potentially 
significant source of systemic risk. 
Some observers have suggested that the systemic risks raised by GSEs are not qualitatively different 
from  those  posed  by  the  largest  bank  holding  companies,  which  are  also  a  sizable  presence  in 
financial markets and enjoy some government guarantees (notably deposit insurance). However, this 
comparison is invalid for several reasons. First, uninsured deposits and other uninsured debt of bank 
holding companies – which are the marginal sources of funding for these organizations – pay rates of 
interest  that  are  higher  than  both  Treasury  and  GSE  rates  and  that  are  sensitive  to  the  financial 
condition of the firm. This behavior of banks’ cost of funds suggests that debt holders do not believe 
                                                      
5   Data on the GSEs’ portfolios can be found at www.ofheo.gov/Research.asp. 
6   See OFHEO (2006) and Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2006). I should also note that in 2003, Fannie and Freddie 
together  accounted  for  almost  70  percent  of  all  mortgage  securitizations  and  about  75  percent  of  all  mortgage-backed 
securities outstanding. The GSEs’ market shares of mortgage securitizations and outstanding MBS have fallen since 2003, 
reflecting the growth of private securitizations. 
7   The  funding  advantage  of  the  GSEs  relative  to  large  bank  holding  companies  has  varied significantly  over  time,  ranging 
from 20 to 45 basis points. Much of this variation reflects changes in the credit risk premiums embedded in the debt of large 
bank  holding  companies,  which  mainly  reflect  systematic  credit  risks.  In  the  past  several  years,  this  credit  premium  has 
narrowed substantially. 
8   Under normal market conditions, the substantial profits of the GSEs would attract competitors. But competitors, which are 
subject  to  market  scrutiny  when  conducting  their  business,  cannot  provide  a  check  on  the  GSEs  because  they  cannot 
compete with the GSEs’ low cost of funds. 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 3
that their investments will be fully protected if the bank gets into trouble, and consequently these debt 
holders exert market discipline on the firm.9  
Second, because of both regulatory requirements and the force of market discipline, banks hold much 
more capital than GSEs hold. The very largest bank holding companies generally hold equity capital 
equal to 6 percent or more of assets, and the largest regional banks generally have capital ratios of 
about 8 percent. (As I am sure you are keenly aware, community banks often have a capital-to-assets 
ratio  exceeding  10  percent.)  In  comparison,  the  GSEs  hold  capital  equal  to  roughly  3.5  percent  of 
assets.10 The justification for the low capital holdings of GSEs relative to banks is unclear. The largest 
banks are more diversified than the GSEs; and although banks likely assume greater credit risks, they 
probably are less subject to interest-rate risk than are GSEs.11 Moreover, the recent experience of the 
GSEs suggests that they are subject to at least as much operational risk as the large banks. 
Measures to reduce the systemic risk of GSE portfolios 
I have argued today that the size and the potentially rapid growth of GSE portfolios, combined with the 
lack  of  market  discipline  faced  by  GSEs,  raise  substantial  systemic  risk  concerns.  How  should  this 
issue be addressed? In recent years, the Federal Reserve Board has laid out three essential elements 
for the effective regulation of the GSEs that we believe would mitigate those concerns while promoting 
more effectively the important public purposes that they serve (Greenspan 2004; 2005b; 2006). First, 
the  GSE  regulator  should  have  the  broad  authority  necessary  to  set  and  adjust  GSE  capital 
requirements in line with the risks posed by the GSEs. Second, the GSEs should be subject to a clear 
and  credible  receivership  process,  a  process  that  would  establish  that  both  shareholders  and  debt 
holders of a failed GSE would suffer financial losses. Third, the GSEs’ portfolios should be anchored 
firmly to a well-understood public purpose approved by the Congress. 
The  concentrated  and  potentially  volatile  nature  of  the  GSEs’  portfolios,  together  with  the  lack  of 
market discipline on GSE activities, makes ensuring adequate capital – the first element – especially 
important. To ensure the safety and soundness of the GSEs and to reduce systemic risks, the GSE 
regulator should have capital authority that is on a par with that of the bank regulators. For example, 
the GSE regulator should have clear authority to establish and modify both the minimum and the risk-
based capital standards for the GSEs. Moreover, the GSE regulator should be able to adjust capital 
requirements quickly and as needed to address developing or foreseeable concerns, rather than being 
required by cumbersome procedures to wait until after the damage has been done. A strong capital 
base  would  significantly  reduce  the  implicit  subsidy  and  incentive  problems  that  now  distort  GSE 
investment decisions (Lucas and McDonald, 2006), while also increasing their safety and soundness. 
The establishment of a clear and credible GSE receivership process, the second element, is needed 
to create market discipline for these companies. Reform legislation should establish (1) a well-defined 
and mandatory process for placing a GSE in receivership and (2) a method for resolving a GSE once it 
is placed in receivership. Both parts are necessary for the receivership process to be meaningful and 
credible. Market participants should clearly understand that, once certain conditions arise, regulatory 
forbearance will be impermissible and a GSE receivership will be established. Importantly, the GSE 
receivership  process  should  include  a  mechanism  for  ensuring  that  both  the  shareholders  and 
                                                      
9   Legal  provisions  such  as  prompt  corrective  action  and  the  least-cost-resolution  requirement  probably  contribute  to  the 
perception of bank debt holders that their investments are not guaranteed if the bank gets into financial trouble. Recently, 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has proposed to require that large banks maintain depositor records in a 
common format to help ensure that those creditors do not escape losses in the event of a bank failure. Also, the ability of 
bank  holding  companies  to  increase  their  government-backed  funding  is  limited.  By  law,  banks  cannot  make  additional 
banking acquisitions if the resulting firm would control more than 10 percent of U.S. insured deposits. 
10   This  comparison  excludes  the  temporary  30  percent  additional  capital  currently  required  by  OFHEO  because  of  the 
operational risks posed by the GSEs’ recent accounting problems. 
11   Interest rate risk depends on the degree of hedging, which is at the discretion of firm management. However, because the 
GSEs’ portfolios are concentrated in the mortgage-backed securities market and thus are subject to rapid changes in market 
value, the risk profile of the GSEs can change rapidly in response to unexpected movements in interest rates. In contrast, 
banks  hold  a  more  diversified  mix  of  liabilities  and  assets,  many  of  which  are  less  sensitive  to  unexpected  changes  in 
interest rates, suggesting that banks as a general matter are less prone to interest rate risk. Regardless, little social benefit 
is gained by encouraging the concentration of the substantial interest rate risks associated with long-term mortgages into 
only  two  government-sponsored  organizations,  when  such  risk  could  be  easily  distributed  across  tens  of  thousands  of 
entities, both domestic and foreign, through the process of mortgage securitization. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2007
creditors of a failed GSE will bear financial losses. Only if GSE debt holders are persuaded that the 
failure of a GSE will subject them to losses will they have an incentive to exert market discipline. 
Third, the GSE portfolios should be anchored to a clear and well-defined public purpose. Tying the 
portfolios  to  a  purpose  that  provides  measurable  benefits  to  the  public  would  help  to  ensure  that 
society  in  general  –  not  just  GSE  shareholders  –  receives  a  meaningful  return  in  exchange  for 
accepting  the  risks  inherent  in  the  portfolios.  Moreover,  defining  the  scope  and  purpose  of  the 
portfolios in this way would reduce the potential for unbridled growth in those portfolios while avoiding 
the imposition of arbitrary limits or caps. 
Affordable housing and the GSE portfolios 
What public purpose should be served by the GSE portfolios? An obvious and worthy candidate is the 
promotion of affordable housing.12 The Congress has frequently expressed the priority it attaches to 
affordable housing through, for example, the provision of various housing programs and tax incentives 
aimed at increasing the availability of moderately priced homes and rental housing. The Congress has 
also determined that financial institutions have a role in providing credit to low- and moderate-income 
households.  Most  notably,  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  (CRA)  obligates  insured  depository 
institutions  to  help  meet  the  credit  needs  of  their  entire  local  communities,  including  low-  and 
moderate-income  borrowers  and  neighborhoods,  consistent  with  the  institutions’  safe  and  sound 
operation.13  
Along similar lines, in 1992 the Congress established an affordable housing mission for Fannie Mae 
and  Freddie  Mac  by  directing  HUD  to  create  specific  mortgage  purchase  goals  for  these  GSEs. 
However, evidence that Fannie and Freddie have had beneficial effects on the supply of affordable 
housing  (over  and  above  the  benefits  of  their  securitization  activities  for  the  mortgage  market  as  a 
whole)  has  been  difficult  to  find.14  After  conducting  several  studies  of  the  effects  of  GSEs  on  the 
mortgage market and establishing the GSEs’ disappointing results, HUD in 2004 raised the numerical 
goals that these institutions must reach to fulfill their affordable housing mission. As noted by HUD, 
“With respect to these public purposes, Congress does not simply expect the GSEs to strive toward 
achievement of these purposes but rather to lead the mortgage finance industry and to ensure that 
citizens  throughout  the  country  enjoy  access  to  the  public  benefits  provided  by  these  federal 
entities.”15  
Thus, a standard for determining the public benefit of Fannie’s and Freddie’s portfolios seems readily 
available: Do the GSE portfolios support affordable housing? At the present time, Fannie and Freddie 
appear  to  fail  this  test.  Indeed,  by  OFHEO’s  estimation,  less  than  30  percent  of  the  GSEs’  current 
portfolio holdings are oriented toward affordable housing (Lockhart, 2007). 
A straightforward means of anchoring the GSE portfolios to a clear public mission would be to require 
Fannie and Freddie to focus their portfolios almost exclusively on holdings of mortgages or mortgage-
backed securities that support affordable housing. The evolution of mortgage markets since the GSEs 
were created strongly suggests that a concentration on affordable-housing products would provide the 
                                                      
12   According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), “The generally accepted definition of affordability 
is 
housing” 
(www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing ). Presumably, this definition would apply only for low- and moderate-income 
households. One difficulty of discussing GSE reform and affordable housing is that there is no straightforward link between 
this  definition  of  affordable  housing  and  the  activities  of  the  GSEs.  Better  data  and  methods  are  needed  to  measure 
accurately the GSEs’ contributions to affordable housing. 
no  more 
household 
percent 
income 
annual 
than 
pay 
for 
30 
on 
its 
of 
to 
a 
13   In addition, the Congress in 1934 established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and gave it the mission of helping 
to increase the availability of affordable housing by extending the provision of mortgage insurance to many lower-income 
and  liquidity-constrained  households.  More  recently,  the  Congress  required  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks  (FHLBs)  to 
establish an affordable housing fund. 
14   As one recent study stated: “A substantial literature has now developed analyzing the efficacy of HUD housing goals for 
promoting home ownership among lower-income families. The consensus conclusion is that the affordable housing goals 
(AHGs)  have  achieved  very  little  in  terms  of  increasing  homeownership  among  low-income  families”  (Jaffe  and  Quigley, 
2007, p. 12). 
15   Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), (2004a), p. 63581. Italics are quotes taken by HUD from Senate 
Report, No. 102-282, at 34 (1992). For reviews of HUD’s studies comparing the GSEs to the primary mortgage market, see 
HUD (2004a and 2004b). 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 5
greatest public benefit. Markets for highly rated assets – including most residential mortgages and the 
pools of MBS backed by such mortgages – have become extremely deep and liquid, with more than 
$25  trillion  in  outstanding  instruments.  These  markets  are  international  in  scope,  and  market 
participants  include  thousands  of  banking  organizations,  insurance  companies,  pooled  investment 
vehicles, institutional investors and, increasingly, foreign governmental authorities. Given the size and 
depth of the secondary market for most residential mortgages, the GSEs’ purchase and retention of 
highly  rated  mortgages  and  of  their  own  MBS  are  unlikely  to  do  much  to  enhance  liquidity  in  the 
secondary markets for these assets or to promote affordable housing. On the other hand, the vast size 
of the market for highly rated assets greatly increases the potential for rapid growth of GSE portfolios 
and, consequently, systemic risk. 
In  contrast,  the  market  for  affordable-housing  products  –  particularly  mortgages  extended  to 
households  with  below-median-income  –  is  less  deep  and  liquid  than  the  broader  market  for 
residential  mortgages.  GSE  portfolio  purchases  might  add  significant  liquidity  to  the  secondary 
markets for such assets, thereby reducing costs and increasing credit availability to prospective home 
purchasers.  In  addition,  increasing  the  presence  of  the  GSEs  in  the  market  for  affordable  housing 
could  help  banks  fulfill  their  CRA  obligations  by  providing  them  with  greater  opportunities  for 
securitizing  such  loans.  In  all,  from  a  social  perspective,  focusing  the  GSE  portfolios  on  affordable 
housing could provide benefits that might offset some of the risks that these more-targeted portfolios 
might pose to financial markets and to taxpayers. The key principle here is that the GSEs’ senior debt 
–  which  investors  view  as  government-backed  –  should  be  used  only  to  finance  assets  (such  as 
affordable-housing mortgages) that have, in the view of the Congress, a clear and measurable public 
benefit.16 Such an approach would set some functional limits on the size of the portfolios and on the 
range  of  assets  that  GSEs  would  be  allowed  to  purchase,  while  preserving  the  ability  of  these 
companies to operate profitably. 
To be clear, I am not advocating a change in the exposure of GSEs to subprime loans.17 Orienting the 
GSEs’ portfolios more toward affordable housing is an approach which can succeed under the current 
GSE credit standards. Indeed, the credit risks associated with an affordable-housing portfolio need not 
be any greater than mortgage portfolios generally, so long as the GSEs continue to adhere to sound 
underwriting  practices.  Moreover,  a  renewal  of  the  GSE  affordable-housing  mission  might  stimulate 
the development of innovative approaches to measuring and managing the credit risks associated with 
such mortgages. 
Conclusion 
Legislation to strengthen the regulation and supervision of GSEs is highly desirable, both to ensure 
that these companies pose fewer risks to the financial system and to direct them toward activities that 
provide important social benefits. Financial safety and soundness can be enhanced by giving the GSE 
regulator capital powers comparable to those of bank supervisors and by creating a clear and credible 
receivership process that leads debt holders to recognize that they would suffer financial losses should 
a GSE fail. Finally, the Federal Reserve Board believes that the GSEs’ investment portfolios should be 
firmly anchored to a measurable public purpose, such as the promotion of affordable housing. I believe 
that this approach provides a reasonable balance of social costs and benefits for the GSE portfolios. 
In  particular,  this  approach  would  re-focus  the  GSEs  on  the  affordable  housing  objectives  given  to 
them by the Congress. 
                                                      
16   Subordinated debt might be used to fund any assets allowed by the Congress and held by Fannie and Freddie that did not 
have a strong and easily measurable link to making housing more affordable. In principle, subordinated-debt spreads should 
be  more  responsive  to  market  developments  than  senior-debt  spreads,  particularly  if  issuance  was  mandatory  and  the 
Congress  establishes  a  clear  and  credible  receivership  process  for  the  GSEs.  Fannie  and  Freddie  took  a  step  in  the 
direction of enhancing GSE market discipline when they issued subordinated debt in 2000. But during the recent period of 
accounting problems, neither GSE has chosen to issue subordinated debt, likely because doing so would have been too 
costly. Only recently has Freddie Mac resolved its problems sufficiently so that subordinated debt could be issued. 
17   The role of the GSEs in subprime lending and whether to increase or decrease their exposure to such lending are important 
questions for the Congress. The GSEs have been only indirect players in the subprime market, purchasing mainly AAA-debt 
that has been collateralized with subprime mortgages and leaving the higher risk components of the subprime mortgages to 
be funded by other market participants. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2007
References 
Ambrose, Brent W., Michael LaCour-Little, and Anthony B. Sanders (2004). “The Effect of Conforming 
Loan  Status  on  Mortgage  Yield  Spreads:  A  Loan  Level  Analysis,”  Real  Estate  Economics,  vol.  32 
(Winter), pp.541-69. 
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (2004a).  “HUD’s  Housing  Goals  for  the  Federal 
National  Mortgage  Association  (Fannie  Mae)  and  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Mortgage  Corporation 
(Freddie  Mac)  for  the  Years  2005-2008  and  Amendments  to  HUD’s  Regulation  of  Fannie  Mae  and 
Freddie Mac,” 24 CFR Part 81 (Docket No. FR 4790-F-03), Federal Register, vol. 69 (November 2), 
pp. 63579-628.  
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (2004b).  “Regulatory  Analysis  for  the  Secretary  of 
HUD’s Final Rule on HUD’s Regulation of the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) 
and  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Mortgage  Corporation  (Freddie  Mac),”  HUD,  Office  of  Policy 
Development and Research, October 2004. 
Eisenbeis, Robert A., W. Scott Frame, and Larry D. Wall (forthcoming). “An Analysis of the Systemic 
Risks Posed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and an Evaluation of the Policy Options for Reducing 
Those Risks,” Journal of Financial Services Research. 
Frame, W. Scott, and Lawrence J. White (2005). “Fussing and Fuming over Fannie and Freddie: How 
Much Smoke, How Much Fire?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19 (Spring), pp. 159-84. 
Gerardi, Kristopher, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen (2006). “Do Households Benefit from Financial 
Deregulation and Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage Market,” Public Policy Discussion Papers 06-
6. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, June.  
Greenspan,  Alan  (2006).  Letter  to  Senators  Elizabeth  Dole,  Chuck  Hagel,  and  John  Sununu, 
January 3. 
Greenspan, Alan (2005a). “Government-Sponsored Enterprises,” remarks delivered at the Conference 
on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, May 19. 
Greenspan, Alan (2005b). “Regulatory Reform of the Government-Sponsored Enterprises,” statement 
before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, April 6. 
Greenspan, Alan  (2004).  “Government-Sponsored Enterprises,”  statement  before  the Committee  on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 24. 
Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2006). The Housing-Related GSEs: Data on Their Business, 
Market, Investments, & Expenditures. Bethesda, Md.: IMFP. 
Jaffe, Dwight M., and John M. Quigley (2007). Housing Subsidies and Homeowners: What Role for 
Government-Sponsored Enterprises?” paper presented at the NBER/Kellogg School of Management 
Conference  on  Measuring  and  Managing  Federal  Financial  Risk,  held  at  Northwestern  University, 
Evanston, Ill., February 8 and 9.  
Lehnert, Andreas, Wayne Passmore, and Shane Sherlund (forthcoming). “GSEs, Mortgage Rates, and 
Secondary Market Activities,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics. 
Lockhart,  James  B.  III  (2007).  “GSE  Reform:  A  Priority  for  2007,”  paper  presented  at  the  National 
Association of Affordable Housing Lenders Legislative Conference, Washington, D.C., February 1. 
Lucas, Deborah, and Robert McDonald (2006). “An Options-based Approach to Evaluating the Risk of 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 53 (January), pp. 155-76. 
Office  of  Federal  Housing  Enterprise  Oversight  (OFHEO)  2006.  “Mortgage  Markets  and  the 
Enterprises in 2005.”  
Passmore,  Wayne,  Gillian Burgess,  Diana  Hancock, Andreas  Lehnert,  and  Shane  Sherlund  (2006). 
“Federal  Reserve  Research  on  Government-Sponsored  Enterprises,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  42nd 
Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition on “Innovations in Real Estate Markets: Risks, 
Rewards, and the Role of Regulation” (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 17-19), pp. 90-101.  
Passmore,  Wayne,  Shane  Sherlund,  and  Gillian  Burgess  (2005).  “The  Effects  of  Housing 
Government-Sponsored  Enterprises  on  Mortgages  Rates,”  Real  Estate  Finance,  vol.  33  (Fall),  pp. 
427-83. 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 7
