W A Wijewardena: Central Bank – why “economic and price stability”? 
Speech  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
Association of Professional Bankers, Colombo, 23 March 2007. 
 through 
involved 
that  emerged 
this  consensus 
An amendment effected to the Monetary Law Act in 2002 requires the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to 
pursue  “economic  and  price  stability”  as  one  of  the  two  core  objectives  of  the  Bank.  This  is 
somewhat a departure from the central banks in the rest of the world which have been mandated to 
attain only “price stability”. Hence, it may be puzzling to many whether the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
has been given an additional objective to attain. It is, therefore, timely to identify the precise meaning 
of this phrase “economic and price stability” in the context of a central bank. 
The amendment to the Monetary Law came as a part of the modernization program which the Bank 
commenced  in  2000.  One  of  the  essential  ingredients  of  that  program was  to  update  the  Monetary 
Law to be on par with the emerging global best practices. Up to that time, the Central Bank had been 
entrusted  with  a  multitude  of  objectives:  attaining  price  stability,  participating 
in  economic 
development, preserving the external value of Rupee, protecting banks from collapse and maintaining 
the financial system stability etc. These objectives were not very clear and were often in conflict with 
each other. They also posed difficulties in monitoring the progress or assessing the success. Many 
critiques had pointed out, and the technical staff in the Bank had experienced, that the Bank could not 
succeed  in  its  main  task of  taming  inflation  and bringing  about price stability,  if  it  was saddled  with 
other tasks that would go against its main objective. Hence, there emerged a general consensus that 
the central bank should do only what it can do effectively and not otherwise. That consensus required 
the Central Bank to pursue a single objective, viz., the attainment of price stability. 
Following 
the  consultative  process 
the 
modernization,  the  technical  staff  of  the  Bank  proposed  an  amendment  to  the  Monetary  Law  by 
mandating the Bank with the task of attaining two core objectives. They were the attainment of both 
“price stability” and “financial system stability”. When the draft law was submitted to the then Governor, 
Mr.  A.  S  Jayawardena,  for  clearance,  he  had  changed  the  “price  stability”  to  “economic  and  price 
stability”. The puzzled and bewildered technical staff flocked into his room seeking a clarification, since 
it  was  not  in  line  with  the  accepted  international  trend.  The  writer  recalls  that  even  the  Resident 
Representative of the IMF too was puzzled by this seemingly inappropriate mandate being added to 
the Bank’s objectives. 
But, Mr. Jayawardena, assuming his usual erudite and serious posture, offered a different explanation 
which had never occur red to the technical staff. The writer recalls him saying “…if you have only price 
stability, then you would fall into the trap of attempting to stabilize a price index which is not what is 
meant by price stability, in the context of a central bank. The attainment of price stability for a central 
bank means elimination of both excess demand and excess supply in the market so that the market is 
free of potential inflationary or deflationary pressures” 
At  that  time,  many  in  the  Central  Bank,  including  the  present  writer,  did  not  fully  understand  the 
wisdom  enshrined  in  that  statement.  It  even  led  to  confusion  by  many  that  the  Bank  had  been 
mandated  to  stabilize  the  growth  rate  as  well,  in  addition  to  the  stabilization  of  prices.  Accordingly, 
some even charged that the Bank had failed in its tasks, when there was a negative growth in the 
economy  in  2001.  In  hindsight,  it  can  now  be  discerned  that  Mr.  Jayawardena’s  wisdom  was  to 
present the price stability in its totality rather than as a sub part of the issue. 
We could illustrate this point as follows: 
An economy produces goods and services, numbering millions, for use by its members. The total of 
these goods and services, when they are offered in the market, is called the aggregate supply. This 
aggregate supply consists of real goods and services which the users can consume or use as inputs 
for  further  production.  Hence,  it  is  known  as  a  real  quantity,  quite  distinct  from  an  imagined  or 
assumed quantity. This real quantity has to be exchanged among members of the society. Since it is 
practically impossible to trade one commodity for another commodity in a modern complex economy, 
there arises the need for adopting a common medium of exchange. “Money” offers the service of this 
common medium of exchange at the cheapest cost to conclude the transactions running into billions. 
in 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
Money,  unlike  the  real  commodities,  is  a  peculiar  animal.  Its  usefulness  arises  from  its  ability  to 
acquire real goods and services which people can enjoy. If money does not have this ability, no one 
would be interested in having money. Hence, the value given to money is simply an imaginary value . 
As a result, money bears a nominal feature, as against the real feature borne by other goods and 
services. That is why any value measured in terms of money is also known as a nominal value. 
We may illustrate the role played by money in an economy by considering the operation of a simple 
economy where there are only two commodities, say, coconuts and money. Everybody has to use 
money to get coconuts or use coconuts to get money so as to store their wealth (for getting coconuts 
in the future). 
Suppose there were 10 coconuts and 100 units of money. Then, each coconut has to be exchanged 
for 10 units of money per coconut. Now, suppose, through a miracle, the money endowment of people 
doubles  to  200  units,  while  the  number  of  coconuts  remains  unchanged  at  10.  Then,  the  price  of 
coconuts in terms of money rises to 20 units from the earlier 10 units. What has happened here is that 
when the amount of money doubled, while the production of coconuts had remained unchanged, the 
prices too have doubled. 
What would happen to the price level, if the number of coconuts too doubled along with the doubling of 
money? Then, 20 coconuts would be exchanged for 200 units of money. Hence, the price level would 
remain unchanged at 10 units of money per coconut. 
Now, suppose that the number of coconuts doubles to 20, while the amount of money remains at 100 
units. In this case, the price level has to fall from 10 units of money to 5 units of money. 
Let’s consider one more possibility. Suppose that there has been a merciful hurricane and it destroys 
exactly a half of the original number of coconuts, leaving the balance half intact for use by people. 
Now, in this economy, there are only 5 coconuts against 100 units of money. It is not difficult to discern 
that  the  prices  would  rise  to  20  units  of  money  per  coconut.  What  would  happen  if  the  amount  of 
money too is raised to 200 units in this scenario? Then, the price of coconut would skyrocket to 40 
units of money. 
What  was  considered  here  was  a  very  simple  economy  for  ease  of  clarity.  But,  the  broad  results 
derived  are  equally  valid  to  a  modern  economy  with  billions  of  transactions.  These  results  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
First, if the money supply increases, while the output remains unchanged, then, the general price level 
will tend to increase. 
Second,  if  the  money  supply  increases  at  the  same  rate  as  the  increase  in  the  output,  then  the 
general price level remains unchanged. 
Third, if the money supply does not increase, when the output has increased, then, the general price 
level will fall. 
Fourth, if the money supply has remained unchanged or even raised when the output has fallen (a 
negative supply shock), then the prices would rise to a still higher level. 
In the above example, coconut constituting real output represented the aggregate supply of goods and 
services, measured in real terms. The total amount of money in the hands of the people represented 
the demand for coconuts. Since the money value of coconuts is an imaginary concept, that demand 
could be described as the nominal aggregate demand for goods and services. What would happen to 
the general price level will depend on the interplay of these two demand and supply forces. 
The rest of the analysis follows the normal microeconomic theory. If the aggregate demand is higher 
than the aggregate supply, there will be an excess demand in the economy. That excess demand will 
generate pressure for the general price level to rise. Similarly, if the aggregate supply is higher than 
the  aggregate  demand,  the  resultant  excess  supply  will  put  pressure  for  the  prices  to  fall.  Then,  it 
follows that, if someone desires to have price stability, he should try to equate the nominal aggregate 
demand with the given real aggregate supply. 
The price stability, in the context of a central bank, means the maintenance of a zero excess demand 
or excess supply in the total economy, commonly known as the macro economy. In that situation, all 
incentives for prices to rise or fall are non-existent. What is meant by economic stability in the broad 
objective of the Central Bank is the attainment and maintenance of this state. A central bank cannot 
be complacent until it has attained this level of stability. The way to attain that level of stability is to 
control the nominal aggregate demand by controlling the main force affecting that aggregate demand: 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
the quantity of money in the hands of people. This is because in the long run, the general price level 
moves exactly in accordance with the movement of money supply. It led the Noble Laureate Milton 
Friedman to remark in his Noble Laureate Oration that “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary 
phenomenon”. 
What are the manifestations of the absence of that level of stability? There are two manifestations. 
First, people on average may not expect the general price level to remain stable in the future. They 
make that expectation by considering the past trends and what is happening right now. If they expect 
that  the  prices  on  average  would  rise,  then,  they  can  be  said  to  be  harboring  high  inflation 
expectations. A central bank can gauge this situation by conducting periodical inflation expectation 
surveys. 
Second, a consumer price index, compiled to measure the changes in the cost of living of a given 
group  of  people,  may  show  a continuous  increase over  a substantial  period of  time.  It  indicates  an 
unstable situation in the macro economy leading to an upward movement in the general price level. 
The presence of either situation requires a central bank to go into action against fighting inflation. This 
means  that,  even  if  the  consumer  price  index  shows  stability  or  a  relatively  low  growth,  the  central 
bank cannot stop taking inflation fighting measures. What a central bank should do is to eradicate the 
cause rather than pampering with the symptoms. It is similar to a physician who does not take delight 
when  he  observes  that  the  high  fever  of  a  patient  has  subsided.  The  physician  would  not  stop  his 
curative treatment, until the cause of that high fever is totally eliminated. 
There appears to be a general tendency for equating increases in the cost of living with inflation. An 
increase in the cost of living occurs when the basket of commodities consumed by a given group of 
people entails a higher cost. As mentioned earlier, this is measured by compiling a consumer price 
index. A central bank cannot do anything about the increases in the cost of living, since it does not 
produce  goods  and  services.  That  is  why  John  Exter,  the  founder  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank, 
remarked in his very first press interview that “…the Bank does not itself produce goods and services. 
It will facilitate it by creating right monetary conditions ” Implicit in these “right monetary conditions” is 
the need for attaining economic and price stability in its totality. 
Inflation is a much wider phenomenon than the cost of living. It entails the absence of stability in the 
macro  economy  leading  to  an  increase  in  all  the  prices  at  the  same  time.  A  consumer  price  index 
measures the price impact on a consumption basket consisting of only consumer goods. In contrast, 
inflation occurs when the prices of all goods, consumption, intermediate, investment and inputs, rise at 
the same time. It elevates the general price level to a higher level, including those of the consumer 
goods. 
The above misunderstanding may lead to the pitfall of a central banker trying to stabilize the value of a 
cost of living index through artificial means. It can be attained by fixing price ceilings or granting price 
subsidies.  But,  it  does  not  cure  the  malady  of  generally  rising  prices  generated  by  rising  nominal 
aggregate demand over the real aggregate supply. A subsidy could ease the burden on the cost of 
living of a given consumer or a group of consumers. But, if the subsidy is financed by incurring a loss 
elsewhere, it does not help to fight inflation. That is because at the place where the loss is incurred, 
there exists a deficit supply creating pressures for prices to rise. Similarly, price controls may keep the 
cost of living index under control. But, as long as there is excess demand in the macro economy, it 
does not help to contain inflation. 
Then,  what  about  negative  supply  shocks  such  as  a  temporary  fall  in  the  output  of  agricultural 
products or increases in the prices of imported goods? They would reduce the real aggregate supply 
creating  an  excess  demand  in  the  macro  economy.  It  would  lead  to  the  increase  in  the  prices  of 
certain consumer goods raising the cost of living of those who consume them. But, that is not inflation. 
For  these  one-off  events  to  become  inflation,  the  nominal  aggregate  demand  should  also  rise 
continuously  over  the  real  aggregate  supply.  In  other  words,  the  macro  economy  should  be 
characterized by the presence of an excess demand for goods and services. The elimination of this 
excess demand is the path for curing the malady of inflation. 
When there is no excess demand or excess supply, then, the macro economy is said to be in balance. 
Such a balance eliminates the pressure on prices to change. The public having observed the general 
stability in the overall price level would form low expectations on future changes in the prices. This 
would lead to future price stability as well. For this to happen, all sources of increasing money in the 
hands of people should be constantly kept under control. This is the wisdom enshrined in “economic 
and price stability”. 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 3
