Erkki Liikanen: The growth of Finland – from a small, underdeveloped country 
to one of the world's high tech elite  
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  1st  Forum  Sortim  al  Món 
"Strategies for the internationalization of Catalan companies", Barcelona, 26 March 2007.  
 Introduction  
During the last 150 years Finland has experienced a remarkable transformation from a poor agrarian 
economy to a modern information society. In the process, it has developed an advanced welfare state, 
adapted to globalisation and joined the European Union.  
Finland's growth experience is, of course, far from unique: a similar pattern of success is shared by all 
mature  industrialised  countries  and  more  recently  also  by  the  newly  industrialised  countries  in  Asia 
and  elsewhere.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  features  in  Finland's  experience  which  may  make  it 
especially interesting.  
One feature is speed. Growth started later in Finland, and was subsequently more rapid, than in other 
Western  European  countries.  In  the  1860s,  Finland  was  a  very  poor  and  underdeveloped  country, 
behind most other European nations. Most of the population was employed in agriculture. The state of 
the agriculture was backward, and the short growing season and disadvantageous weather conditions 
made  harvests  uncertain.  As  late  as  in  1867-68,  Finland  experienced  a  severe  famine,  losing  one 
tenth of its population through starvation and diseases. This was the last major peacetime famine in 
Europe. According to historical national account estimates, Finland's GDP per capita in the 1860s was 
only 40 per cent of that of England and some 50 per cent of that of the average of Western European 
countries.  
After the 1860s, the Finnish GDP per capita has grown at a rate of 2.2 per cent per annum, while that 
of the present EU-15 has been 1.7 per cent per annum. This difference in the growth rates may seem 
small,  but  cumulated  over  a  long  period  it  really  makes  a  difference.  From  1860  to  2000,  Finland's 
GDP per capita has been estimated to have grown 21-fold, whereas the GDP per capita of the EU-15 
countries grew "only" 11-fold.  
Today,  Finland's  GDP  per  capita  has  reached  and  even  exceeded  the  average  Western  European 
level, implying that the catching up process is over. Nevertheless, Finland's economic development 
continues to proceed at a relatively rapid pace. In some branches of the industry labour productivity 
now  exceeds  the  level  of  leading  industrial  countries,  including  the  United  States.  Finland  has  – 
together with the other Nordic countries – also succeeded in combining economic efficiency with an 
equal distribution of income and a low incidence of poverty.  
In this presentation, I discuss the successful evolution of the Finnish economy a small underdeveloped 
economy to one of the world's high tech elite. How has it been possible? I want to stress two points.  
First, while the growth of the Finnish economy has attracted attention only recently, its transformation 
from a backward agrarian economy to a modern and efficient welfare economy has been a long and 
gradual process. This process has taken at least 150 years, the period for which accurate statistical 
data are available, and there is some evidence which indicates that its roots go back even further in 
history. There is a strong element of continuity concerns in legislation, the form of society as well as 
many public institutions and civil servants which continued to function virtually unchanged even though 
the circumstances chanced radically.  
Emphasis  on  the  creation  of  human  capital  also  goes  back  to  the  educational  reforms  of  the  19th 
century, and it has resulted not only in well educated labour force but also in many key inventions such 
as GSM  technologies or  the  Linux  operating system,  for  example.  And  throughout  Finland's  growth 
period the governments have understood the importance of a competitive open sector for a small open 
economy and tried to keep the business climate favourable.  
The second point I want to stress, in addition to the element of continuity, is that Finland's success has 
by no means been historically inevitable. Its situation could now be very different if events had played 
themselves  out  slightly  differently.  This  is  evident  from  a  comparison  with  the  neighbouring  Baltic 
countries  or  Poland.  Chance  may  have  played  its  part.  However,  one  of  Finland's  strengths  has 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 1
perhaps  been  its  ability  to  adapt  to  changes  in  external  circumstances  and even  to  crises.  At  least 
occasionally, luck has been aided by pragmatism and good political judgement.  
Factors behind success 
Institutional continuity  
(1) 
One factor of economic development, which only recently has received the recognition it deserves, is 
the quality and credibility of institutions such as law, money, and the integrity of administration. The 
importance  of  these  things  is  now  frequently  given  as  an  explanation  why  some  less  developed 
countries with seemingly abundant resources have failed to take off economically.  
Finnish public institutions at least have shown a remarkable degree of continuity through our history. 
Especially  the  legal  system,  and  the  structure  of  administration  have  continued  to  function  virtually 
undisturbed  through  many  dramatic  circumstances,  including  the  critical  years  of  1917-18,  and 
1939-44. There have been changes, of course, but these have almost always taken place by gradual 
evolution rather than through abrupt regime shifts.  
Finland  obtained  its  national  institutions  after  Russia  conquered  Finland  from  Sweden  in  1809, 
Napoleon having encouraged the Russian emperor Alexander I to make war on Sweden. While that 
war  was  still  in  progress,  the  emperor  proclaimed  Finland's  "elevation  to  the  national  status"  and 
convened  the  first  Finnish  diet.  He  agreed,  by  way  of  an  experiment,  to  become  a  constitutional 
monarch  of  Finland,  even  though  he  was  an  autocrat  in  Russia.  Finland  was  made  into  an 
autonomous state called the Grand Duchy of Finland, ruled according to an old Swedish constitution.  
As  a  Grand  Duchy  in  the  Russian  Empire,  Finland  retained  its  previous  Swedish  legal  system,  its 
Lutheran religion, and Swedish as its official language. A Finnish central government and institutions 
of  national  administration  were  created,  including  the  Bank  of  Finland  –  now  world's  fourth  oldest 
central  bank.  With  the exception  of  a Governor-General,  the  representative of  the  Emperor,  all civil 
servants in the administration of the country were native Finns.  
In the late 19th century, constitutionalism and a rather stiff sort of legalism were increasingly identified 
with national survival, as safeguards against the mounting pressure for assimilation to tsarist Russia. 
At the turn of the century, the country’s institutions were under a real threat of dissolution. At the same 
time, however, real democratic development begun. In 1907, universal suffrage was introduced and 
the  first  democratically  elected  parliament  was  elected.  First  women  parliamentarians  in  the  world 
were also then elected.  
Finland proclaimed its independence in December 1917, shortly after the Bolshevik coup in Russia. In 
January  1918  a  bloody  civil  war  broke  out  between  "whites"  and  "reds",  with  Bolsheviks  supplying 
assistance to the reds, and Germany to the whites. Politically, the issue was whether Finland should 
follow Russia on the road to revolution or not. The whites won, of course, and democracy prevailed, 
but the war marks arguably the worst crisis ever of the Finnish tradition of the rule of law.  
However, in view of the horrors of the civil war, the country returned to its democratic ways surprisingly 
quickly. Even the political left could return to normal parliamentary life in only a year after the war. The 
20's and the 30's were in Finland decades of social integration and the consolidation of democracy. A 
number of far-reaching social reforms were successfully implemented. In the 1930’s, when much of 
the  continental  Europe  fell  under  the  sway  of  different  dictatorial  regimes,  Finland  stuck  to  its 
democracy, looking to its Scandinavian neighbours for models for social development.  
The  continuity  of  national  institutions  was  remarkable  also  during  the  Second  World  War  and  its 
aftermath. In 1939-1944, Finland lost two wars to the Soviet Union and had to make heavy territorial 
concessions in two peace treaties. However, Helsinki was the only capital of a European belligerent 
country, apart from Moscow and London, which was not occupied by a foreign army during the war. 
Also, the Finnish parliament continued to work uninterrupted throughout the war. Despite of losing the 
war  in  the  end,  Finland  retained  its  independence,  even  though  its  room  for  manoeuvre  in  foreign 
policy was severely limited, especially in the years immediately after the war.  
The  development  of  the  Finnish  society  in  post-was  decades  was  characterised  above  all  by  two 
challenges, the building of a modern, industrialized welfare state, and developing a modus vivendi with 
the powerful Soviet neighbour. These policy goals were not independent. The building of a modern 
welfare state required economic growth, which had to be based on exports and integration with the 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2007
other Western market economies. However, the country could hardly risk getting into conflict with the 
Communist  superpower,  which  might,  it  was  feared,  put  an  end  to  Finland's  policy  of  economic 
integration with the West. Finnish policy was a delicate balancing act, as if walking on a tightrope.  
In  the  end,  however,  Finland  was  the  only  western  neighbours  of  the  Soviet  Union  to  retain  its 
democratic constitution, its multi-party democracy, the rule of law and a free market economy. These 
national institutions stayed intact. In a way, the miracles of the 1910’s and the 1930’s, the survival of 
the rule of law and democracy, were repeated in the late 1940’s as Finland managed to hold on to its 
democratic  course,  despite  difficult  circumstances.  The  value  of  this  stability  for  economic 
development and growth cannot easily be overestimated.  
Free trade and internationalisation  
(2) 
Another success factor for Finland has been a proactive attitude towards the internationalisation of the 
economy.  As  a  small  country,  with  not  very  many  natural  resources,  Finland  has  always  been 
dependent on foreign trade for its economic development and welfare. This fact is so obvious that it 
was understood quite early, and as a consequence the economic policy of the country has traditionally 
been export-oriented, and very eager to develop economic linkages with international markets, to the 
extent political realities have allowed.  
Finland's early efforts to develop its economic links with Western European countries were exemplified 
by the creation of the Finnish monetary system and its integration with the countries of Northern and 
Western  Europe  in  the  1860's.  The  aim  of  the  reform  was  to  replace  the  depreciating  rouble-
denominated  currency  of  the  time  with  stable  money,  convertible  to  metal.  A  new  currency,  the 
markka, was introduced in 1860, fixed to silver in 1865 and finally tied to the gold standard in 1878. 
The currency was made equal in value with the French franc.  
As a stable currency, the markka provided for decades favourable conditions for capital imports, the 
increase of foreign trade, financial development. It was also important politically, not least because of 
its significance as a national symbol. However, the basic motivation for the currency reform was not 
political (separatist) but instead economic (integrationist).  
After the 1860s, Finland embarked on the road of industrialisation by exploiting its forest sector, its 
hydropower potential and its rural labour reserve. A slow but persistent convergence of Finland's per 
capita output and standard of living with those of the other Western European countries started. The 
acceleration  of  GDP  growth  was  largely  based  on  expanding  exports  of  forest  products.  The  main 
market for exports was Western Europe, as before, even though consumption goods were exported to 
Russia.  
The interwar period, Finland started to catch up quite rapidly with the leading European economies, 
diversifying its economy in the process. On the eve of the Second World War the GDP per capita was 
about 60 per cent of that of England and almost 80 per cent of that of France. England was the main 
foreign trade partner of Finland in the 1920's and 1930's. In spite of the Great Depression, which was 
milder in Finland than in continental Europe, output growth in the interwar period was more rapid than 
before the war in all major sectors of the economy.  
After the Second World War, the new sensitive relationship with the Soviet Union and the policy of 
neutrality  in  the  Cold  War  prevented  Finland  from  accepting  Marshall  aid  or  considering  EEC 
membership.  Despite  these  political  constraints,  economically  Finland  was  already  in  the  1950s 
integrating  fast  with  the  West.  Although  the  trade  with  the  Soviet  Union  was  important,  it  never 
dominated Finland's foreign trade. About 70 per cent of foreign trade was directed to Western Europe.  
From the economic point of view, it was especially valuable that Finland was able to join the Western 
multilateral  organizations, such as  GATT,  the  IMF already  in  the  late  1940's  and  early  1950's.  This 
was a necessary prerequisite for participating in the Western multilateral trade regime and having a 
convertible  currency  –  which  was  achieved  in  1959.  In  order  to  promote  its  trade  and  commercial 
interests  further,  Finland  participated  also  in  the  West  European  trade  integration,  joining  the 
European Free Trade Association (Efta) as an associate member in 1961, and concluded a free trade 
agreement with the EEC in 1973.  
The  collapse  of  the  Soviet  Union  made  it  finally  possible  for  Finland  to  join  the  Western  European 
family. In 1990 it became apparent, that Sweden and Austria – which were also neutral Efta members 
–  were  aiming  for  full  membership  in  the  EC.  This  prompted  Finland  to  make  up  its  mind  about 
applying as well. [In order to prepare for the EC membership, the Finnish Government announced in 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 3
the autumn of 1990 that military articles in the Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance Treaty 
of 1947 between Finland and the Soviet Union had expired as a consequence of the re-unification of 
Germany.  
In  March  1992  Finland's  application  of  the  EC  membership  was  submitted  to  the  Commission. 
Accession negotiations were concluded in 1994. After a referendum, in which a clear majority, 57 per 
cent of the voters, voted for the membership, Finland became a member of the European Union as 
from the beginning of 1995, simultaneously with Sweden and Austria.  
After the extremely traumatizing experience of financial instability in the beginning of the 1990’s, with 
its currency and banking crisis, the Finns put great value on monetary stability. It was therefore logical 
that Finland joined the euro area in 1999, in the first group of countries to do so. Membership in the 
euro area has naturally facilitated the further internationalization of the economy and opened deeper 
financial  markets  for  the  benefit  of  Finnish  firms  and  institutional  investors.  It  has  also  provided  a 
degree of monetary stability unprecedented in the history of the country, certainly important for sound 
investment decisions and improvement of productivity.  
The Eastern dimension  
(3)  
As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  Finland  geographic  position,  next  to  Russia,  has  influenced  its 
economic  and  political  history  in  many  ways.  For  the  Finnish  economy,  Russia  has  been  both  a 
challenge and an opportunity. Already in the late 19th and early 20th century, easy access to Russian 
markets  accelerated  economic  growth  in  Finland.  Because  of  geographical  proximity,  the  Finnish 
economy has been influenced by the ups and down of that huge market ever since.  
After the Russian revolution, and Finnish independence, trade all but stopped, but after the Second 
World War, the economic linkages again became significant. Finland had to pay war reparations to the 
Soviet Union. These were to be paid mostly in the form of products of engineering and shipbuilding 
industries, in effect forcing the development of this sector. Until then, Finland's exports had consisted 
largely  of  the  products  of  the  wood-processing  industry.  However,  when  reparations  ended,  in  the 
early 1950’s, Finland had an engineering industry the products of which were much in demand in the 
Soviet Union, willing to pay for these products mainly with energy and other raw materials.  
The  Finnish-Soviet  trade  was  carried  out  in  barter  terms,  with  a  bilateral  clearing  arrangement. 
Engineering  products  remained  important  in  Finland's  export  to  the  Soviet  Union,  but  in  the  1970s 
Finland also carried out large construction projects in the Soviet Union. In the 1980s more than half of 
the export to the Soviet Union consisted of consumption goods. The bulk – about 80 per cent – of 
imports from the Soviet Union was crude oil. The barter arrangement facilitated Finland's adjustment 
to the oil shocks of the 1970's and the early 1980's, because the increased oil bill could be paid for 
with Finnish industrial products. However, the barter arrangement also made some Finnish industries 
very vulnerable to the fate of the Soviet economy. In 1991, the Soviet system was no more, the barter 
trade had suddenly disappeared, and the trade relationship with Russia had to be rebuilt almost from 
scratch.  
In  the  early  1990s,  after  the  collapse  of  the  Soviet  trade,  Finland  encountered  a  severe  economic 
crisis, with GDP declining by some 15 per cent in only two years' time. This was followed by a fast 
recovery, and by the year 2000, Finland's output per capita has again exceeded the average level of 
EU-15.  
Now, Russia emerging as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, Finland's Russian trade 
is booming again and Russia is, once more, one of our biggest trade partners. In addition to producing 
a  variety  of  goods  of  the  Russian  market,  Finland  has  also  become  a  significant  channel  of  transit 
trade for Russian imports. This has been facilitated by our excellent port and transportation facilities 
close to the Russian border.  
Investment in human capital and educated labour force 
(4)  
Entering  a  phase  of  innovation-driven  development  has  presupposed  the  interplay  of  several 
fundamental  factors,  including  an  efficient  education  system,  a  consistent  and  predictable  policy 
environment, and a sound basic infrastructure. Most of these preconditions were in place before the 
1990s.  
Generally speaking, the development of the educational system in Finland since the early 19th century 
has involved three processes: expansion, increase, and integration. Over the decades, the increasing 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2007
emphasis on education has been variously motivated by values such as nationalism, social equality, 
and economic growth.  
Equality of opportunity regardless of gender, region, and socioeconomic background are fundamental 
values in the Finnish basic education system. All basic education, as well as most of higher education, 
is publicly financed, and free of charge to the student. The ideal of educating and training everyone 
regardless of his or her social status was already evident already in the very early developments of an 
education system in Finland.  
Mobilisation  of  human  resources  and  equality  in  opportunity  to  pursue  higher  education  after  the 
compulsory  basic  education  were  further  much  improved  in  the  1970s,  not  least  through  a  gradual 
implementation of the comprehensive school system, the regional expansion of the university system, 
and the introduction of a financial aid system for students. The system is now integrated in such a way 
that  the  option  of  higher  education,  even  at  the  university  level,  is  open  also  for  graduates  from 
vocational schools.  
The efficiency of the Finnish basic schooling system has been reflected in the OECD's Programme for 
International Student Assessments (the PISA study), which measures the knowledge and skills of 15-
year-old students. In the last assessment in 2003, Finland kept its top position in reading, but was now 
on  top  also  in  sciences  and  second  after  Hong  Kong  in  mathematics.  Finland's  performance  in  the 
PISA ratings has often been referred to as an example showing that it is possible to succeed both in 
terms of quality of results and equality of opportunities in learning.  
As regards higher education, Finland has recently been doing rather well, although only a generation 
ago the number of university students was not especially large. Now, however, the share of working 
age population with higher education is higher in Finland than in other EU member states, with the 
exception of Ireland, even though not as high as in the US. In 2000, 32%, of the total workforce in 
Finland had achieved tertiary education, while for the EU15, the average was 24%. Today, about 45% 
of each age cohort go to university. The share of women is especially high.  
An educated labour force has fostered innovation and increased the innovation absorption capacity. 
Also,  the  growing  supply  of  science  and  technology  graduates  has  helped  to  keep  the  salaries  of 
researchers  and  engineers  working  in  the  ITC  cluster  moderate,  in  spite  of  the  strong  increase  in 
demand. At the same time, estimates indicate that the return on investment in education has remained 
high, implying that the demand for educated labour has kept pace with the rapid increase in supply.  
Investment in research and development  
(5) 
A very important feature of the Finnish “miracle” of the 1990’s and thereafter has been the spectacular 
rise  of  the  ICT  industry,  especially  mobile  telephony.  The  large  share  of  the  ICT  sector  in  Finnish 
exports  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  explains  an  important  part  of  the  country’s  rapid  productivity 
growth since the 1990s. The rise of the Finnish ICT sector has attracted a lot of attention from many 
countries and governments which would like to enjoy a similar positive transformation.  
An  important  milestone  in  the  rise  of  the  ICT  cluster  was  the  early  liberalisation  of  the 
telecommunication sector in Finland, which heightened competition, drove prices down, and led to the 
growth  of  mass  markets  for  wireless  communication,  providing  a  test  laboratory  for  the  equipment 
industry. Standardisation among the Nordic countries, in particular the common Nordic NMT standard 
of mobile telephony, gave an early start for the internationalisation of the mobile telecommunication 
industry. The later GSM standard was a result of a European research and standardisation effort, and 
opening  of  the  telecom  market  in  Europe  gave  access  to  new  entrants  in  telecom  services.  As  a 
consequence, integrated and technologically advanced mass market for wireless communication was 
created in the whole of Europe. As early starters, the Nordic telecom equipment manufacturers were 
well positioned to respond to the growing demand.  
A  necessary  condition  for  success  is  that  there  has  been  in  Finland,  at  least  since  the  1980s,  a 
consistent  commitment  by  decision  makers,  private  and  public,  to  foster  an  innovation-driven 
economy. Successive governments have invested in a lot research and development. As a result, the 
total  research  and  development  expenditure  in  Finland  is  3.5%  of  GDP,  highest  in  Europe  after 
Sweden,  and  higher  than  in  the  United  States.  The  government  has  contributed  a  third  of  the  total 
while private sector has answered for two thirds of the Finnish R&D outlays. An important part of the 
research has focused on the ICT. Public agencies, foundations and universities have promoted open 
R&D cooperation with private companies. Finland and the Finnish companies have also been active 
participants in EU research programs.  
BIS Review 39/2007 
 5
The ICT sector is not the only one to improve its productivity in a big way, however. Banking is another 
industry worth of attention. It is actually a lesson on the connection of competition with productivity. 
Finland had a major banking crisis in the early 1990’s followed by an almost complete restructuring of 
the sector. The number of the bank employees and branches was reduced to a half in the process. 
Due to competitive pressure the banks had to change their business models. The banks had invested 
a  lot  in  information  systems,  ATMs  and  telephone-based  services  already  before  the  crisis.  In  the 
more competitive 1990’s, the earlier IT investments were put in efficient use while new Internet-based 
services  took  off  as  well.  The  productivity  of  the  banking  sector  accelerated  and  contributed  in  a 
significant way to the remarkable Finnish growth performance of the last decade and a half.  
Sound public finances and a strong current account  
(6 )  
The Finnish fiscal policy tradition displays an aversion to deficits. For instance, a key ingredient of the 
growth  policies  of  the  1950’s  and  the  1960’s  was  that  the  government  sector  was  a  big  saver  and 
generally in surplus. The funds generated by government saving were then used for structural policy 
purposes,  such  as  financing  of  infrastructure  projects,  or  to  recapitalise  government  owned  basic 
industries, or for lending to private companies. There is an interesting parallel with the growth policies 
followed by some East Asian NICs some decades later.  
By  the  1980's,  government-led  industrialization  gave  way  to  a  more  market-oriented  approach. 
However,  the  policy  of  sound  public  finances  was  clearly  evident.  Unlike  many  OECD  countries, 
Finland weathered the oil crises and the stagflation period of the 1970's and the early 1980s without 
accumulating a large government debt burden. The situation was shaken only by the economic crisis 
of the early 1990's, when large deficits suddenly emerged. However, these were corrected in by large 
expenditure cuts (cumulatively about 8 per cent of GDP in 1991–1999) and by limited tax increases. 
By 1998, the general government sector was again in surplus.  
In recent years, fiscal policy has been effectively based on explicit policy rules such as spending limits 
covering the whole electoral term. As a result of prudent fiscal policies, the general government sector 
has been in surplus for more than a decade. The surplus ratio is at the level of 2-3% and is expected 
to remain so. The Stability and Growth Pact of the EU has not played a large role as an argument in 
the Finnish fiscal policy debate. The surpluses have been motivated more by the need to provide for 
the ageing of the population and the anticipated growth of pension expenditures.  
Parallel to government surpluses, the Finnish current account has also posted large surpluses since 
1994.  The  emergence  of  current  account  surpluses  is  a  marked  difference  with  the  past.  Besides 
competitive open sector and strong growth of exports, the persistent current account surpluses reflect 
a decline in the investment ratio after the crisis of the early 1990s. The corporate sector has adopted a 
more  cautious  investment  policy,  reducing  its  debt  exposure  and  increasing  its  capital  buffers. 
Productivity of investment seems to have increased significantly as well.  
Another conspicuous part of the balance-of-payments developments of the last years has been the 
unprecedented growth of both inward and outward portfolio investment ever since Finland joined the 
EMU. As a consequence of international diversification of investors' portfolios, non-residents' holdings 
of shares in the Finnish Stock Exchange rose to over 70% of the total market capitalisation already in 
2000. This greatly reduced the exposure of the Finnish economy to the ICT asset price bubble at the 
turn of the century, as much of the risks were born by foreign investors.  
Established social dialogue  
(7) 
Finland  is  one  of  the  countries  where  institutionalized  social  dialogue  between  labour  unions, 
employers’ organizations, and the government has a major role. This dates back to the late 60’s and 
70’s when the Finnish labour market was quite restless because of political fighting between Social 
Democrats and Communists over the control of the unions. Also, better control of inflationary wage 
claims was seen as vital because of the recurrent balance of payments and competitiveness problems 
of the Finnish economy at the time. The incomes policy framework instituted in those days has proved 
quite durable, and in the recent decades has made the Finnish labour markets highly organized and 
consensus-oriented.  
Nation-wide collective wage agreements have been rather the rule than an exception and they play a 
relatively prominent role in shaping the relationship between employee and employer. The agreements 
have contributed to relatively moderate wage increases and low inflation while also compressing wage 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2007
differentials. In return to wage moderation, the unions have been guaranteed a voice in the formulation 
of social policy and labour market legislation.  
Established social dialogue has actually been helpful in the implementation of some reforms. Recently 
a  major  pension  reform  was  agreed  between  employees,  employers  and  the  government.  In  the 
reform,  which  has  already  been  implemented,  two  early-retirement  schemes  were  abolished.  There 
will be a longevity coefficient linking pensions to life expectancy, and benefits will be calculated on the 
basis of the whole lifetime income and not the last working years only, as earlier. The system is closer 
to being actuarially fair than before. This has improved the sustainability of the pensions system, and 
strengthened incentives to work, but challenges still remain.  
The  challenge  for  the  future  is  how  to  retain  wage  moderation  while  taking  productivity  differences 
between  industries  and  firms  into  account.  Even  the  unions  increasingly  recognize  that  work  is 
becoming more abstract and knowledge-based, and that today’s global market often forces very rapid 
changes on firms. It seems that a widely shared view in the labour markets now is that the collective 
agreements need to become more flexible and allow more scope for local, firm-level negotiations.  
Capacity to act  
(8) 
At a fundamental level, the economic and also social success of societies depends on their ability to 
adapt to and take advantage of changing circumstances. If anything, the importance of flexibility has 
only increased in the last years. It is generally acknowledged, almost a cliché, that today's world of 
globalization requires of societies a degree of adaptability which is a big challenge for any society to 
achieve.  
For  various  reasons,  the  Finnish  political  system  has,  in  the  recent  years,  been  able  to  respond  to 
emerging challenges in a surprisingly smooth way. One reason for this may be the hard lesson which 
the country learned during the economic crisis of the 1990's. The crisis proved that it is much better to 
face  up  with  realities  and  act  in  a  timely  manner  than  to  try  to  live  in  denial  of  unpleasant  facts. 
Another reason may be the Finnish culture of consensus-based politics, which includes also the labour 
unions for instance.  
An example of how this has worked in Finland is the country's nuclear energy policy. The country has 
made rather tough commitments in terms of CO2 emissions in the context of the Kyoto protocol. The 
use  of  fossil  fuels  must  be  strictly  limited  in  the  future.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Finnish  economy  is 
relatively  energy  intensive,  because  of  the  climate,  and  economic  growth  puts  creates  pressure  for 
energy production.  
In this situation, increasing the nuclear power capacity emerged as a sensible and indeed necessary 
part of the solution. There was an intensive public debate of our energy policy, and in the spring 2002 
the Government took a positive stand on adding another reactor in Finland's nuclear power capacity. 
The decision was submitted to the parliament which approved the project after a tight vote. However, 
the  public  opinion  has  respected  the  leadership  shown  by  the  government  and  has  subsequently 
become more favourable. Recently increased awareness of the risks of adverse global climate change 
has only increased the popular approval of the chosen course.  
Risks and policy challenges 
I have mentioned a number of success factors which I believe have been instrumental for Finland's 
good economic performance. However, past performance as such is no guarantee for future success 
and  there  is  no  reason  for  complacency.  There  are  significant  risks  and  policy  challenges  in  the 
horizon for the Finnish economy. I will mention just two of them.  
One important concern is the terms of trade, which, in recent years, have deteriorated and have been 
predicted to continue to do so. This phenomenon has to do with the structure of the Finnish exports. 
The  prices  for  ICT  products  are  generally  falling,  globally,  due  to  technology  developments  and 
competition from low-cost countries. Also the price developments in the forest sector have been rather 
weak.  
The result of the secular decrease of the Finnish terms of trade is that a very large part of the fruits of 
increasing productivity is actually transferred abroad, to the buyers of our products. Year by year, they 
get the products at lower relative prices than previously. This means that our real national income, in 
terms of goods which we import, tends to rise by less than our GDP and productivity statistics would 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 7
indicate. Politicians and labour market partners in Finland must realise that, because of the structure 
of  our  exports,  we  cannot  increase  our  costs  and  our  expenditure  as  fast  as  our  economy  grows, 
measured by the GDP.  
One way to react to this challenge is to try to keep ahead in the global productivity race, something 
which  the  Finnish  export  companies  have  been  quite  successful  so  far.  Continuous  productivity 
improvements are necessary, but not sufficient in the long term. Quantitative improvements must be 
complemented  by  qualitative  change  as  well,  adding  more  value  into  our  exports.  Instead  of  just 
producing more and more, Finland must change the composition of its export basket to include more 
and more sophisticated goods and services. The past record of Finnish engineers in developing new 
and advanced products is actually very good, but the future seems to require even deeper change, 
emphasizing  the  creative  content  in  products,  business  solutions  and  marketing,  in  addition  to 
technical features in the narrow sense.  
Another crucial problem for Finland is the ageing of its population. This is due to the very strong baby-
boom  of  the  years  1945–1950.  Even  though  ageing  is  a  challenge  for  many  European  countries, 
Finland is now encountering the problems earlier than the other European nations. In just two years' 
time we are reaching the point when age cohorts leaving the labour force are bigger than the cohorts 
entering it.  
As  the  labour  force  is  starting  to  diminish,  maintaining  sustained  and  reasonably  strong  economic 
growth will be increasingly difficult. This underscores the necessity of paying a lot of attention to labour 
productivity: in the emerging area of a declining labour force, productivity increases are emerging as 
the  only  source  of  economic  growth.  One  way  to  spur  productivity  is  to  remove  obstacles  from 
effective  competition  in  the  services  sector,  for  instance.  The  adverse  change  of  our  population 
structure also requires that, in social and tax policy, as well as in education, incentives to work must be 
given high priority.  
The effects of an ageing population are felt on public finances as well. Expenditure on pensions and 
on the care of the elderly increases dramatically as the population gets older. As far as pensions are 
concerned, the Finnish economy is better prepared than most of our European partners, thanks to the 
accumulation  of  considerable  funds  even  in  the  mandatory  public  pension  system.  Also,  recent 
pension  reforms  have  gone  some  way  towards  reducing  future  pension  costs,  by  postponing  the 
average  retirement  age  and  by  certain  other  means.  But  despite  this,  the  costs  will  increase  very 
rapidly relative to the anticipated growth of the economy as a whole. At the same time, the room for 
financing extra expenditure by rising taxation is limited by concerns of not creating disincentives for 
work.  
The  only  possible  conclusion  is  that  we  must  improve  the  productivity  of  the  public  services,  and 
health  care  in  particular.  Currently,  many  issues  regarding  the  governance,  organization  and 
management  of  health  care  are  hotly  debated  in  Finland,  which  is  a  promising  sign  that  we  are 
beginning to understand the seriousness and urgency of this formidable challenge.  
8 
 BIS Review 39/2007
