Glenn Stevens: The Asian crisis – a retrospective 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank, 
Sydney, 18 July 2007. 
I thank Vanessa Rayner for assistance in preparing this address. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Reserve 
Bank of Australia’s website.  
 Thank you all for coming out today to support the Anika Foundation.1 Since a similar function 
last year the Foundation has continued to build up its capital, and this year will be making its 
first  grants  by  way  of  scholarships,  called  the  Anika  Foundation  Depression  Awareness 
Scholarships,  as  a  part  of  the  NSW Premier’s  Teachers  Scholarship  Program.  These  will 
enable  teachers  and  counsellors  in  our  schools  to  travel,  study  responses  to  adolescent 
depression  in  other  countries  and  return  to  NSW  to  raise  awareness  and  improve 
responsiveness to depression among school students. Your interest in being here today will 
help  us  to  build  further  over  the  coming  year,  when  we  hope  to  expand  this  same  sort  of 
scholarship  to  other  Australian  states.2  In  time,  funding  permitting,  we  would  also  like  to 
establish a PhD-level research scholarship in the field of adolescent depression.  
Thank you also to Macquarie Bank for providing the venue and food for today’s event, and to 
the Australian Business Economists for their logistical and advertising support. 
Ten years ago this month, the Thai baht was allowed to float. It promptly fell very sharply. 
There were danger signs before then, but if we were looking for one event that marked the 
start  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  this  would  be  it.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  the  crisis  had 
engulfed  Thailand,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia  and  the  Philippines,  countries  with  a 
combined population of around 400 million. It had very pronounced effects on neighbouring 
countries  like  Singapore,  serious  financial  contagion  effects  on  Hong  Kong,  and  had  a 
discernible impact on the global economy. 
More  fundamentally,  perhaps,  the  crisis  brought  to  an  end  a  period  of  extraordinary 
economic growth in Asia, and seriously deflated optimism about future growth. It has proven 
very difficult to recapture that sense of optimism. While that earlier ebullience may, of course, 
have been overdone, the scars of the crisis remain fresh in some respects even a decade 
later.  
                                                 
1   The  Anika  Foundation  was  established  in  2005  to  raise  funds  for  the  purposes  of  supporting  research  into 
adolescent depression and suicide. For details, see http://www.anikafoundation.com. 
2   Further  details  about  the  scholarships  can  be  found  in  the  2007  NSW  Premier’s  Teachers  Scholarships 
handbook. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 1
Graph 1 
Selected Asian Exchange Rates Against US$
June 1997 = 100
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Korea
Philippines
Index
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Index
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
l
l
l
l
1989
l
l
1992
Source: Bloomberg; IMF
l
l
l
l
1995
l
l
l
1998
l
l
2001
l
l
l
2004
l
0
l
 
2007
 With  the  passage  of  time  it  is  of  some  value  to  re-visit  the  crisis,  to  ask  what  has  been 
learned,  what  steps  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  national,  regional  and  international 
arrangements against a recurrence, and what remains to be done. That is the task that I shall 
begin today, though it is probably too big a task to finish in one session. 
What happened? 
I start with the question: what happened? 
There are many detailed treatments available elsewhere of what occurred, and I cannot do 
full justice to the literature or to the events themselves, which were fairly complex.3 We must 
be  mindful,  too,  that  “Asia”  is  not  some  homogenous  mass,  but  a  group  of  countries  and 
economies that have considerable variety in their historical development and their approach 
to some economic policies. Nonetheless, I have to generalise for the sake of brevity. 
Asian economies grew rapidly through the mid 1990s. Average rates of GDP growth were 
between 7 and 10 per cent in most cases over the decade up to 1996. Rates of investment 
were high,  and current account positions in several cases showed substantial deficits. Put 
another,  and  more  illuminating,  way,  there  was  substantial  capital  inflow.  In  the  case  of 
Thailand, capital inflow amounted to about 10 per cent of GDP per year between 1990 and 
1996,  though  that  was  at  the  high end  of  the  range  in  the  region.  In  Indonesia’s case  the 
                                                
 
3   Some recent articles and speeches that reflect on the Asian crisis 10 years on include: “Ten Years After the 
Asian Crisis: What Have We Learned or Not Learned?”, Asian Economic Policy Review, 2, 2007, pp. 1-168; 
Geithner, T.  (2007),  “Reflections  on  the  Asian  Financial  Crises”,  remarks  at  the  Trends  in  Asian  Financial 
Sectors  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  20 June;  Kuroda, H.  (2007),  “Asia  is  Moving 
Forward:  Ten  Years  after  the  Crisis”,  speech  at  the  Asian  Development  Bank  International  Symposium, 
Mandaluyong City, 2 July. A large number of books covering the general topic of the Asian crisis were written 
shortly after the event. To name a few: Goldstein, M. (1998), The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Cures and 
Systemic Implications, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC; World Bank (1999), East Asia: 
The Road to Recovery, Oxford University Press, USA; Hunter, W.C., G.G. Kaufman, T.H. Krueger (eds), and 
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (1999),  The  Asian  Financial 
Crisis: Origins, Implications, and Solutions, Kluwer Academic Publishing, Dordrecht. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2007
corresponding figure was 3½ per cent. From an Australian viewpoint, that does not seem all 
that big, actually, but it had the Indonesian authorities concerned at the time.  
 
Table 1: East Asian GDP 
Average annual percentage growth 
1987-1996 
1997-1999 
2000-2006 
5.2 
7.1 
8.1 
9.5 
3.6 
9.2 
7.2 
9.5 
7.6 
-0.8 
-6.4 
1.0 
-0.8 
1.4 
2.8 
5.1 
-3.3 
0.0 
4.7 
4.9 
4.6 
4.7 
4.6 
4.6 
3.3 
5.1 
4.5 
 Hong Kong 
Indonesia 
Korea 
Malaysia 
Philippines 
Singapore 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
East Asia* 
*  Excluding China and Japan 
Source:  IMF, CEIC, RBA 
 
Capital  markets  in  the  region  were  underdeveloped,  so  the  capital  inflow  tended  to  be 
intermediated through the banking sector. Exchange rates were heavily managed, and the 
counterpart of the inflow was a large build-up in money and credit in the domestic financial 
sectors,  an  associated  inflation  of  asset  values  and  some  rise  in  prices  for  goods  and 
services. 
Foreign currency risks associated with these flows were large, and were being incurred by 
domestic  entities  rather  than  being  shared  around  the  global  markets.  In  many  instances, 
neither borrowers nor their bankers were managing these risks at all well, in part due to weak 
risk-management capacities and ineffective supervision and, in part, no doubt, because the 
exchange  rate  regimes  were  assumed –  wrongly  as  it  turned  out –  to  be  robust.  Foreign 
counterparties  also  seemed  insufficiently  attuned  to  the  likely  difficulties  that  could  be 
experienced by the Asian borrowers and financial institutions, and their own limited ability to 
exit collectively what were quite small markets in the event that things went wrong. 
Pressures  on  the  Thai  currency  began  late  in  1996,  with  early  signs  of  some  problems  in 
local lenders coinciding with a rise in the effective exchange rates (and hence a decline in 
competitiveness) of some Asian countries owing to the rise in the US dollar and a downturn 
in the semiconductor market, which had been an important source of growth. For a time the 
Thai authorities were able to resist these pressures but they had to give up by mid 1997, as 
foreign exchange reserves were exhausted. 
The baht was floated on 2 July. It fell by 13½ per cent that day and ended the month 23 per 
cent lower. Intense pressure quickly flowed to currencies of neighbouring countries. A period 
of stability following the announcement of the support program for Thailand in early August 
was short lived and by  early October the currencies of Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines 
and Indonesia were again under intense pressure. Attention then shifted to the economies of 
north  Asia,  which  up  until  then  had  been  only  lightly  affected.  There  was  tremendous 
pressure on the Hong Kong dollar peg, where overnight interest rates soared and the share 
market slumped. As corporate and banking problems intensified in Korea, foreign lenders cut 
back  credit  lines,  and  in  November  Korea  approached  the  IMF  for  assistance  in  meeting 
foreign  currency  obligations.  Political  and  economic  uncertainty  in  Indonesia  became 
extreme in the first half of 1998, and the rupiah lost 85 per cent of its value. Even today, the 
rupiah trades at a 75 per cent discount to its pre-crisis level. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 3
In  recent  years,  we  have  lived  in  an  environment  of  unusually  subdued  volatility  in 
international financial markets, so we tend to forget just how discontinuous price movements 
can  sometimes  be.  But  the  uncertainty  and  financial  skittishness  that  encompassed  the 
global economy in 1998 were pervasive.  
It was not confined to emerging markets either. By August 1998, we had the Russian default, 
followed by the LTCM crisis in September. Around that time, the US dollar/yen exchange rate 
moved 30 big figures in three months, and at one point nearly 15 per cent in one day. Now 
that’s  volatility!  One  observer  later  described  the  international  financial  system  in  the  late 
1990s as having endured perhaps its “greatest stress in the post-war period”.4  
In Asia, as the financial market prices adjusted, some of the underlying vulnerabilities came 
more clearly into focus. The unhedged foreign currency positions meant that the authorities 
in the crisis countries faced a huge dilemma: as the exchange rate fell, the borrowers or their 
bankers, or both, went under water owing to the valuation changes on the debts. But raising 
interest rates to support the currency damaged capacity to repay as well. 
It  was  this  financial  dimension  that  made  the  Asian  crisis  so  costly.  And  costly  it  certainly 
was. Per capita real GDP fell by about 9 per cent in east Asia excluding China and Japan. 
The fall in Indonesia was 15 per cent. On the best available figures, non-performing loans 
(NPLs)  reached  nearly  half  of  all  loans  in  Indonesian  and  Thai  banks,  and  NPL  ratios 
reached  double-digits  in  several  other  countries  in  the  region.5  The  process  of  sorting  out 
banking  problems  of  this  magnitude  required,  as  it  usually  does,  extensive  public  funding. 
The net fiscal costs of the banking crises are estimated to have been over 20 per cent of a 
year’s GDP in Korea, 35 per cent in Thailand and about 40 per cent in Indonesia.6  
We sometimes read that Asia quickly recovered. I am not so sure. In due course, recovery in 
Asia did take hold, but it was very slow in some cases. The pre-crisis peak in real per capita 
GDP was regained within two or three years in Korea, the Philippines, Singapore and Hong 
Kong.  But  that  achievement  took  five years  in  Thailand,  six years  in  Malaysia  and 
seven years in Indonesia. To put that in perspective, after the 1982 recession in the United 
States,  real  per  capita  GDP  took  about  two years  to  regain  its  previous  peak.  In  Australia 
after the 1990-91 recession, it took about three years. As I recall, those episodes were widely 
seen as serious.  
 
                                                 
4   See  McDonough, W.  (2001),”The  Role  of  Financial  Stability”,  address  at  the  XIII  International  Frankfurt 
Banking Evening, Frankfurt, May 2001. Available at http://www.bis.org/review/r010504a.pdf. 
5   World Bank (2007), East Asia and Pacific Update – 10 Years after the Crisis, April, p. 60. 
6  
IMF (2004), Indonesia: Selected Issues, IMF, Washington DC, p. 35. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2007
 Hong Kong 
Indonesia 
Korea 
Malaysia 
Philippines 
Singapore 
Thailand 
East Asia** 
Memo items: 
United States (1981/82)^ 
Australia (1990/91) 
Table 2: East Asian GDP per capita 
Change post-crisis* 
Per cent 
Years to recover 
-6.4 
-15.0 
-7.5 
-9.5 
-2.7 
-4.6 
-11.6 
-8.8 
 -3.8 
-3.8 
3 
7 
2 
6 
3 
2 
5 
3 
2 
3 
 *  Taiwan did not experience a contraction in GDP 
**  Excluding China and Japan 
^  Assumed to start in September quarter 1981, as per NBER dating committee 
Source:  IMF, CEIC, Thomson Financial, ABS, RBA 
 
Even accepting that the pre-crisis situation was unsustainable, it is clear that the cost of the 
Asian  crisis  was  enormous,  and  the  recovery  slow.  In  fact,  the  average  rate  of  per  capita 
GDP growth in east Asia post-crisis was a little more than half what had been seen in the 
decade up to 1996. 
What did we learn? 
We learned a good deal about the nature of crises from these events. This was a different 
sort of crisis from the ones that had often been seen in earlier periods. It was not a standard 
example  of  a  currency  crisis  resulting  from  lax  macroeconomic  policies,  in  which  large 
budget deficits (often funded from abroad), easy money, high inflation and so on lead to a 
loss of confidence in the policy regime and capital flight. In those cases, the standard remedy 
is mainly macroeconomic tightening to restore discipline and investor confidence.7  
In Asia, by contrast, fiscal and monetary policies had always been reasonably conservative. 
Inflation  rates  were  low  by  developing  country  standards,  budgets  were  reasonably 
controlled in most cases, and government debt levels were generally not excessive.8  
                                                 
7   Prior  to  the  Asian  crisis,  the  academic  literature  attempted  to  explain  currency  crises  as  a  result  of 
unsustainable  fiscal  policies  or  self-fulfilling  speculative  attacks.  As  the  Asian  crisis  was  not  able  to  be 
adequately explained under these models, a raft of new research emerged, and so called “third-generation” 
models were developed. For example, see Krugman, P. (1999), “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and 
Financial Crises”, International Tax and Public Finance, 6, pp. 459-72; Chang, R. and A. Velasco (2001), “A 
Model  of  Financial  Crises  in  Emerging  Markets”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  116,  pp. 489-517; 
Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2001), “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of 
Emerging Market Crises”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 48, pp. 513-548. 
8   Some have argued that in some respects the Mexican crisis was a precursor to the “new” type of crisis seen in 
Asia  (see  Ito, T.  (2007),  “The  Asian  Currency  Crisis  and  the  IMF”,  Asian  Economic  Policy  Review,  2, 
pp. 16-49.).  There  were  some  similarities  but  also  important  differences,  not  least  that  the  Mexican  crisis 
required  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt,  whereas  in  Asia  the  problem  was  private  debt.  Nonetheless,  Ito 
argues that important lessons that could have been drawn from the Mexican experience were not applied in 
the Asian crisis. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 5
Graph 2 
Crisis Countries* – Policy Indicators
%
3
0
-3
%
90
60
30
%
40
20
0
-20
Fiscal balance
Ratio to nominal GDP
Korea
Other crisis countries
Gross general government debt**
Ratio to nominal GDP
%
3
0
-3
%
90
60
30
Consumer prices
Year-ended percentage change
1995
1999
2003
%
40
20
0
-20
2007
1991
*
Includes Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and
Thailand
** Central government debt for Indonesia and Korea.
Data prior to 1996 unavailable
Sources: CEIC; IMF; Thomson Financial
  
At its heart, the Asian crisis was a banking crisis brought on by banks and their customers 
taking on too much foreign currency risk. No doubt macroeconomic policies were not always 
perfect, but the real problems were in the financial structure more than the macroeconomic 
settings. This is now well understood, but it was not fully appreciated at first by many outside 
observers, even though some Australian commentators, to their very great credit, understood 
it  very  quickly.9  A  period  of  learning  about  how  this  type  of  crisis  was  likely  to  unfold  and 
what needed to be done was inevitable, but it delayed recovery. Macroeconomic tightening 
was always going to be some part of the response, but far from sufficient on its own, and if 
carried  too  far  would  be  counterproductive.  General  structural  reform  of  the  economy’s 
supply side, moreover, however desirable from the point of view of raising long-run growth 
rates,  was  always  likely  to  play  little  role  in  the  immediate  recovery  from  a  crisis  of  this 
                                                 
9   The  early  and  clear  analyses  of  these  issues  by  Ian Macfarlane  and,  especially,  Stephen Grenville  were 
ahead  of  most  in  comprehending  the  situation.  See: ”Asia  and  the  Financial  Sector”,  December 1997; 
“The Changing Nature of Economic Crises”, December 1997; “Exchange Rates and Crises”, February 1998; 
“The Asian Situation: An Australian Perspective”, March 1998; and “The Asian Economic Crisis”, April 1998; 
“Some  Thoughts  on  Australia’s  Position  in  Light  of  Recent  Events  in  Asia”,  April  1998;  “Capital  Flows  and 
Crises”,  December  1998;  “Recent  International  Developments  in  Perspective”,  December  1998;  “The  Asian 
Crisis and Regional Co-operation”, speech at the International Seminar on East Asia Financial Crisis, Beijing, 
21 April 1998;  “The  Asian  Crisis,  Capital  Flows  and  the  International  Financial  Architecture”,  speech  to 
Monash University Law School Foundation, Melbourne, 21 May 1998. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2007
nature, in which demand collapsed. In fact, recovery depended on addressing the financial 
burden of the debts as directly and quickly as possible. 
The  biggest  problem  that  the  countries  of  Asia  had  was  that  they  had  not  developed  the 
financial infrastructure needed to provide resilience to swings in mood before becoming more 
open to flows of international capital. In drawing lessons, much discussion focused on the 
difficulty  of  maintaining  relatively  inflexible  exchange  rates  in  an  environment  of  relatively 
open capital accounts. While the early tendency to conclude that only corner solutions – hard 
pegs  or  unfettered  floating –  were  viable  has  softened  over  time,  I  think  most  observers 
would say that a degree of flexibility is needed, in most cases, to build resilience to swings in 
capital flows. 
But it was not just exchange rates that were the problem. The capacity of financial institutions 
and corporations to manage risk, and of the supervisors to enforce better management, were 
far  too  weak.  The  markets  required  to  manage  such  risks –  to  hedge  foreign  currency 
exposures, for example – were small or non-existent. More generally, capital markets were 
underdeveloped, especially local-currency denominated ones. Hence, not only were the risks 
concentrated in the banking system, but when the banks could no longer extend credit there 
was no other channel to make up the difference. 
As the countries concerned and the international community came to grasp these lessons, 
the nature of the debate changed. We began to hear much more discussion about “capital 
account” crises, and the proposed responses became much more nuanced. Hitherto seldom-
disputed  notions  about  the  optimality  of  rapid  opening  up  to  international  capital  flows 
became  more  widely  questioned.  Capital  controls –  anathema  in  the  world  of  the  early 
1990s – became respectable under certain circumstances. Much more focus was placed on 
developing  bank  supervision,  and  also  such  supporting  frameworks  as  bankruptcy  laws, 
corporate governance standards and so on. In international circles, there was considerable 
discussion about the need for some sort of international counterpart to domestic commercial 
bankruptcy procedures – “standstills”.  
The countries most affected by the crisis drew their own particular conclusions too. One was 
that while the international financial institutions might come to their assistance, there would 
be a lot of strings attached, and the assistance might prove to be neither timely nor sufficient. 
From this judgement, whether it was correct or not, about the international mutual insurance 
arrangements embodied in the IMF, two things followed. First, the countries of Asia decided 
to self-insure, by building larger foreign currency reserves. In the face of speculative attacks 
in future they would be better armed. Ironically, the IMF itself encouraged this reserve build-
up initially.  
BIS Review 82/2007 
 7
Graph 3 
 40
30
East Asian Foreign Reserves
Value and ratio to GDP
(cid:122)
(cid:122)
China (Ratio to GDP, LHS)
China (Value, RHS)
Other East Asia* (Ratio to GDP, LHS)
Other East Asia* (Value, RHS)
20
(cid:122)
10
0
(cid:122)
1992
* Excluding Japan
Sources: CEIC, IMF
(cid:122)
(cid:122)
1995
1998
2001
2004
US$b
1 200
(cid:122)
(cid:122)
900
600
300
0
2007
 Second, the countries of the region re-doubled their efforts towards building regional-support 
arrangements. There had been much discussion of this prior to the crisis, and some largely 
symbolic  arrangements  had  even  been  put  in  place.  But  after  the  crisis,  there  was  much 
more activity in this space. 
What then has been achieved in the area of strengthening the countries concerned and the 
international system since the crisis? 
What has been achieved in Asia since the crisis? 
At the risk of over-generalising, several common themes emerge at the national level. First, 
as  one  would  expect,  there  has  been  an  even  greater  emphasis  first  on  pursuit  of  sound 
macroeconomic  policies.  Of  some  note  is  that  in  several  countries  monetary  policy 
frameworks have moved towards inflation targeting. This is a natural progression when the 
exchange rate is no longer available as an anchor for policy. Thus far this framework has 
been operated with a fair degree of success. Fiscal positions in most countries have been 
improved, after a period post-crisis when some countries showed large deficits. 
Countries  in  the  region  have  also  done  a  lot  of  work  aimed  at  making  their  financial 
intermediaries stronger. The frameworks for dealing with impaired assets in the immediate 
aftermath  of  the  crisis  have,  together  with  the  economic  recovery,  resulted  in  a  gradual 
improvement in the shape of balance sheets of the core institutions, though more progress is 
needed yet in some countries. One World Bank report puts the average ratio of NPLs to total 
loans in the five initial crisis economies at 6 per cent in 2006 – still a high figure by industrial 
country standards, but down from close to 30 per cent in 1998.10 Foreign participation in local 
                                                 
10   World Bank (2007), East Asia and Pacific Update – 10 Years after the Crisis, April, p. 36. 
8 
 BIS Review 82/2007
financial  systems  has  increased  in  several  countries,  which  brings  both  capital  and 
expertise.11  
 Indonesia 
Korea 
Malaysia 
Philippines 
Thailand 
Table 3: Non-performing Loans 
Per cent of total loans 
At peak* 
48.6  (1998) 
13.6  (1999) 
11.5  (2001) 
17.3  (2001) 
45.0  (1998) 
2006 
6.1 
0.9 
4.8 
6.0 
8.1 
*  Year of peak in brackets 
Source:  World Bank 
 
Emphasis has been placed on beefing up bank supervision and fostering a stronger culture 
of risk management in the private sector. This is an area, however, where rapid progress is 
very  difficult,  and  several  countries  still  have  difficulty  meeting  the  relevant  international 
standards. Developing and maintaining a strong supervisory apparatus is a challenge in any 
country at any time, no less so in the Asian region. Countries have also pursued stronger 
requirements for disclosure, better accounting and auditing standards and so on. That said, 
progress  towards  improving  the  broader  regulatory  and  governance  arrangements  that 
condition the “investment environment” has, in the view of at least some commentators, been 
mixed, at best.12  
A  good  deal  of  work  has  also  been  done,  particularly  of  a  co-operative  nature  between 
countries, aimed at fostering deeper, more resilient capital markets. The Asian Bond Funds, 
initiated by the regional central banks, established cross-border mutual-fund type structures 
allowing  regional  investors  to  hold  obligations  issued  in  local  currency  by  regional 
governments  and  quasi-government  authorities.  The  ASEAN+3  group  has  encouraged  the 
issuance  of  local-currency  debt  by  the  multilateral  institutions.  The  development  of 
securitisation and credit guarantee markets in the Asian region has been promoted through a 
number of regional fora, and securitisation in east Asia has grown quite rapidly since 1999, 
particularly  in  Korea,  Hong  Kong  and  Malaysia.  These  sorts  of  initiatives  typically  involve 
trying  to  remove  the  various  small  impediments  that  individual  countries  have  (sometimes 
unintentionally) put in the way of investors, and progress towards the mutual recognition of 
regulatory  frameworks  in  differing  countries.  These  have  been  very  useful  examples  of 
practical co-operation – and of how much work is involved in giving practical effect to general 
ideas agreed to so easily in international meetings. 
More ambitious ideas for mutual support have also been pursued, of which the Chiang Mai 
Initiative (CMI) is probably the most concrete. CMI provides for the countries in the ASEAN+3 
group  a  series  of  bilateral  swap  lines,  with  the  amounts  committed  being  increased 
progressively.13  Recently,  an  in-principle  agreement  was  reached  to  make  the  lines 
multilateral rather than bilateral, which would presumably make for more efficient activation in 
a crisis. 
                                                 
11   Ghosh, S.R. (2006), East Asian Finance: The Road to Robust Markets, World Bank, Washington DC, p. 64. 
12   See Asian Development Bank (2007), “Ten Years After the Crisis: The Facts about Investment and Growth”, 
in Beyond the Crisis: Emerging Trends and Challenges, pp. 1-20. 
13   Currently, the CMI involves a network of 17 Bilateral Swap Arrangements, totalling US$83 billion. The swaps 
are all US-dollar based, except for swaps between Japan-China, Japan-Korea and China-Philippines, which 
are local-currency based. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 9
As a result of these developments, I imagine that today few countries in Asia would, if they 
got  into  trouble,  consider  an  early  approach  to  the  international  financial  institutions  for 
assistance. But  while  the  regional  initiatives  are  all  useful,  they  remain  to  be  tested  under 
less benign conditions in the global financial system. In fact, it is open to doubt whether they 
would  necessarily  prove  sufficient  as  a  defence  mechanism,  were  really  big  changes  in 
sentiment about the region to occur in international markets the way they did in 1997-98. If 
most countries in the region were under pressure at the same time, there would surely be 
questions as to whether regional counterparties could meet all the commitments for support. 
In  any  case,  few  financial  crises  are  confined  to  one  region:  even  those  that  start  with  a 
regional  focus  have  a  habit  of  spilling  over  quite  quickly,  as  events  after  the  Asian  crisis 
demonstrated.  So  while  everyone  has  an  interest  in  regional  crises  being  effectively  dealt 
with at the regional level, we surely still need global mechanisms for dealing with crises, and 
preventing them as far as possible. That prompts the obvious question: what has been done 
since the Asian crisis to improve the global arrangements? 
What has been done internationally since the crisis? 
A good deal of effort has gone into crisis prevention. There has been a step-up in national 
and regional-level surveillance by the international official bodies, and an emphasis on more 
timely and accurate data being made available by governments. A stronger focus on financial 
sector soundness is another key element, with a number of countries undergoing Financial 
Sector Assessment Programs, in conjunction with the IMF. 
These and other efforts represent serious attempts to use what was learned from the Asian 
and other crises to reduce susceptibility, or at least to get an early warning of regional level 
problems,  in  future.  But  as  useful  as  these  things  are,  no-one  could  say  that  they  will 
definitely  prevent  future  crises.  Hence,  crisis  management  arrangements  have  still  been 
given attention.  
One of the key elements is calming behaviour in capital markets once a crisis occurs. The 
private  sector  has  contributed  with  a  code  of  conduct,  known  as  the  Principles  for  Stable 
Capital  Flows  and  Fair  Debt  Restructuring  in  Emerging  Markets,  which  provides  a  flexible 
framework  for  co-operative  discussion  and  action  between  private-sector  creditors  and 
emerging  market  sovereign  debtors.  A  complementary  initiative  was  the  introduction  of 
Collective Action Clauses in emerging market bond contracts. This is intended to lessen the 
problem  of  getting  collective  action  when  a  debtor  needs  to  reschedule,  by  preventing 
minority  hold-outs  from  derailing  the  rescheduling.  The  use  of  such  clauses  is  now 
widespread.14,15
A  more  far-reaching  idea  is  that  of  stand-still  provisions.  This  is,  conceptually,  the 
international equivalent to bankruptcy proceedings, where, once a creditor cannot repay in 
full, there is a temporary cessation of all payments while an orderly process works out how 
much creditors can collectively expect to receive, rather than a disorderly and ultimately very 
costly rush to the exits. This idea found concrete expression in the proposed Sovereign Debt 
                                                 
14   According to the IMF, all sovereigns, except two, that have issued under New York law since May 2003 have 
included CACs in their bonds. In 2005, more than 95 per cent of new issues, in values terms, included CACs. 
See IMF (2006), Global Financial Stability Report, April, Chapter 1, p. 46. 
15   The  use  of  CACs  was  encouraged  by  advanced  countries  agreeing  to  put  such  clauses  in  their  own  bond 
contracts  so  as  to  remove  any  perception  of  stigma,  and  by  research,  including  some  done  at  the  RBA, 
showing that there was no discernible impact of including CACs on the cost of borrowing. See Gugiatti, M. and 
A. Richards  (2003),  “Do  Collective  Action  Clauses  Influence  Bond  Yields?  New  Evidence  from  Emerging 
Markets“, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper 2003-02. But it was the action of Mexico in 
unilaterally including CACs in their bond issues that did most to encourage others to move in this direction. 
10 
 BIS Review 82/2007
Restructuring  Mechanism  discussed  at  the  IMF,  but  did  not  attract  sufficient  support  from 
major countries and has not gone forward.16  
There has been some evolution in the architecture of international groupings over time. The 
formation of the G-20 had its genesis around the time of the Asian crisis. Its membership is 
more  representative  of  the  global  economy  and  financial  system  of  the  21st century,  as 
opposed to the mid-20th century, and it has become more prominent over recent years. In 
parallel, the G10 seems to be diminishing in importance. With no crises of any magnitude in 
the past few years, the G-20 has turned its attention to other matters, including issues on the 
structural side. We should hope, though, that the G-20 will retain a capacity to talk frankly 
about urgent issues in the highly informal but effective way it did at first, should some new 
crisis  erupt.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  was  another  creation  of  the  more  crisis-
prone era, and is a useful body for getting key officials together regularly to identify potential 
threats to global stability. 
But while these architectural changes are helpful, the G-20 remains a work in progress, and 
the FSF is a consultative group, not a decision-making one. The reality is that if there is to be 
collective  international  action  in  the  face  of  a  crisis,  international  financial  institutions,  with 
formal mandates and balance sheets, will remain very important. Focus on adapting the IMF 
to 21st century needs has intensified in recent years. Questions of governance have been to 
the  fore,  in  particular  relating  to  representation  and  voting  power  for  emerging  market 
countries.  A  small  but  significant  step  was  made  last  September  with  increased  quota 
allocated  to  four  important  emerging  market  countries  which  had  been  under-represented. 
The more laborious work of getting agreement on longer-run and more far-reaching changes 
is now under way and has some distance to travel.  
But  it  is  critically  important  too  that  resolution  of  the  questions  about  the  IMF’s  mandate – 
what we want it to do – accompanies the governance reform. It will not be sufficient for the 
emerging world simply to expect more say in how the international financial institutions are 
run, without being part of a clearer shared understanding of what the institutions are seeking 
to  achieve.  That  is  a  topic  for  another  speech,  but  suffice  it  to  say  that  constructive 
engagement  by  the  emerging  world,  and  especially  Asia,  in  finding  an  agreement  on 
mandate will be a key prerequisite for genuine progress. 
Asia’s future in the global financial system 
After all this, then, how would we sum up the way things have changed since July 1997? Is 
Asia, or the world, less vulnerable to a crisis than it was then, or not? 
Were we to ask policy-makers in the countries concerned, I am pretty sure they would say 
they remain acutely conscious of theirs being small countries in a world of large capital flows, 
with  the  attendant  possibility  of  being  overwhelmed  by  those  flows –  in  both  directions. 
Suspicion in the region of some of the larger players in international markets remains strong, 
as does the desire for regional co-operation in handling the financial ebbs and flows. 
That  said,  vulnerability  to  a  1997-style  crisis  must  have  been  reduced.  The  build-up  in 
reserves  means  that  speculative  outflows  could  now  be  handled  more  effectively. 
Furthermore, the fact that most exchange rates have some more flexibility now, even if they 
do not float completely freely, also means that the authorities would be in a much stronger 
position  because  they  can  allow  that  price  to  bear  some  of  the  adjustment  before  they 
intervene. The various regional initiatives have contributed to development of capital markets 
and  stronger  mutual-support  arrangements.  The  former  still  has  some  way  to  go  and  the 
latter have not been tested, but certainly progress has been made. 
                                                 
16   Some observers feel this issue still needs to be addressed. See Grenville, S. (2007), “Regional and Global 
Responses to the Asian Crisis”, Asian Economic Policy Review, 2, pp. 54-70. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 11
But maybe the question of whether Asia could withstand 1997 better if it occurred again is 
not the right question. A future crisis could be of quite a different nature. It is at least as likely 
to be truly global as to be regional, and just as likely to originate in the developed world as in 
the emerging world. A generalised re-assessment of risk would no doubt test the resilience of 
the countries of Asia, along with everywhere else. That being the case, it is in Asia’s interest 
that international efforts to manage risks more effectively on a global basis be continued. It 
would  also  be  important  therefore  for  Asia  to  be  sure  that  Asian  regionalism  does  not 
become  inward-looking.  Asia  has  mostly  benefited  from  engagement  with  the  global 
economy, and that will continue to be so. 
Another  question  is  whether  some  aspects  of  the  approaches  being  taken  to  avoid  1997 
recurring are themselves starting to become a problem. In particular, the build-up in reserves 
has gone a long way past what seems sufficient for self-insurance purposes, and has surely 
complicated monetary policy in some cases, not least in China. The associated capital flows 
are big enough, moreover, to have a significant effect on global markets and potentially to 
rebound  onto  the  Asian  region.  The  rising  size  of  sovereign  wealth  funds,  and  what  risk 
profile they will have, is also a question that is likely to be important to countries receiving the 
capital flows. 
For the Asian crisis countries, we should ask: is it optimal for so much saving to be funding 
investment in the developed world when the social return to investment at home surely ought 
to be higher? While investment prior to the crisis may have been unsustainably high, in some 
of  these  countries  it  is  now  arguably  too  low.17  Given  that  many  changes  over  the  past 
decade  have  been  implemented  to  try  and  improve  the  stability  of  the  region,  do  local 
investors still perceive the risks to be so great that they are unwilling to invest in their home 
countries? If so, why? Does that point to the need for further efforts at improving governance 
frameworks and regulatory environments, deepening capital markets and so on?  
                                                 
17   A  number  of  recent  studies  have  argued  that  investment  rates  in  East  Asia  are  currently  too  low.  See 
IMF (2007),  “Investment  Recovery  From  Financial  Crises:  A  View  from  Cross-Country  Experiences”,  in 
Thailand: Selected Issues, IMF Country Report No. 07/231, June, pp. 3-23; Asian Development Bank (2007), 
“Ten Years After the Crisis: The Facts about Investment and Growth”, in Beyond the Crisis: Emerging Trends 
and Challenges, pp. 1-20. The following paper includes a summary of other research on this topic: IMF (2006), 
“Asia’s Investment Decline”, in Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook, World Economic and Financial 
Surveys, Chapter 5, May, p. 35. 
12 
 BIS Review 82/2007
Graph 4 
 35
30
25
20
East Asia* – Saving and Investment
 Ratio to nominal GDP
Saving
Investment
1995
1993
1998
* Excluding China, Hong Kong and Japan
Source: World Bank
1996
2000
2003
2005
 35
30
25
20
 The reason to address these issues has something to do with avoiding crises in future, but it 
has more to do with improving Asian living standards. To see how relevant that is, moreover, 
we  need  only  look  at  the  sorts  of  per  capita  growth  rates  post-crisis  compared  with  the 
decade leading up to the crisis. They are much lower. The growth is not as easy to get as it 
once appeared, which puts the focus squarely back onto policy frameworks. 
Conclusion 
The Asian crisis was an extremely costly event for the countries concerned. The crisis is now 
a decade in the past, but those costs continue to be felt today in a number of countries. 
The crisis dramatically changed thinking in Asia, and around the world, about the nature of 
economic and financial crises, the policies appropriate to dealing with them, and the role of 
the  various  regional  and  global  bodies  charged  with  fostering  economic  and  financial 
stability. It is important that the passage of time, and the apparently benign environment we 
have  recently  enjoyed,  do  not  prevent  us  from  pressing  on  with  the  as  yet  uncompleted 
regional and global efforts to develop more resilience. Were we to slacken efforts there, we 
would surely come to regret it. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 13
