Njuguna Ndung’u: The Kenyan money market and other key 
developments in the financial sector 
Foreword message by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, for the 
Kenya  National  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Mombasa  Branch  Chronicle,  “Business  Financing 
Edition”, June 2007 issue. 
 I am honoured and privileged for the opportunity to share the Central Bank’s thoughts on the 
Kenyan  money  market  specifically  and  other  key  developments  in  the  financial  sector 
generally.  It  is  important  to  underscore  at  the  onset,  the  mandate  of  the  CBK  which  is 
principally  to  foster,  price,  monetary  and  financial  stability,  supervision  of  efficient  and 
effective payment, clearing and settlement systems. Currently the ambit of the Central Bank 
supervision  extends  to  commercial  banks,  mortgage  finance  companies  and  non  bank 
financial institutions licensed under the Banking Act. Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions 
are also expected to come under the purview of the CBK once the Microfinance Act, 2006 is 
operationalized by the Minister of Finance. 
Money markets play a key role in providing a channel for savings which can be mobilised to 
fund  productive  ventures  in  the  economy.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  there  are  positive 
linkages  between  mobilisation  of  savings,  channelling  them  to  productive  investments  and 
poverty reduction. This is important especially when poverty is caused by lack of access to 
credit and productive investment. 
The Banking Sector currently offers an array of products that can be considered as channels 
of deposits and savings. They range from savings accounts to fixed deposit accounts. They 
offer a return by way of periodic interest on amounts saved or on maturity for fixed deposits. 
There has however been public outcry on the returns received on these products which are 
considered  meagre  in  comparison  to  the  rates  charged  on  loans  and  also  the  charges  on 
these  products.  From  an  analytical  point  of  view,  most  of  these  products  have  negative 
returns  in  real  terms.  The  CBK  in  a  bid  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  these  products, 
embarked on publication of charges in the print media in 2003. This initiative was expected to 
reduce the charges on the products thus increasing their “net return” The publications which 
had been suspended in 2005 are being reviewed to sharpen their effectiveness in promoting 
market discipline. It is also noteworthy that the Banking Act was recently amended to restrict 
charges on savings accounts. 
In its role as fiscal agent of the government, the CBK also raises funds for the government 
through Treasury Bills and Bonds. These instruments offer a secure investment vehicle with 
the Bills being of a short term maturity of up to six months. Bonds are offered over longer 
tenors  of  up  to  15  years.  These  instruments  can  be  discounted  at  the  Central  Bank  and 
bonds are tradeable on the Nairobi Stock Exchange. 
It is also useful to highlight other critical investment products that fall under the purview of the 
Capital Markets Authority (CMA). Of particular interest are equity securities and unit trusts. 
The Nairobi Stock Exchange (NSE) offers equity (shares) and fixed income (debt) securities. 
There  are  over  50  companies  in  diverse  sectors  that  are currently  listed  on  the  NSE.  The 
shares  of  these  companies  provide  an  investment  opportunity  based  on  one’s  risk 
preferences and investment horizon. Recent Initial Public Offers (IPO) such as the Kengen 
one  have  elicited  substantial  interest  among  Kenyan  investors.  This  trend  is  expected  to 
continue  with  forthcoming  IPO’s  in  line  with  the  Government’s  ongoing  privatization 
programme.  On  the  fixed  income  segment,  the  NSE  offers  bonds,  commercial  paper  and 
notes that tend to target institutional investors. 
I regard Unit Trusts as a form of “collective investment scheme” that provide an opportunity 
for  small  investors  to  access  the  capital  markets.  They  involve  the  pooling  of  funds  from 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 1
various investors by market players licensed by the CMA. The pooled funds are invested in 
diverse investment vehicles primarily shares based on among other factors, the investors risk 
appetite  and  liquidity  preference.  The  returns  are  then  proportionately  shared  among  the 
investors. Unit Trusts particularly offer small investors the benefits of professional investment 
management, economies of scale and portfolio risk diversification. 
Turning  to  recent  significant  developments  in  the  financial  sector,  I  will  focus  on  Micro-
Finance  and  Credit  Reference  Bureaus.  Microfinance  involves  the  provision  of  diversified 
financial  services  and  products  to  the  un-banked  and  underserved  segments  of  the 
population by different financial service providers, mainly to the low-income households and 
micro  enterprises.  Microfinance  plays  a  vital  role  in  poverty  alleviation  in  empowering  the 
underserved and un-banked economically active and underprivileged social constituencies in 
contributing more effectively to wealth creation and economic development. 
The  recently  enacted  Microfinance  Act,  2006  provides  a  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework 
for  deposit-taking  microfinance  business  aimed  at  creating  an  enabling 
environment that will promote performance and sustainability of deposit-taking microfinance 
institutions, while at the same time protecting depositors’ interests. 
One of the key hindrances to access to financial services and products by the vast majority 
of the Kenyan populace engaged in the informal/small and medium enterprise sectors has 
been the lack of a “credit track history”. Further, this information asymmetry problem has also 
been a contributory factor to the high levels of non-performing loans in the Kenyan Banking 
Sector. It is in this regard that the CBK teamed up with the Kenya Bankers Association and 
other players to develop a credit information sharing mechanism. The mechanism will entail 
the licensing and oversight of Credit Reference Bureaus by the CBK. The Bureaus will act as 
depositories of credit information to be used by banks in their lending decisions. Regulations 
for the Bureaus are expected to be gazetted by the Minister of Finance in the second half of 
2007. One of the challenges facing us now is the presence of Pyramid Schemes that are not 
only fraudulent but also not known until one falls victim. Information asymmetry makes such 
a business thrive. Information provided by these bureaus will be long-term and sustainable 
solution and promote undeterred development in the financial sector. 
In  closing,  let  me  extend  my  thanks  once  again  to  the  Mombasa  Branch  of  the  Kenya 
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry for this opportunity. I wish the branch well in its 
endeavours to achieve its mandate of acting as a forum for business people to share their 
experiences and forge solutions that will create a conducive business environment. To the 
readers,  may  you  have  an  enjoyable  and  fruitful  read  and  direct  innovative  ideas  to  us  in 
CBK. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2007
