Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Promoting the safety and efficiency of the 
financial system – a steady commitment to reforms 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the International Conference on the Safety and Efficiency of 
the Financial System, Mandaluyong City, 27 August 2007. 
 UP  College  of  Business  Administration  Dean  Dr.  Erlinda  Echanis;  banking  and  finance 
educators  from  the  University  of  Limoges,  the  University  of  Poitiers  and  the  University  of 
Birmingham,  University  of  the  Philippines;  Prime  Minister  Virata;  other  distinguished 
members of the academe; colleagues from BSP, guests, ladies and gentlemen: A pleasant 
morning to all of you! 
I  am  deeply  honored  to  be  invited  to  this  conference  and  keynote  the  discussion  on  the 
theme, “The Safety and Efficiency of the Financial System.” But first, let me commend the 
conference  organizers  for  putting  together  this  event  that  touches  on  a  broad  spectrum  of 
issues  on  the  financial  system.  I  would  also  like  to  give  credit  to  the  team  of  university 
professors and researchers representing the four aforementioned universities who will walk 
us through the various topics covered in this conference. In fact, one of them happens to be 
a BSPer – Ms. Thea Josefina Natalia Santos.  
I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  presence  of  the  panel  of  experts  led  by  Bankers 
Association of the Philippines’ President Mr. Ramon Sy, UP Diliman Chancellor Dr. Sergio 
Cao and First Philippine Consultants, Inc. President Dr. Conchita Manabat all of whom will 
join us later in the session. I am certain we can look forward to a meaningful and engaging 
dialogue. 
The promotion of the safety and efficiency of the financial system forms part of our mandate 
at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  to  uphold  the  integrity  and  stability  of  banks  and  other 
financial institutions that we supervise. Admittedly, this is no simple task, particularly since 
we  have  to  contend  with  the  challenges  brought  about  by  globalization  which  has 
significantly  altered  the  course  of  the  international  financial  system.  To  respond  to  this 
challenge, we have intensified our structural reform efforts to ensure that banks and other 
financial institutions continue to operate safely and efficiently.  
It is this steady commitment to financial reforms that has helped contribute to a stable and 
resilient financial system. 
The banking system, in particular, has managed to perform creditably amidst a complex and 
rapidly changing environment. 
Performance of the banking system 
In  more  concrete  terms,  key  financial  indicators  as  of  end-June  2007  reflected  overall 
soundness of the banking system. 
• 
Bank resources sustained expansion, posting a growth of 8.6 percent to reach P4.9 
trillion from the end-June 2006 level of P4.5 trillion.  
Asset expansion was underpinned by increased deposit mobilization and buildup in 
capital. Deposit liabilities grew by 11.0 percent to P3.6 trillion. Capital accounts, on 
the other hand, grew by 11.6 percent.  
The  banking  system’s  capitalization  remained  more  than  adequate  relative  to 
international norms and the statutory floor. As of end-December 2006, the system’s 
capital adequacy ratio (CAR) stood at 16.9 percent on a solo basis and 18.1 percent 
  BIS Review 95/2007 
 1
   on  a  consolidated  basis.  These  ratios  are  well  above  the  BSP’s  10  percent 
regulatory floor and the international benchmark of 8 percent. 
The  banking  system  has  achieved  notable  gains  in  cleaning  up  their  bad  assets, 
helping bring down the NPL ratio to 5.7 percent as of end-June 2007 from its peak 
of around 18 percent at end-December 2001. For universal and commercial banks, 
the NPL ratio was recorded at 5.2 percent. This is much closer to the pre-crisis level 
of about 4.0 percent.  
With  a  healthier  balance  sheet,  banks  have  also  now  been  able  to  post  a  steady 
uptick in loan growth. As of end-June 2007, total loans, gross (exclusive of interbank 
loans)  stood  at  P2.0  trillion  (vs.  P1.9  trillion  at end-June  2006)  or  a  growth  of  5.1 
percent.  
Profitability  is  also  returning  to  the  banking  system.  Net  income  after  tax  (NIAT) 
increased  by  an  estimated  10.2  percent  for  the  first  six  months  of  2007  over  the 
same period last year. Annualized return on equity (ROE) and annualized return on 
assets  (ROA)  also  recovered  to  a  respectable  11.1  percent  and  1.3  percent, 
respectively. 
Notwithstanding its resilience and efficiency, the Philippine banking system cannot afford to 
be complacent and rely on these sound fundamentals alone if it is to continue to stand its 
ground amidst a challenging financial environment. It needs to sustain the path to reforms.  
Reforms and policy directions  
In  the  pursuit  of  these  objectives,  we  will  carry  on  with  our  work  in  the  following  areas: 
reinforce asset cleanup through asset disposition under the amended SPV Law; improve the 
risk management process through effective enforcement of risk-based supervision; promote 
better  governance  and  market  discipline;  and  establish  an  appropriate  capital  adequacy 
framework for banks.  
At this point, let me give you an overview of where we are now in the reform process and 
what still remains to be done. 
Ongoing asset cleanup 
The asset cleanup process remains a priority. Here, we expect banks to unload more bad 
assets under the amended SPV Law. 
The BSP has so far approved Certificates of Eligibility (COE) amounting to P31.7 billion SPV-
related transactions under phase II of the amended SPV Law. Combined with the P97 billion 
worth of NPAs disposed under Phase I, this brings the total amount of NPAs sold to roughly 
P128.7 billion. We expect this to reach up to P200 billion. 
fostering  a  strengthened  environment 
Full implementation of risk-based supervision 
We  are  also 
consolidated and risk-based supervision.  
To keep pace with the increasing sophistication and complexity of the financial environment, 
we have directed our policy thrust toward acceptable risk management practices that enable 
financial industry participants to better assess and manage risks without unduly hampering 
the ability to innovate.  
In effect, we have assumed a more liberal approach to bank supervision in the sense that we 
do  not  instruct  banks  to  avoid  risks  that  seem  too  high,  which  is  the  way  traditional  bank 
supervision is done. Instead, the approach being used is to favor assessment of the quality 
implementation  of 
through 
full 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2007
of  risk  management  practices  by  giving  banks  greater  flexibility  to  respond  to  changing 
opportunities  and  allowing  them  to  take  risks  so  long  as  they  demonstrate  the  ability  to 
manage and price for those risks.  
This  is  being  complemented  with  enhanced  regulations  on  risk  management  as  a  way  of 
developing appropriate standards suited to banks’ risk-taking activities. 
More  recently,  we  have  issued  general  guidelines  on  supervision  by  risk,  setting  forth  the 
broad expectations of the BSP with respect to the conduct of risk management by financial 
institutions under its jurisdiction. We followed this up with the issuance of specific guidelines 
on technology risk management, one of many envisaged to cover strategic areas, which is 
aimed at ensuring effective management of technology-related risk by financial institutions. 
We have since come up with specific guidelines on market risk management and liquidity risk 
management, which set forth BSP’s expectations on the management of these key risks by 
banks.  
Another  related  issuance  of  the  BSP  is  the  strengthening  of  the  prompt  corrective  action 
(PCA) framework. This was done to compel banks to take pre-emptive action against what 
may constitute as emerging threats to their financial viability and thereby, ensure that they 
continue to operate in a safe and sound manner. As part of the PCA framework, banks are 
guided  to  align  capital  with  actual  risk  exposures,  implement  business  improvement 
measures, and institute corporate governance reforms. 
Corporate governance and disclosure 
To complement the above initiatives, the BSP has also been keen on promoting a culture of 
good  corporate  governance  in  the  banking  system.  We  have  correspondingly  issued 
appropriate  regulations  anchored  on  effective  corporate  directorship,  sound  audit  and 
compliance systems, and enhanced disclosure in financial reporting. 
Shift to IFRS/IAS 
A  related  initiative  is  our  move  toward  the  adoption  of  prescribed  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) and International Accounting Standards (IAS) in 2005. This was 
a major step that we had to take in order to firmly establish meaningful and reliable standards 
for financial reporting in the banking system. 
With  the  implementation  of  the  Philippine  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (PFRS)  and  the 
Philippine Accounting Standards (PAS), we expect to derive benefits in terms of improving 
the  quality  of  financial  information  to  be  disclosed  to  market  participants.  This  should 
contribute to enhanced risk disclosure and better market discipline in the banking system. 
Risk-based capital adequacy framework  
In the time that we are building on these reform initiatives, we are simultaneously working on 
strengthening the risk-based capital adequacy framework.  
Essentially,  the  shift  to  risk-based  capital  adequacy  framework  is  much  more  than  the 
application  of  mechanical  risk  weighting  rules.  The  real  challenge  and  benefit  is  actually 
greater in motivating banks to more deeply understand their risk exposures, develop models 
to capture the essence of those risks, and, consequently, fine-tune their business models to 
manage  their  risks  to  maximize  value.  We  expect  our  domestic  banks  to  rise  to  this 
challenge, particularly now that we are implementing tougher standards under Basel II. 
What makes the new Basel II-based framework even more challenging is that it will not only 
focus on the computation of the appropriate level of capital given a certain level of exposure, 
but  will  also  underscore  the  need  for  more  market  disclosures  by  banks  on  their  risk 
exposures and management practices. The required disclosures to the public of bank capital 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 3
structure and risk exposures are aimed at promoting greater market discipline in line with the 
so-called Pillar 3 of the Basel II recommendations. This is a challenge that our banks must 
not underestimate. 
We are maintaining the prescribed minimum CAR of 10 percent. However, consistent with 
Basel II recommendations, we have begun implementing major methodological revisions to 
the  calculation  of  minimum  capital  that  universal  banks,  commercial  banks  and  their 
subsidiary  banks  and  quasi-banks  should  hold  against  actual  credit  risk  exposures.  This 
significantly  amends  BSP  Circular  No.  280  dated  29  March  2001  (for  banks)  and  BSP 
Circular No. 400 dated 1 September 2003 (for quasi-banks).  
Meanwhile, stand-alone thrift banks, rural banks and quasi-banks will continue to be covered 
for  now  by  existing  regulations  (i.e.,  Circular  Nos.  280  and  400)  insofar  as  credit  risk 
measurement  is  concerned.  However,  we  are  studying  enhancements  to  make  the 
applicable capital regulations more attuned to Basel II principles. Moreover, the guidelines for 
allocating  minimum  capital  to  cover  market  risk  (BSP  Circular  No.  360  dated  3  December 
2002)  have  also  been  amended  to  some  extent,  primarily  to  align  specific  market  risk 
charges on trading book assets with the revised credit risk exposure guidelines. 
A  completely  new  feature  is  the  introduction  of  capital  charge  for  operational  risk.  This 
reflects  recognition  of  the  potentially  significant  costs  emanating  from  this  critical  risk  area 
that actually encompasses all facets of bank operations. 
Complementary reform initiatives 
On other key fronts, we will also carry on with our task of fostering the development of our 
financial markets through support for various legislative measures, such as the enactment of 
the Credit Information System Act (CISA) that will be pivotal in helping establish a reliable 
and comprehensive credit information system in the country.  
We  will  also  continue  to  foster  the  creation  of  stronger  and  globally  competitive  financial 
institutions that can be an asset to the financial system. Lately, we have been witnessing a 
growing trend toward mergers and consolidations among domestic banks and we expect this 
to  further  hasten  in  the  next  two  years.  This  is  driven  in  part  by  the  increasing  market 
competition as a result of liberalization and the adoption of more stringent global standards. 
However, we are not discounting the role that smaller specialist banks play in the evolving 
financial landscape. Definitely, we need smaller specialist players that can more effectively 
cover important niche markets that have their own unique needs. Under this scenario, the 
smaller specialist players are able to complement the services offered by bigger banks. 
Simultaneous with the ongoing process of reform in the banking system, the BSP has also 
actively  engaged  in  initiatives  to  promote  a  deep  domestic  capital  market  that  will 
complement  the  presence  of  a  resilient  banking  system  by  having  an  alternative  pillar  to 
cushion  against  external  shocks.  We  have  pursued  cooperative  efforts  to  (1)  improve  the 
market  infrastructure,  particularly  the  establishment  of  the  FIE  to  promote  efficient  and 
transparent price discovery of debt securities, (2) enhance securities and payment settlement 
mechanism  to  achieve  DVP/PVP,  (3)  develop  securities  borrowing  and  lending  and  repo 
markets  to  deepen  GS  market,  (4)  develop  the  domestic  derivatives  market  especially  for 
interest rate, currency and credit products to support risk management, and redistribution of 
risk to those best able to bear them. 
Final note  
I  have  just  presented  to  you  the  essential  items  in  the  comprehensive  financial  reform 
package.  
4 
 BIS Review 95/2007
The  BSP  will  continue  to  take  a  proactive  role  in  the  pursuit  of  genuine  reforms  that  will 
reduce  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  in  these  complex  times  and  contribute  to  the 
overall financial health of the country. 
As  pillars  in  the  academe,  you  help  build  the  foundation  for  excellence  and  integrity.  I 
challenge  you  to  let  this  spirit  transcend  to  the  community  outside  your  own  sphere.  The 
academic  community  can  make  significant  contributions  in  this  area,  not  just  in  training 
(which  is  of  course  very  important)  but  also  in  research  and  mass  advocacy  to  broaden 
financial literacy. A key target for literacy are directors who serve in the boards of banks and 
other FIs. It is important that the culture of risk management be institutionalized at embraced 
at  the  corporate  governance  level.  This  means  going  beyond  regulatory  compliance  and 
willingly  embracing  risk  management  principles  as  a  value-creating  and  value-preserving 
undertaking just as important as earning profits. 
With  your  continuing  support  and  that  of  the  other  reform-minded  professionals  in  the 
industry,  we  can  collectively  address  the  most  fundamental  challenge  of  achieving  and 
maintaining a strong domestic financial system that can effectively respond to the demands 
of the times.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 5
