Bandid Nijathaworn: Global markets outlook 
Opening speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Global 
Markets  Outlook  Conference  Series  2007,  organised  by  Deutsche  Bank,  Bangkok, 
8 January 2007. 
 Thank you very much and good morning, 
First, let me thank Deutsche Bank for inviting me to give the opening remark this morning. Last 
year, I was also honoured with the same opportunity, so I am very pleased to be back doing this 
again this year, addressing this important conference. 
A lot of things have happened to both the global markets and to Thailand since the time we met last 
year. And compared to last year, to be speaking on the economy and the markets this year, I think, is 
much more challenging. At this time, although the mood in the markets is positive, I think considerable 
uncertainty still looms in the global economy to the extent that even the best of our analysts still do not 
seem to be coming to a common view on the key issues. For example, the pace of global slowdown 
and  how  much  further  would  the  US  dollar  need  to  adjust.  But,  this  is,  in  essence,  the  nature  of 
markets, and a variety of views will provide the markets with the needed latitude and balance for its 
continued  growth  and  stability.  So,  I  very  much  look  forward  to  today's  conference,  and  to  the 
presentation on some of these issues, as well as on this year's outlook. 
As for my part this morning, given the limitations of time, I want to share with you my thoughts on a 
few issues that I think will be important for the global economy and for Thailand this year. These are 
my own views on the global outlook and the implications for Thailand. 
First, the global economy. 
Conventional  market  view  at  this  time  is  for  the  global  economy  to  slow  somewhat  from  last  year, 
growing  at  about  4.9  percent  compared  to  a  growth  of  5.1  percent  last  year.  So,  as  the  numbers 
suggest, the current view is for a moderate slowdown, reflecting for the most part a slower pace of 
expansion  in  the  US.  This  is  essentially  a  soft-landing  scenario  in  the  sense  that  the  US  will 
experience only a moderation in growth without major adverse impact on asset prices.  
From  Thailand's  point  of  view,  the  slowing  of  global  growth  will  have  important  implications  for  our 
export  sector.  Exports,  particularly  last  year,  have  been  the  key  driver  of  Thailand's  performance. 
Therefore,  for  the  economy  to  continue  to  maintain  its  momentum,  it  is  important  that  we  see  in 
Thailand this year a stronger turnaround in domestic demand, especially in private sector investment. 
For  the  global  financial  markets,  I  think  three  important  implications  are  likely  to  emerge  from  this 
year's slower growth. 
First,  inflation  is  likely  to be  less  of  a policy concern  across  the major  economies compared  to  last 
year.  This  means  liquidity  should  continue  to  be  ample  as  monetary  policy  in  the  major  economies 
need to focus less on inflation. Ample global liquidity, therefore, will be a positive factor for financial 
markets this year. 
Second,  structurally,  the  US  dollar  may  need  to  stay  with  its  softening  tone  on  account  of  the 
moderated US growth and the possible narrowing of interest rate differentials that used to benefit the 
US dollar. This is a conjecture consistent with the current market's fundamental view. 
And third, because of ample liquidity, cross-border capital flows look to gain further momentum this 
year  as  international  investors  continue  to  search  for  yield  and  move  further  ahead  on  asset 
reallocation and diversification. 
This last implication is important for the region, because it will mean continued flows of capital into 
Asia,  putting  pressure  on  the  region's  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices.  Therefore,  managing  the 
macro  implications  of  persistent  capital  inflows,  as  well  as  the  risk  of  volatile  and  abrupt  capital 
outflows, will be, in my view, an important policy challenge this year. 
To me, the context underlying these implications relates very closely to the process of the unwinding 
of global imbalance. Such unwinding, as we know, requires a weaker path of the US dollar and higher 
US interest rates. A weaker US dollar is something that we have been seeing. As for interest rates, 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
going forward, it is not yet certain whether the US long rates would need to rise in order to facilitate the 
financing of the US current account deficit. This would depend essentially on the relative ease with 
which  the  US  deficit  can  be  financed.  So,  I  think  we  need  to  watch  these  developments  closely 
because financial markets can adjust much more rapidly than the real side of the economy. 
Turning to the Thai economy. 
Last  year,  the  economy  showed  considerable  resilience,  notwithstanding  many  adverse  shocks 
affecting  it,  especially  the  higher  oil  price  and  political  uncertainties  at  home.  Growth,  estimated  at 
about 5 percent last year by the market, is satisfactory while the second round effects of the oil price 
increase  on  inflation  were  well  contained.  Overall,  the  economy's  fundamentals  remain  sound  with 
economic stability intact. 
Last year, monetary policy in Thailand was focused on limiting the second round effects of the oil price 
increase on inflation. That focus I think was well met. Policy rate has been held steady from midyear 
last  year,  and  since  then,  inflation  pressure  looks  to  be  moderating.  Latest  data  show  a  further 
consolidation of inflation in December. So, under the current softening trend, baring no surprises on 
the oil price, there is also a possibility that, in Thailand too, inflation could be less of a policy concern 
this year. Under this scenario, therefore, there could be greater room for monetary policy to aim for a 
balance between growth and inflation. 
I noted earlier that, to ensure continued momentum of expansion, what we need to see in Thailand 
this year is a stronger turnaround in domestic demand, especially in private sector investment. This is, 
in a way, the most important must-have macro development for Thailand this year. 
Financial environment supporting private sector investment, I think, is very positive and conducive this 
year, with lower oil prices, easing domestic inflation, ample liquidity, and a more stable interest rate 
environment.  But  to  substantially  lift  investment,  what  we  need  to  see  in  Thailand  is  a  continued 
improvement in business sentiment and confidence. Here, therefore, lies an important issue for policy. 
On  this,  I  am  quite  confident  that  the  ongoing  efforts  by  the  Government  to  promote  growth  with 
stability will successfully lead to continued improvements in business sentiment and confidence, which 
will be positive for our investment going forward. 
I want to end my brief remarks this morning with a few year for our domestic banks and financial firms 
as they continue to support the economy while preparing for a number of important regulatory changes 
that are set to take place this year. 
Beginning this month, Basel II will be launched in the G7 economies. For Thailand, this means we will 
have less than two years to prepare for our own eventual adoption of Basel II, which has been slated 
for end 2008. At this time, most banks in Thailand have already decided on using the standardized 
approach  for  the  calculation  of  minimum  capital.  And  to  prepare  for  Basel  II,  we  will  be  asking  our 
banks to begin reporting their capital under the new standardized approach from the third quarter of 
this year onwards, in parallel with the usual calculation under Basel I. This, I think, will be an important 
exercise for our banks before we formally begin Basel II at the end of next year. 
This year will also see financial firms in Thailand adopting the IAS39 accounting rules for the valuation 
of collaterals, which will affect their loan provisioning. We will see the Bank of Thailand implementing 
consolidated supervision,  and  we will  see  the  whole  financial  system  going  through  a  formal  FSAP 
assessment with the IMF. All these will happen this year, and all these will be positive developments 
for our financial system. 
So, 2007 should be another active and positive year for the global markets and for Thailand. But given 
the  uncertainties  that  still  loom  in  the  global  markets,  I  think  maybe  we  should  move  to  meet  the 
optimism and the challenge of this year cautiously. But this is the words coming from a central bank, 
which  probably  and  usually  sounds  too  careful.  So,  I  guess  now  you  may  want  to  hear  something 
different from Michael Spencer and his team. So, on this note, let me end my brief remarks and wish 
you all a successful conference. 
Again I want to thank Deutsche Bank for the invitation, and a happy new year to all of you. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2007
