Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the meeting of 
the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 15 February 2007.  
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
 Introduction 
1  
The poet Rolf Jacobsen would have been 100 years old this year. He was particularly interested in 
geography. In an interview with Telemark Arbeiderblad in 1971, he stated that the Bible was a work of 
substantial  importance,  but  that  the  same  could  be  said  about  the  comprehensive  guide  to  public 
transport in Norway.14 In one of his geography poems, he writes:  
“When the sun is shining on China 
the stars are twinkling here. 
And the reverse. Asia is vast. 
Half the earth’s land mass 
[...]15  
Yes, Asia is vast. The rapid expansion in China and other Asian countries is of growing importance to 
Norway. These countries are a major source of cheap consumer goods and services and demand for 
our raw materials.  
                                                      
14   Ole  Karlsen  (editor)  (1993):  Frøkorn  av  ild  (Seeds  of  Fire).  Om  Rolf  Jacobsens  forfatterskap,  Landslaget  for 
norskundervisning, Cappelen Fakta. 
15   Source: From the poem ”Når solen skinner på kinesere” (When the sun is shining on China) in Rolf Jacobsen’s collection of 
poems ”Nattåpent”. Gyldendal Norsk Forlag A/S 1985. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 1
2  
Interest rates, inflation and the business cycle 
The Norwegian economy is now booming following the pronounced upswing since summer 2003. The 
upturn followed a period of slower growth as from 1998 and a mild recession in 2002 and into 2003. 
Even though there have been cyclical changes, growth has been very high over the past 15 years.  
Norway is one of the nations that has gained most from trade liberalisation and increased cross-border 
flows of capital, technology and labour. Norway has experienced the benefits of shifts in the division of 
labour across countries and regions.  
 First, Norway’s terms of trade have improved markedly. We can buy one and a half to two times the 
volume of imports for the price paid for our exports than was the case only 5-6 years ago. Prices for oil 
and gas, shipping, fish, industrial commodities and engineering products have increased considerably. 
Moreover, Norwegian importers have gained access to new markets in central Europe and Asia which 
offer considerably cheaper consumer goods. A similar situation has not been seen since World War I, 
when  earnings  in  the  shipping  industry  and  other  export  industries  were  exceptionally  high  for  a 
period.16  
                                                       
16   Tore  Jørgen  Hanisch,  Espen  Søilen,  Gunhild  Ecklund  (1999):  Norsk  økonomisk  politikk  i  det  20.  århundre  (Norwegian 
economic policy in the 20th century), HøyskoleForlaget, page 60. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2007
Second, the supply of foreign labour has increased markedly after EU enlargement in 2004. Over the 
past two years, these labour inflows have accounted for more than 30 per cent of growth in our labour 
force.  Norwegian  companies  have  also  been  able  to  be  considerably  bolder  in  undertaking  new 
assignments and investments knowing that they can procure labour throughout Europe. In addition to 
increased labour inflows from Poland, Lithuania and other central European countries, we have long 
benefited from inflows of labour from Sweden. Many workers are on temporary assignment and their 
consumption is primarily concentrated in their home country. The Norwegian economy has seen a net 
capacity increase.  
 Third, the Norwegian business sector has been quick to integrate information technology. This applies 
both to companies competing on international markets and those supplying goods and services to the 
domestic market. In comparison with other countries, it is particularly productivity gains in banks and 
other service sectors that stand out. Examples are automated processes and swifter payments in the 
financial industry and improved inventory and management systems in commerce and transport.  
In  Norway,  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  operational  target  is 
consumer price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per cent  over  time. We operate  a  flexible  inflation  targeting 
regime. Both variability in output and inflation are given weight in interest-rate setting.  
 BIS Review 15/2007 
 3
A  decline  in  import  prices,  ample  supply  of  labour  and  high  productivity  growth  have  boosted  the 
growth potential of the Norwegian economy and led to very low inflation. Against this background, it 
has been appropriate to stimulate demand for goods and services. We consider a normal real interest 
rate to be in the order 2½ to 3½ per cent. We have kept the interest rate markedly lower than that level 
since autumn 2003.  
 Since the economic recovery started, it has gradually broadened. Capacity utilisation is now at a very 
high level. There are reports of limited capacity in most industries and regions and labour shortages in 
almost every occupational category. There are shortages of drivers, pre-school teachers, supervisors, 
engineers,  carpenters,  architects,  auditors,  accountants,  IT  personnel  and  health  workers.  It  has 
probably not been since the 1970s that we find such widespread reports of purely physical production 
constraints, for example now in the form of shortages of rigs and other equipment in the petroleum 
industry or shortages of plank, concrete and insulation in the construction industry.  
 4 
 BIS Review 15/2007
 When we reduced the interest rate in 2003, demand and output rapidly picked up. However, it took a 
long  time  for  employment  to  rise  and  the  next  phase  from  a  pick-up  in  employment  to  a  fall  in 
unemployment was also long. But now the upturn has entered into a mature phase. As illustrated in 
the chart, capacity utilisation was higher than its normal level in 2006. Nevertheless, wage growth has 
thus far been moderate and inflation is clearly lower than the target of 2½ per cent.  
The decline in import prices, increased labour flows and higher productivity came into clear evidence 
when wage and price inflation fell markedly 3-4 years ago. A period of low real interest rates would 
nevertheless  have  been  appropriate  in  order  to  realise  the  added  growth  potential.  However,  after 
several  years  of  strong  growth,  resources  are  now  in  short  supply.  With  the  substantial  number  of 
businesses now facing capacity constraints, we can expect inflation to pick up. It is uncertain whether 
inflation will then rise quickly or only gradually near target.  
Strong  export  growth,  high  oil  investment  and  after  a  period  higher  growth  in  general  government 
demand have contributed to the upswing in production and employment. But the low level of interest 
rates  has  also  been  a  prominent  driving  force.  This  reflects  the  dynamics  inherent  in  interest-rate 
setting. Low interest rates have stimulated demand and production and should lead to higher inflation, 
to which we are now reacting by raising interest rates.  
Under inflation targeting, it is important to be mindful of the effects of higher interest rates on the krone 
exchange  rate  when  inflation  is  low.  Interest  rate  developments  in  other  countries  are  thus  of 
importance to interest rates in Norway.  
BIS Review 15/2007 
  5
Unemployment  has  declined  sharply  in  recent  quarters.  The  pace  of  decline  and  the  level  of 
unemployment are reminiscent of two earlier cyclical peaks, one in the mid-1980s and the one that 
began  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  and  continued  into  the  present  decade.  Both  booms  culminated  in 
sharply accelerating cost and wage inflation.  
Some  of  the  driving  forces  that  have  boosted  the  growth  potential  of  the  Norwegian  economy  and 
restrained inflation may diminish. Prices for imported goods are no longer decelerating at the same 
pace.  Labour  market  conditions  are  tightening  in  Sweden  and  Poland.  There  are  also  signs  that 
productivity growth in service sectors is slackening.  
We  are  now  seeing  the  first  signs  of  higher  wage  growth.  We  cannot  ignore  previous  episodes  of 
abrupt  shifts  in  wage  growth  during  boom  periods.  On  the  other  hand,  improved  labour  market 
adaptability and the supply of foreign labour may have a dampening impact. Unemployment may thus 
stabilise  at  a  lower  level  than  earlier.  Moreover,  the  social  partners’  experience  of  the  impact  of 
substantial wage increases on interest-rate setting may also restrain pay increases in the centralised 
settlements.  
Economic  policy  will  increasingly  have  to  reflect  the  capacity  constraints  facing  many  Norwegian 
enterprises.  
Given the high level of activity and the prospect of a pick-up in inflation, it is appropriate to increase 
the  policy  rate  from  today’s  level  of  3.75  per  cent.  We  envisage  a  gradual  interest  rate  increase 
towards a more normal level of a little more than 5 per cent. Economic developments are uncertain. 
The  uncertainty  surrounding  the  interest  rate  ahead  is  illustrated  by  the  shaded  area  in  the  chart, 
which is intended to capture the outcome with a 70 per cent probability.  
 6 
 BIS Review 15/2007
In Norway, inflation fell markedly from the end of the 1980s up to the mid-1990s and has subsequently 
been low and stable, with considerably less variability than earlier. Inflation has averaged around 2 per 
cent over the past 5-10 years, i.e. somewhat lower than the target. Thus, the growth potential of the 
Norwegian economy has been strong and higher than expected.  
 3  
Long-term interest rates, income growth and house prices 
Favourable economic developments in Norway have had an impact on developments in our property 
markets.  House  prices  have  risen  sharply  over  the  past  14  years.  Real  house  prices  have  almost 
trebled. This rise has been considerably stronger than earlier. Moreover, the rise in house prices has 
spanned  a  long  period.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  months  in  2003,  house  prices  have  risen 
continuously since 1992. This is the second longest period of rising real prices since 1819. Statistics 
for earlier years do not exist. House prices also rose in the 18 years between 1954 and 1972, albeit at 
a more moderate pace.  
 BIS Review 15/2007 
 7
Norway  is  not  the  only  country  where  house  prices  have  shown  a  strong  rise  over  a  long  period. 
House price inflation has been particularly high in Ireland and the Netherlands, but Denmark, the UK 
and  Spain  also  stand  out.  The  countries  where  house  price  inflation  has  been  high  are  the  same 
countries where economic growth has been strongest.  
 Since prices are rising in tandem in many countries, it is natural to look for common driving forces. 
With  increasing cross-border  flows  of  intermediate goods, capital  and  increasingly  so  labour,  prices 
will  largely  reflect  growth  and  competition  in  the  global  economy.  If  capital  or  labour  becomes  too 
expensive in one country, businesses can relocate production. Prices for fixed factors of production, 
such  as  property,  will  on  the  other  hand  reflect  income  developments  in  different  countries. 
Consequently,  the  rise  in  property  prices  will  tend  to  be  highest  in  those  countries  where  income 
growth is highest.  
 8 
 BIS Review 15/2007
 Norway is now reaping the considerable benefits brought by the strong expansion in Asian countries 
and  changes  in  the  international  division  of  labour.  Norway’s  GDP  is  increasing  sharply  and  this  is 
reflected  in  high  government  revenues  and  saving,  increased  household  purchasing  power  and 
buoyant earnings in the business sector. The rise in house prices is partly being driven by growth in 
household income. Moreover, this period of prosperity and government budget surpluses may have 
engendered  a  sense  of  security  which  is  also  affecting  household  saving  and  house  purchases.  It 
would  appear  that  household  saving  has  fallen  markedly  in  Norway  in  the  recent  past.  Saving  was 
probably negative in the latter half of 2006, which would be the first time saving has fallen since 1988. 
Housing investment for the household sector as whole is being fully debt-financed, i.e. an increase in 
net debt.  
 External  and  domestic  interest  rates  are  low  in  an  environment  of  solid  growth.  Long-term  interest 
rates have fallen sharply both in nominal and real terms since the beginning of the 1990s. Inflation has 
declined and contributed to a fall in nominal interest rates. A more stable inflation environment also 
results in lower real interest rates when investors become more certain about returns. Furthermore, it 
would appear that high saving in some parts of the world is pushing down long-term interest rates. 
Saving is high both in oil-producing countries, China and other Asian countries.  
Long-term interest rates in Norway largely shadow external interest rates because like other countries 
Norway  is  keeping  inflation  in  check.  Norwegian  households  primarily  finance  house  purchases  by 
means  of  floating-rate  loans.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  still  of  considerable  importance  because 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 9
they provide information about the future path of short-term interest rates that borrowers can expect 
over time.  
Unusually  low  short-term  interest  rates  have  probably  also  boosted  the  rate  of  increase  in  house 
prices in recent years, but this particular effect will be reversed when the interest rate is raised to a 
more  normal  level.  Developments  in  short-term  interest  rates  have  influenced  the  path  for  house 
prices  over  the  past  15  years,  but  periods  of  low  interest  rates  are  followed  by  periods  of  higher 
interest rates. Norges Bank’s policy rate is therefore of limited importance for house price inflation over 
a period of 15 to 20 years.  
 The housing stock in Norway, which numbers a good 2.2 million dwellings, shows little change from 
one year to the next. As a result, higher demand for housing will primarily translate into higher prices in 
the  short  term.  In  the  1990s,  housing  starts  in  Norway  were  fairly  low  in  relation  to  growth  in  the 
number of households. Moreover, population growth has been higher in recent years, largely reflecting 
a high level of immigration. In 2006, the population increased by more than 40 000 and the number of 
households by roughly 30 000.  
Furthermore, migration patterns in Norway follow the business cycle. Migration to densely populated 
areas is now rising. Demands for high standards and new building regulations have also pushed up 
housing construction costs and thereby house prices.  
10 
  BIS Review 15/2007
The rise in house prices has been accompanied by a sharp increase in household debt. In Norway, 
household debt is now almost twice the level of disposable income, and the debt to income ratio is the 
highest ever. It is higher than in Sweden and the UK, but lower than in Denmark and the Netherlands.  
Norway is among the countries with the highest share of owner-occupied dwellings, at around 80 per 
cent. This high proportion partly accounts for the high mortgage debt of households. In recent years, 
new loan products have also been launched, facilitating mortgage equity withdrawal. Housing wealth 
has become more liquid. Borrowers have greater scope for choosing repayment profiles. We cannot 
identify the exact level of household debt that can be sustained over time, but the rapid accumulation 
of debt increases household vulnerability.  
Housing investment has been profitable in recent years. Since 1992, the real rise in house prices has 
averaged 8 per cent, which is markedly higher than for the entire post-war period. At the same time, 
fluctuations in prices have been considerably smaller.  
 The main determinants of house price inflation have long been income, unemployment, interest rates 
and  residential  construction.  In  the  past  year,  however,  house  price  inflation  has  been  higher  than 
implied  by  these  factors.  A  large  share  of  the  increase  in  2006  cannot  be  explained  by  previous 
patterns.  Developments  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  may  have  engendered  expectations  that 
house  prices  will  only  continue  to  rise.  This  may  increase  house  purchases  for  pure  investment 
purposes  and  induce  younger  buyers  to  enter  the  housing  market  earlier  than  otherwise.  The 
pronounced fall in saving indicates that households are taking greater chances.  
 BIS Review 15/2007 
 11
The housing market may now be in a state of euphoria.  
 After a long period of rising house prices, it may therefore be of interest to look at periods of falling 
prices. Earlier periods of decline have not lasted very long. Generally, the increase has been stronger 
than  the  ensuing  fall.  There  are  nevertheless  examples  of  periods  where  house  prices  exhibited  a 
continuous fall of up to 50 per cent.  
Earlier periods of declining house prices probably do not provide a perfect guide. The two most well-
known  episodes  are  the  fall  in  house  prices  around  1990  and  the  housing  market  collapse  in 
Christiania (now Oslo) around 1900.  
The fall in house prices 15-20 years ago was probably ascribable to the very high real interest rates 
required to tame inflation and stabilise the exchange rate following two decades of very high inflation. 
This is not a challenge we are facing today.  
The period at the end of the 1890s, just prior to the housing market collapse in Christiania, has some 
features similar to today’s situation. It was a period of rising house prices, a housebuilding boom in 
Christiania, rising equity prices and rapid credit growth. At the same time, the level of prices for goods 
and  services  was  stable.  After  the  housing  market  crash  in  Christiania  in1899,  house  prices  fell  by 
more than 50 per cent over 5 years. The fall in house prices for the country as a whole was more 
moderate.  
Higher debt will become a mounting financial burden for many households and limit the willingness to 
pay in the housing market. Long-term interest rates are unusually low and will probably rise over a few 
years. Moreover, the current level of population and income growth is not sustainable. On balance, 
developments in these variables will eventually stem the rise in house prices and lead to a period of 
stagnating or declining prices.  
12 
 BIS Review 15/2007
4  
Modernisation of the economic system  
 The global economy has become increasingly integrated. Norway and the other Nordic countries are 
tackling  the  challenges.  Adaptability  in  the  business  sector,  the  willingness  to  integrate  new 
technology, a relatively efficient public sector, high growth, low inflation and moderate unemployment 
are  now  characteristic  features  of  our  region.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  the  Nordic  countries  have 
expanded at a faster pace than other European countries and almost as fast as the US economy.  
This was not the case only 20 years ago. Following strong economic growth in the post-war period, the 
Nordic  countries  lost  ground  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Growth  in  the  Nordic  region,  particularly  in 
Denmark  and  Sweden,  was  lower  than  in  other  European  countries  and  the  US  during  this  period. 
Finland recorded strong growth for a long period, but a poorly diversified industry structure made the 
country vulnerable. Oil brought growth to the Norwegian economy, but the first decades of the oil age 
were still marked by instability in the mainland economy.  
Solid growth in the Nordic countries in recent years has been underpinned by strong productivity gains 
in  most  of  these  countries.  Finland  and  Sweden  have  a  highly  developed  ICT  industry.  A  feature 
shared by the Nordic countries is the growing efficiency of service production.  
 BIS Review 15/2007 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review 15/2007
Economic  developments  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  were  unstable  both  in  the  Nordic  region  and  in 
Europe.  Inflation  was  very  high  and  variable,  but  was  tamed  in  the  1990s.  Falling  demand  and 
production resulted in high unemployment. For a long period, there was a tendency in both the Nordic 
region  and  elsewhere  in  Europe  for  unemployment  to  climb  to  higher  levels  in  each  cycle.  This 
tendency has been reversed in the Nordic countries, while unemployment still remains high in several 
European countries.  
During  the  1980s  and  1990s,  economic  policy  was  revised  in  all  the  Nordic  countries.  Denmark 
tightened government budgets as early as the 1980s. The other Nordic countries deregulated credit 
and housing markets, but this was followed by growth bubbles. At the same time, monetary policy was 
tightened in order to stabilise the exchange rate and rein in high inflation. This proved to be impossible 
without a sharp fall in the level of activity and employment, and high interest rates shook the financial 
system.  
Following the crises, the Nordic countries were not locked into a low growth trap. Many enterprises 
were closed. This freed up labour and other resources that could be channelled to new areas. The 
decline in itself provided fertile ground for innovation and entrepreneurship – we experienced creative 
destruction in the Nordic economies.  
An elaborate system of direct regulation of activities in the business sector and the labour market was 
devised in the post-war period. Loans from banks and financial undertakings were regulated through 
quotas that were set out in a separate credit budget and state banks accounted for a substantial share 
of credit to households and enterprises. Cross-border capital movements – for example non-resident 
rights  to  buy  Norwegian  equities  and  Norwegian  enterprises'  access  to  foreign  funding  –  were 
regulated by separate quotas. The government authorities set both short-term and long-term interest 
rates at a low level, with demand for credit periodically outstripping supply. Credit was rationed. The 
krone exchange rate was in principle fixed, but was frequently adjusted when cost inflation spiralled 
out  of  control  despite  extensive  regulation.  House  prices  in  cities  were  regulated,  with  queues  and 
under-the-table transactions. Direct price and wage controls were also applied in periods. There was 
an active business policy through state ownership and support and subsidy schemes.  
Government spending increased substantially as a share of total GDP, from 35 per cent in 1970 to 50 
per cent in 1990, hand in hand with tax increases. The government budget was also used to secure 
high employment, but unemployment still rose from one cycle to the next.  
The experience and lessons of the 1970s and 1980s have left their mark on the current formulation of 
policy. Prior to, during and following the crises around 1990, policy reforms were introduced in all the 
Nordic countries. In Norway, the economic system was modernised over a 10-15 year period.  
First, as in other countries, increased emphasis was placed on norm-based or rule-based monetary 
and  fiscal  policy,  and  over  time  a  clear  division  of  responsibility  was  established.  Monetary  policy 
steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to  smoothing  fluctuations  in 
output  and  employment.  The  government  budget  –  growth  in  public  spending  –  influences  the  real 
krone exchange rate and the scale of the tradable sector in the medium term. Government spending 
and  revenues  must  be  in  balance  in  the  long  term.  Wage  formation,  the  economy’s  structures  and 
incentives determine how efficiently we make use of labour and other economic resources.  
Second, trade policy plays an important role for growth in small open economies. Since the beginning 
of the 1990s, Norway, like Sweden and Finland, has become more closely integrated into Europe. The 
EEA  Agreement,  which  provides  for  the  free  movement  of  labour,  capital,  goods  and  services,  has 
enhanced  efficiency  in  many  industries.  The  recent  WTO  rounds  have  covered  a  broader  range  of 
goods and services and the number of member countries has increased. Almost all countries are now 
members  or  observers,  and  the  issues  are  broad-ranging.  Trade  policy  has  paved  the  way  for  the 
change  in  the  international  division  of  labour  which  has  brought  benefits  to  Norway  and  the  other 
Nordic countries.  
Third, the tax reform in 1992 was a crossroads. It made it possible to finance the welfare state with a 
substantially lower loss of efficiency and wealth creation than previously. The key was to reform the 
deduction schemes for personal and company taxation and to introduce more equal tax treatment of 
companies across industries and aim at neutral taxation of capital income and interest. Marginal taxes 
could be lowered. The tax deductibility rate for interest was considerably reduced for households. It 
became more advantageous to save and less advantageous to borrow.  
The pressure on our tax system has also been reduced because public spending control has improved 
over the past 10-15 years.  
BIS Review 15/2007 
 15
Fourth, Norwegian credit markets have undergone structural changes. The function of state banks has 
become more concentrated and their share of the credit market has been reduced from more than 30 
per cent in the1980s to 8 per cent today. The first wave of banking deregulation in the mid-1980s was 
not particularly successful. It was only after the banking crisis and the tax reform that Norwegian credit 
and  capital  markets  started  to  function  efficiently.  It  became  more  profitable  to  channel  capital  to 
investment  projects  that  yield  the  highest  social  return  and  locked-in  capital  was  freed  up  for  new 
industries and businesses.  
 It became easier for entrepreneurs to start up and build up businesses and capital. Illustrative of the 
enterprise spirit in the period 1998-2003 – which was not a period of particularly strong growth – was 
the start-up of 12 new businesses for every 100 existing businesses, which was quite high compared 
with other countries.  
Norwegian credit and capital markets are relatively well developed today. Sound projects will always 
find funding. The main weakness is still to be found in housing, property and wealth taxation, which 
favours considerable overinvestment in dwellings and holiday homes.  
In  addition  to  the  changes  I  have  highlighted,  the  framework  conditions  for  the  electricity  market, 
telecom  market,  aviation  and  audiovisual  industry  have  changed.  Retail  trade  has  been  liberalised. 
State-owned companies were listed on the stock exchange and new forms of managing public entities 
were developed.  
16 
  BIS Review 15/2007
Economic  growth  has  also  been  bolstered  by  higher  female  labour  force  participation.  Higher 
educational attainment and maternity leave have also made a contribution.  
Just as there are new companies that start up each year, there are also many people who change jobs 
every  year.  On  average  for  the  years  2000-2005,  260 000  work  contracts  were  terminated.  Every 
eighth  person  changed  jobs.  At  the  same  time,  new  jobs  were  created,  bringing  net  annual  job 
creation to 4 000 in this period. Job change and the diffusion of new technology tend to go hand in 
hand. The key here is that companies have had the opportunity and capacity to rationalise and adapt 
when new technology has made this profitable.  
The modernisation of economic systems must be given the main credit for the solid performance of 
Nordic  countries  over  the  past  10-15  years.  Norway  is  benefiting  from  oil,  but  developments  in  the 
mainland  economy  have  also  been  considerably  more  stable.  Global  economic  developments  have 
brought  us  substantial  gains,  but  this  does  not  explain  the  strong  productivity  gains  in  our  service 
industries. Moreover, it may appear that cooperation in companies is better in Nordic countries than in 
many other European countries. In Norway, there are few examples of objections to investing in new 
technology on the grounds that it will eliminate jobs. On the contrary, employees will often be the first 
to  support  new  investments  to  strengthen  a  company’s  position  in  highly  open  and  competitive 
markets.  
Labour market adaptability is fairly similar in the Nordic region, even though legislation and rules are 
quite  different.  For  example,  there  is  a  high  level  of  employment  protection  legislation  in  Norway, 
Sweden, and Finland but not in Denmark. In Denmark, agreements between the social partners can 
stipulate firing rules.  
The  negotiating  position  that  employment  protection  offers  employees  can  induce  companies  to  go 
farther  in  safeguarding  employees'  interests  in  the  event  of  restructuring.  The  social  safety  net  – 
unemployment benefits and the more permanent benefit schemes – probably also make it easier to 
gain support for rationalisation.  
But this safety net has also become a pretext for not addressing the problems at hand. The increased 
use of our welfare schemes is increasingly becoming the Achilles’ heel of the Norwegian economy.  
Sickness  absence  has  risen  sharply  in  Norway  and  a  steadily  higher  share  of  the  working-age 
population is on disability benefit or rehabilitation schemes. Many choose to retire under contractual 
early  retirement  schemes  at  the  age  of  62,  and  these  numbers  will  probably  increase  ahead.  In 
Norway, close to 600 000 persons among the working-age population are outside the labour force and 
on benefit and retirement schemes. This accounts for 25 per cent of the labour force. Sweden has 
seen a similar development.  
 BIS Review 15/2007 
 17
The  sharp  increase  in  benefits  cannot  be  explained  by  the  population’s  state  of  health,  which  is 
steadily  improving.  A  survey  of  more  than  31  European  countries  also  shows  that  there  is  a  high 
degree of job satisfaction among Norwegians.17  
Demographic developments will have a dampening impact on demand for public services and social 
security disbursements over the coming years. The number of elderly among pensioners, i.e. 80 years 
and older, will not grow and the post-war generation will only start drawing on social security in the 
next decade. There will still be pressures for higher public spending. Demand for services we have 
chosen  to  let  the  government  provide,  for  example  health  services,  increases  markedly  when 
revenues rise at the pace they are rising today. Growth in government revenues – among others the 
return on the Government Pension Fund which is rising rapidly – also raises our expectations. At the 
same time, this is also a period of strong growth in demand for labour in the business sector.  
With the exception of part-time employees who want to work more, there are now few idle resources in 
the  labour  force.  We  cannot  expect  a  substantial  increase  in  the  supply  of  foreign  labour.  Workers 
from other countries, such as Sweden and Poland with families and the largest share of consumption 
in  their  home  country,  have  increased  production  capacity  in  Norway,  but  it  now  appears  that  the 
supply of foreign labour is starting to become more limited. Other inward labour migration does not 
generate higher value added per capita. Immigrants that become permanent residents make the same 
contribution to increasing demand as to increasing production.  
The main challenge is to limit flows of persons into benefit. Recent research findings can provide us 
with guidance.18 During periods of restructuring of private and public sector activities, the number of 
new benefit claims rises. Findings show that the interaction between unemployment benefit schemes 
and  other  social  security  schemes  is  not  optimal.  When  demand  for  labour  falls,  flows  into  benefit 
increase. But the flows do not primarily go into unemployment benefit and seeking work and activity, 
but directly into rehabilitation. And rehabilitation is to a large extent a gateway to disability benefit. A 
broad range of measures is probably needed to limit these flows. The new government agency the 
Norwegian  Labour  and  Welfare  Organisation  is  facing  considerable  challenges.  Moreover,  there 
should  be  strong  financial  incentives  in  enterprises  to  counter  employee  flows  into  benefit.  Certain 
schemes should be reassessed, schemes that now function as pure poverty traps, because for certain 
recipients there is little to be gained financially in early phases from moving from welfare to work.  
Growth and the environment 
5  
Strong growth in the world economy is reducing poverty at a faster pace than ever before. Increased 
trade  and  economic  integration  are  bringing  opportunities  for  raising  living  standards  to  ever  larger 
groups.  
                                                      
17   European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (2006):”Fourth European Working Conditions 
Survey”. 
18   Knut Røed:” Hvor stor er arbeidskraftsreserven? Og hvordan kan den mobiliseres?” (How large are labour reserves? And 
how  can  they  be  mobilised?)  Presentation  at  the  conference:  Arbeidsmarked,  lønn  og  økonomisk  politikk,  (The  labour 
market, wages and economic policy) University of Oslo, 23 January 2007. 
18 
 BIS Review 15/2007
But growth has a price. This is particularly reflected in increased emissions of greenhouse gases as a 
result of growing human activity. The highest emission levels per capita are found in rich, industrialised 
countries. Growth in total emissions is nevertheless highest in Asia.19  
  Scientific findings are clear: In the past 100 years, the global mean temperature has risen by 0.74ºC. 
There  is  more  than  a  90  per  cent  probability  that  the  increase  in  gas  emissions  has  contributed  to 
global warming over the past decades. Developments mean that the Arctic ice may melt away, the 
climate may become more unstable and the supply of safe source water may decline.  
The  changes  also  have  an  economic  cost.  It  is  expensive  to  repair  damages  to  buildings  and 
infrastructure following storms and floods. Insurance pay-outs are rising and premiums are following 
suit. When insurance is not possible, society must bear the cost directly.  
It  is  important  to  combine  knowledge  about  nature  and  knowledge  about  the  functioning  of  the 
economy  in  addressing  environmental  challenges.  Maximum  positive  impacts  and  minimal  negative 
impacts  are  achieved  by  using  instruments  that  induce  businesses  and  individuals  to  choose  the 
technology and consumption pattern that stem emissions. Using these instruments releases the full 
                                                      
19   John  Llewellyn  (2007):  ”  The  Business  of  Climate  Change.  Challenges  and  Opportunities”,  Lehman  Brothers,  February 
2007. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 19
force of market mechanisms. Taxes that require the polluter to pay and tradable emission quotas are 
important instruments.  
When the costs of reduced emission are to be distributed, it will be tempting for countries to act as free 
riders. Restrictions and taxes that only apply to one country or to a small group of countries do not 
solve the problem. There are important lessons to be drawn from international trade cooperation in the 
post-war period, which was also marked by strong conflicts of interest but still made headway through 
the period.  
It is still uncertain how serious the impact of gas emissions will be. But once the impact comes into full 
evidence, it may be too late to take corrective action. There is also the risk that the concentration of 
greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere  reaches  such  a  high  level  that  it  exceeds  critical  values  that 
cannot be reversed. The right approach is therefore to guard against events that may have serious 
consequences even if there is a small probability of the event occurring.  
Most of us already pay a certain amount every year to guard against the consequences of events we 
will hopefully never experience. The cost of curbing global warming can be looked upon as such an 
insurance  premium.  Higher  transport  taxes  and  increased  electricity  and  energy  prices  are  a  small 
price to pay.  
Conclusion 
6  
I opened by quoting from Rolf Jacobsen. In the poem “Otherness land”20 he describes Norway as a 
country in the far north, a nation struggling and resisting intimidation.  
A prominent feature of Norway is its natural resources. The harvesting of waterfall power, oil and gas, 
timber and fish are important to income and welfare in Norway. Jacobsen writes:  
“… But we became a civilised people in the end, 
seafarers from the start, rulers 
of the whole of the North Atlantic. 
And now we are reaping black gold from the seabed (…)”  
And  
So do not …….. dwell in a dream 
for we await your hands and goodwill.  
We  should  hope  that  we  have  become  a  civilised  people  –  but  we  should  not  believe  that  we  can 
safeguard welfare simply by reaping black gold from the seabed. Welfare is secured by putting hands 
back  to  work,  productive  labour  and  the  willingness  to  change  –  and  of  no  less  importance  by 
protecting the environment.  
                                                      
20   A  previous  translation  of  the  poem  does  not  exist.  The  verses  included  in  the  address  have  been  translated  by  Norges 
Bank's staff translators Janet Aagenæs and Helle Snellingen. 
20 
 BIS Review 15/2007
