Y V Reddy: Globalisation and monetary policy – some emerging issues 
Inaugural  address by  Dr Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve Bank  of  India, at  the  conference on 
“Advances  in  Open  Economy  Macroeconomics”,  organised  by  the  Center  for  Economics  and 
Development,  Northwestern  University,  USA  and  the  Indira  Gandhi  Institute  of  Development 
Research, Mumbai, 19 March 2007. 
 Professor  Radhakrishna,  Professor  Eichenbaun,  Professor  Rebelo,  Professor  Christiano,  Professor 
Nachane, Dr. Rakesh Mohan and friends, 
Happy New Year to all of you. For Dr. Rakesh Mohan, it is a holiday issue, as he described. For me, it 
is a festival issue also, since I am a Telugu. So, my address will be in the form of sharing of the festive 
mood  also.  As  you  may  be  aware,  today  is  a  festival  celebrated  as  New  Year  by  the  State  of 
Maharashtra, and is called Gudipadwa by the Marathi-speaking people, who number about 70 million. 
It  is  also  celebrated  by  about  65  million  Kannada-speaking  people  as  "Ugadi".  We,  the  80  million 
Telugu-speaking also celebrate the festival as Ugadi. 
The festival marks the New Year day for people who follow the southern Indian lunar calendar. This 
calendar reckons dates based on the Salivahana era (Salivahana Saka), which begins its count from 
the supposed date of the founding of the Empire by the legendary hero Shalivahana. The Satavahana 
king Shalivahana (also identified as Gautamiputra Satakarni) is credited with the initiation of this era 
known as Shalivahana. The Shalivahana era begins its count of years from the year corresponding to 
78  AD  of  the  Gregorian  calendar.  Thus,  the  year  2000  AD  corresponds  to  the  year  1922  of  the 
Salivahana  Era.  In  the  terminology  used  by  this  lunar  calendar,  Ugadi  falls  on  Chaitra  Sudhdha 
Paadyami or the first day of the bright half of the Hindu month of Chaitra.  
The Telugu and Kannada people celebrate the festival with great fanfare; gatherings of the extended 
family and a sumptuous feast are de rigueur. The day, however, begins with ritual showers followed by 
prayers, and then the eating of a specific mixture of Neem Buds/Flowers for Bitterness, Jaggery for 
Sweetness, Raw Mango for Vagaru , Tamarind Juice for sour. This mixture, called “Ugadi Pachhadi” in 
Telugu and “Bevu-Bella” in Kannada, symbolizes the fact that life is a mixture of pleasure and pain, 
which should be accepted together and with equanimity.  
People  traditionally  gather  to  listen  to  the  recitation  of  the  religious  almanac  (Panchangam)  of  the 
coming year, and to the general forecast of the year to come. This is the Panchanga Sravanam, an 
informal social function where an elderly and respected person opens the new almanac pertaining to 
the coming year and makes a general benediction to all present. The advent of radio and television 
has changed this routine somewhat, especially in the cities. Nowadays, people turn on the radio or TV 
to watch the recitation.  
Ugadi  celebrations  are  also  marked  by  literary  discussions,  poetry  recitations  and  recognition  of 
authors of literary works through awards and cultural programmes. Recitals of classical carnatic music 
and dance are held in the evenings. 
In  Maharashtra,  it  is  customary  to  erect  “Gudis”  on  the  first  day  (Padwa)  of  the  Marathi New  Year. 
“Gudi”  is a  bamboo  staff with  a  colored  silk cloth  and  a  garlanded  goblet atop  it,  which  symbolizes 
victory or achievement. Hence, this day is known as "Gudipadwa" in Maharashtra. The New Year is 
ushered  in  with  the  worship  of  the  “Gudi”  and  the  distribution  of  a  specific  “Prasadam”  comprising 
tender neem leaves, gram-pulse and jaggery. The symbolism of tastes is the same as that of Ugadi. 
It  is  believed  that  the  creator  of  the  Hindu  pantheon  Lord  Brahma  started  creation  on  this  day  – 
Chaitra suddha padhyami or the Ugadi day. Also, the great Indian Mathematician Bhaskaracharya’s 
calculations proclaimed  the  Ugadi  day  from  the  sunrise  on  as  the  beginning  of  the  New  Year,  new 
month and new day. 
Let me confess that I am not able to predict for the next year, the future of monetary policy in the open 
economies in general or opening economies like India, since I am yet to hear "Panchang Sravanam" 
for  the  New  Year  named  as  "Sarvajeet".  There  is  an  interesting  reason  why  I  could  not  hear  the 
authentic  Panchang  Sravanam.  There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  among  the  top  pundits  in  Andhra 
Pradesh as to whether Panchang Sravanam should be on the 19th or the 20th March, 2007, and a 
leading light insisted that it should really be on 20th since "Surya-Grahanam" (solar eclipse) on the 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 1
19th  bars  "Panchang  Sravanam"  on  that  day.  So,  the  Panchang  Sravanam  is  slated  for  the  20th 
March  at  11  am  on  Saptagiri  official  TV  channel.  So,  I  understand  that  the  Government  of  Andhra 
Pradesh has declared that in addition to today being a holiday, the 20th March would be an optional 
holiday for those who would choose tomorrow for their festivities.  
Friends,  the  Indians  may  be  argumentative  but  the  Telugus  are  not  only  argumentative  but  love 
freedom to choose – even their Ugadi festival day, even when based on a reading of celestial stars. 
In the festive mood that lasts for two days this year for the Telugus, let me wish the deliberations of the 
conference on "Advances in Open Economy Macroeconomics" a very productive and pleasant time. I 
recognise  that  a  number  of  eminent  economists  from  the  North  Western  University  and  other  US 
universities are participating in the conference and I would like to extend a hearty welcome to them. I 
congratulate  the  economists  from  the  IGIDR,  the  RBI  and  other  Indian  universities  for  their 
contributions to this conference. Let me extend a personal warm welcome to our guests from other 
countries – we believe in "Atithi devo bhava". 
I would like to take this opportunity to share a few thoughts on a possible rethink that may be occurring 
in regard to globalisation that could affect how the open economies would choose to be – to the extent 
the  public  policy  has  choices.  That  would  lead  me  to  share  some  of  the  challenges  for  conduct  of 
monetary policy, in a world currently less certain of the costs or benefits of globalisation. I am afraid, I 
may  be  repeating  what  I  had  said  in  some  other  fora  recently  but,  I  hope  to  contextualise  the 
presentation. 
In the recent period, a reassessment of the costs and benefits associated with globalisation seems to 
be  taking  place.  Domestic  structural  reforms  in  the  emerging  economies  are  unlocking  the  pent-up 
domestic demand and, in turn, enabling a greater realisation of the huge potential for growth. So, what 
is causing the rethink in both – the developed and the emerging economies?  
Firstly, the traditional postulate that the capital flows from the capital-surplus or developed countries to 
the capital-scarce or developing countries, seems to have been disproved in recent years. The world's 
largest economy, the United States, currently runs a current account deficit, financed to a substantial 
extent by capital exports from the emerging market economies. Of course, it can be argued that the 
so-called “global imbalances” are a reflection of incomplete globalisation. But the fact remains that as 
long  as  globalization  happens  to  be  incomplete,  public  policy  has  to  manage  the  consequential 
"imbalances". 
Secondly,  in  a  globalising  world,  the  context  in  which  monetary  policy  is  set,  often  leads  to  a 
confrontation  with  the  impossible  trinity  –  independent  monetary  policy,  open  capital  account  and 
managed exchange rate. The theory holds that at best, only two out of the three would be feasible. In 
practice, however, there is a shift in preference away from the corner solution with respect to financial 
imbalances.  Currently,  intermediate  solutions,  which  were  earlier  regarded  as  “fuzzy”,  are  now 
becoming  increasingly  relevant.  Moreover,  in  recognition  of  the  differences  between  trade  and 
financial integration – first pointed out by Jagdish Bhagwati – there is less certainty today about the 
corner solutions than in the past.  
Thirdly, at a practical level, the recent experience seems to indicate that globalisation may have had 
accentuated potential conflicts that can impact the fabric of our societies, particularly, in view of rising 
corporate profits coupled with a reduction in share of remuneration for the labour. In this regard, I was 
struck by what Mr. John Micklethwait, Editor-in-Chief of The Economist is reported to have said in an 
interview, as mentioned in a leading daily yesterday (March 18, 2007). He said this in the context of 
the process of globalisation: 
"But as far as globalisation goes, I am worried about one thing: if you look at inequality, particularly in 
America, the rich have got even richer and the median income has barely budged. What is interesting 
is that just in the last couple of quarters, you began to see a sign of the wages beginning to rise. What 
if you have seen in the last ten years is the returns to capital increasing dramatically and returns to 
labour  proportionately  going  down?  What  is  happening  now  is  that  if  you  have  the  prospect  of  a 
downturn, then inequality will become much bigger issue in the American elections. Around the world it 
is already a much bigger issue, including in places like Japan. The corporate boss in Japan now is 
paid 35 times what the median worker is paid. In America, it is 411 times." 
Fourthly, there are wide-spread concerns about the gaps in international trade rules and regulations, 
the  impasse  in  multilateral  trade  negotiations  and  consequently,  a  rising  number  of  regional  and 
bilateral trade arrangements.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2007
Fifthly,  the  rapid  pace  of  globalisation  in  monetary  and  financial  relationships  has  not  been 
accompanied by an improvement in the international financial architecture. Managing financial crisis 
remains largely a national responsibility. As the UNCTAD’s Trade and Development Report, 2006 has 
noted:  ‘‘The  bulk  of  adjustment  in  case  of  external  imbalances  is  often  concentrated  on  a  group  of 
developing and transition economies, despite the fact that the source of such imbalances may occur in 
the developed world’’ (Overview, p. 38-39). 
In the wake of these developments, there is a growing expression of heightened sensitivity to the costs 
associated with globalisation. It is recognised that in the ultimate analysis, public policy has important 
role  in  managing  the  costs  and  benefits  of  globalisation.  To  quote  Chairman  Bernanke:  ‘‘Further 
progress in global economic integration should not be taken for granted…as in the past, the social and 
political opposition to openness can be strong… much of it arises because changes in the patterns of 
production are likely to threaten the livelihoods of some workers and the profits of some firms…The 
natural  reaction  of  those  so  affected  is  to  resist  change,  for  example,  by  seeking  the  passage  of 
protectionist measures’’ (Jackson Hole, 2006).  
In  brief,  the  unfolding  path  of  global  economic  integration  and  consequently,  preferences  for  open 
economies are beset with unknown uncertainties. In this broader setting, let us look at the emerging 
challenges to monetary policy.  
First,  considerations  relating  to  maximising  output  and  employment  weigh  as  much  upon  monetary 
authorities as maintaining price stability, particularly in the developing countries. The twin-objective is 
often  enshrined  in  the  legal  provisions  except  where  inflation  targeting  is  mandated.  However, 
domestic inflation has increasingly become less sensitive to the domestic output gap and potentially 
more sensitive to the world output gap. Each country may, therefore, take a holistic approach to the 
trinity of free flows of capital, fixed or managed exchange rates and independent monetary policy. The 
impossible trinity has to be often managed in the emerging economies and this is ensured by close 
coordination between monetary and other public policies.  
Second, the central banks are often concerned with the stability / variability of inflation rather than the 
level of prices. However, inflation processes have become highly unclear, amidst these uncertainties; 
central banks are faced with the need to recognise the importance of inflation perceptions and inflation 
expectations also, as distinct from inflation indicators. The distinction between inflationary expectations 
and  current  inflation  perceptions  in  the  context  of  inflation  policy  is  also  worth  bearing  in  mind. 
Furthermore, often than not, the expected change rather than the actual change in real interest rate, 
following a change in the policy rate, often drives the actions of the economic agents. In this context, 
credible communication and creative engagement with the market and economic agents has emerged 
as the critical channel of monetary transmission. The existence of administered prices in commodities 
critical to inflation expectations, perceptions or indicators complicates the relationship between prices 
and monetary policy transmission, though the outcome may be socially desirable.  
Third, the presence of administered interest rates, even in segments of a financial system, could hold 
back  appropriate  adjustments  in  real  rates  as  a  sequel  to  changes  in  the  policy  rates.  The 
administered interest rates do occur in different forms, instruments and magnitudes but these could 
be, to some extent, monitored. What is surprising, however, is that the financial market rates could 
also display somewhat inexplicable impervious behaviour and thereby, act as the source of nominal 
rigidities in the economy. Sometimes, it is described as a conundrum, or might I say "I do not know"? 
Fourth, the central banks are now taking baby steps – sometimes more frequent steps and at other 
times after a long gap, and in both directions – to respond to, what appear to be, ripples rather than 
huge waves in the sea of economic activity. Further, while what is considered as a “neutral rate” of 
interest, in the present period, appears to be much lower compared to several years before, the issue 
is  whether  the  neutral  rate  in  respect  of  the  emerging  market  economies,  which  has  been  coming 
down in tandem with global rates, will tend to be distinctly higher than in the developed economies. 
Fifth, if the domestic inflation rate of an economy, however low it may be, is higher than the average 
inflation rate of its trading partners, it puts pressure on the exchange rate. In this context, the question 
of simultaneous balance of the internal and external sectors becomes a major issue if the flexibilities in 
the  economy  are  less  than  adequate.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  inevitably  involves  a  careful 
judgment  on  the  relative  weights  assigned  to  the  domestic  and  the  global  factors  and  constant 
reassessment and rebalancing of these in response to evolving circumstances. 
Sixth,  since  external  capital  flows  to  emerging  economies  cannot  be  easily  predicted  and  can  also 
reverse  even  in  the  presence  of  sound  fundamentals,  monetary  authorities  often  have  to,  in 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 3
consultation  with  the  government,  make  choices  in  regard  to  exchange  rate  and  monetary 
management.  
Seventh,  financial  stability  considerations  may  require  the  use  of  monetary  policy  measures,  in 
conjunction  with  other  prudential  measures.  Some  times,  there  could  be  even  a  trade-off  between 
raising  the  short-term  interest  rate  and  tightening  of  prudential  norms,  if  the  risks  are  perceived  to 
originate  from  certain  segments  of  the  market.  The  highly  leveraged  lending  operations  in  the 
backdrop  of  asset-price  bubbles  might  require  adjustments  in  the  lending  margins  and  risk-based 
capital requirements.  
Eighth, in terms of financial stability, some new challenges are emerging. The international financial 
markets are currently dominated by private equity funds like hedge funds, which are largely operating 
outside  the  “Know-your-customer”/  “Know-your-investor”  (KYC/KYI)  norms.  Hedge  funds  have  long 
used  arrangements  that  allow  them  to  execute  trades  with  several  dealers  but  there  is  now  an 
increasing tendency on their part to consolidate the clearing and settlement of their trades at a single 
firm,  the  “prime  broker”.  Prime  brokerage  poses  some  unique  challenges  for  the  management  of 
counterparty credit and operational risk. Recent events have reinforced the possible adverse impact of 
their risks. Further, it is commonly observed at the global level that hedge funds are “opaque” – that is, 
information  about  their  portfolios  is  typically  limited  and  infrequently  provided.  From  a  policy 
perspective,  transparency  to  investors  is  largely  an  issue  of  investor  protection,  but  the  need  for 
counterparties to have adequate information is a risk-management issue. 
Finally, there are some uncertainties associated with the settling of trades in newer types of over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives,  particularly  credit  derivatives.  As  part  of  recent  financial  innovations,  the 
credit-derivative and structured-credit markets have grown rapidly during the past few years, allowing 
dispersion of credit risk by financial players. As we are aware, the impact of instability in the emerging 
economies in times of crisis appears to be borne by the home or domestic public sector also, along 
with the global private sector. Avoiding crisis is ultimately a national responsibility. In such a milieu, the 
policy makers are often confronted with competing positions and make choices in the face of daunting 
dilemmas. 
Concluding remarks 
Before concluding,  it will be  remiss  of me  not  to  address  the relationship between  the  real  and  the 
financial sectors in the context of globalisation, open economies and macro finance. 
Economists have for long recognised the strong complementarities between the real and the financial 
sectors. Financial development contributes to growth in either a supply-leading or a demand-following 
sequence;  that  is,  either  the  financial  sector  development  creates  the  conditions  for  growth  or  the 
growth  generates  demand  for  the  financial  services.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  financial 
sector in India is no longer a constraint on growth and its strength and resilience are acknowledged, 
though  further  improvements  need  to  take  place.  On  the  other  hand,  without  the  real  sector 
development in terms of the physical infrastructure and improvement in supply elasticities, the financial 
sector  can  even  misallocate  resources,  potentially  generate  bubbles  and  possibly  amplify  the  risks. 
Hence, public policy may have a crucial role to play in ensuring balanced reforms in both the real and 
the  financial  sectors.  The  criticality  for  the  policy  makers  is  not  only  to  ensure  that  there  are  no 
financial  sector  constraints  on  the  real  sector  activity  but  also  to  assure  that  the  financial  sector 
reforms have complementarity with the pace and process of reforms in the real sector in India, along 
with, no doubt, fiscal empowerment – as consistently emphasised by the Reserve Bank.  
Let me conclude by complimenting all those who have devoted their energies to bring to fruition this 
innovative collaborative academic activity with policy significance for the Reserve Bank of India. I am 
thankful to the organizers, specially Prof. Nachane for giving me this opportunity to be with you.  
We,  in  the  RBI,  look  forward  to  the  benefit  of  discussions  in  this  conference.  Let  me  wish  the 
conference all success, and, with success, hopefully many happy returns. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 27/2007
