Timothy Ridley: What makes the Cayman Islands a successful international 
financial services centre? 
Background paper by Mr Timothy Ridley, Chairman of the Cayman Islands Monetary Authority, at the 
Caribbean Investment Forum, Montego Bay, Jamaica, 12-13 June 2007.  
In developing this paper, CIMA is indebted to Ms Deborah Drummond, Deputy Financial Secretary in the Portfolio of Finance & 
Economics, on whose 2006 presentation to Case Western Law School we have relied heavily. 
 Introduction 
The  Cayman  Islands’  development  into  one  of  the  world's  largest  international  financial  services 
centres is based on a combination of fundamental core factors – providing the infrastructure, services 
and operational freedom and flexibility for international investors and businesses on a foundation of 
stable, certain, intelligent and balanced political, economic, social, legal and regulatory regimes. 
The  financial  services  sector  was  essentially  founded  by  Cayman  investing  its  “historic  capital”: 
English common law and tax neutrality (non-discriminatory absence of direct taxes), both dating from 
the 1700s. Political, economic and social stability completed the platform. 
A brief history lesson 
Some of the significant decisions and events that shaped the development of the industry over the last 
40 years are set out below. 
Phase One – 1966 to 1976 
The sector was established with the enactment of a handful of laws in 1966, including the Banks and 
Trust Companies Regulation Law, the Trusts Law and the Exchange Control Regulations Law. The 
Companies  Law  had  been  enacted  earlier  in  1960  (and  with  much  amendment  and  enhancement 
continues to be a crucial part of the legislative infrastructure). In the decade from 1966 to 1976, the 
sector took root, significantly assisted by political uncertainty in the Bahamas and the development of 
the Eurodollar market (itself in turn thanks to US interest equalisation tax). At the end of 1976, there 
were 7,521 registered companies, 126 banks & trusts with assets of US$21.9 billion, and 1 captive 
insurance company. 
Contributing to the local stability was the decision in 1970 for the Cayman Islands to begin issuing its 
own currency. Prior to this Cayman had used the Jamaican dollar as legal tender, a carry-over from 
the Cayman’s history as a dependency of Jamaica. It was felt that, in view of the rapid progress of the 
Cayman economy, it would be to the Islands’ economic and political advantage for the jurisdiction to 
have its own currency and a Currency Board (now the Cayman Islands Monetary Authority). Further 
cementing the Cayman currency’s stability was the 1974 decision to delink the currency from sterling 
and to tie it to the US dollar a relationship that exists today. The country has always enjoyed a healthy 
surplus in the reserves backing the Cayman dollar. 
Cayman’s resident population was around 13,000 in 1974. 
Phase Two – 1976 to 1986 
In 1976, the Confidential Relationships (Preservation) Law (a codification of English common law) was 
enacted to protect confidential information in the possession of financial services professionals from 
improper disclosure as a response to aggressive action by the U.S. authorities at the time to obtaining 
information  from  offshore  banks.  All  exchange  control  restrictions  were  abolished  during  the  late 
1970’s.  The  Insurance  Law  was  enacted  in  1979,  to  enhance  and  regulate  the  growing  captive 
insurance industry (driven initially by (illfounded) concerns about political stability in Bermuda). There 
followed  again  a  decade  of  growth,  during  which  Cayman  came  into  its  own  in  financial  services, 
notably in banking, captive insurance and general financial transactions (e.g., the first euro-bond issue 
by the Cayman subsidiary of a Japanese shipping company). Towards the end of this period, in 1984, 
the  Cayman  Islands  entered  into  the  Narcotics  Agreement  with  the  U.S.,  which  matured  into  the 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in 1986. At the end of 1986, there were 16,791 registered companies, 
456 banks & trusts with assets of US$202 billion, 6 company managers and 107 captive insurance 
companies. 
Phase Three – 1986 to 1996 
During  the  decade  1986  to  1996,  robust  financial  services  activity  continued  over  a  wide  array  of 
areas,  notably  in  on  and  off-balance  sheet  secured  and  unsecured  financing,  mutual  funds  and 
captives. During this time, the regulatory infrastructure became more developed, particularly with the 
enactment of the Mutual Funds Law in 1993, which provided a secure and clear framework for the 
fund industry. The Trusts Law and other legislation continued to be amended to maintain Cayman’s 
edge in financial services. At the end of 1996, there were 37,919 registered companies, 575 banks & 
trusts with assets of US$507.8 billion, 75 company managers, 378 captive insurance companies, 121 
mutual fund administrators and 1379 mutual funds. 
Phase Four – 1996 to today 
In 1996, the Proceeds of Criminal Conduct Law and related anti money laundering regulations were 
enacted, and was one of the first in the region “all-crimes” anti-money laundering legislation; and the 
Cayman  Islands  Monetary  Authority  (CIMA)  was  established  to  replace  the  Financial  Services 
Supervision  Department.  In  1997,  the  Cayman  Islands  Stock  Exchange  (CSX)  was  established.  In 
May  2000,  Cayman  committed  to  entering  into  controlled  bilateral  on-request  arrangements  for 
assisting  Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD)  member  states  in  tax 
matters. 
The first of these was the Tax Information Exchange Agreement signed with the U.S.A in November 
2001, with an operative date of 1 January 2004. In June 2000, despite its demonstrated track record in 
anti-money  laundering  Cayman  found  itself  on  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF)  list  of  non-
cooperative countries. We were successful in being removed from that list in June 2001. Cayman also 
agreed  to  implement  the  automatic  reporting  of  interest  payments  under  the  EU  Savings  Directive 
(EUSD) which became effective 1st July 2005. A key benefit secured by Cayman was that all but one 
of its mutual fund categories were agreed to be “out-of-scope” of the EUSD. 
The  Securities  Investment  Business  Law  was  enacted  in  2001  and  provided  for  the  licensing  of 
investment managers and advisors. 
At the end of 2001, mid-way through the decade 1996-2006, there were 64,495 registered companies, 
427  banks  with  total  assets  of  over  US$800  billion,  3,648  mutual  funds,  542  captive  insurance 
companies, 418 listings on the CSX with a market cap of US$38.1 billion, 92 company managers, and 
217 mutual fund administrators. 
In 2002, CIMA became fully independent operationally in keeping with international expectations and 
standards.  In  late  2003,  Cayman  was  assessed  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and 
received  a  report  confirming  substantial  compliance  with  international  regulatory  standards,  with 
particular emphasise on the strong and effective anti money laundering culture. 
Current 
The financial industry continues to show strong growth in most areas. Figures for year-end 2006 show 
the number of active registered companies had grown to 81,783, a 27% increase from 2005. The CSX 
had 1,225 listings with total market capitalization of US$111.5 billion, after reaching its milestone of 
1,000 listings in 2005. Investment funds grew to 8,134 an increase of 14%. Cayman continues to be 
the  world’s  number  one  domicile  for  hedge  funds  and  for  structured  finance  transactions.  We  also 
continue  to  hold  our  own  as  the  number  two  jurisdiction  after  Bermuda  for  captive  insurance 
companies, with consistent growth to 740 as at December 2006. The number of trust companies and 
company managers remains relatively stable with some modest growth in the number of private trust 
companies. 
The lone departure from the numerical growth trend is on the banking side, where consolidation and 
cost-efficiency considerations continue to have an impact, with the number of licensees at the end of 
2006  down  3%  from  2005  to  291.  However,  the  quantum  of  assets  on  deposit  (overwhelmingly 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
institutional  funds)  at  around  US$1.4  trillion  continues  to  climb,  with  Cayman  remaining  by  far  the 
biggest offshore bank booking centre. 
Cayman  continues  to  update  and  enhance  its  key  regulatory  laws  and  regulations  and  anti  money 
laundering regime to maintain its competitive position and to meet appropriate international standards. 
The resident population is now over 50,000, i.e. nearly 400% growth in 33 years. 
This brief historical review not only demonstrates the consistent growth that Cayman has experienced 
as an international financial services centre, but shows that growth has gone hand in hand with policy 
and legislative development and international cooperation. 
Where is Cayman going? 
Successive Governments have maintained a firm commitment to providing the necessary policy and 
legislation  to  facilitate  orderly  development  as  Cayman  has  ventured  into  new  sectors,  to  support 
innovation,  to  safeguard  its  industry  from  abuse  and  to  fulfil  its  international  obligations  as  it  has 
advanced to become a major participant in global financial services. Set out below is what Cayman is 
now doing and how it does it, and highlights the main challenges. 
Philosophy 
Cayman  takes  a  principled  and  pragmatic  approach  to  the  development  of  the  financial  services 
industry in the Cayman Islands. In terms of principles, our “operating manual” is based on 
• 
Adherence to recognized relevant international standards – Cayman fully accepts that it 
should adhere to generally accepted and applied international standards – and not just as 
they  are,  but  as  they  evolve.  Cayman’s  experience  has  been  that  it  is  not  absence  of 
regulation  that  has  promoted  business,  but  the  introduction  of  sensible  and  balanced 
regulation as  circumstances demanded.  The  growth  of  the  financial  services  industry  over 
the last four decades is proof of this. 
Proportionality  of  regulation  –  the  jurisdiction  operates  on  the  principle  that,  before  a 
regulatory measure is introduced, we must be satisfied that it is necessary, it is appropriate 
given the nature of financial services business in the Cayman Islands, it is proportional to the 
identified risks, we understand the regulatory impact and its benefits outweigh its costs. 
Respect for the rule of law, due process and the right to privacy of personal financial 
information – this speaks for itself. 
Progressive  reinforcement  of  our  international  cooperation  channels  –  evidenced  by 
the  Mutual  Legal  Assistance  Treaty  and  Tax  Information  Exchange  Agreement  with  the 
U.S.A;  the  Proceeds  of  Criminal  Conduct  Law;  the Monetary  Authority  Law;  the  Terrorism 
Law;  the  Criminal  Justice  (International  Cooperation)  Law;  and  willingness  to  negotiate 
additional  agreements  for  cross  border  cooperation  and  information  exchange  with  key 
jurisdictions. 
Constructive  engagement  on  international  issues  in  the  provision  of  cross-border 
financial  services  –  based  on  a  level  playing  field  and  encompassing  equity,  fair 
competition, transparency and non-discrimination. 
    These all promote legal and commercial certainty and control reputational risk for Cayman and users 
of the jurisdiction. 
The tools 
Public sector infrastructure 
The public sector support infrastructure includes a number of key institutions. These are: 
• 
Minister, International Financial Services Policy – with oversight of two key bodies – the 
Financial Services Council and the Private Sector Consultative Committee. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
     Portfolio  of  Finance  &  Economics  –  under  the  leadership  of  the  Financial  Secretary, 
Deputy Financial Secretary, also includes The Secretariat (policy), Public Relations Unit, Tax 
Information Exchange Authority, Anti Money-Laundering Steering Group. 
CIMA  –  regulates  the  financial  sector,  (including  monitoring  for  compliance  with  AML/CFT 
requirements), i.e. banks, money services providers, trust companies, securities (investment 
funds,  fund  administrators,  brokers,  investment  managers),  insurance  (captives,  general, 
managers, and agents), company managers and corporate service providers. 
General  Registry  –  registry  for  companies,  exempted  partnerships  &  trusts,  patents  & 
trademarks. 
Cayman Islands Stock Exchange – from its start as a listing facility for Cayman Islands’ 
specialist  products,  mutual  funds  and  debt  securities,  the  CSX  has  emerged  as  an 
innovative, global gateway to accessing capital markets in ten years. 
Financial  Reporting  Authority  –  similar  to  U.S.-based  FINCen,  UK  NCIS  and  other 
international financial crime reporting agencies around the world. 
Private sector 
The private sector is a critical component of the infrastructure. Over the years Cayman has built up a 
world-class  cadre  of  professionals  who  have  facilitated  specialization  in  institutional  high  value 
business. Our growing law firms routinely rank very highly in these main areas of specialization, and 
all of the “Big 4” accounting & auditing firms have significant offices here. Among our banks are 43 of 
the top 50 international banking houses. There is a large number of top quality service providers for 
fund administration, insurance and company management and fiduciary services, both independently 
owned and members of well-known international groups. 
The special relationship 
The  relationship  between  the  Government  and  the  private  sector  is  one  of  the  strengths  of  the 
Cayman Islands’ financial industry. There is a culture of consultation and cooperation. At the central 
Government level this is facilitated through the two bodies already mentioned, the Financial Services 
Council  and  the  Private  Sector  Consultative  Committee.  These  two  standing  groups  provide 
Government  with  valuable  advice,  input  and  feedback  on  financial  and  economic  initiatives.  Private 
sector consultation is also a formal requirement for CIMA. The Monetary Authority Law stipulates that 
prior consultation must occur before the regulator issues or amends rules or statements of principle or 
guidance  regarding  the  conduct  of  licensees.  Industry-CIMA-Government  working  groups  are 
frequently used to address sectors requiring attention. Recent examples are the insurance and mutual 
fund industries. 
Challenges 
The high tax v low tax battle 
The  principal  ongoing  challenge  for  the  Cayman  Islands,  and  one  faced  by  other  small  financial 
services centres, is the pressure from leading economic powers (and their client international agencies 
such as the OECD) to curtail the activities of these centres, that are seen as diverting tax revenue 
from the public coffers of these higher tax jurisdictions. The latest initiative is the current offensive in 
the  United  States  Congress  against  perceived  “tax  havens”  by  proposed  new  tax  legislation 
blacklisting such centres and deterring U.S. taxpayers from using them. 
The Cayman Islands is responding to this with efforts to ensure that decision-makers and influencers 
understand the Cayman Islands regime and our associated international cooperation channels, as well 
as the effectiveness of those channels (particularly under the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty and the 
Tax  Information  Exchange  Agreement  with  the  U.S.).  Cayman  is  also  actively  considering  tax 
information  exchange  agreements,  double  tax  treaties  or  comprehensive  tax  agreements  with  key 
jurisdictions. Its position is that there must be real and measurable benefits to Cayman under any such 
agreements. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2007
International standard setters 
Cayman  has  been  periodically  challenged  by  international  standard  setters  with  their  establishment 
and  revision  of  standards,  which  Cayman  and  similar  jurisdictions  usually  have  not  had  a  hand  in 
developing,  and  the  resulting  sanctions  unilaterally  imposed  for  perceived  non-compliance.  As 
mentioned above, Cayman was placed on the FATF list of noncooperative countries in 2000. It also 
felt  the  brunt  of  the  OECD’s  harmful  tax  competition  initiative  during  that  period,  and  subsequent 
initiatives since that time. 
The primary strategy is to engage these standards setters in dialogue so as better to inform them as to 
the regulatory regime in Cayman and to secure Cayman’s early participation in framing international 
standards that are accepted and applied by all. Currently, Cayman is engaged in this exercise with the 
International Organisation of Securities Commissioners (IOSCO) and the International Association of 
Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS).  The  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force  mutual  evaluation  now 
underway and the IMF assessment in late 2007 will provide further opportunities for dialogue. 
Other challenges 
• 
 Natural  and  man-man  shocks  –  Hurricane  Ivan  in  2004  underscored  Cayman’s 
vulnerability  to  natural  disasters,  in  particular  hurricanes.  The  financial  sector  proved  itself 
very  resilient  in  the  aftermath  of  Ivan,  thanks  in  part  to  its  business  continuity  planning. 
However there were areas of weakness, and since that time industry and Government have 
been working to address these. The Government has strengthened its ability to handle large-
scale  emergencies  with  the  recent  establishment  of  an  emergency  management  agency. 
CIMA has also issued a statement of guidance on business continuity for all licensees. 
Immigration/Human Resources – there is a worldwide shortage of skilled labour to support 
the financial services industry. Cayman is an expensive location in which to do business and 
live. Just as Cayman has been the beneficiary of outsourcing of financial transactions from 
high tax and overregulated jurisdictions, so it must accept that many support functions will be 
outsourced by its service providers to lower cost jurisdictions. This makes it ever important 
that Cayman focuses on delivering high value added services and providing better education 
and opportunities for the local community while continuing to welcome those with the needed 
skills that Cayman has not yet developed at home. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 5
