Alan Bollard: Delivering sound and innovative financial services for New 
Zealand  
Background paper for an address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
to the Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce1, Christchurch, 26 January 2007. 
Alan Bollard, Adrian Orr, and David Drage wrote this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of a range of 
Reserve Bank staff in putting this paper together. Any errors are the responsibility of the authors. 
 An important issue for the economic performance of New Zealand is whether New Zealand has the 
financial services on offer that will best enable the allocation of our resources to their most productive 
uses – both from the perspective of the investment product choice set an individual faces when saving 
and the options available to firms when raising capital.  
New Zealand’s rather unique financial market and institutional structure suggest that there is room for 
further development. This includes expanding the width and breadth of New Zealand’s capital market, 
enhancing  the  performance  of  the  non-bank  financial  sector,  and  raising  the  total  pool  of  financial 
savings and financial literacy. In doing so, New Zealand’s financial system will be more dynamic and 
sound, potentially raising our sustainable economic growth performance. 
This paper outlines the important influence the financial system has on economic growth, highlights 
some of the unique features of our system, and discusses how the potential gaps and vulnerabilities in 
New Zealand’s financial system could be addressed (including actions the Bank is undertaking).  
The important role of the financial system 
It is well known that New Zealand is, and has been for a long time, dependent on foreign savings for 
its  investment  capital.  New  Zealand  finances  around  a  third  of  its  national  investment  spending 
through  domestic  savings,  with  the  remaining  two  thirds  financed  from  abroad.  Given  the  many 
positive  features  of  New  Zealand’s  economic  and  institutional  structures,  foreign  savers  have 
remained prepared to invest in New Zealand. In part we choose to access global savings because of 
the relatively small scale of New Zealand’s capital demands compared to the global pool.  
Both the price of capital and its means of delivery (or intermediation) are some of the most important 
determinants of the quantity and quality of investment in New Zealand.  
The financial system plays the central role in informing and facilitating these saving and investment 
decisions.  It  enables  the  vast  majority  of  economic  exchange  to  occur  –  both  between  people  and 
across  borders,  and  through  time.  As  such,  the  financial  system  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  the  efficient 
allocation of economic resources and risk – thus influencing the long-run growth performance of an 
economy. Developed economies tend to have efficient and sophisticated financial systems.  
The financial system comprises three interconnected components: 
• 
financial  markets  in  which  financial  contracts  are  entered  into  or  traded  directly  between 
buyers  and  sellers  (or  borrowers  and  lenders).  These  includes  debt  (i.e.,  bond),  foreign 
exchange, and equity (i.e., share) markets;  
financial institutions which intermediate between borrowers and lenders and provide financial 
services. This sector includes banks (which dominate the institutional sector in New Zealand) 
and  other  non-bank  financial  institutions  such  as  finance  companies,  credit  unions  and 
building societies; and  
payments systems which allow financial transactions within markets and between institutions 
to be settled.  
                                                        
1   Declarations of interest: Dr Bollard’s wife, Jenny Morel, runs a venture capital business, No 8 Ventures Limited; at the time 
of  drafting  this  speech  Adrian  Orr  had  been  appointed  as  Chief  Executive  of  the  Guardians  of  the  New  Zealand 
Superannuation Fund.  
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
This paper focuses primarily on the interaction between the financial markets and financial institutions.  
The  efficiency  of  any  financial  system  relates  both  to  its  role  in  allocating  risk  and  resources 
throughout  the  economy  (i.e.,  allocative  efficiency),  the  economic  costs  of  providing  these  services 
(i.e., productive efficiency), and the incentives for ongoing innovation (i.e., dynamic efficiency). When a 
financial system is operating efficiently, investors will receive the highest risk-adjusted returns on their 
investments,  borrowers  will  minimise  the  cost  of  raising  their  capital,  and  the  financial  system  will 
make its greatest contribution to economic growth.  
Countries  with  efficient  financial  systems  also  tend  to  be  less  prone  to  financial  (e.g.,  banking  or 
currency) crises, and tend to recover more quickly at less cost if such a crisis does occur.2 A sound 
financial system is thus one that has the resilience to continue to efficiently provide financial services 
under  a  plausible  range  of  economic  circumstances.  We  define  the  conditions  for  financial  system 
efficiency and stability as existing when all relevant financial system risks are adequately identified, 
priced, allocated, and managed.3  
Financial product offerings and New Zealand’s uniqueness 
In  a  developed  economy firms,  the government,  and  individuals will  supply and  demand  a  financial 
portfolio that includes debt (government and private sector), equity, and bank (i.e., loans and deposits) 
products. A range of financial services allow firms to raise capital in various forms and individuals to 
invest in a portfolio of these products so as to best meet their savings needs.  
Marvin Goodfriend provides an exposition on the reasoning for the creation of this financial product set 
in  a  developed  economy,  and  the  benefits  it  brings  in  terms  of  financial  system  soundness  and 
efficiency.4  Essentially  firms,  as  they  grow,  have  increasing  demands  for  capital  that  cannot  be 
supplied from within their firm alone (i.e., retained earnings), and as such they go in search of various 
forms of external finance.  
First and perhaps foremost, banks play an important role in the provision of external finance. However, 
the provision of external finance involves information-intensive processes such as credit evaluation, 
loan monitoring, and a premium for the risk of default, all of which add to the cost of borrowing. Bank 
lending thus comes at a price to the borrower over and above internal finance.  
However, as firms become more widely known they can afford to partially bypass bank lending (which 
is often relatively more expensive) and gain direct access to savings through capital markets. Firms 
with a sound public image (perhaps because of a good credit rating) may thus have a price incentive 
to directly issue their own debt securities.  
At  some  point  it  is  also  going  to  be  the  case  that  too  much  reliance  on  debt  financing  alone  –  no 
matter  the  form  –  will  constrain  a  firms’  flexibility.  Hence,  many  firms  will  inevitably  rely  on  some 
combination of both external equity and debt for their financing. Naturally equity finance comes at an 
additional cost, which is essentially a share of future profits. This portfolio of capital raising products 
provides a firm the flexibility to choose its optimal gearing ratio, and mix of dividends and debt service.  
From a saver’s (or investor’s) perspective, a broad portfolio choice of debt and equity products is also 
desirable. An investor has the ability to combine these products – and their unique range of risk and 
return features – to best match their savings needs. The portfolio choice an individual makes generally 
comes down to issues such as their investment time horizon and income needs. Investor access to 
these  capital  raising  products  also  provides  an  important  market  discipline  on  firms  and  financial 
institutions that promotes the dynamic and sound allocation of scarce resources.  
                                                      
2   Mario I Blejer, Economic growth and the stability and efficiency of the financial sector, Journal of Banking and Finance 30 
(2006). 
3   See  Leni  Hunter,  Adrian  Orr  and  Bruce  White  (2006),  “Towards  a  framework  for  promoting  financial  stability  in  New 
Zealand” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin (Volume 69, Number 1). 
4   Marvin Goodfriend (2005) “Why a corporate bond market: growth and direct finance” remarks made at the BIS/PBC seminar 
on “Developing corporate bond markets in Asia” held in Kumming, China, 17-18 November 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2007
New Zealand’s unique financial services  
It is thus instructive to assess the relative role that these financial products play in New Zealand. Doing 
so  highlights  just  how  unique  –  although  not  necessarily  concerning  –  New  Zealand’s  financial 
intermediation  is  in  some  respects.  While  the  profile  looks  similar  to  Australia,  domestic  credit5 
accounts for around 150 percent of GDP in NZ, compared to 180 percent in Australia, and our stock 
market capitalisation is less than half of theirs, relative to GDP. 
Relative  to  most  developed  economies,  banks  play  a  very  dominant  role  in  New  Zealand’s 
intermediation  process,  with  bank  credit  (especially  mortgage  credit)  our  preferred  capital  raising 
instrument. Domestic bank credit is comparatively large relative to the size of the economy and our 
capital (i.e., bond and equity) markets (see Figure 1). 
Figure 1: Channels of local currency funding (2005) 
Source: RBNZ, Bank for International Settlements 
In aggregate, banks own around 75 percent of New Zealand’s total financial assets, with around 90 
percent of these owned by the largest four banks. By contrast, funds under management account for 
less than 20 percent of financial system assets, and the non-bank financial sector accounts for only 7 
percent.  
The registered banks operating in New Zealand also have a relatively high reliance on foreign funding 
for their lending activities. The banking sector’s net foreign liabilities account for around 20 percent of 
New Zealand’s total liabilities, which is very high by international standards.  
                                                       
5   Domestic credit consists of claims (lending) of M3 institutions on central government, and of M3 institutions and the Reserve 
Bank on the private sector. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 3
Figure 2: Offshore funding of banks (2003) 
Net banking sector non-resident liabilities / gross financial system liabilities 
Source: OECD. Bank Profitability – Financial statements of the Banks. RBNZ calculations  
New Zealand has a very high level of foreign ownership by developed country standards, with more 
than 90 percent of the banking sector owned by foreigners. 
 Figure 3: Share of foreign bank assets in domestic banking systems (2001) 
Source: World Bank. Foreign banks are banks with more than 50 percent foreign shareholding. 
4 
  BIS Review 11/2007
Similar  to  Australia,  a  relatively  high  proportion  of  lending  is  to  households,  with  the  bulk  of  this 
mortgage lending. 
Figure 4: Breakdown of lending by financial institutions (2005) 
 Source: RBNZ for NZ and Australian credit figures (which include securitisation), National Central Banks 
In summary, the banking sector dominates the New Zealand financial system, with this sector highly 
country  concentrated  in  its  ownership,  strongly  reliant  on  (largely  short-term)  foreign  funding,  and 
focussed primarily on lending to the household sector for housing mortgages. 
Compared to other countries, New Zealand’s capital markets are relatively small. While the amount of 
New Zealand dollar corporate bonds (or securities) outstanding relative to the size of the economy is 
similar to that of Australia, very few of these are actually issued by local businesses. Instead, the vast 
majority of New Zealand dollar debt securities are issued by non-resident entities in offshore markets – 
mainly Eurokiwi and NZ dollar Uridashi bonds. In relative terms, New Zealand’s businesses are low 
users of the capital markets for fund raising. 
The Eurokiwi and Uridashi debt securities are issued into, for example, the Japanese retail financial 
sector on behalf of an international institution (such as the World Bank) wanting to raise capital. The 
Japanese  investor  gets  access  to  New  Zealand  interest  rates  (and  NZ/Yen  currency  fluctuations), 
while only facing World Bank credit risk. Meanwhile, the NZ Dollar denominated capital that has been 
raised by the World Bank is usually ‘swapped’ for US dollars with a local NZ bank, with the latter then 
on-lending this capital within New Zealand. From New Zealand’s perspective, this issuance provides a 
mechanism  for  hedging  the  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  risks  associated  with  our  offshore 
borrowing. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 5
Figure 5: Corporate bonds outstanding (2005) 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 
Government  bonds  are  the  dominant  product  in  New  Zealand’s  debt  market.  However,  the  New 
Zealand government bond market has become less liquid over recent years, which is a reflection of 
the Government’s reduced funding requirement, having run fiscal surpluses for the past 10-15 years.  
The amount of government bonds outstanding has shrunk from more than 35 percent of GDP in the 
early 1990s, to around 20 percent currently. In addition, at present close to 70 percent of government 
bonds  outstanding  are  held  by  offshore  investors,  many  of  whom  are  not  active  traders  of  their 
holdings. In line with this, turnover in the New Zealand government bond market is also lower than in 
other developed markets.  
 Figure 6: New Zealand Government securities 
Source: RBNZ 
6 
  BIS Review 11/2007
Figure 7: Government bond turnover ratio (2004) 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 
 Equity market 
Unsurprisingly  given  the  relative  size  of  our  economy  and  high  level  of  foreign  ownership,  New 
Zealand’s  stock  market  is  small  by  global  standards,  with  the  total  capitalisation  of  the  market  less 
than  that  of  many  individual  corporations  overseas.  But  it  is  also  small  relative  to  the  size  of  our 
economy.  
As  shown  in  the  chart,  the  capitalisation  of  the  stock  market  is  very  low  as  a  proportion  of  GDP  – 
something that limits options for New Zealand businesses and New Zealand investors. Whether as a 
symptom  or  consequence  of  this,  the  direct  and  indirect  holdings  of  equity  by  New  Zealand 
households appear to be relatively low by global standards.6  
                                                      
6  
“Why Kiwis like buying houses more than buying businesses” speech to Trans-Tasman Business Circle, October 2005. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 7
Figure 8: Equity market capitalisation as a % of GDP (2006) 
Source: IMF 
 Is New Zealand well serviced by the financial product offering? 
New  Zealand’s  financial  product  range,  and  the  way  the  products  are  used,  raises  some  questions 
about its soundness and efficiency. In particular, the intermediation process in New Zealand is largely 
dominated  by  the  banking  sector  which  is  primarily  focussed  on  mortgage  lending  to  households. 
Meanwhile, both the non-bank financial sector and capital markets are relatively small. Concerns have 
been raised by some commentators that the dominance of one intermediation channel may constrain 
financial market development.  
Whether  or  not  banks  have  crowded  out  other  market  developments,  the  product  range  has 
implications for, amongst other things:  
• 
The operation of monetary policy, with regard to information regarding expectations gathered 
through financial market product prices;  
Financial  system  efficiency  and  innovation,  with  regard  to  competition  in  product  offerings 
and financial service completeness; and  
Financial system soundness, with regard to alternative forms of financing or intermediation 
when  this  is  dominated  by  only  one  or  two  channels  (i.e.,  banks and  derivatives  markets) 
that have their own specific credit risks and operational drivers. 
  Of course, a full range of desirable investment products will not necessarily evolve in any economy if 
there is no demand for them. That is, there is a potential ‘chicken and egg’ relationship between the 
size  of  the  total  pool  of  financial  savings  in  a  country  and  the  range  of  financial  product  offerings 
available. Some have argued that the pool of capital created by a rise in household financial savings in 
other  countries  –  notably  Australia  in  recent  years  –  has  provided  an  important  impetus  for  capital 
market development, via increased demand for investment products. Raising New Zealand financial 
savings is another important topic in itself. 
The concentration of bank lending  
New Zealand is well served by its banks, which are well capitalised and very profitable over the cycle. 
The  sector  is  also  relatively  efficient  by  some  standard  measures.  A  common  measure  of  bank 
efficiency – the ratio of non-interest expenses (cost) to revenues – indicates that New Zealand banks 
are comparatively efficient. Moreover, bank margins are around the average for developed economies.  
8 
 BIS Review 11/2007
Figure 9: Bank efficiency: Cost / income rations (2005) 
Source: RBNZ (for New Zealand), Standard and Poors. Based on the largest banks in each country. 
Figure 10: Bank margins: Net interest margins (2002) 
  Earnings from all interest bearing assets (including debt securities) minus the cost of all funding, as a ratio of average assets. 
Source: West LB Global Bank Chartbook 
However, the banking sector is very dominant in New Zealand’s financial intermediation process, and 
heavily  industry  and  country  concentrated  in  its  ownership  structure.  This  raises  questions  around 
overall financial system efficiency and soundness. For example, given that bank lending is dominated 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 9
by  residential  mortgages,  it  may  be  the  case  that  small  to  medium-sized  firms  will  find  it  difficult  to 
raise  bank  loans.  In  part  this  might  explain  the  relatively  high  use  of  home  mortgages  for  raising 
business capital, with around 10 percent of total mortgage lending estimated to be going into financing 
business.  
Banks’  dominant  intermediation  position  appears  to  enable  them  to  price  standard  loans  and  offer 
deposit  rates  very  aggressively  at  times  for  short-term  competitive  reasons.  This  activity  may 
potentially  limit  the  room  for  the  alternative  forms  of  investment  products  to  develop  and  create 
pro-cyclical lending behaviour, thus accentuating asset price and business cycles.  
Banks  also  play  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  new  financial  products.  However,  the 
relatively small role that capital markets and the non-bank lending sector play in New Zealand may 
reduce this impetus domestically. Recently, for example, Professor Dick Herring identified a number of 
potential financial developments that would help improve New Zealand’s financial stability, including 
longer-term mortgages and various investment products (including mortgage securitisation).7  
The role of domestic capital markets 
A  well  functioning  capital  market  offers  a  number of  advantages.  A  broad and  deep  corporate  debt 
market  will  generate  an  observable  benchmark  for  firms  raising  capital  and  for  investors  seeking  a 
fixed interest investment with a corporate credit risk premium. The existence of longer-term financing 
options that capital markets provide is also useful for firms who have long-term growth prospects, as 
for example infrastructure businesses. A well functioning capital market also provides incentives for 
innovation in banking products, as discussed already. And, the more means by which savings can be 
transformed into capital investment in a prudent manner, then the more back up there is if any single 
channel fails.  
However, as highlighted by the statistics discussed earlier, New Zealand’s domestic corporate bond 
market has been relatively stagnant since the early 1990s, and remains small in relative and absolute 
size.  This  market  also  remains  relatively  illiquid,  with  private  placements  often  preferred  and  low 
turnover in the secondary market. The situation could be summarised as too few willing institutional 
investors on one side of the market, and too few quality issuers on the other side. 
One constraint on investor demand for access to corporate debt has been the shape of New Zealand’s 
interest rate yield curve, with the highest returns to investors often being seen at the shorter-end of the 
lending spectrum. This in part reflects New Zealand’s low savings rate and favours short-term bank 
deposits as the preferred savings instrument.  
However,  other  more  structural  challenges  to  the  development  of  a  deep  and  liquid  New  Zealand 
corporate  bond  market  include  tax  effects  that  favour  both  non-financial  investments  and  bank 
offshore debt raising.  
One  of  the  main  competitors  to  the  corporate  bond  market  is  New  Zealand’s  well  developed 
derivatives  market  in  both  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rates.  These  markets  have  developed  in 
response  to  a  demand  for  risk  mitigation  from  banks  and  corporates.  These  markets  have  enabled 
larger  domestic  companies  to  access  offshore  capital  markets  directly  for  their  funds,  and  then 
manage the associated foreign currency and interest rate risks.8  
Such  financing  activities  have  proved  reasonably  efficient  for  the  larger  companies  and  banks.  For 
example, the major New Zealand registered banks have quite legitimately set up offshore subsidiaries 
for the specific purpose of accessing offshore capital markets to fund their lending activities. These 
legal structures enable banks to avoid the 2 percent Approved Issuer Levy (AIL) that is levied on the 
interest  paid  to  raise  the  capital,  as  the  capital  raised  by  the  subsidiary  is  then  loaned  back  to  its 
parent.9  Similarly  many  New  Zealand  corporates  rationally  choose  to  borrow  directly  in  offshore 
                                                      
7   Richard J. Herring (University of Pennsylvania) "Property Prices, Lending and Vulnerability to Financial Crises." speech to 
RBNZ workshop on Financial Sector Balance Sheets and Vulnerability to Financial Crises, September 25, 2006. Available at 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/workshops/25sep2006/2827569.html
8   Tyler, Simon (2005) “The New Zealand corporate bond market” BIS Kunming conference. 
9   AIL was introduced in 1992 as a mechanism to make New Zealand fixed income more attractive for foreign investors, by 
enabling investment free of "non resident withholding tax". 
10 
 BIS Review 11/2007
markets, often in a foreign currency that has a lower interest rate structure so as to minimise the cost 
of the AIL.  
While these activities make financial sense under current tax structures, they do constrain the amount 
of domestic capital raising activity and the access to high quality debt securities by domestic savers.  
A deep and liquid foreign currency and interest rate swap market is a strong virtue of the New Zealand 
financial system. However, it is by no means a perfect substitute for a deep and liquid bond market. In 
particular, interest rate swap trades are only as good as the credit risk associated with the institutions 
or  parties  (e.g.,  the  local  bank)  involved  in  the  swap.  The  swaps  market  is  also  subject  to  liquidity 
pressures  at  different  points  in  the  business  cycle.  It  may  not  be  as  reliable  in  times  of  adverse 
economic conditions, when financial system robustness and a ‘spare tyre’ is most needed.  
 Enhancing financial system efficiency and soundness 
To recap, there are several areas of interest with regard to possible constraints on the efficiency and 
soundness of the New Zealand financial system. These include: 
• 
The dominance of the banking intermediation channel and concentration of bank ownership 
to one country, Australia;  
The dominance of the derivatives market (foreign exchange and interest rate swap markets) 
in intermediating between foreign savings and domestic borrowing; and  
The relatively small size and role of domestic capital markets. 
• 
The remainder of this paper highlights some possible actions that may better promote a sound and 
dynamic  financial  system.  Some  of  these  actions  sit  directly  with  the  Bank  and  progress  is  being 
made.  However,  in  doing so,  we  are  acutely  aware  that  just  as markets can fail,  so  can regulatory 
interventions.  Our  experience  suggests  that  market-based  solutions  –  sometimes  with  regulatory 
prompting  and  encouragement  –  often  result  in  a  better  performing  financial  system.  So,  with  that 
caveat in place, let me highlight some near-term challenges.  
Banking 
A near-term issue for bank regulators (here and abroad) is whether bank regulatory rules accentuate 
the pro-cyclicality of bank lending. That is, credit booms and busts are positively correlated with the 
economic  cycle  and  banks  often  face  incentives  to offer  credit  more  generously  in  booms and  less 
generously in busts. Regulators do not want their rules to magnify the cyclicality of bank lending, and 
hence  the  extent  of  economic cycles  and  any associated strains  on  the  financial system. However, 
some aspects of the new Basel II capital framework have the potential to provide banks with additional 
incentives if not monitored closely.10  
Under Basel II, it is possible that overly optimistic assessments of risk at a good point in the economic 
cycle  might  feed  through  to  the  capital  banks  hold  and  encourage  further  pro-cyclical  lending.  For 
example, if banks were to underestimate the long-run risk of borrowers defaulting or overestimate the 
realisable  value  of  collateral  (e.g.,  a  mortgage  over  a  house)  and  that  fed  through  to  their  capital 
requirement they might be encouraged to lend more.  
When implementing Basel II capital requirements in coming months, we will be working to ensure that 
the average level of capital a bank is required to hold for regulatory purposes is sufficient for all stages 
of the business cycle and any changes do not accentuate the lending cycle.  
On a different topic but still with banks, we are also looking at the role securitisation plays in the New 
Zealand financial system as part of our Basel II activity. In simple terms, securitisation is the parcelling 
up  of  a  stock  of  assets  (such  as  bank  mortgages)  and  the  on-selling  of  such  parcels  to  interested 
investors.  
                                                      
10   Basel II is a new set of bank capital adequacy requirements being implemented in many developed countries. For more 
details  see:  Yeh,  A,  J  Twaddle  and  M  Frith  (2005),  “Basel  II:  a  new  capital  framework”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand 
Bulletin, 68 (3), 4 –15. 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 11
Given  the  dominance  of  banks  in  New  Zealand,  and  the  concentration  of  their  activity  in  mortgage 
lending,  the  securitisation  of  some  of  their  mortgage  books  has  the  potential  to  reduce  the 
concentration of mortgage loans on banks’ balance sheets and to distribute the credit risk associated 
with those loans more widely. In addition to spreading risk more widely, securitisation gives investors 
another product in which to invest their funds and provides banks with another way of sourcing funding 
and reducing maturity mismatches on their balance sheets arising from a preponderance of short-term 
funding and longer-term lending (e.g. fixed rate mortgages).  
It  is  unclear  exactly  why  New  Zealand  banks  have  not  been  more  active  users  of  securitisation. 
Possible reasons include New Zealand banks’ current credit ratings and the pricing of bank debt and 
subordinated debt that make it more attractive for banks to keep mortgage loans on their own balance 
sheet. There are also up front costs to securitisations and banks may be looking for a more liberal 
treatment  of  securitisations  with  originator-provided  credit  enhancements  for  regulatory  capital 
purposes.  
Our  work  on  implementing  Basel  II  capital  adequacy  rules  is  designed  to  more  closely  link  the  risk 
banks  are  taking  with  their  regulatory  capital  requirement.  For  securitisation,  the  key  element  is 
determining the extent that a bank has passed on the risks associated with the mortgage loans to the 
investors  in  the  securitisation  and  whether  it  retains  exposure  to  the  risk  of  the  loans  in  form  or 
substance. In carrying out our review of capital adequacy requirements relating to securitisations we 
will aim to ensure that banks are required to hold an appropriate level of capital to cover the risks they 
incur,  without  overlooking  the  extent  to  which  the  securitisation  may  result  in  risk  reduction  for  the 
institution. 
Non-bank sector 
Meanwhile,  non-bank  financial  institutions  (such  as  building  societies,  credit  unions,  and  finance 
companies) may  also potentially  fill  gaps  in  the  range  of  financial  services  offered  in New  Zealand. 
This tends to occur through specialising in the provision of services to particular sectors, groups, or 
regions. These institutions also increase competition, add to financial depth and liquidity, and provide 
a wider choice of product set for capital raising and investors. Hence, it is in New Zealand’s interest to 
have a sound and dynamic non-bank financial sector. 
At present the Bank is playing its role in the Government’s review of the regulation of many aspects of 
New  Zealand’s  financial  system.11  The  main  aim  of  this  review  is  to  ensure  that  the  myriad  of 
legislation  in  this  area  does  not  create  unintended  and  undesirable  distortions  in  the  competitive 
environment, that unnecessary compliance costs remain are reduced, that the objectives of regulation 
are clear, and that investors are well informed in order to make good investment decisions.  
While  final  decisions  related  to  the  review  are  some  months  off  yet,  we  are  confident  that  the 
outcomes  will  include  improved  information  flows  to  investors  and  some  improved  efficiencies  for 
non-bank financial institutions. 
Capital markets 
There appears room for New Zealand’s capital markets to develop. One area to better understand is 
the  drivers  that  have  led  to  the  development  of  two  New  Zealand  dollar  debt  markets:  one  with 
resident issuers and one with non-resident issuers (e.g. Eurokiwis and Uridashi). Attracting domestic 
and  offshore  issuers  and  investors  into  New  Zealand’s  capital  market  would  promote  financial 
efficiency,  allow  larger  domestic  borrowers  to  reduce  their  reliance  on  the  banking  system,  and 
continue New Zealand’s integration into the global economy.  
Evidence  internationally  and  theoretically  suggests  one  important  component  of  a  robust  capital 
market is the existence of a reliable and liquid government bond benchmark yield curve. A challenge 
for  New  Zealand  is  to consider  the overall  net benefit  of  the  government  continuing  to borrow (i.e., 
issue debt) even as it is starting to build a significant net asset position. This challenge is increasing as 
the New Zealand government debt market becomes increasingly illiquid.  
                                                      
11   The government is undertaking a review of financial products and providers. The key objective for the review is to develop 
an effective and consistent framework for the regulation of non-bank financial institutions, intermediaries and products. 
12 
 BIS Review 11/2007
The  Australian  government  recently  decided  to  continue  issuing  debt  despite  its  persistent  financial 
surpluses  due  to  the  perceived  welfare  enhancing  features  of  a liquid  government  benchmark  yield 
curve. The Australian experience also suggests that once broad based credit markets develop around 
the risk-free government yield curve, it is possible to scale back the government debt on offer.  
The  New  Zealand  Treasury  does  not  undertake  its  government  bond  funding  with  the  primary 
objective  of  maintaining  a  benchmark  yield  curve.  More  recently,  however,  the  Debt  Management 
Office have shown a willingness to re-issue bonds that the market has expressed demand for and is 
working  towards  offering  facilities  that  will  help ensure  that  debt  market  participants  can  borrow 
parcels  of  government securities  when  they  are  unavailable  on  the  open  market.  In  addition,  the 
Reserve Bank recently reduced the need for banks to hold government bonds as collateral in the inter-
bank payment system, freeing up the supply of government bonds in the secondary market. We also 
introduced a ‘bond lending facility’ that improves the liquidity in the government bond market. Market 
participants have indicated a preference to see fewer but larger tranches of government bonds offered 
by the Treasury to consolidate liquidity in a few key sectors of the yield curve. 
Moreover,  unlike  Australia,  where  the  supply  of  commonwealth  government  bonds  is  similarly  tight, 
New  Zealand  has  not  developed  a  liquid  government  bond  futures  market  to  provide  a  substitute. 
Bond  futures  (as  opposed  to  physical  government  bonds  themselves) are  the  most  actively  traded 
instruments  in  well  developed  bond  markets  internationally  and,  as  such,  play  an  important  role  in 
allowing a wide range of market participants to manage and allocate interest rate risks. The advantage 
of bond futures is that their trading is not constrained to the total amount of government securities on 
issue, meaning that liquidity problems are less common once the futures market is developed. 
The futures market in New Zealand has struggled to develop because of a few factors. An important 
issue is the ‘chicken and egg’ syndrome again, where market participants have been reluctant to trade 
futures  until  liquidity  has  improved,  but  liquidity  will  not  improve  until  more  participants  enter  the 
market and trade.  
Another  issue  has  been  the  historically  dominant  position  of  the Over-The-Counter  inter-bank 
market for  physical government  bonds  in  New  Zealand,  which  has  tended  to  attract  the  trading 
activities  of  local banks  who  are  the  price-makers  in  that  market.  The  recent  reduction  in  local 
interbank government bond trading (reflecting a lack of availability of physical government bonds to 
trade)  may  mean  local  banks  will  have  more  of  an  appetite  to  trade  and  offer  bond  futures 
trading services in the future. 
Regarding the potential for rejuvenating the corporate bond market, there may be reason to reassess 
the  efficacy  of  the  Approved  Issuer Levy  placed  on  securities  issued.  In  1993  the  New  Zealand 
Treasury announced that they would pay the AIL on New Zealand government bonds, which led to the 
rapid expansion of the New Zealand government bond market. Subsequently, the AIL has remained 
an impediment to non-government securities issues and has driven many corporate to borrow in lower 
interest rate offshore capital markets purely to lower their AIL commitments.  
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in Australia  a  "public  offer  test"  was  introduced  to  enable  Australian 
companies to issue local currency bonds to foreign investors free of any non-resident withholding tax 
or levy. This enables Australian companies to issue local currency bonds that are treated equally by 
both  domestic  and  foreign  investors.  Given  the  efforts  New  Zealand  borrowers  take  to  avoid  the 
AIL, and given that it collects only marginal revenue, it may be appropriate to reassess it. We note that 
the  government  is  currently  seeking  submissions  on  the  appropriate  calibration  of  taxation  on  Non 
Resident Withholding Tax and the AIL regimes. From a capital markets development perspective we 
see merit in changes that reduce the incentives for security issuers to issue outside of the domestic 
market. 
More  generally,  other  crown  initiatives  will  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  development  of  New 
Zealand’s capital markets. The investment activities of the New Zealand Superannuation Fund, along 
with the other government investment vehicles (including ACC and the Government Superannuation 
Fund),  are  a  significant  component  of  the  demand  for  investment  products.  Their  evolving 
requirements,  particularly  with  regards  to  investment  products  that  are  currently  outside  the 
mainstream, will play a role in the development of our markets. Moreover, Kiwisaver has the potential 
to further boost demand for investment products.  
The  ongoing  review  of  the  regulation  around  financial  product  provision  may  also  lead  to  some 
improved  cost-efficiencies  for  firms  wanting  to  offer  debt  securities.  This  includes  the  potential  for 
savings on offer documentation costs (with the potential combining of both investment statements and 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 13
prospectuses),  and  revisiting  the  definition  of  ‘habitual  investors’.  In  addition,  a  Treaty  was  recently 
signed between New Zealand and Australia for the mutual recognition of securities regulations.  
Across many aspects of New Zealand’s financial system, there is also a general push for improved 
investor  information  that  enables  the  assessment  of  financial  product  features,  including  risk  and 
return.  These  include  ongoing  improvements  to  bank  disclosure  statements,  improved  disclosure 
requirements  for  non-bank  financial  institutions,  and  more  consistency  and  timeliness  in  investment 
prospectuses.  The  whole  area  of  credit  ratings  and  their  use  is  also  under  review  as  part  of  the 
financial regulatory review. 
As part of the broader financial sector reforms under way, Government is placing greater emphasis on 
the  role  of  investor  education,  to  promote  greater  financial  literacy  and  capacity  for  non-expert 
investors to make well-informed and well-considered risk/return decisions. A number of initiatives are 
planned or already under way in this area. Similarly, the move to strengthen the regulation of financial 
advisers and planners could be expected to produce longer term benefits in terms of potentially higher 
quality investment advice to investors. 
Overall,  New  Zealand’s  financial  system  remains  sound  and  dynamic.  However,  there  is  room  for 
improvement across many aspects of it, in particular the non-bank financial sector and capital market 
development. These improvements can come about through more effective regulatory arrangements 
currently  being  considered,  through  a  better  understanding  of  the  influence  of  the  current  tax 
environment, through the promotion of deeper and more liquid bond markets, and through improved 
financial literacy. 
However,  some  of  these  improvements  may  also  occur  as  a  natural  consequence  of  financial 
innovation and the necessary recovery of private savings. As we have noted in the Bank’s Financial 
Stability Report and in speeches, while the government and corporate sectors have been net savers in 
recent years, the household sector has been a heavy net borrower, and this has been a driver of New 
Zealand’s  external  indebtedness.  Aside  from  the  potential  financial  stability  or  soundness  concerns 
this  raises,  it  may  also  have  implications  for  product  and  service  innovation,  and  ultimately  the 
dynamism of our financial system. 
We  asked  at  the  beginning  of  this  paper  how  well  our  financial  services  industry  works  for  us.  To 
conclude: banks deliver basic banking services in New Zealand reasonably efficiently. However our 
capital markets do not all look so sophisticated: there are some financial services that our businesses 
and  our  investors  cannot  easily  access  on-shore.  Our  financial  system  currently  looks  sound.  The 
industry has adapted to our rather unique circumstances. Because of this, and in particular our lack of 
household  savings,  we  probably  remain  more  vulnerable  to  financial  shocks  than  most  developed 
countries. 
14 
 BIS Review 11/2007
