Frederic S Mishkin: Monetary policy and the dual mandate  
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Virginia, 10 April 2007. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  talk  with  you  today.1  I  would  like  to  direct  my  remarks  to  the 
macroeconomic mission of the Federal Reserve System. I wish to note that these remarks reflect only 
my  own  views  and  not  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  or  of  anyone  else  associated  with  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
In a democratic society like our own, the ultimate purpose of the central bank is to promote the public 
good by pursuing a course of monetary policy that fosters economic prosperity and social welfare. In 
the  United  States,  as  in  virtually  every  other  country,  the  central  bank  has  a  more  specific  set  of 
objectives that have been established by the government. This mandate was originally specified by the 
Federal  Reserve  Act  of  1913  and  was  most  recently  clarified  by  an  amendment  to  the  Federal 
Reserve Act in 1977.  
According  to  this  legislation,  the  Federal  Reserve's  mandate  is  "to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of 
maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates."  Because  long-term 
interest  rates  can  remain  low  only  in  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  these  goals  are  often 
referred  to  as  the  dual  mandate;  that  is,  the  Federal  Reserve  seeks  to  promote  the  two  coequal 
objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In the remainder of my remarks today, I will 
describe  how  these  two  objectives  are  consistent  with  our  ultimate  purpose  of  fostering  economic 
prosperity  and  social  welfare.  I  will  then  talk  about  some  important  practical  challenges  in 
implementing these goals.  
(By the way, I wish that I could also discuss the Federal Reserve's role in promoting the stability of the 
financial system, another key objective of central banks, but unfortunately that would violate my own 
personal mandate of finishing this speech in the allotted time.)  
Now with respect to the first objective, the rationale for maximizing employment is fairly obvious. The 
alternative situation – high unemployment – is associated with human misery, including lower living 
standards and increases in poverty as well as social pathologies such as loss of self-esteem, a higher 
incidence  of  divorce,  increased  rates  of  violent  crime,  and  even  suicide.  Furthermore,  when 
unemployment  is  high,  the  economy  has  idle workers  along with  a reduced  level  of production and 
household income. And when factories are idle, firms generally choose not to invest in additional plant 
and  equipment,  which  in  turn  has  adverse  consequences  for  subsequent  labor  productivity  and 
economic  growth.  All  these  symptoms  of  high  unemployment  were  observed  during  the  economic 
devastation of the Great Depression during the 1930s, which is now just a fading memory. But even 
less  severe  recessions  are  associated  with  painful  consequences  for  many  individual  workers  and 
their families.  
With respect to the second objective – that of price stability – there is now a broad consensus among 
policymakers, academic economists, and the general public in support of the principle that maintaining 
a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate  provides  lasting  benefits  to  the  economy.  In  particular,  low  and 
predictable  inflation  promotes  social  welfare  by  simplifying  the  savings  and  retirement  planning  of 
individual households and by facilitating firms' production and investment decisions. Furthermore, an 
environment of overall price stability contributes to economic efficiency by reducing the variability of 
relative prices and by minimizing the distortions that arise because the tax system is not completely 
indexed to inflation.  
Price stability also has important benefits in terms of equity. For example, an elevated inflation rate 
typically increases poverty because the poorest members of society do not have access to the sorts of 
financial  instruments  that  would  help  protect  them  against  inflation.  By  the  way,  these  are  not  just 
theoretical  arguments:  The  experience  of  the  United  States  in  the  1970s,  and  that  of  many  other 
economies  across  a  wide  range  of  times  and  circumstances,  demonstrates  that  high  and  unstable 
                                                      
1  
I want to thank Andrew Levin, Brian Madigan, and Spencer Dale for their extremely helpful comments on and assistance 
with this speech. 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
inflation  generally  detracts  from  the  standard  of  living,  hinders  the  process  of  capital  formation  and 
economic growth, and in some countries has even led to political and social instability. Such episodes 
also show that a full recovery from the adverse effects of severe inflation can take many years.  
Although  I  could  spend  all  morning  extolling  the  virtues  of  the  dual  mandate,  let  me  now  turn  to 
describing some of the challenges that the Federal Reserve faces in implementing this mandate.  
The first challenge is determining how to interpret the dual mandate. Of course, the Federal Reserve 
doesn't take a literal approach to the goal of maximum employment. In that case, our policies would 
need to be directed at getting everyone to work at least one hundred hours a week, and we would 
have to discourage senior citizens from retiring and young people from attending college instead of 
entering  the  labor  force.  Furthermore,  every  modern  economy  has  a  certain  level  of  "frictional" 
unemployment,  which  reflects  the  transitory  periods  over  which  individuals  remain  voluntarily 
unemployed  while  searching  for  a  new  job.  Partly  for  these  reasons,  Federal  Reserve  officials  and 
other policymakers often refer to this aspect of the dual mandate as the goal of maximum sustainable 
employment, and they place particular emphasis on the word sustainable.  
Similarly,  in  promoting  the  goal  of  price  stability,  policymakers  have  generally  not  taken  this  goal 
literally – by aiming at complete constancy of the price level – but instead have pursued policies aimed 
at  maintaining  a  low  and  predictable  inflation  rate.  In  particular,  at  a  congressional  hearing  in  mid-
1988, then-Chairman Greenspan defined price stability as an environment in which households and 
businesses "can safely ignore the possibility of sustained, generalized price increases or decreases" in 
making their saving and investment decisions.2  
Now let's turn to the practical challenges in conducting monetary policy to achieve the dual mandate.  
A central element in successful monetary policy is a strong commitment to a nominal anchor, that is, 
the  use  of  monetary  policy  actions  and  statements  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation.  During  the 
1980s and 1990s, the Federal Reserve succeeded in bringing inflation down from double-digit levels 
to the average rate of about 2 percent that has prevailed over the past decade. Moreover, when some 
measures of inflation were close to 1 percent in 2003, the Federal Open Market Committee's official 
statements  specifically  noted  that  any  further  substantial  decline  in  inflation  would  be  unwelcome, 
mainly  because  of  the  risk  that  a  falling  price  level  (which  has  not  occurred  since  the  Great 
Depression) could cause a significant disruption to economic activity and employment.  
In recent years, the Federal Reserve has been quite successful in maintaining a nominal anchor. Not 
only has the inflation rate remained within a reasonably narrow range, but inflation expectations, as 
measured by spreads between inflation-indexed and non-inflation-indexed Treasury securities and by 
surveys of professional forecasters and the general public, have also been well anchored.  
Maintaining  price  stability  is  also  essential  for  achieving  the  other  element  of  the  dual  mandate, 
namely,  maximum  sustainable  employment.  First,  as  I  have  already  emphasized,  a  low  and 
predictable inflation rate plays a crucial role in facilitating long-term growth in employment and labor 
productivity.  Second,  although  the  economy  will  inevitably  be  buffeted  by  various  shocks,  in  the 
majority of circumstances the appropriate monetary policy response to stabilize inflation also helps to 
stabilize employment and output fluctuations around their maximum sustainable levels. In other words, 
the two elements of the dual mandate are usually complementary.  
To see how a commitment to price stability leads to appropriate policy actions to stabilize employment 
and  output  fluctuations,  we  need  to  understand  that  there  are  two  key  determinants  of  inflation: 
inflation expectations and the amount of slack in the economy.3 Maintaining a nominal anchor helps 
stabilize  inflation  expectations,  which  in  turn  means  that  rises  or  falls  in  inflation  tend  to  be  highly 
correlated  with  economic  slack.  Thus,  stabilizing  inflation  also  helps  to  stabilize  economic  activity 
around sustainable levels.  
To see further how this process would work, consider a negative shock to aggregate demand (such as 
a  decline  in  consumer  confidence)  that  causes  households  to  cut  spending.  The  drop  in  demand 
                                                      
2   Alan  Greenspan  (1988),  statement  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Finance,  and  Urban  Affairs  (746  KB  PDF),  U.S. 
Senate, July 13. 
3   Two  other  important  factors  are  import  prices,  which  are  determined  by  world  market  prices  and  exchange  rates,  and 
relative  energy  prices,  such  as  the  price  of  oil.  However,  a  central  bank  has  no  control  over  world  market  or  relative  oil 
prices, and so adding these factors into the analysis does not change the basic conclusion here. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
leads, in turn, to a decline in actual output relative to its potential, that is, the level of output that the 
economy can produce at the maximum sustainable level of employment. As a result, future inflation 
will fall below levels consistent with price stability, and the central bank will pursue an expansionary 
policy to keep inflation from falling. The expansionary policy will then result in an increase in demand 
that raises output back up to potential output in order to return inflation to a level consistent with price 
stability.  
For example, during the last recession the Federal Reserve reduced its target for the federal funds 
rate a total of 5-1/2 percentage points, and this stimulus not only contributed to economic recovery but 
also helped avoid an unwelcome further decline in inflation. In other cases, a tightening of the stance 
of  monetary  policy  is  needed  to  prevent  an  "overheating"  of  economic  activity,  thereby  avoiding  a 
boom-bust cycle in the level of employment as well as an undesirable upward spurt of inflation.  
A  strong  commitment  to  price  stability  helps  reduce  fluctuations  in  employment  and  output  in  other 
ways. First, when inflation expectations are well anchored, a central bank will not have to worry that 
expansionary policy to counter a negative demand shock will lead to a sharp rise in expected inflation 
–  a  so-called  inflation  scare  –  that  will  then  push  up  actual  inflation  in  the  future.  Thus,  a  strong 
commitment to a nominal anchor enables a central bank to be more aggressive in the face of negative 
shocks and therefore to prevent rapid declines in employment or output.  
Moreover, with a strong commitment to a nominal anchor, supply shocks to inflation, such as a rise in 
relative energy prices, are likely to have only a temporary effect on inflation. This result is exactly what 
we have seen in the United States. Because people are confident that the Fed will not allow inflation to 
remain high, the recent sharp run-up in oil prices did not lead to a sustained rise in longer-run inflation 
expectations.  As  a  result,  inflation  rose  temporarily  but  has  now  been  falling  back  again.  When 
inflation expectations are well-anchored, the occurrence of an adverse aggregate supply shock does 
not  necessarily  mean  that  the  central  bank  must  raise  interest  rates  aggressively  in  order  to  keep 
inflation  under  control,  and  hence  the  commitment  to  price  stability  can  help  avoid  imposing 
unnecessary harm on the economy and on the workers who are most vulnerable to a weakening of 
economic activity.  
Now that we see the benefits of maintaining a commitment to a nominal anchor, one might naturally 
think that there would also be benefits to establishing a similar sort of anchor for the maximum level of 
employment. But that thought would be incorrect.  
In particular, although the Federal Reserve can determine and achieve the long-run average rate of 
inflation in keeping with its mandate of price stability, the level of maximum sustainable employment is 
not something that can be chosen by the Federal Reserve because no central bank can control the 
level  of  real  economic  activity  or  employment  over  the  longer  run.  As  I've  already  emphasized, 
monetary policy can certainly help improve the maximum sustainable employment of the economy by 
maintaining  low  and  predictable  inflation.  But  any  attempt  to  use  stimulative  monetary  policy  to 
maintain employment above its long-run sustainable level will inevitably lead to an upward spiral of 
inflation  and  therefore  will  actually  undermine  the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy,  with  severe 
adverse consequences for household income and employment.  
Indeed, the level of maximum sustainable employment is primarily driven by the fundamental structure 
of the economy, including factors such as demographics, people's preferences, the efficiency of labor 
markets, the characteristics of the tax code, and so forth. And many policies outside the control of the 
Fed  can  have  a  significant  effect  on  the  efficiency  of  the  economy  and  hence  on  the  maximum 
sustainable level of employment.  
Another crucial challenge in implementing the dual mandate is that the level of maximum sustainable 
employment  cannot  be  directly  observed  and  is  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty.  Indeed, 
economists do not even agree on the economic theory or econometric methods that should be used to 
measure the level of maximum sustainable employment. This challenge would be less formidable if 
the structure of the U.S. economy remained fairly constant over a sufficiently long period of time. In 
that  case,  a  reasonably  good  estimate  of  the  natural  unemployment  rate  –  the  unemployment  rate 
consistent  with  maximum  sustainable  employment  –  could  be  obtained  from  the  actual  long-term 
average rate of unemployment, and one could similarly estimate the path of potential output by fitting a 
trend  to  actual  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  data.  In  fact,  however,  such  estimates  can  be  highly 
misleading  because  the  structure  of  the  U.S.  economy  is  highly  dynamic  and  evolves  almost 
continuously over time.  
BIS Review 35/2007 
 3
In  particular,  over  the  past  few  decades  the  natural  unemployment  rate  and  the  path  of  potential 
output have apparently moved around quite substantially. If we do not recognize the potential for such 
shifts, they can pose serious pitfalls for the conduct of monetary policy. It is difficult to gauge these 
structural changes even with the benefit of hindsight, and it is even more difficult to recognize such 
developments  when  they  occur.  For  example,  most  economists  now  agree  that  the  natural 
unemployment rate shifted upward in the late 1960s and that potential output growth shifted downward 
after  1970.  However,  perhaps  because  these  shifts  were  not  generally  recognized  until  much  later, 
monetary  policy  in  the  1970s  seems  to  have  been  aimed  at  unsustainable  levels  of  output  and 
employment,  and  hence  policymakers  may  have  unwittingly  contributed  to  a  series  of  boom-bust 
cycles  as  well  as  accelerating  inflation  that  reached  double  digits  by  the  end  of  the  decade.  And 
although  subsequent  monetary  policy  tightening  was  successful  in  bringing  inflation  back  under 
control, the toll was a severe recession in 1981-82, which pushed up the unemployment rate to around 
10 percent.  
The  opposite  problem  occurred  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  when  the  common  view  among 
economists  was  that  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  was  near  6  percent.  When  the  actual 
unemployment rate dropped close to 4 percent, and the economy was growing at a rate that many 
economists viewed as unsustainable, there were widespread calls for the Fed to raise interest rates to 
prevent  an  acceleration  in  inflation.  Under  Chairman  Greenspan's  leadership,  however,  the  Federal 
Reserve resisted these views because it did not see inflation pressures developing and questioned 
whether the common estimate of the natural rate of unemployment was correct. The result was that 
the Fed did not tighten monetary policy, and the economy reaped the benefits of the new economy: 
very low levels of unemployment and a modest decline in the inflation rate.  
Attempting to anchor a particular rate of growth of output and employment in the longer term could 
therefore lead to seriously flawed policies. As I have already noted, an attempt by the Fed to achieve 
growth that is higher than the underlying growth rate of productive capacity would lead to unnecessary 
fluctuations of employment and inflation. And trying to achieve growth that is lower than the economy's 
true  potential  growth  rate  would  create  unnecessary  unemployment  and  generate  deflationary 
pressures that would subsequently have to be reversed.  
Given the possible pitfalls of trying to anchor the level of output or employment, what is the best way 
for a central bank to minimize deviations of employment from its maximum sustainable level?  
To be sure, central banks need to form some views about the economy's potential to produce on a 
sustained  basis.  After  all,  as  I  have  already  noted,  the  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  is  a  key 
determinant of inflation. But, rather than focusing on fixed estimates of potential output or the natural 
rate  of  unemployment,  central  banks  should  take  an  eclectic  approach  in  assessing  the  overall 
balance  of  economic  activity  relative  to  productive  capacity.  In  other  words,  in  pursuing  the  dual 
mandate, the central bank should recognize that a wide variety of indicators drawn from labor, product, 
and  financial  markets  provide  information  about  the  overall  balance  of  supply  and  demand  in  the 
economy. In addition, central banks should use information from various price indicators to tell them 
whether the economy is overheating or running well below productive capacity.  
In  some  circumstances,  a  temporary  tradeoff  between  the  two  elements  of  the  dual  mandate  may 
exist.  Unforeseen  shocks  to  the  economy  –  an  adverse  supply  shock,  for  example  –  might  lead  to 
inflation  that  is  temporarily  above  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  at  the  same  time  that 
employment is growing more slowly than its maximum sustainable pace. In such a situation, returning 
inflation  too  quickly  to  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  might  unnecessarily  exacerbate  the 
economic weakness. Instead, while restoring price stability remains critical, the central bank should do 
so at a pace that does not do undue harm to the economy.  
Finally,  central  banks  should  respond  aggressively  to  output  and  employment  fluctuations  on  those 
(hopefully  rare)  occasions  when  the  economy  is  very  far  below  any  reasonable  measure  of  its 
potential. In this case, errors in measuring potential output or the natural rate of unemployment are 
likely to be swamped by the large magnitude of resource gaps, so it is far clearer that expansionary 
policy is appropriate. Furthermore, taking such actions need not threaten the central bank's credibility 
in its pursuit of price stability.  
It  should  be  clear  from  my  remarks  today  that  although  as  a  Federal  Reserve  official  I  am  legally 
obligated to fulfill the dual mandate, I am actually an enthusiastic supporter. The best way to achieve 
the mandate is for the Federal Reserve to have a strong commitment to a nominal anchor to promote 
price  stability,  but  with  a  focus  on  keeping  employment  as  close  as  possible  to  its  maximum 
sustainable level.  
4 
 BIS Review 35/2007
