Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European economic integration 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe 2007, Lausanne, 21 September 2007. 
 Introduction1  
1. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  invited  as  a  speaker  to  the  Dialogue  européen  de  la 
Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe. Let me start by saying that we are today confronted 
with  exciting  challenges  and  unique  historical  developments.  The  enlargement  of  the 
European Union, currently including 27 countries and 494 million people with Romania and 
Bulgaria recently joining, is an exceptional endeavour. More historical developments can be 
observed in the euro area, which now comprises 13 countries and will expand to 15 in three 
months’ time as we are joined by Cyprus and Malta.  
It  is  a  fact  that  economic  integration  has  increased  among  the  countries  in  the  European 
Union. It is also true that further and deeper integration is needed and that the creation of the 
euro  area,  as  well  as  EU  enlargement  and  globalisation,  highlights  the  need  for  flexible 
economies.  In  this  sense,  all  policy-makers  and  social  partners  now  have  increased 
responsibilities. They must provide good management to ensure a well-functioning European 
Union  characterised  by  flexibility,  integrated  labour,  product  and  financial  markets  and 
disciplined fiscal policies.  
This leads me to the issue I would like to address today, namely the process of European 
economic integration. First, I would like to share with you some stylised facts on the features 
of the European Union’s and the euro area’s economic integration process. Second, I would 
like to look at some ideas regarding economic adjustment processes, particularly in the euro 
area. Finally, I would like to talk about Europe in a global context.  
Features of economic integration in the European Union 
2.  
Allow me to briefly elaborate on four main features of the process of economic integration in 
the European Union, and the euro area in particular.  
i) 
First,  economic  integration  has  been  reflected  in  a  marked  increase  in  intra-euro 
area  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Let  me  provide  you  with  some  figures.  Exports 
and  imports  of  goods  within  the  euro  area  increased  from  about  26%  of  GDP  in 
1998, the year before the adoption of the single currency, to around 32% in 2006. 
Intra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% of GDP in 
1998  to  almost  7%  in  2006.  The  continued  deepening  of  the  Single  Market  will 
further  facilitate  trade  in  services.  As  this  interdependence  within  the  euro  area 
becomes  stronger,  the  euro  area  is  also  becoming  a  more  open  economy  with 
increasing extra-euro area trade. Extra-euro area exports and imports of goods rose 
from  about  24%  of  GDP  in  1998  to  around  33%  in  2006.  Over  the  same  period, 
extra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 8% of GDP to 
almost  10%.  These  developments  clearly  show  that  we  are  not  witnessing  the 
creation of a “fortress Europe”. On the contrary, European integration complements 
global integration.  
                                                 
1  
I  should  like  to  thank  Malin  Andersson  for  her  input  into  this  speech,  Klaus  Masuch  and  Hans-Joachim 
Klöckers  for  their  helpful  comments,  and  Philippe  Leclercq,  Katherine  Brandt  and  Antonio  Afonso  for  their 
additional contributions. 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
As  a  second  feature,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  contributed  to  financial 
integration which, in turn, improves the free movement of capital in the euro area. 
Financial integration enhances the efficiency of economic mechanisms, strengthens 
competition  and  raises  the  potential  for  stronger  economic  growth.  For  example, 
recent research by London Economics estimated the benefits of the integration of 
EU  bond  and  equity  markets  to  be  around  1  percentage  point  of  additional  GDP 
growth over a ten-year period, or approximately €100 billion.2 Financial integration is 
also  crucial,  as  it  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  the  single 
monetary policy throughout the euro area. Despite some progress, further financial 
integration is particularly needed in a number of areas, including in retail banking. 
Labour  mobility  constitutes  the  third  feature  I  should  like  to  mention.  Lack  of 
openness in some countries increases risks of wage pressures as labour markets 
tighten. Available evidence suggests that, overall, cross-border labour mobility is still 
limited  in  most  parts  of  the  European  Union  and  we  still  have  regulatory  barriers 
across  the  European  Union,  including  the  euro  area  in  respect  of  labour  from 
Slovenia. This is in clear contrast to the situation in the United States.  
As  a  fourth  and  final  feature,  the  degree  of  synchronisation  or  co-movement 
between  the  different  cyclical  positions  across  the  euro  area  countries  increased 
since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  In  other  words,  a  large  number  of  euro  area 
economies  now  share  similar  business  cycles.  In  addition,  current  inflation  and 
output growth differences among euro area countries are relatively limited compared 
with the past. The differences are also similar to those observed across regions or 
states within the United States.  
The decline in inflation differentials has been impressive. At the beginning of the 1990s, the 
dispersion  in  inflation  rates  across  the  euro  area  countries  was,  on  average,  around  6 
percentage  points  (standard  deviation  measured  in  unweighted  terms).  Last  year,  the 
inflation dispersion was only 0.7 percentage point. As to real GDP growth rates across the 
euro  area  countries,  the  dispersion,  measured  in  terms  of  standard  deviations,  has  been 
fluctuating around a level of 2 percentage points over the past few decades, with no apparent 
upward or downward trend.  
While some differences are temporary, others are of a more persistent nature. Let me stress 
that the sustained differences in economic growth or inflation rates between some euro area 
countries are absolutely normal in a monetary union, to the extent that they are related to 
catching-up  phenomena.  However,  it  is  also  true  that  persistent  differentials  which  reflect 
structural rigidities are a concern. I will address this issue later. 
In  sum,  there  is  evidence  of  stronger  economic  integration  among  the  countries  in  the 
European Union. The adoption of the euro has particularly contributed to this development by 
reducing information costs, enhancing price transparency and eliminating exchange rate risk 
between  countries  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  manner,  the  euro  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  the 
Single  Market,  within  which  goods,  services,  people  and  capital  are  to  move  freely. 
Nonetheless, a lot remains to be done, for instance, in order to increase services trade and 
labour mobility and to reduce structural rigidities. 
Economic integration and adjustment processes in the euro area 
3.  
Let me now turn to adjustment processes whose smooth functioning is important in all EU 
countries  but  particularly  in  the  euro  area.  Why  is  an  efficient  adjustment  mechanism 
particularly  important  in  the  euro  area?  In  a  monetary  union  where  national  monetary  and 
                                                 
2   London  Economics,  “Quantification  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  integration  of  EU  financial  markets”, 
report to the European Commission, 2002. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2007
exchange rate policies are no longer available options, it is important to make sure that other 
mechanisms of adjustment to shocks function properly. This is needed to avoid a situation 
whereby a country or a region, for instance after experiencing a specific event or asymmetric 
shock, enters either into a period of protracted low growth and higher unemployment, or into 
a long period of overheating. 
There  are  many  factors  that  can  improve  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economies  to 
adverse  shocks.  But  before  addressing  this  issue,  let  me  stress  that  the  ECB’s  single 
monetary policy contributes to the proper functioning of adjustment mechanisms within the 
euro  area  by  ensuring  price  stability,  i.e.  by  anchoring  price  stability  in  economic  agents’ 
decisions.  I  believe  that  this  is  a  very  important  contribution.  In  other  words,  the  social 
partners, when agreeing on wage increases, and also national authorities, when preparing 
their budgets or designing policies in their fields of responsibility, should be, and, as a matter 
of  fact,  are  fully  confident  that  we,  at  the  ECB  and  in  the  Eurosystem,  will  deliver  price 
stability. 
Turning  to  other  factors,  well-designed  structural  reforms  that  enhance  competition  and 
foster  flexibility  in  product  and  labour  markets  are  particularly  relevant  for  the  proper 
functioning of the euro area.  
In  this  context,  the  Lisbon  strategy  is  a  fundamental  and  ambitious  programme  to  draw 
Europe’s attention to the urgency of structural reforms. Such reforms will improve long-term 
growth  prospects.  They  do  so  by  affecting  positively  labour  participation  and  by  improving 
productivity growth through the promotion of innovation and technological change. In recent 
years, we have already seen the benefits of a number of structural reforms, with the creation 
of about 13 million new jobs since 1999.  
Economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible wage 
and price-setting mechanisms. Specifically, in a monetary union, most of the adjustment has 
to take place through national labour markets. Therefore, wage setting should appropriately 
reflect the different situations of sectors, of firms and of overall labour market conditions. Let 
me  stress  that  social  partners  share  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  wage  settlements  fully 
take into account the need to reduce unemployment and to enhance labour market access 
and employment. Moreover, governments should also be aware of the way in which wage 
setting  for  public  servants  can  serve  as  a  role  model  for  the  private  sector.  And  social 
partners  need  to  take  into  account  the  different  conditions  at  the  firm  and  sectoral  level, 
internalising 
thus 
employment  at  their  company  and  in  their  industry,  sector  or  region.  Sufficient  wage 
differentiation  would  improve  employment  opportunities  for  less  skilled  workers  and  in 
regions or sectors with high unemployment. In this respect, it is clear that excessive wage 
regulations are undermining job creation, in particular for young and less qualified workers, 
as well as for all those who face problems entering the labour market.  
The proper functioning of adjustment through labour markets also requires the completion of 
the  Single  Market.  In  particular,  all  existing  barriers  to  labour  mobility  within  the  EU  and 
notably within the euro area must be removed.  
As  to  product  markets,  let  me  stress  that  it  is  also  essential  that  the  Single  Market  be 
deepened, particularly in services and network industries. Greater cross-border competition 
and a deeper integration of markets across all EU countries would contribute to lower prices 
and  higher  real  wages.  It  would  also  enhance  price  flexibility,  and  thereby  the  adjustment 
processes in the individual countries. 
Another important market-based mechanism that can help to attenuate the impact of shocks 
in a country or region is well-integrated financial markets and readily available opportunities 
for  the  diversification  of  financial  asset  portfolios.  This  would  reduce  the  dependence  of 
households’ saving and spending decisions on economic and financial developments in their 
country  or  region.  This  mechanism  is  known  as  the  “credit  and  risk-sharing  channels”.  In 
essence, it means that consumption is less dependent on movements in national output, first 
the  repercussions  of  wage  settlements  on  competitiveness  and 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 3
because  consumers  can  borrow  from  international  financial  institutions  which  are  active  at 
the  level  of  the  euro  area,  and  second  because  the  financial  wealth  of  households  is  less 
dependent on local conditions thanks to an internationally well diversified portfolio allocation. 
Moreover,  more  integrated  financial  markets  give  rise  to  greater  competition,  resulting  in 
more  favourable  financing  conditions  for  consumers  and  firms.  To  provide  you  with  some 
figures, in the United States, over the period 1963-90, capital markets smoothed out 39% of 
the shocks to gross state product (the equivalent to GDP), the credit channel smoothed out 
23%  and  the  federal  government,  through  the  fiscal  channel,  13%.  Around  25%  of  the 
shocks were not smoothed out. Hence, financial markets and financial institutions contributed 
62% to the absorption of idiosyncratic state shocks. We therefore see from the US example 
that  the  financial  channel  can  be  much  more  important  than  the  fiscal  channel.  This  is  an 
additional  reason  for  speeding  up  financial  integration  in  Europe.3  According  to  a  more 
recent  study,  the  level  of  integration  in  the  euro  area  has  been  increasing,  although  it 
remains  modest.  It  was  found  that  in  the  countries  that  now  make  up  the  euro  area 
(excluding  Luxembourg),  capital  markets  smoothed  out  about  10%  of  the  country-specific 
shocks to GDP between 1993 and 2000.4  
National  authorities  can  also  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  ensuring  the  proper 
functioning  of  adjustment  mechanisms  within  the  European  Union  by  conducting  well-
designed fiscal policy. The best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper functioning 
of  the  euro  area  is  by  being  disciplined  and  medium-term  oriented,  fully  in  line  with  the 
orientations  provided  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Moreover,  improving  the  quality  of 
public  finances  can  enhance  business  and  growth  conditions,  while  at  the  same  time 
allowing  a  reduction  in  overall  public  spending  at  the  national  level.  Indeed,  available 
evidence points to the existence of significant inefficiencies in public spending both in the EU 
and  in  OECD  countries.  In  other  words,  it  would  seem  that  public  spending  could  be 
substantially reduced without a detrimental impact on the volume of output. Additionally, a 
more  efficient  public  administration  would  also  allow  the  indirect  costs  of  public  sector 
inefficiency, linked to financing through inappropriate taxation regimes, to be reduced.  
Let  me  finally  mention  the  important  issue  of  competitiveness.  One  of  the  most  important 
market-based  adjustment  mechanisms  in  a  monetary  union  works  via  changes  in 
competitiveness.  In  the  euro  area,  persistent  losses  in  relative  cost  competitiveness 
necessarily  translate,  in  the  medium  term,  into  a  period  of  below-average  growth  and  an 
abnormal level of unemployment. According to recent figures, the difference in the cumulated 
growth of unit labour costs for the total economy between the euro area countries with the 
largest  and  the  smallest  cost  increases,  respectively,  was  between  20%  and  25%  in  the 
period 1998-2006.  
In sum, structural reforms in the labour, product and financial markets together with sound 
fiscal policies are crucial to enable smooth adjustment processes in the European Union and 
particularly in the euro area. At the same time, differences in price competitiveness and in 
unit labour costs across the euro area economies need to be closely monitored, as they may 
imply major adjustments in the countries concerned in the years ahead. 
Europe in a global context 
4.  
Economic  integration  and  smooth  adjustment  processes  are  clear  prerequisites  for  the 
efficient  functioning  of  the  European  Union.  All  the  more  so  because  Europe  is  regularly 
                                                 
3   See P. Asdrubali, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 111, 1996. 
4   See S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary union: 
Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4463. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2007
confronted with various adverse events or shocks, for instance in the context of globalisation, 
which translates in particular into greater interdependence between our economies through 
an  increase  in  cross-border  transactions  of  goods,  labour  and  capital.  Let  me  briefly 
elaborate on this aspect. 
Globalisation is triggering major transformations all over the world, not only in Europe. For 
instance, globalisation has undeniably had an impact on the inflation process.  
Numerous channels have been identified in economic theory through which globalisation can 
influence  the  level  of  prices.  Without  doubt,  globalisation  and  the  associated  rise  in  world 
trade  have  contributed  to  import  price  moderation,5  notably  in  the  manufacturing  sector, 
which  is  primarily  due  to  increased  imports  from  low-cost  countries.  Furthermore,  the 
widespread  opening-up  of  emerging  countries  and  of  almost  all  former  centrally  planned 
economies  has  significantly  increased  the  labour  pool  available,  leading  to  dampening 
pressures  on  labour  costs,  especially  for  unskilled  labour.  Globalisation  can  also  exert 
pressure conducive to lower inflation more indirectly, as increasing international competition 
may have limited the pricing power of domestic corporations. However, at the same time, the 
sudden  emergence  of  fast-growing  economies  in  the  global  economy  is  exerting  upward 
pressure on prices for energy and raw material prices.6  
Regardless of the intensive research currently pursued in particular in academia, at central 
banks and at various international institutions, there still remains significant uncertainty about 
the  aggregate  role  and  impact  of  globalisation.  Even  though  the  net  effect  of  these 
counterbalancing  forces  is  mostly  believed  to  have  contributed  towards  reducing  inflation, 
whether  and  how  long  this  disinflationary  effect  will  last  in  the  future  remains  an  open 
question. 
Ultimately, globalisation is an opportunity, not a threat. Globalisation provides much-needed 
solutions.  For  instance,  it  may  allow  increased  labour  inflows  to  the  euro  area,  which,  in 
certain sectors, would help to reduce bottlenecks in labour markets and hence ease wage 
pressures. In addition, globalisation may supply external capital in exchange of know-how. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  euro  area  has  become  an  attractive  place  for  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI). A breakdown of extra-euro area liabilities indeed reveals that inward FDI 
amounts to more than 27% of euro area GDP, against 22.5% for the United States. The euro 
area has received, proportionally to GDP, a similar amount of FDI as China, 27.3% for both 
economies,  according  to  IMF  statistics.  A  rising  amount  of  FDI  comes  from  the  so-called 
BRIC group – including Brazil, Russia, India and China. 
In  fact,  contrary  to  what  such  protectionist  thinking  would  suggest,  EU  integration  and  the 
adoption of the euro seem to make Europe fitter for globalisation. The single currency has 
supported  the  development  and  diversification  of  exports  in  the  euro  area  countries,  as 
mentioned  earlier.  The  euro  has  also  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the  process  of 
opening up euro area financial markets. On the assets side, stocks of euro area assets held 
abroad have increased from less than 87% of GDP in 1999 to over 124% in 2005. On the 
liabilities  side,  the  increase  was  also  very  substantial,  from  around  92%  of  GDP  to  137%. 
The  rise  has  actually  been  much  less  pronounced  for  the  United  States  during  the  same 
period: US assets grew from 80% of GDP in 1999 to 90% today, and US liabilities increased 
from 91% to 110% of GDP. In other words, the euro area and the United States held roughly 
                                                 
5   See Box 13 in the June 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin entitled “Is the downward impact of globalisation on 
import prices waning”. 
6   Furthermore, there are also other factors – independent of globalisation – that can help to explain the decline 
in global inflation, such as the rapid technological progress and structural reforms that both have helped to 
increase the growth potential of the economies and thus to facilitate price stability, greater budgetary discipline 
and finally “better” monetary policy, that have resulted in an enhanced credibility of central banks. 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 5
comparable  assets  and  liabilities  in  1999,  but  the  euro  area  witnessed  a  more  substantial 
increase since the start of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Finally,  globalisation  puts  emphasis  on  the  need  for  further  reforms  to  raise  the  ability  of 
Europe  to  adjust  to  the  major  changes  taking  place  in  the  global  environment.  The 
implementation  of  such  reforms  should  raise  flexibility  and  lower  the  adjustment  costs  for 
European firms and workers facing the globalisation process. Raising competitiveness is the 
main condition for making globalisation a success for the European citizens. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. The successful creation of the euro area and further 
economic  integration  within  Europe  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  the  integration  of  Europe 
within  the  global  economy.  In  no  way  are  we  creating  a  “fortress  Europe”.  This  is  not  our 
objective and is not in our interests. It is crucial to promote further economic integration and 
to  enhance  flexibility  of  the  European  economies.  This  would  also  enhance  adjustment 
processes  in  Europe.  As  regards  monetary  policy,  Europe  can  count  on  the  European 
Central Bank and the Eurosystem to be faithful to their primary objective and solidly anchor 
inflation expectations in the euro area. As regards the elements of policy that do not depend 
on the central bank, I have touched on three crucial areas: disciplined fiscal policies, fully in 
line with the Stability and Growth Pact; structural reform policies, fully in line with the Lisbon 
Agenda and the completion of the Single Market; and appropriate monitoring of the relative 
cost competitiveness indicators. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2007
