Bandid Nijathaworn: The pursuit of monetary and financial stability in 
emerging market economies 
Remarks by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Bank of 
England/Cornell University workshop on New Developments in Monetary Policy in Emerging 
Economies,  Centre  for  Central  Banking  Studies  (CCBS)  at  the  Bank  of  England,  London, 
17-18 July 2007. 
 First, let me thank the CCBS and the Cornell University for the invitation. Today my topic is 
the pursuit of monetary and financial stability in emerging market economies, based largely 
from the draft paper that has been circulated. 
What the paper attempts to do is to draw attention to the unique context of emerging markets 
compared  to  developed  economies  in  the  attainment  of  monetary  and  financial  stability. 
Specifically, the paper discusses the underlying cause of the differences, and highlights the 
key implications of these differences for the pursuance of monetary and financial stability in 
the  emerging  market  context,  in  terms  of  short-term  stabilization  challenge,  long  term 
structural challenge, and the challenge in implementing structural reform. 
The unique context 
I  
A good starting point to discuss the issue is to take note of the two stylized facts of emerging 
market that are unique to its policy setting. The first is the greater income and consumption 
volatility  in  emerging  markets,  both  in  terms  of  level  and  growth,  relative  to  developed 
economies.  And  the  second  is  the  observation  that  economic  agents  in  emerging  market 
face limitations in the ability to smooth consumption in response of shocks. 
 
BIS Review 89/2007 
  1
Table 1 summarizes the empirical evidence from the two recent studies. As documented in 
Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), consumption in emerging markets is around 40 percent more 
volatile  than  income  at  business  cycle  frequencies.  The  same  is  true  when  comparing 
relative  volatility  in  growth  rates  of  consumption  and  income.  A  study  by  Prasad  and  his 
colleagues in 2005 also shows greater income and consumption volatility in emerging market 
relative  to  developed  economies.  Such  heightened  volatility  in  macroeconomic  outcomes 
undoubtedly has adverse implications for welfare. 
Our  central  proposition  is  that  a  large  part  of  the  explanation  for  higher  macroeconomic 
volatility  rests  with  key  differences  in  the  nature  of  shocks  hitting  emerging  economies  as 
well as the way in which their economic systems propagate those shocks. 
 
Figure  1  depicts  how  observed  macroeconomic  outcomes  are  the  result  of  the  interaction 
between  the  nature  of  shocks  hitting  emerging  market  and  the  structural  features  of  the 
economic system. 
On  the  nature  of  shocks,  a  particularly  pertinent  example  in  this  context  is  capital  flow 
shocks.  As  shown  in  Table  2,  capital  flow  shocks,  especially  debt  and  equity,  are  more 
volatile  in  emerging  markets  relative  to  advanced  economies,  as  well  as  relative  to  other 
developing economies. 
 2 
 BIS Review 89/2007
 Such volatility, which sometimes manifest themselves in “sudden stop”, is linked to a variety 
of factors including the pro-cyclical nature of the flows. For example, the pro-cyclical nature 
with  respect  to  sovereign  bond  ratings.  On  the  other  hand,  information  asymmetries  in 
emerging market may also make the flows more susceptible to contagion effect, resulting in 
large  swings  in  capital  flows  unrelated  to  changes  in  fundamentals.  Macroeconomic 
conditions in industrial countries is another candidate that can make emerging market more 
susceptible to a wide array of global shocks. 
Domestic  political  shock  in the  form  of  policy uncertainty can  also  be  more  pronounced  in 
emerging markets, as evidenced by more frequent regime switches i.e, from fixed to floating 
exchange  rates,  as  well  as  reversals  in  policies.  Such  shocks  can  exacerbate  capital  flow 
volatility and manifest themselves in terms of greater macroeconomic volatility. 
The  second  key  difference  between  emerging  markets  and  developed  economies  is  the 
structural  features  of  the  economic  system  which  influences  how  various  shocks  are 
propagated  through  the  economic  system.  While  there  are  many  key  differences  in  this 
regard,  two  features  are  especially  important  in  the  context  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability.  The  first  is  financial  development.  And  the  second  is  institutional  framework  of 
monetary and financial supervision policies. 
Financial  development  is  an  important  process  for  channeling  resources  to  their  most 
productive  uses.  For  example,  a  strong  banking  sector  with  highly  disciplined  risk 
management can help mitigate the risk of financial imbalance. This feature can be lacking in 
emerging  markets.  Also  the  existence  of  a  deep  and  liquid  financial  market  that  offers  a 
breadth of financial instruments and improves the ability of the economy to absorb shocks is 
generally lacking. Indeed, a number of empirical studies indicate that financial development, 
especially greater financial access, is associated with lower macroeconomic volatility. 
The  institutional  framework  of  monetary  and  financial  supervision  policy  also  has  an 
important  influence  on  the  extent  to  which  various  shocks  make  their  way  through  the 
economy. For example, a lack of independence and credibility in monetary policy to anchor 
long-run inflation expectation is likely to undermine macroeconomic outcomes. In contrast, a 
credible  policy 
the  necessary 
preconditions  for  alleviating  the  impact  of  shocks  on  the  economy.  Similarly,  weak 
supervisory framework also increases risks to financial imbalance build-up. 
framework  and  central  bank 
independence  provide 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 3
Overall, our proposition is that the unique combination of shocks and structural features of 
the  economic  system  in  emerging  market  give  rise  to  a  macroeconomic  backdrop  that  is 
characterized  by  significantly  higher  output  and  consumption  volatility  than  in  developed 
economies.  The  Asian  financial  crisis  ten  years  ago  is  a  good  example  of  this  interaction, 
where large and persistent capital flows interacted with financial system underdevelopment 
and rigid policy regime resulting in a boom-bust cycle. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  pursuit  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  emerging  market, 
therefore,  has  two  key  facets.  The  first  is  addressing  the  immediate  short  run  concerns 
emanating from various shocks; and the second is implementing structural reforms to ensure 
that financial stability becomes embedded in the underlying structure of the economy in the 
long run. 
In  terms  of  challenges,  the  former  essentially  concerns  the  challenge  of  maintaining 
economic  stability  through  appropriate  policy  settings  and  actions  to  offset  the  various 
shocks hitting the economy at any given point in time. The latter, on the other hand, focuses 
on strengthening the institutional framework for monetary policy and financial supervision as 
well  as  fostering  financial  system  development  that  improves  the  ability  of  the  system  to 
absorb shocks by itself in a way that minimizes the impact on the real economy without the 
need for policy intervention. 
Let me now discuss some specific challenges to monetary and financial stability in emerging 
markets from both the short and the long run perspectives. For short-run stabilization, it is 
clear that one of the important challenges at present is how to contain financial vulnerabilities 
that accompany an influx of short-term capital. 
In coping with capital flows, lowering interest rates to reduce the relative attractiveness of the 
country to capital inflows may be a first appropriate way to ensure price stability. But, in most 
cases, fast appreciation may not subside as exchange rates tend to behave more like asset 
prices than relative goods prices. So, there is a risk that central bank may cut interest rate by 
too much, hence, sowing the seeds for inflation and an asset price boom down the road as 
well. 
On the other hand, sterilized intervention also entails quasi-fiscal costs, as well as adding to 
inflation risk from the build-up of local currency debt should there be future fiscal stresses. 
Moreover, international reserves accumulation can also risk damaging central bank credibility 
as they can incur balance sheet loss when reserves are marked to market in local currency. 
These are all important and delicate points for policy consideration. 
The second challenge is the ability of emerging market central banks or financial supervision 
authorities to identify and quantify risks of potential financial instability in advance. On this, 
we find stress testing to be a powerful tool to assess financial stability ex-ante. Unfortunately, 
financial  institutions  and  regulators  in  emerging  markets  have  significantly  lagged  behind 
their  counterparts  in  advanced  economies,  especially  on  credit  and  liquidity  risk  stress 
testing. 
Therefore, regulators in emerging markets should move faster to increase the use of macro 
stress testing. They should also push financial institutions to invest in human resource and 
technology to conduct macro stress testing at least on an annual basis. And regulators and 
monetary  policymakers  must  increase  coordination  in  order  to  arrive  at  more  relevant  and 
convincing macro stress testing scenarios. 
The  third  challenge  is  the  role  of  prudential  measures.  While  it  is  unclear  how  effective 
domestic  monetary  policy  can  be  in  checking  excessive  asset  price  volatility,  the  threat  of 
financial instability has given rise to a more prominent role for macro-prudential measures to 
reduce  the  procyclicality  of  the  credit  market.  As  we  see  it,  the  primary  challenge  in  this 
respect  is  how  best  to  move  forward.  Combining  the  use  of  prudential  measures  with 
monetary  policy  is  a  useful  policy  option,  but  it  is  still  an  unsettling  issue  because  of  the 
concern  for  efficiency.  In  practice,  discretionary  prudential  measures  pose  difficulty  in  the 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2007
form  of  potential  regulatory  forbearance,  market  distortion,  timing  effectiveness,  and  the 
difficulty  in  modeling  early  warning  system.  Rule-based  prudential  measures,  on  the  other 
hand, pose difficulty in policy calibration. This is to say calibrating this type of policy tools has 
so  far  proven  difficult  for  emerging  market  where  data  availability  is  limited  and  large 
structural breaks are usually present. 
Turning  to  longer-term  perspective,  the  attainment  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  is 
determined predominantly by embedded structural  features of the economy. This points to 
the importance of pursuing long run structural reforms. On this issue, we discuss the role that 
financial sector development and policy institutions and framework can play in this respect. 
First, financial development 
The  first  point  we  make  on  financial  development  is  the  importance  of  a  well-balanced 
financial structure. 
Efficient  and  well  balanced  financial  system  will  allow  the  system  to  better  manage  and 
absorb  shocks  as  the  market  would  be  less  prone  to  one-way  market  conditions  and 
possesses  greater  liquidity.  A  well  balanced  financial  structure  contributes  positively  to 
information processing, price discovery, and risk management. The experience of the Asian 
crisis,  for  example,  points  to  the  critical  importance  of  the  development  of  long-term  local 
currency debt market, to increase the depth and the breadth of financial market. In relation to 
this, BIS identified that the lack of diversified structure and market may lead to increased risk 
from concentration of credit and maturity risks in the banking system as lack of markets may 
lead to the mispricing of risk and excessive delay in correcting large exposures, as well as 
increased vulnerabilities from capital inflows. 
The second point we want to make is the importance of strong financial market infrastructure. 
One of the key issues for emerging markets is the structural weaknesses which can create 
disincentive  and  moral  hazard.  The  presence  of  such  distortions  contribute  to  built-up  of 
financial vulnerability, hinder growth of market solution for tackling risk, and complicate policy 
actions in events of crisis management. Progress in correcting these weakness however may 
be slow. 
Market-driven  financial  market  developments  need  the  support  of  critical  infrastructure, 
namely:  
(1) 
Information  that  allows  efficient  decision  making  and  pricing  on  various  asset 
markets, financial as well as related market such as real estate market, which are 
still very lacking in many emerging markets, and may be an area of public support.  
Legal  reform  to  ensure  enabling  environment  for  innovation  in  products  and 
business models of financial system. And  
Human resource with proper competency in modern financial and risk management 
are scarce and is becoming a bottle neck for development. The authority may need 
to  step  in  to  facilitate  training  and  accredition  of  professional  standards,  if  it  has 
external benefits. 
(2) 
(3) 
Notwithstanding these challenges, notable progress has been made by emerging markets in 
the  past  decade,  much  of  which  catalysed  by  comprehensive  economic  reform  in  which 
market-oriented  economic  and  financial  liberalization  been  main  features.  For  East  Asia, 
despite  the  progress  made,  significant  gap  still  exists  in  diversification,  efficiency  and 
robustness  when  compared  to  the  role  played  by  financial  markets  in  the  developed 
economies.  Looking  ahead,  in  addition  to  the  pressure  from  globalization,  the  shift  in 
demographic  structure  will  also  be  an  additional  pressure.  This  is  to  say  some  smaller 
emerging markets will face aging population and increase demand of wealth management, 
while  supply  of  local  products  are  limited  for  diversification.  This  will  pose  challenges  for 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 5
inter-temporal  allocation  of  resource  and  risk.  Thus,  it  is  imperative  that  emerging  market 
devise a proper strategy and process to expedite reforms and develop the financial system. 
The second long-term reform I want to bring up is on policy institution and framework. On 
this, two institutions are upmost important for attaining monetary and financial stability. The 
first  is  a  credible  monetary  framework  that  effectively  anchors  the  public’s  expectation  of 
inflation. On this, the key issue is the importance of independence and transparency of the 
monetary policy process. Our view is that lack of independence can come at a great cost in 
terms  of  lower  central  bank  credibility  and  a  less  favorable  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
output  volatility.  Likewise,  weaknesses  in  monetary  policy  transparency  can  contribute  to 
policy uncertainty and exacerbate the impact of shocks on macroeconomic volatility. 
The  second  important  policy  institution  is  an  effective  supervisory  policy  and  domestic 
financial institution’s capacity for sound risk management. The logic for this is clear. With less 
effective supervision and limited capacity to manage risk, the ability of the economic system 
to absorb volatility from global markets is significantly compromised. 
Reflecting this emerging market has put enormous emphasis on building up the necessary 
institutions with regards to effective supervision. But the challenges are many. For example, 
at this time many emerging markets are facing the challenge in implementing Basel II. 
Stronger risk management culture 
(i) 
The objective of Basel II is to strengthen the soundness and stability of the banking system 
through  more  risk-sensitive  capital  requirements  and  rigorous  internal  risk  assessment 
process.  This  has  a  direct  bearing  on  ensuring  financial  stability.  But  because  Basel  II  is 
developed  from  the  current  practice  among  banks  in  developed  countries,  some  banks  in 
emerging markets may have a large gap to fill. For example, in moving away from collateral-
based  to  credit-based  loan  approval,  banks  must  focus  more  on  the  ability  to  pay  of 
customers and to make loan decisions in a forward looking manner. This requires a different 
set  of  expertise  that  focuses  on  risk  assessment  in  the  environment  changing  economic 
cycle and asset quality. 
Information system and resource and capacity building 
(ii) 
Next is the information system which is the most important foundation for achieving financial 
stability through capital adequacy. Whereas developed countries generally already have in 
place the necessary infrastructure in this regard, financial institutions in emerging countries 
have  to  build  the  system  from  the  ground  up,  involving  areas  such  as  data  collection, 
storage,  analysis,  and  ways  to  effectively  embed  the  information  in  the  decision  making 
process. This step may take more time and effort because it involves building a knowledge 
base  for  quantitative  analytical  skills  and  ability  to  apply  international  best  practices  to  the 
unique local settings of emerging market. 
Involvement of stakeholders 
(iii)  
Another  difficulty  in  Basel  II  implementation  is  that  other  players  in  the  wider  financial 
industry  will  be  playing  more  active  role  in  the  banking  sector’s  risk  assessment.  For 
instance,  the  simple  approach  of  Basel  II  ties  the  amount  of  required  capital  to  ratings  by 
External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) because they have the strength in both the 
wealth  of  data  and  expertise  in  credit  risk  assessment.  Unfortunately,  only  a  few  large 
companies in emerging countries are rated. Therefore, a challenge for regulators lies in the 
process  of  ECAI  recognitions  and  risk-weight  mapping  processes  as  they  must  ensure 
stability of the banking system while at the same time foster the development of local ECAIs 
and the bond market. These efforts will undoubtedly take considerable time and patience, but 
it is a road that has to be taken. 
6 
 BIS Review 89/2007
The challenge of implementing structural reforms 
The  two  facets  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  that  I  discussed  are  present  in  all 
economies.  But  in  the  emerging  market  context,  the  interaction  between  them  and  the 
tensions  that  arise  in  terms  of  where  the  policy  emphasis  is  placed  are  arguably  more 
complex  with  greater  welfare  implications.  Let  me  end  by  touching  on  some  of  the 
complexities that arise in this regard and highlight some of the challenges in implementing 
structural reform in emerging markets. 
The first problem is that the gains from reform are hard to quantify because they are often 
indirect  and  thus  rarely  fully  appreciated  by  the  wider  public.  Also  the  fact  that  many 
structural  reforms  entail  short  run  costs  compounds  the  problem.  This  time  mismatch 
between the costs and benefits of reform is a prime reason why they are hard to sell. And 
where the costs and benefits accrue to different segments of the economy, the difficulty of 
instilling reforms is exacerbated since it is hard to create satisfactory compensation schemes 
while  those  who  lose  out  tend  to  be  concentrated  and  thus  more  effective  in  organizing 
opposition to the reform. 
Next,  even  if  the  obstacles  to  selling  the  reforms  have  been  overcome,  one  of  the  most 
important issue that follows is the proper pace and sequencing of structural reform. In the 
context  of  financial  sector  reforms,  for  example,  the  underlying  challenge  is  the  proper 
mitigation  of  the  additional  risks  that  are  injected  into  the  financial  system  as  markets 
develop and become more sophisticated. These risks consist of both financial risks borne by 
market  participants  as  well  as  macroeconomic  risks  that  may  be  associated  with  greater 
financial  market  volatility.  Hence,  the  consensus  on  the  importance  of  structural  reform 
efforts does not carry over with the same strength to the issue of the appropriate pace and 
sequencing of policy changes. 
And finally, in the context of emerging market, the main stumbling block for structural reforms 
is  the  high  degree  of  political  fragmentation.  The  need  to  accommodate  many,  and 
sometimes  conflicting,  interests  not  only  slows  the  reform  process  but  often  leads  to 
compromised  solutions  that  fail  to  address  the  original  underlying  goal  of  the  reform. 
Therefore, it is vital to have a well thought-out strategy for the timing and manner with which 
structural reforms are instigated. 
To  conclude,  the  central  theme  running  through  the  paper  is  to  point  to  the  intricacy  of 
achieving  monetary  and  financial  stability  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  the  delicate 
balance of short run stabilization efforts and long run structural reforms. This is perhaps the 
toughest challenge for emerging market. But despite the challenge, the overall direction of 
change in emerging market economies to date is fundamentally reassuring. Much has been 
achieved 
in 
financial  system 
development.  
Thank you. 
term  of  strengthening 
framework  and 
the  monetary 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 7
