Rundheersing Bheenick: Launch of the Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank 
of Mauritius  
Opening address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Launch of 
The Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 23 April 2007. 
 In the presence of 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development, 
Former Governor Sir I. Ramphul, Directors of the Bank of Mauritius, 
Distinguished Guests and Other Dignitaries 
It is a great honour and indeed a pleasure for me to add my own words of welcome and to address 
you today on the occasion of the launching ceremony of the Monetary Policy Committee as a statutory 
committee of the Bank of Mauritius. 
It is a landmark move. It is eloquent testimony of our determination to rid our structures and processes 
of remaining outdated practices, loopholes, and bottlenecks in our quest for excellence. It is designed 
to leverage our economy to its next level of excellence and it is all happening in the year when the 
Bank is gearing up to celebrate its 40th anniversary. It has a touch of history. It is fitting, therefore, that 
former governor, Sir Indur Ramphul, and so many of you associated with the Bank’s early days should 
be with us this morning. 
You will forgive me if I read some more history in today’s event. It was exactly 13 years ago, on 22nd 
April 1994, that the National Economic Development Council – of which I was the founder-Chairman, – 
published its report entitled Improving Efficiency in the Financial Sector in Mauritius. The report 
recommended “some major structural changes for a more efficient and dynamic financial sector, which 
can support and sustain the other sectors of the Mauritian economy to stay globally competitive”. The 
objectives are no less pertinent today than they were 13 years ago. 
If I may be allowed to plagiarise myself, the NEDC was set up as a tripartite, high-level, policy review 
and  policy  advisory  body  to  the  Government  of  Mauritius,  with  an  open-ended  remit  in  all  matters 
related  to  the  economic  development  of  Mauritius.  It  provided  a  forum  for  informed  debate  on  vital 
economic  issues  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  consensus  regarding  ways  of  improving 
economic  performance  and  national  competitiveness.  A  laudable  objective,  indeed,  and  one,  I  may 
add, that is being so ably pursued today under the baton of my friend Mohamed Vayid. 
What the NEDC did not have, at least in those days, was the resources to match its ambition. I had 
identified the late Maxwell Fry, then Tokai Bank Professor of International Finance at Birmingham, as 
the man we needed to support our work in finance and I was unwilling to settle for a more affordable 
second-best  alternative.  We  were  thus  forced  to  innovate  and  do  a  little  bit  of  public-private- 
partnership well before PPP became flavour-of-the-month. That is how I was able to draw on such co-
sponsors as the State Bank of Mauritius, the Mauritius Commercial Bank, Air Mauritius, and IBL to be 
able to attract such high-powered financial expertise. 
The NEDC chose to focus on a “…relatively small number of reforms that .… would have maximum 
immediate  impact  in  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  Mauritian  financial  sector”.  In  other  words,  we 
recommended that we go in for the low-hanging fruit first. 
The point of this short trip down memory lane is to remind ourselves that the seeds of the MPC that we 
are  launching  to-day  were  planted  a  full  13  years  ago.  There  were  nearly  3  dozen  of  us,  bankers, 
economists, accountants, insurance executives and financial services specialists, who were roped in 
by  the  NEDC  for  the  exercise.  To  drop  some  names,  they  included  the  likes of  Muni  Reddy,  Rana 
Tacouri, Tim Taylor, Iqbal Rajaballee, Yvan Lagesse, Radhakrishna Chellapermal, Pierre Guy Noel, 
the  late  Alain  Cheong,  Jean  De  Fondaumiêre,  Mootoosamy  Sidambaram,  Omar  Rawat  and  many 
others…. The establishment of the MPC figured prominently among the NEDC recommendations. Let 
me quote Maxwell Fry’s own words: “In order to coordinate policy formulation and implementation, a 
monetary policy committee might be formed …. [to] formulate policy and agree on the way in which the 
policy would be implemented … effectively and efficiently … [to] benefit everyone.” 
You  will  agree  with  me  that  we  were  definitely  on  the  right  track.  We  could  have  established  the 
grandfather of all MPC’s in 1994, a full 3 years before the Bank of England set up its own MPC, which 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
now commands international headlines each time it meets. The MPC, as envisaged originally by us, 
was admittedly of a slightly different vintage than the one we are launching today. 
In contemplating how we were then very much on the right track, I am reminded of the words of Mark 
Twain, an early tourist here: “Beware if you just stay on the right track, you may be run over by the 
next train that comes along!” Rest assured: there is no risk of that happening to us. We are on the right 
track. More than that, we have caught the right train and we are moving in the right direction. Today, 
more than 80 central banks take monetary policy decisions in a committee. Indeed, our launch vehicle 
of  this  morning  is  now  recognised  as  a  key  element  of  how  central  banks  the  world  over  have 
transformed themselves. As Alan Blinder, of the US Federal Reserve, puts it “One of the elements of 
the quiet revolution in central banking has been a change in the way monetary policy decisions are 
taken: the ‘dictatorial central bank governor’ of the past has increasingly been replaced by committees 
taking monetary policy decisions”. 
The MPC, then, is part of the transformation of our Bank. It is being established under Section 54 of 
the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, with specific responsibility for the formulation of monetary policy. In 
addition to the Executive side, comprising myself as the Chairperson and my two Deputy Governors, 
the  MPC  has  two  Board  Directors  and  three  external  members  with  experience  in  the  field  of 
economics, banking and finance. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development has appointed Jacques Li Wan Po, an old friend going back to our primary-school days, 
and  Shyam  Seebun  as  the  two  Board  Directors  on  the  MPC.  He  has  appointed  Pierre  Dinan  and 
Jagnaden  Coopamah,  my  former  Civil  Service  colleague  and  friend,  as  external  members.  I  am 
circulating, for your information, some background information on all the members of this first MPC. 
We are also privileged to be able to draw on the experience of somebody as distinguished as Mario 
Blejer  who  has  kindly  agreed  to  support  our  work  as  Honorary  Adviser  to  the  MPC.  Mario  is  a 
respected academic, a former Fund staffer, a past Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina and he 
is  currently  Director  of  the  Centre  for  Central  Banking  Studies  at  the  Bank  of  England  –  a  position 
previously held by the late Maxwell Fry, to whom I referred earlier. Thank you Mario for being with us 
today and convey our thanks to the Bank of England for allowing you to do so. 
I am also pleased to welcome Stefan Gerlach as observer to the MPC. He has extensive experience in 
monetary  policy,  having  held  a  number  of  positions  both  in  central  banks  and  in  academia.  He  is 
currently the Head of the Secretariat of the Committee on the Global Financial System at the Bank for 
International Settlements, which is the central bankers’ central bank. He serves as Adviser to the Hong 
Kong  Institute  for  Monetary  Research  and  is  Adjunct  Professor  of  Economics  at  the  University  of 
Basel. 
Central  banks  are  sometimes  accused  of  practising  a  culture  of  secrecy  and  of  suffering  from  in-
breeding. We, at the Bank – and here I am including my Second Deputy Governor and myself, both 
newly-minted  central  bankers  of  only  nine  weeks’  standing,  as  part  of  the  “in”  crowd  –  place 
tremendous value on “outside” talent and expertise. Outsiders bring a much-needed fresh perspective 
to old issues – this is even truer when they come from outside the country. Let me observe here that 
committee decision-making in central banks is in line with trends in other sectors: juries, not individual 
jurors,  rule  on  guilt  or  innocence;  parliament,  not  individual  lawmakers,  decides  upon  bills  and 
legislates and so on. Perish the thought if any of you were reminded of horses and camels! 
A fresh perspective is vital for innovation. With the passage of time, some of the old ways of doing 
things  have  become  just  that  –  old!  Changes  in  the  global  environment,  in  perceptions  and 
approaches  force  us  to  think  differently  –  out  of  the  box,  if  you  will  –  and  adapt  international  best 
practices in all areas. 
Innovation  is  at  the  heart  of  our  strategy.  For  we  shall  achieve  nothing  unless  we  help  to  fulfil  the 
strategic objective of the Government, so deftly promoted by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of 
Finance, to create a new economic model and open up the economy to fundamental change. It is a 
new architecture that we are seeking to create. But the purpose of gleaming new tall towers like this 
one  is  not  for  the  de-fenestration  of  bankrupt  investors,  bankers  or  central  bank  governors  but  to 
provide  a  new  vision  into  the  future  and  beyond  our  shores.  The  core  focus  of  our  strategy  is  to 
improve  the  banking  industry  and  financial  services  generally  to  bring  them  in  line  with  best 
international standards and make them internationally competitive. 
The launch of the MPC is a part of the re-engineering process of the central bank. We have set up an 
MPC Unit, reallocated staff to it, and tasked it to coordinate all work relating to the MPC. My Second 
Deputy Governor will chair an in-house Monetary Policy Review Committee to ensure a continuous 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2007
monitoring of the economic situation. We are also proposing that the MPC meet at quarterly intervals. 
The  dates  on  which  the  meetings  will  be  held  will  be  communicated  to  the  public  well  in  advance. 
However,  there  is  provision  for  the  MPC  to  meet  in  between  should  the  need  arise.  The  MPC  will 
decide on the key Repo Rate by voting. All these are tentative at this stage and are subject to revision 
or confirmation by the MPC when it meets later today. 
Inflationary pressures have built up lately in our economy and the inflation rate is expected to cross the 
single digit level by June this year. We are experiencing the highest rate of inflation in a decade. It is a 
cause for concern, but certainly not for alarm as the rate is expected to decline as the pass-through 
effects of recent price hikes taper off. This of course assumes that we do not compound the problem 
by inappropriate fiscal and wage policies. Eternal vigilance on these fronts is the price we have to pay 
to combat inflation. In any case, we must remind ourselves that the primary objective of the Bank is to 
maintain  price  stability  and  to  promote  orderly  and  balanced  economic  development.  Thus,  in  our 
mandate as given by the Act setting us up, price stability is not an end in itself. Rather it is a means to 
an end, which is sustainable macroeconomic growth. We therefore need to weigh real sector issues 
adequately  in  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  this  respect,  the  Bank  intends  to  institute  regular 
contact with stakeholders of the real sector in addition to those of the financial sector we normally deal 
with.  And  I  very  much  welcome  the  presence  among  us  this  morning  of  employers,  trade  unions, 
economic operators, exporters, and their respective associations and chambers. 
I am convinced that there is a lot more that must be done – and done fast - within the Bank. We are 
expecting shortly the arrival of a consultant from another central bank to help us with a strategic review 
of our existing structure. As a pro-active institution, we want to make sure that our staff is equipped 
with the right tools, given state-of-the-art training and imbued with the level of professionalism that the 
situation calls for. I hope I shall be able to count on the support of the staff and the union as we press 
on  with  the  re-engineering  that  we  have  already  embarked  upon.  We  shall  proceed  in  a  measured 
manner, with full consultation every step of the way. 
I  have  been  able  to  draw  on  the  pool  of  talent  in  the  Bank  as  we  launched  different  initiatives  in 
several directions simultaneously. The very first task-force that I set up completes its mandate today 
with the launch of the MPC. There are several others still at work on a range of issues such as the 
strategic review I just mentioned, the celebration of the 40th anniversary of the Bank, the move to the 
new Headquarters, the review of our approach to retail forex trading, and one on such a mundane but 
serious issue as the flooding of the Bank’s vault. 
Looking down the line, we have on the drawing board our move into Islamic banking services which 
constitute a global business opportunity. We can rapidly roll out a new financial product and service, 
with some re-engineering of our approach to banking regulation and supervision to make it possible. In 
the next few weeks, we have a training programme, organised jointly with Deutsche Bank, for our own 
staff and also for staff from commercial banks, to pave the way for our move to full conformity with 
Basel II principles. Both regulators and regulatees will be given the same training to ensure they are 
on the same wavelength. And later this week, a joint Bank of Mauritius/ Mauritius Bankers’ Association 
delegation  leaves  for  East  Asia  as  we  make  final  preparations  to  introduce  the  cheque  truncation 
system. This will reduce paper processing, speed transactions and reduce their cost, and make us all 
cheque-users a little bit more efficient and productive. As you can see, we have many balls up in the 
air. 
Our vision is clear. Our goal is set. We continue the exciting journey of modernisation with renewed 
determination. We do not have the luxury of time. This time round, we do not want to wait another 13 
years to do what must be done. The future does not belong to the hesitant. We must get on with the 
job, come what may. To achieve all this, we need resources. We require new blood. And this is the 
reason  why  the  Bank  has  recently  advertised  for  a  range  of  positions  for  such  openings  as  Bank 
Examiners,  Research  Officers  and  Communications  Manager.  The  response  has  been  very  good, 
indicating that the Bank has a good reputation and enjoys credibility as an employer. 
Allow me to conclude by making two specific observations. First and foremost, let me point out that 
this  first  MPC  meeting  is  not  an  interest-  rate-  setting  meeting.  Today  the  MPC  will  discuss  the 
operational  aspects  for  the  conduct  of  its  future  meetings,  take  stock  of  the  current  and  future 
economic and monetary developments, and agree on its future work programme and the way forward. 
So, the markets, the media and the public should not expect any interest rate decision today. 
Second, the monetary policy decision-making process as established in the Bank of Mauritius Act has 
an unusual feature. Currently, the MPC can only recommend its decision to the Board of Directors of 
the Bank, which shall then determine the monetary policy stance of the Bank. However, this situation 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 3
is  far  from  optimal  and  warrants revision.  As  an  interim  measure,  I  will  shortly  be  seeking  from  my 
Board  a  specific  delegation  of  authority  enabling  the  MPC  both  to  formulate  and  implement  its 
monetary  policy  decision.  In  this  way,  the  MPC  which  we  are  launching  this  morning,  before  this 
august assembly of dignitaries, will operate in line with international best practice. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, today is the start of a new era in monetary policymaking in Mauritius. It marks 
the end of a long journey that began nearly four decades ago, with direct controls, directed interest 
rates and credit ceilings on lending, to say nothing of exchange controls which disappeared more than 
a dozen years ago. I am confident that the MPC, with its high-powered membership and even higher-
powered advisory support, will fully deliver on the Bank’s monetary policy mandate. The time has now 
come for that “dictatorial central bank governor” of yore that we spoke about earlier to step definitely 
into history. And for the current one of yours who is now speaking to step aside and make room for our 
guest speaker! 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2007
