European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  press 
conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by the President of 
the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
At today’s meeting, we decided to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. This decision 
was taken in view of the prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium term that we have 
identified  through  both  our  economic  and  monetary  analyses.  Today’s  decision  will  contribute  to 
ensuring that medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area remain solidly anchored at 
levels consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an 
ongoing contribution towards fostering sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. 
After today’s increase, given the positive economic environment in the euro area, our monetary policy 
is  still  on  the  accommodative  side,  with  overall  financing  conditions  favourable,  money  and  credit 
growth  vigorous,  and  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  ample.  Looking  ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely 
manner to ensure price stability in the medium term is warranted. The Governing Council will monitor 
closely all developments to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Incoming 
information  clearly  confirms  that  the  euro  area  economy  continues  to  expand  at  a  pace  which  is 
significantly stronger than generally expected a year ago. With a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.6%, real 
GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  2007  was  again  somewhat  above  previous  expectations.  Other 
available  information  on  economic  activity,  notably  various  surveys  of  business  and  consumer 
confidence, suggests that solid growth has continued into the second quarter.  
Looking ahead, the medium-term outlook for economic activity remains favourable. The conditions are 
in place for the euro area economy to continue to grow at a sustained rate. As regards the external 
environment,  global  economic  growth  has  become  more  balanced  across  regions  and,  while 
moderating somewhat, remains robust. External conditions thus continue to provide support for euro 
area  exports.  Domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area  is  also  expected  to  maintain  its  relatively  strong 
momentum.  Investment  should  remain  dynamic,  benefiting  from  financing  conditions  which  remain 
favourable, accumulated and ongoing strong corporate earnings, balance sheet restructuring as well 
as business efficiency gains achieved over an extended period. Meanwhile, consumption should be 
supported  by  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  labour  market  conditions  continue  to 
improve. 
This outlook is also reflected in the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. The projections 
foresee average annual real GDP growth in a range between 2.3% and 2.9% in 2007 and between 
1.8% and 2.8% in 2008. In comparison with the previous ECB staff projections, the ranges projected 
for real GDP growth in 2007 are within the upper part of the ranges from March. For 2008, the ranges 
have been revised marginally downwards, following the increase in oil prices over recent months.  
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding this favourable outlook for economic growth are 
broadly balanced over the shorter term. At medium to longer horizons, the balance of risks remains on 
the  downside,  owing  mainly  to  external  factors.  These  relate  in  particular  to  fears  of  a  rise  in 
protectionist  pressures,  the  possibility  of  further  increases  in  oil  prices,  concerns  about  possible 
disorderly developments owing to global imbalances and potential shifts in financial market sentiment.  
As  regards  price  developments,  oil  prices  have  risen  again  over  recent  months.  Accordingly,  as 
reflected in Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 1.9% in May 2007, unchanged from 
April but somewhat higher than expected a few months ago. Looking ahead, the short-term profile of 
annual  inflation  rates  continues  to  be  determined  largely  by  current  and  past  energy  price 
developments, as last year’s volatility in energy prices leads to significant base effects. On the basis of 
the current level of oil prices and oil price futures, which show an upward slope, annual inflation rates 
are likely to fall slightly in the months ahead before rising again significantly towards the end of the 
year. 
Consistent with this view, Eurosystem staff projects average annual HICP inflation of between 1.8% 
and 2.2% in 2007 and between 1.4% and 2.6% in 2008. Compared with the March 2007 ECB staff 
projections, the range projected for inflation in 2007 is somewhat higher, largely reflecting higher oil 
prices. The projected range for inflation in 2008 is unchanged. In this context, let me remind you of the 
conditional  nature  of  these  projections,  which  are  based  on  a  series  of  technical  assumptions, 
including  assumptions  for  future  short  and  long-term  interest  rates  that  are  based  on  market 
expectations derived from the yield curve, as well as assumptions for oil and non-energy commodity 
prices.  
At the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, risks to the outlook for price stability remain on the upside 
in the Governing Council’s view. These risks relate notably to the domestic side. In particular, capacity 
utilisation  in  the  euro  area  economy  is  increasing  and  labour  markets  are  gradually  improving. 
Accordingly, there is a risk that wage developments will be stronger than expected, which would pose 
significant  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  In  addition,  pricing  power  in  market  segments  with  low 
competition  may  increase  in  such  an  environment.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned 
meet their responsibilities. Wage agreements in particular should be sufficiently differentiated to take 
into account price competitiveness positions, the still high level of unemployment in many economies 
and  sector-specific  productivity  developments.  The  Governing  Council  stresses 
that  wage 
developments should be avoided which would eventually lead to inflationary pressures and harm the 
purchasing  power  of  all  euro  area  citizens.  In  addition,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  arise  from 
increases  in  administered  prices  beyond  those  anticipated  thus  far.  Finally,  on  the  external  side, 
upside risks stem from the possibility of further unexpected oil price rises.  
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons. The underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong, in a context of already ample 
liquidity. The ongoing strength of monetary expansion is reflected in the continued rapid growth of M3, 
which reached an annual rate of 10.4% in April, as well as the still high level of credit growth. The 
strong rate of monetary and credit expansion reflects, in part, favourable financing conditions and solid 
economic growth.  
In the short term, monetary and credit developments can be affected, inter alia, by the shape of the 
yield curve and external factors, and be subject to some degree of volatility. In assessing the policy-
relevant underlying trends in monetary and credit growth, it is important to look through such transitory 
aspects. Taking this perspective, there are several indications that higher short-term interest rates are 
now influencing monetary dynamics, although they have not, as yet, significantly dampened the overall 
strength of the underlying rate of monetary and credit expansion. For example, increases in short-term 
rates have contributed to a more moderate expansion of the narrow aggregate, M1, in recent quarters. 
Equally,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  shown  some  signs  of  stabilising 
since mid-2006, albeit at double-digit levels. The stabilisation of loan growth is now becoming more 
broad-based,  as  evidenced  in  recent  months  by  developments  in  borrowing  by  non-financial 
corporations and by households. At the same time, house price growth has come down somewhat, 
although remaining at high levels on average in the euro area. 
Taking  into  account  both  short-term  factors  and  the  underlying  trend  of  the  continued  vigorous 
expansion of money and credit, there are clear indications of upside risks to price stability at medium 
to longer-term horizons. Following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation in 
the euro area remains ample. In this environment, monetary developments continue to require very 
careful monitoring, particularly against the background of the expansion in economic activity and still 
strong property market developments. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look beyond any short-term volatility in inflation 
rates. The relevant horizon for monetary policy is the medium term. Risks to the medium-term outlook 
for  price  stability  remain  on  the  upside,  relating  in  particular  to  the  domestic  side.  As  capacity 
utilisation increases and labour markets gradually improve, constraints are emerging which could lead 
in particular to stronger than expected wage developments. Given the vigorous monetary and credit 
growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic 
analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability 
prevail  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will  monitor  closely  all 
developments in order to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. 
This will support the solid anchoring of medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area at 
levels consistent with price stability. Looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price 
stability in the medium term is warranted. 
As regards fiscal policy, all countries should be in line with the rules and provisions of the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact.  This  will  be  crucial  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  Monetary  Union,  given  that  the 
Stability and Growth Pact is an indispensable part of its institutional setting. Following the significant 
budgetary improvement recorded in 2006, the latest available forecasts suggest a further reduction in 
the government deficit-to-GDP ratio of the euro area over the period 2007-08. This reflects in particular 
projected  ongoing  strong  revenue  collection  in  the  context  of  a  favourable  macroeconomic  outlook. 
However, the structural improvement is more muted. The current economic “good times” should be 
used  to  rapidly  redress  the  remaining  budgetary  imbalances  in  euro  area  countries  as  well  as  to 
accelerate  the  adjustment  towards  their  medium-term  objectives  of  sound  budget  positions  with  a 
focus on expenditure restraint. As agreed by the euro area finance ministers at the Eurogroup meeting 
in Berlin on 20 April, taking advantage of the favourable cyclical conditions would enable most euro 
area members to achieve their medium-term objectives in 2008 or 2009, and all of them should aim for 
2010 at the latest. This is particularly important with a view to reducing the still high government debt 
ratios and preparing for the fiscal challenges arising from population ageing. In order to ensure that 
fiscal developments are monitored effectively, the Governing Council supports all efforts by Eurostat to 
improve  the  fiscal  data  situation.  It  also  welcomes  the  increased  emphasis  placed  by  the  ECOFIN 
Council  on  measures  to  improve  the quality  of  public  finances  and  increase  the  efficiency of  public 
administration. 
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  fully  supports  any  efforts  that  enhance 
competition,  increase  productivity  and  foster  economic  flexibility,  thus  promoting  higher  sustainable 
real  GDP  growth  and  employment.  In  this  respect,  we  strongly  back  reforms  focusing  on  reducing 
labour  market  rigidities,  product  market  barriers  and  administrative  burdens,  and  on  stimulating 
technological innovation. Exploiting the complementary nature of reforms would increase their benefits 
in  terms  of  long-term  economic  dynamism  and  price  stability.  Furthermore,  the  importance  of  a 
successful conclusion of the Doha round of trade talks for productivity and growth in Europe should 
not be underestimated. In the end, higher productivity growth will allow increases in real wages without 
negatively affecting employment, thereby supporting the income growth of the euro area workforce. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
