Nigel Jenkinson: Promoting financial system resilience in modern global 
capital markets – some issues 
Speech  by  Mr  Nigel  Jenkinson,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  Bank  of  England,  at  the 
conference,  Law  and  Economics  of  Systemic  Risk  in  Finance,  University  of  St.  Gallen,  St.  Gallen, 
29 June 2007.  
This speech has been prepared with my colleague Mark Manning. I am very grateful to Mark and to Joanna Perkins for her input 
on legal risks, and to Ben Norman, Victoria Cleland and Andrew Bailey for their comments. 
 The changing nature of risks 
Spurred  by  rapid  innovation,  we  are  currently  witnessing  a  period  of  major  structural  change  in 
financial  intermediation  and  the  global  financial  system.  Financial  market  activity  is  growing  at  a 
tremendous  pace.  For  example,  over  the  past  five  years,  the  credit  derivatives  market  has  grown 
spectacularly from around $1 trillion notional amount outstanding in 2001 to around $20 trillion in 2006 
(Chart 1) and the issuance of leveraged loans has increased almost three-fold (Chart 2). The balance 
sheets  of  the  major  global  financial  institutions  (the  so-called  large  complex  financial  institutions  or 
LCFIs)  have  more  than  doubled  since  2000,  fuelled  by  an  increase  in  trading  assets  (Chart  3). 
Turnover in the UK and US foreign-exchange markets has risen by around 50% in only the last couple 
of years. And capital market integration is rising rapidly as barriers to cross border flows have come 
down. Taking a longer sweep, over the past 35 years cross border asset holdings having risen more 
than six-fold in terms of world GDP (Chart 4). 
Financial innovation has delivered considerable benefits. New products have improved the ability to 
hedge  and  share  risks  and  to  tailor  financial  products  more  precisely  to  user  demand.  That  has 
enabled  financial  intermediaries  and  users  of  financial  services  to  manage  financial  risks  more 
effectively, and has lowered the costs of financial intermediation. And innovation and capital market 
integration have facilitated the wider dispersal of risks, which may have increased the resilience of the 
financial system to weather small to medium-sized shocks. 
Innovation has also delivered new challenges and vulnerabilities. Dependence on capital markets and 
on sustained market liquidity has increased, as banks and other intermediaries place greater reliance 
on their ability to “originate and distribute” loans and other financial products, and to manage their risk 
positions  dynamically  as  economic  and  financial  conditions  alter.  In  turn  that  places  additional 
pressure  on  the  robustness  of  financial  market  infrastructure  to  handle  large  changes  in  trading 
volumes and to cope with periods of strain. And the greater integration of capital markets means that if 
a major problem does arise it is more likely to spread quickly across borders. So as highlighted by a 
number of academics and authorities,1 the flip side to increased resilience of the financial system to 
small and medium-sized shocks may be a greater vulnerability to less frequent but potentially larger 
financial crises.  
Benign  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  recent  years  have  kept  credit  losses  at  low  levels. 
Combined  with  buoyant  returns  from  capital  market  activity,  the  profitability  of  major  financial 
institutions  has  been  strong.  And  capital  levels  are  high.  But  as  highlighted  in  Financial  Stability 
Reports by the Bank of England and others, this benign environment has encouraged an increase in 
risk-taking  and  a  “search  for  yield” which  has  lowered  the  compensation  for  bearing  credit risk  and 
market  risk  to  very  low  levels.  The  vulnerability  of  the  system  as  a  whole  to  an  abrupt  change  in 
conditions has consequently increased. 
Against this background, I would like to focus my comments today on some of the implications for the 
management and reduction of risks to the financial system as a whole. More specifically, how can the 
public policy goal of promoting systemic financial stability be best achieved? I will not provide a fully 
comprehensive  answer  to  this  question  but  will  touch  briefly  on  four  aspects;  improving  the 
assessment  of  vulnerabilities  that  might  threaten  stability;  developing  appropriate  buffers  for  capital 
                                                      
1 
in 
System  Risks 
Financial 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech280.pdf 
the  UK 
Issues 
 and  Challenges 
(John  Gieve) 
(July 
2006) 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
and  liquidity  within  the  financial  system  that  take  due  account  of  the  changing  nature  of  risks; 
strengthening the core market infrastructure; and lowering legal uncertainty. 
Systemic stress-testing 
As  financial  markets  evolve  and  new  vulnerabilities  are  exposed,  it  becomes  increasingly  important 
that both market participants and the public authorities improve their understanding and assessment of 
threats to financial stability, and take steps, where appropriate, to contain and lower them. 
The Bank of England has been active in the development of models to identify and assess potential 
sources of major vulnerability to the UK financial system2 and is, with the Financial Services Authority, 
engaged in a dialogue with practitioners, both to understand better current approaches to measuring 
risks under stressed conditions and to encourage improvements and the sharing of best practice in 
stress testing techniques. 
Recent distress in the US sub-prime lending market, and the collapse of the hedge fund, Amaranth, 
have  exposed  weaknesses  in  risk  management,  including  in  the  management  of  contingent,  or  off-
balance  sheet,  exposures.  Although  developments  in  the  sub-prime  market  of  course  continue  to 
unfold,  the  impact on conditions  in broader  financial  markets  has  to date been relatively  contained. 
But, in a more severe stress scenario, perhaps in a more significant market such as corporate credit, 
or  one  in  which  several  areas  of  vulnerability  were  exposed  in  combination,  the  impact  could  have 
more serious consequences for the financial system. 
This highlights the potential value of a more rigorous assessment of tail-end risks. In particular, stress-
tests by financial institutions should attempt to incorporate the behavioural responses of other firms 
which  may  have  a  substantial  impact  on  market  conditions.  For  instance,  scenarios  should  take 
account of the extent to which many firms might respond to a common shock in a similar way, with 
potential implications for market prices or market liquidity. The likely amplification of price moves as 
financial institutions attempt to exit “crowded” trades and liquidity dries up is an important example. 
Indeed, given the importance of market liquidity for the efficient execution of banks’ dynamic hedging 
strategies  and  for  their  activities  in  the  wholesale  funding  and  credit  risk  transfer  (CRT)  and 
securitisation  markets,  it  is  essential  that  stress  tests  factor  in  extreme,  yet  plausible,  scenarios  for 
liquidity  conditions  in  these  markets,  recognising  that  market  liquidity  can  evaporate  very  quickly, 
particularly for complex structured financial instruments. And it is also essential to factor in increased 
liquidity needs linked to contingent calls, associated, for instance, with funding margin payments. 
Capital and liquidity buffers 
A  sizeable  buffer  of  capital  and  liquidity  can  help  a  bank  to  withstand  a  shock  that  threatens  its 
solvency or would otherwise leave it with insufficient liquidity to meet its obligations as they fall due. 
But a bank’s private choice as to the size of its capital or liquidity buffer may not be aligned with the 
socially optimal choice, as firms will not naturally take account of (or “internalise”) the implications of 
their distress or failure on the financial system more broadly – for example through the possibility of 
contagion  to  other  firms  and  impairment  of  the  financial  intermediation  system.  That  provides  the 
justification for prudential regulation. 
I will not dwell here on the value and importance of capital adequacy standards in containing systemic 
risks – enough has been written on the Basel Accord and Basel II, such that this is well understood. 
However,  consistent  with  my  earlier  comments  on  stress-testing  and  the  importance  of  modelling 
behavioural responses, it is crucial the authorities understand banks’ likely responses to changes in 
minimum  capital  requirements  over  the  business  cycle.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  and  the  Financial 
Services  Authority  (FSA)  have  recently  developed  a  framework  for  monitoring  the  potential  for  pro-
cyclicality  in  credit  conditions.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision and  the Committee  of 
European Banking Supervisors are working on similar frameworks internationally. 
                                                      
2   Financial Stability Report (April 2007) (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/2007/fsr21.htm) & FS Paper No.2: “A 
(April  2007) 
(Haldane,  Hall  and  Pezzini) 
new  approach 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/fs_paper02.pdf) 
to  assessing 
financial 
stability” 
risks 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2007
Capital adequacy standards are usefully complemented by “large exposures” rules. In particular, the 
application of such rules recognises the importance of addressing the risks from an unforeseen event 
that could cause a bank to incur serious loss, and that major problems could spill over from one bank 
to  another  given  the  network  of  interconnections.  A  European  Union-wide  review  of  the  Large 
Exposures  Directive  is  underway,  offering  the  opportunity  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system to such spill overs, including in the inter-bank market. 
Rather  less  has  been  written  about  liquidity  buffers  and  prudential  liquidity  standards.  Given  their 
balance-sheet  structure,  funding  liquidity  is  a  key  risk  for  banks:  the  transformation  of  short-term 
liabilities  into  long-term  assets  leaves  them  structurally  vulnerable  to  liquidity  pressures.  Banks 
therefore need to position themselves so as to be able to withstand extraordinary demands on their 
liquidity.  If  capital  markets  work  efficiently,  a  solvent  bank  in  need  of  liquidity  should,  in  principle, 
always be able to rely on the market to obtain funds. However, in practice, the interbank market may 
not  always  work  perfectly;  asymmetric  information  and  coordination  failures  are  among  the  most 
severe potential frictions. Banks may, therefore, find themselves unable to access normal sources of 
funding liquidity. The measures to which a bank in this situation would have to resort, such as large 
scale asset sales, could have major adverse spill over effects through the system, as could the most 
extreme case of an outright failure to meet obligations as they fall due. Liquidity buffers may help in 
this regard: a bank holding a buffer of assets that is reliably liquid under conditions of stress, perhaps 
with  a  core  component  that  is  eligible  as  collateral  at  the  central  bank,  should  always  be  able  to 
access liquidity in a way that avoids precipitating severe market disruption. 
The  trends  described  at  the  outset  are  also  important  here.  First,  a  shift  to  greater  reliance  on 
wholesale  funding  and  greater  involvement  in  capital  market  activity  more  broadly  perhaps  makes 
banks more exposed to funding liquidity pressures than in the past: they are at the mercy of nimble 
wholesale lenders. And with internationally active banks managing multi-currency balance sheets, a 
local  approach  to  liquidity  regulation  is  becoming  less  relevant.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Basel 
Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  decided  to  convene  a  Liquidity  Working  Group  to  take stock  of 
prudential approaches internationally and to explore whether there is a case for greater consistency. 
The critical role of infrastructure 
The  financial  market  infrastructure  –  exchanges  and  the  systems  used  to  clear  and  settle  market 
trades  or  cash  obligations  –  also  plays  a  critical  role  here.  Market  participants  rely  on  such 
infrastructure to implement their desired portfolio allocation; to execute risk management strategies; to 
raise liquidity, both in normal course and in times of stress; and to manage contingent exposures and 
cash-flows.  It  is  therefore  important  for  financial  stability  that  these  systems  function  efficiently  and 
continuously,  and  do  not  introduce  unnecessary  costs,  risks  or  frictions  to  trading  and  post-trade 
processes.  Frequent  interruptions  to  pre-  or  post-trade  processing,  or  excessive  costs  in  accessing 
core  components  of  the  market  infrastructure,  can  impose  significant  welfare  costs.  Under  such 
circumstances,  agents  may  be  forced  to  deviate  from  their  desired  portfolio  allocations  and  risk 
exposures, or indeed may be prevented from meeting their obligations as they fall due. With markets 
for credit risk transfer (CRT) growing rapidly, there has been an expansion in the range of transactions 
for which robust, resilient and well-designed infrastructure is essential. 
Market failures in infrastructure provision and single points of failure 
It is instructive to consider why providers of the market infrastructure and their members might, left to 
their  own  devices,  invest  too  little  in  resilience  and  risk-mitigation.  The  answer  lies  in  the 
microeconomics of infrastructure provision, and, in particular, the presence of market characteristics 
such as network externalities, increasing returns to scale and coordination failures. 
By network externality, I refer to the incremental benefit derived by existing owners of a particular good 
or  service  when  another  party  purchases  that  good  or  service.  For  instance,  the  broader  the 
participation in a particular exchange or trading facility, the more extensive the trading opportunities 
and  the deeper  the  liquidity;  as  a  result,  the  greater the  potential benefits  from  membership  of  that 
exchange.  Equally,  in  the  case of  post-trade  infrastructure  – clearing and settlement systems  –  the 
greater the volume of transactions cleared or settled, the greater the potential for netting exposures 
and/or cash-flows (or in gross payment and settlement systems, the more efficiently liquidity can be 
recycled). 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 3
Increasing returns  to scale  reflect  the fact  that  infrastructure  provision  is,  by and  large,  a fixed-cost 
business:  once  an  investment  has  been  made  in  the  information  technology  supporting  the  trade, 
clearing or settlement of a given volume of transactions, the marginal cost of each transaction up to 
the capacity of the system is very low. 
But  the  market  characteristics  imply  a  tendency  towards  natural  monopoly  in  the  provision  of 
infrastructural services and hence dependence on a single, non-substitutable provider: often termed a 
“single point of failure”. A monopolist provider of infrastructure services may face insufficient incentive 
to  innovate  –  including  in  risk-reduction  –  and,  importantly,  may  not  fully  internalise  the  potential 
effects of a disruption to its services on the financial system as a whole, thereby undervaluing system 
resilience from a public policy perspective. 
But couldn’t the users of the infrastructure ensure that the monopoly provider invested more heavily in 
risk mitigation? And with many infrastructures being user-owned cooperatives, would there not be a 
natural mechanism for this? 
Perhaps – and indeed there is evidence of effective risk-mitigation among user-owned providers, for 
example  the  throughput  guidelines  on  payment  flows  to  lower  liquidity  risk  in  CHAPS,  the  UK  high 
value RTGS payment system, was led by member initiative. But such risk mitigation may still not be 
enough to meet social welfare goals fully. 
First, the effects of a disruption are likely to be felt beyond what may be a narrow group of direct users 
of the infrastructure. That is, the effects may be systemic; for instance, there may be an interruption to 
the flow of liquidity via dependent markets or systems, or among participants relying on the system 
indirectly, for example through a correspondent banking relationship. 
Second, users may place insufficient value on systemic stability because material operational failures 
are  low-probability  events  and  difficult  to  anticipate.  Their  assessment  horizon  may  also  be  shorter 
than the social optimum. 
And, crucially, coordination failures may be a factor: users of a particular infrastructure, many of whom 
may compete in underlying markets, need to coordinate their actions if they are to influence decisions 
on the future strategy of the infrastructure provider. Investment in the reduction of operational risk will 
be  one  such  decision.  Difficulties  in  organising  effective  bargaining  among  users  may  leave  them 
unable  to  coordinate,  particularly  in  the  face  of  differences  in  their  information,  expectations  or 
preferences. Potential welfare-increasing actions may, therefore, not be carried out. 
These  market  failures  may  justify  intervention  by  the  public  authorities:  either  via  a  continuous 
oversight or regulatory regime; via targeted intervention; or maybe even via public ownership, as is 
often the case in respect of large-value payment systems and sometimes with securities settlement 
systems. An alternative strategy when faced with a monopoly provider might be to promote (or even 
set  up)  alternative,  competing  suppliers,  to  improve  market  contestability  while  ensuring  adequate 
interoperability  and  substitutability  across  systems.  Of  course,  given  the  existence  of  network 
externalities and increasing returns to scale, the cost of this form of risk mitigation may well be higher 
than the cost of regulating a natural monopoly on an ongoing basis. 
Most typically, public intervention would seek to address the vulnerability stemming from single points 
of  failure  by  the  imposition  of  minimum  standards  of  resilience  on  monopoly  (or  near-monopoly) 
systems, either to reduce the probability of operational failure; or to mitigate the impact of such failure 
by improving contingency arrangements – for instance, via increased investment in back-up facilities. 
Steps might also be taken to improve general risk management practices and mitigate the risk of exit 
of a key infrastructure; financial resilience and business risk is an important consideration here. 
A regulator or overseer might also (or alternatively) seek to narrow the gap between the choices of a 
monopoly provider and the social optimum by encouraging more effective and inclusive governance 
arrangements.  User-  as  opposed  to  external-ownership  might  be  promoted,  though,  as  previously 
noted,  this  might  not  be  enough.  Other  measures  might  include  steps  to  clarify  the  scope  of  the 
system’s  activities,  admissions  criteria,  voting  rights,  transparency,  and  the  role  of  external 
stakeholders. 
For instance, in the UK, overall governance of payment systems is carried out via the newly-formed 
Payments Council. This body is headed by a governing board comprising a (non-voting) independent 
Chair,  four  independent  directors,  and  eleven  directors  from  the  payments  sector.  The  board  is 
expected to consult with key stakeholders before determining strategy, and before making important 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2007
decisions.  Transparency  is  also  enhanced  via  the  publication  of  an  annual  report,  with  a  separate 
contribution by the independent directors, and the publication of board minutes. 
Finally,  we  should  not  underestimate  the  importance  of  users  themselves  building  resilience  within 
their  own  operations  to  single  points  of  failure  in  infrastructures.  For  the  very  same  reasons  that 
monopoly  infrastructure  providers  may  tend  to  under-invest  in  resilience  from  a  public  policy 
perspective,  even  where  run  as  user-owned  cooperatives,  financial  institutions  might  also  need 
supervisory encouragement to invest in work-around measures to deal with disruptions at the level of 
the core infrastructure. 
Other sources of systemic risk 
The existence of single points of failure is not the only manifestation of systemic risk in infrastructures, 
as the behaviour of agents within the systems can lead to problems spilling over to other participants 
given the interconnections and strategic interactions. For example, if a large net provider of liquidity to 
a real-time gross settlement payment system were to face severe operational difficulties which left it 
unable to make payments, other banks within the system might find themselves short of liquidity, and, 
in  extremis,  some  might  be  unable  to  meet  their  own  payment  obligations.  Behavioural  responses, 
such as payment delays and liquidity-hoarding, might then exacerbate the problem within the payment 
system, potentially also spilling over to activity in other systems and financial markets. And, where a 
system is integral to the implementation of monetary policy, a disruption could directly affect a central 
bank’s ability to set overnight rates and maintain confidence in the currency. 
Although this variant of systemic risk does not originate directly in infrastructures, system design can, 
nonetheless, help mitigate the impact. Features of the design and operation of an infrastructure can 
help to lower risks of this type – for example, by introducing collateralisation and loss-sharing rules, 
net sender limits and throughput guidelines to promote efficient liquidity recycling – so that failures do 
not give rise to financial contagion. Again, left to their own devices, users will lack an incentive to take 
into  account  fully  the  costs  imposed  outside  of  the  system  and  they  again  face  acoordination 
challenge in effectively implementing system design or rule changes to reduce such effects. 
Infrastructure robustness and the changing nature of risks 
Some  of  the  financial  market  trends  identified  earlier  have  placed  additional  pressure  on  potential 
shortcomings in the financial infrastructure, attracting the interest of the public authorities and, in some 
cases,  prompting  targeted  intervention.  I  would  like  to  discuss  two  of  these:  financial  market 
innovation; and the global linkages and system interdependencies that arise from the emergence of 
large cross-border banking groups. 
Financial market innovation 
Taking  the  first  of  these,  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets  have  grown  rapidly  in  recent 
years, particularly in the credit sector, driven in part by the shift towards an “originate and distribute” 
model of banking finance and by greater recourse to credit risk transfer to manage and hedge risks, as 
well  as  increasing  activity  by  insurance  companies,  hedge  funds  and  institutional  investors  in  this 
sector. The infrastructure for OTC derivatives has, however, lagged behind. 
Notwithstanding the emergence of new automated vendor services in recent years, OTC derivatives 
trades continue to be cleared and settled on a predominantly bilateral basis. Hence, a party to such a 
transaction is dependent upon the ongoing creditworthiness, liquidity and operational robustness of its 
counterparty over the life of the contract. A sound legal basis for the trade is, of course, also critical. 
Rising volumes (and values) and the development of new, and often more complex, products have 
placed  a  strain  on  existing  arrangements,  exposing  capacity  constraints  in  existing  procedures. 
Questions  have  also  been  raised  over  the  risk  implications  of  deficiencies  in  post-trade  processes, 
most notably in the assignment of credit derivatives contracts. 
Progress towards addressing these deficiencies was initially relatively slow, held back by coordination 
failures in the dealer community, until the regulatory community took an interest in 2005. The issue 
was noted in the Bank of England Financial Stability Review and the UK’s Financial Services Authority 
helped to bring the issue to public attention. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) later 
convened a group of 14 dealers and their regulators, encouraging them to set targets for the reduction 
of processing backlogs in credit derivatives and to put in place mechanisms for speedier post-trade 
processing going forward. The dealers were encouraged to embrace existing automated services for 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 5
the  delivery  and  matching  of  confirmations,  and  the  industry  was  propelled  rapidly  towards  the 
adoption of a Protocol for communicating trade assignments. The group was also encouraged to work 
with vendors, notably the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC), to implement solutions 
providing a framework for ongoing processing efficiency and data integrity. The result was the launch, 
in November 2006, of DTCC’s Trade Information Warehouse. 
In  parallel,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  has  been  investigating 
developments in the OTC derivatives space more generally, updating work carried out in 1998 to map 
the landscape and identify risk issues. The Committee published a report in March 2007. 
The  report  recognises  that  the  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  has  been  strengthened 
significantly in recent years, noting, in particular, the progress in automating and centralising key post-
trade  functions.  But  the  report  also  highlights  that  there  is  more  to  be  done.  For  instance,  while 
processing  backlogs  in  credit  derivatives  have  been  reduced  substantially,  they  remain  sizeable  in 
other  product  lines.  Recognising  that  the  group  convened  by  the  FRBNY  has  been  effective  in 
resolving co-ordination problems, the report argues that momentum from the credit initiative should be 
carried  across  to  other  products.  An  initiative  is  already  under  way  in  this  regard,  with  the  FRBNY 
group having been expanded to 17 firms and a broader range of products. Firms are working towards 
targets for backlog reduction. Automation is a key element of this initiative, although it is recognised 
that there needs to be interoperability between core vendor services if the benefits are to be realised. 
One  implication  is  that  further  public  intervention  might  be  required  should  coordination  problems 
undermine the incentives to deliver such interoperability. And, as the OTC derivatives market becomes 
more  dependent  upon  centralised  providers  of  post-trade  services,  public  authorities  will  need  to 
consider whether established international standards for operational reliability of infrastructures should 
be applied to emerging new systems. 
Global linkages and system interdependencies 
The rapid growth of capital market integration and of large cross-border banking groups (often termed 
large  complex  financial  institutions  or  LCFIs)  and  the  increased  international  linkage  between 
infrastructure providers also has significant implications for the assessment and reduction of systemic 
risk arising in or from the financial infrastructure. Specifically in an Anglo-Swiss context, for instance, 
we have seen Switzerland's SWX Group establish in London back in 2001 the recognised investment 
exchange, virt-x, as a cross-border trading platform, which offers central counterparty (CCP) clearing 
with both LCH.Clearnet Ltd and SIS x-clear AG, and settlement through CrestCo Ltd, Euroclear Bank 
and SIS SegaInterSettle AG. The Swiss CCP, x-clear, also plans to join LCH.Clearnet Ltd in clearing 
the London Stock Exchange. 
Infrastructure  providers  have  responded  positively  to  the  demands  of  an  increasingly  internationally 
oriented  customer  base  by  offering  settlement  links  –  which  facilitate  cross-border  collateral  and 
liquidity management – and clearing links – which allow margin offset with respect to positions held in 
related assets in different centres. 
Cross-border  mergers  between  infrastructures  are  also  becoming  more  common.  For  example,  in 
recent  years,  the  UK’s  central  counterparty  for  derivatives,  London  Clearing  House  (LCH)  Limited 
merged  with  Clearnet  SA,  while  the  Euroclear  Group  acquired  CREST,  the  securities  settlement 
system for the UK and Ireland. The Euroclear Group currently provides domestic securities settlement 
services  in  5  European  countries  as  well  as  international  settlement  services.  Such  tie-ups  are  of 
course  an  international  extension  of  the  microeconomics  of  infrastructure  provision  outlined  above, 
exploiting economies of scale and network externalities. But, at the same time, they introduce common 
business  risks  and  cross-border  dependence  on  core  systems,  thus  providing  another  channel  for 
problems to spill across borders. Such cross-border linkages consequently add a layer of complexity 
to supervisory arrangements, making international coordination among the public authorities essential. 
Linkages  arising  at  the  user  level  are  again  important  here.  As  banks  operate  in  multiple  markets, 
there is increasing scope for shocks to propagate across borders. That may arise from the increased 
centralisation of banks’ liquidity risk management. To the extent that banks use the foreign exchange 
markets to recycle surplus liquidity in one system to meet a shortfall in another, or else take advantage 
of settlement links between securities settlement systems to transfer collateral across borders, liquidity 
risk  may  be  reduced.  But,  to  the  extent  that  banks  respond  to  the  availability  of  mechanisms  for 
reallocating  liquidity  between  systems  by  reducing  their  aggregate  holdings,  a  bank  may  be  more 
vulnerable  to  simultaneous  liquidity  demands  across  markets  or  to  operational  disruption  to  such 
mechanisms. 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2007
The Basel Committee for Payment and Settlement Systems has again been looking closely at issues 
arising from international integration of banks and infrastructures. In recent years, the Committee has 
published a report exploring mechanisms for the cross-border use of collateral, and in the context of a 
broader report on central bank oversight of payment and settlement systems, has established a set of 
principles  for  international  cooperative  oversight.  Work  is  also  continuing  to  map  more  formally  the 
nature of international interdependencies between systems, and thus of cross-border risks. 
Legal certainty 
No  matter  how  safe  and  resilient  the  market  infrastructure,  a  sound  legal  basis  for  transactions  is 
essential if the financial markets are to fulfil their role in effectively allocating scarce capital. 
Financial markets operate within legal systems that not only regulate the behaviour of participants for 
the good of the markets as a whole, but also safeguard the property and contractual rights of those 
participants. Prospective market participants will have greater confidence to invest or to seek finance if 
they  feel  confident,  first,  that  the  regulatory  obligations  and  sanctions  imposed  upon  them  are 
predictable and, second, that the contractual rights/obligations which they acquire/undertake can be 
identified with certainty. 
Furthermore,  market  discipline  is  likely  to  be  enhanced  if  participants’  legal/contractual  rights  and 
obligations are precisely defined; the introduction of an ambiguity into the law can unsettle financial 
markets  or  exacerbate  existing  instabilities.  Legal/contractual  uncertainty  is  therefore  a  potential 
source of systemic risk. Two aspects of legal certainty are particularly crucial: 
Contractual certainty 
One  key  element  of  a  stable  legal  framework  is  contractual  certainty.  Systems  of  contract  law  that 
show respect for formal agreements help to drive down commercial risk and therefore to promote the 
efficient  allocation  of  capital.  And  uncertainty  as  to  the  enforceability  of  contracts  is  likely  to  be 
particularly  damaging  to  financial  markets.  Against  this  background,  contracts  are  becoming  longer 
and more complex as financial innovation continues apace: the documentation for a structured finance 
product can often run into several hundred pages, thus raising the important issue of “documentation” 
risk. 
Legal and regulatory stability 
Another key element is legal and regulatory stability. This is very important to the financial markets, 
where the ability to form complex plans with a degree of confidence as to the stability over time of 
external  influences  (such  as  legal  rules)  impacts  directly  on  risk,  price  and,  ultimately,  the  efficient 
allocation of capital. A stable planning environment is conducive to investment and, therefore, market 
growth.  Examples  of  harmful  consequences  of  ambiguities  in  legal/regulatory  frameworks  include 
uncertainty  as  to  the  extent  and  scope  of  regulatory  obligations or  sanctions,  and  uncertainty  as  to 
how old laws will apply to dynamic and fast-changing market practices. 
The Financial Markets Law Committee (FMLC) 
In recognition of this, a number of countries have established groups of experts to promote greater 
legal certainty in financial markets. In the UK, the Financial Markets Law Committee was established 
in 2002. Its objective was to identify issues of legal uncertainty which might give rise to material risks, 
and  to  consider  how  such  issues  might  best  be  addressed.  The  Committee  seeks  to  meet  this 
objective,  first,  via  liaison  with  industry  and  market  participants  to  identify  those  areas  of  legal 
uncertainty with potentially adverse impacts, and, second, by working with market experts to propose 
solutions. 
One area in which the FMLC has been active in recent years is in encouraging the development of a 
smoothly functioning legal framework for cross-border transfers of intermediated securities. In 2005, 
the Committee undertook a thorough analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of harmonisation 
of the private international law in this area, as reflected in the Hague Convention. It was, and still is, 
widely  accepted  that  such  harmonisation  would  contribute  to  legal  certainty  by  facilitating  a  clear 
identification  of  the  law  governing  the  holding  and  transfer  of  indirectly-held  securities.  This  is 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 7
particularly  important  in  the  context  of  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral:  a  key  element  of  banks’ 
global liquidity management strategies. Early in 2006, the FMLC published a paper that undertook a 
full analysis of the Convention and expressed strong support for its central propositions. 
The FMLC’s work in this (and other) areas has been well received and has contributed to the decision-
making  process  for  government  at  the  national  and  supra17  national  level.  Indeed,  overall,  the 
Committee has had some notable successes in addressing and ameliorating legal uncertainty in the 
financial markets context.  
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, the rapid structural change in global financial markets is providing considerable benefits 
to users of financial services, by lowering the costs of financial intermediation and improving the ability 
to  manage  and  hedge  financial  risks  and  tailor  financial  products.  But  recent  developments  also 
provide  new  challenges  and  sources  of  vulnerability  as  financial  markets  become  increasingly 
integrated, and as participants place increased reliance on sustained market liquidity to manage their 
risks. While financial institutions are in a strong financial position, risk taking has increased and the 
vulnerability of the financial system as a whole to a sharp change in conditions has risen. Against this 
background,  and  given  the  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  how  many  new  complex  financial 
products would perform in more strained market conditions, it is important to improve the analysis and 
understanding of tail risks through systemic stress tests and thereby strengthen risk management, to 
ensure that financial institutions retain strong buffers of capital and liquidity, and that investment in the 
financial  and  legal  infrastructure  keeps  pace  with  market  developments  and  thus  ensures  that  it 
remains robust and resilient. 
8 
 BIS Review 77/2007
BIS Review 77/2007 
  9
10 
  BIS Review 77/2007
