Kevin M Warsh: Hedge funds 
Testimony  of  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 11 July 2007.  
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate  the  opportunity  to  appear  today  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  to  discuss  the  systemic  risk  implications  of  the  growth  of  hedge 
funds. 
The  Board  believes  that  the  increased  scale  and  scope  of  hedge  funds  has  brought 
significant net benefits to financial markets. Indeed, hedge funds have the potential to reduce 
systemic risk by dispersing risks more broadly and by serving as a large pool of opportunistic 
capital that can stabilize financial markets in the event of disturbances. At the same time, the 
recent growth of hedge funds presents some formidable challenges to the achievement of 
public  policy  objectives,  including  significant  risk-management  challenges  to  market 
participants. If market participants prove unwilling or unable to meet these challenges, losses 
in the hedge fund sector could pose significant risks to financial stability. 
The Board believes that the "Principles and Guidelines Regarding Private Pools of Capital" 
issued by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) in February provides a 
sound framework for addressing these challenges associated with hedge funds, including the 
potential  for  systemic  risk.1  The  Board  shares  the  considered  judgment  of  the  PWG:  the 
most effective mechanism for limiting systemic risks from hedge funds is market discipline; 
and, the most important providers of market discipline are the large, global commercial and 
investment banks that are their principal creditors and counterparties.  
The  emphasis  on  market  discipline  neither  endorses  the  status  quo  nor  implies  a  passive 
role for government. In recent years, the global banks have significantly strengthened their 
practices and procedures for managing risk exposures to hedge funds. But, further progress 
on this front is needed – in no small part because of the increasing complexity of structured 
credit products such as collateralized debt obligations.2 The Board believes that even those 
banks with the most sophisticated risk-management practices must further strengthen their 
enterprise-wide systems to put the PWG Principles fully into practice. 
As  the  PWG  Principles  rightly  emphasize,  supervisors  of  global  banks  are  responsible  for 
promoting  market  discipline  by  monitoring  and  evaluating  banks'  management  of  their 
exposures to hedge funds. As the umbrella supervisor of U.S. bank holding companies, the 
Federal Reserve continues to pay keen attention to hedge fund exposures and is working to 
ensure stronger risk-management practices. In addition, through the Federal Reserve Bank 
of  New  York,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  actively  facilitating  collaboration  and  coordination 
among domestic and international supervisors of the global banks that are key counterparties 
and  creditors  of  hedge  funds.  This  area  of  significant  focus  –  targeting  management  of 
exposures to hedge funds – is part of a broader, comprehensive set of supervisory initiatives 
that seeks to ensure that banks' risk-management practices and market infrastructures are 
                                                 
1   www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/hp272.htm 
2   A  collateralized  debt  obligation  (CDO)  is  a  security  that  entitles  the  purchaser  to  some  portion  of  the  cash 
flows from a portfolio of assets, which may include bonds, loans, mortgage-backed securities, or other CDOs. 
For a given pool, CDOs designated as senior debt, mezzanine debt, subordinated debt, and equity often are 
issued. 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 1
sufficiently  robust  to  cope  with  stresses  that  may  accompany  a  deterioration  of  market 
conditions.  
To that end, the Federal Reserve has been focusing on five key supervisory initiatives: (1) 
comprehensive  reviews  of  firms'  stress-testing  practices;  (2)  a  multilateral  supervisory 
assessment of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to 
hedge funds; (3) a review of the risks associated with the rapid growth of "leveraged lending"; 
(4)  a  new  assessment  of  practices  to  manage  liquidity  risk;  and  (5)  continued  efforts  to 
reduce risks associated with weaknesses in the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives 
and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives.  
Indeed,  this  Committee  should  be  assured  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  on  these 
initiatives  with  great  purpose  and  resolve.  These  initiatives  are  fully  consistent  with  the 
founding purpose assigned to the Federal Reserve by Congress: to help mitigate the risks to 
the  financial  system  and  the  broader  economy  caused  by  periodic  bouts  of  instability  and 
financial stress. 
Hedge funds 
Although  there  is  no  precise  legal  definition,  the  term  "hedge  fund"  generally  refers  to  a 
pooled  investment  vehicle  that  is  privately  organized,  administered  by  a  professional 
investment  manager,  and  not  widely  available  to  the  public.  The  assets,  investment 
strategies, and risk profiles of funds that meet this broad definition are quite diverse. In no 
sense  are  hedge  funds  an  "asset  class,"  like  stocks,  bonds,  commodities,  or  real  estate. 
While  some  hedge  funds  pursue  investment  strategies  similar  to  those  pursued  by  private 
equity funds, the strategies of the sector as a whole are quite varied. Some hedge funds are 
highly leveraged, while many use little or no leverage. 
The hedge fund sector has grown very rapidly in recent years. By the end of 2006, more than 
9,000  funds  managed  more  than  $1-1/2  trillion  of  assets.3  Assets  managed  in  the  United 
States are estimated to account for about 60 percent of the total. The hedge fund industry 
remains  small  relative  to  the  U.S.  mutual  fund  industry,  which  included  more  than  8,000 
funds with about $10-1/2 trillion of assets under management at the end of 2006.4 Hedge 
funds, however, can make greater use of leverage than mutual funds. Their market impact is 
further  magnified  by  the  active  trading  of  some  funds.  The  aggregate  trading  volumes  of 
hedge  funds  reportedly  account  for  significant  shares  of  total  trading  volumes  in  some 
segments of the financial markets.5  
Possible implications of hedge fund growth for financial stability and systemic risk 
In important respects, the activities of hedge funds tend to foster financial stability. They are 
significant providers of liquidity across the financial markets. Many hedge funds are devoted 
to  exploiting  arbitrage  opportunities  that  emerge  when  financial  asset  prices  become 
misaligned.  For  example,  when  interest  rates  spiked  in  the  summer  of  2003,  demands  by 
hedgers of mortgage prepayment risks strained the liquidity of interest rate options markets, 
sending option prices soaring. Some hedge funds saw profit opportunities in selling interest 
                                                 
3   www.fsforum.org/publications/HLI_Update-finalwithoutembargo19May07.pdf 
4   See  Investment  Company  Institute  (2007),  2007  Investment  Company  Fact  Book  (Washington,  D.C.:  ICI, 
May). 
5   Greenwich Associates (2004), "Hedge Funds: The End of the Beginning?", December; Greenwich Associates 
(2006),  "For  Hedge  Funds,  Fixed-Income  Trading  Volumes  Soar,  While  Costs  Take  on  New  Importance," 
December. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2007
rate options, and their actions helped restore liquidity to the markets and reduced the cost of 
hedging.  
The  growth  of  hedge  funds  has  also  contributed  to  a  broader  dispersion  of  risks  in  the 
financial  system,  which  thus  far  seems  to  have  made  the  financial  system  somewhat  less 
volatile.  For  example,  in  2001  and  2002,  significant  losses  caused  by  corporate  bond 
defaults were absorbed without causing any discernible stress in the financial system. This 
experience contrasted with earlier periods when financial risks were concentrated at banks 
and  other  insured  depositories.  In  those  earlier  periods,  declines  in  asset  prices  created 
considerable  financial  and  economic  stress  –  the  losses  produced  failures  of  many 
depositories and severely impaired the capital and lending capacity of others. 
At the same time, the growth of hedge funds clearly presents risk-management challenges to 
participants  in  financial  markets.  If  those  risk-management  challenges  are  not  addressed 
successfully,  problems  in  the  hedge  fund  sector  could  pose  risks  to  the  broader  financial 
system. For example, when the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) nearly 
failed  in  September  1998,  market  participants  were  concerned  that  LTCM's  losses  would 
force liquidation of its very large positions in a wide range of financial markets, which could 
amplify price movements and erode market liquidity. Indeed, the primary factor that induced 
LTCM's  counterparties  and  creditors  to  recapitalize  the  institution  was  their  fear  that 
liquidation of LTCM's positions would adversely affect the value of their own trading positions 
and their exposures to other counterparties.  
In recent months, many market participants have expressed concern that a widening of credit 
spreads from relatively narrow levels could lead to hedge fund losses that would make funds 
unwilling  or  unable  to  maintain  their  existing  positions,  thus  potentially  eroding  market 
liquidity.  Such  circumstances  could  pose  significant  challenges 
funds' 
counterparties and creditors and perhaps to other market participants. Thus far, however, the 
repricing of credit risk does not appear to have imposed significant strains on the financial 
system. 
to  hedge 
Limiting potential systemic risks from hedge funds 
Since  the  LTCM  episode,  policymakers  have  continued  to  discuss  the  best  approach  to 
limiting potential systemic risks from the activities of hedge funds. In the immediate aftermath 
of  the  episode,  the  PWG  studied  the  implications  for  financial  stability  and  published  its 
conclusions in April 1999 in a report entitled "Hedge Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of 
Long-Term Capital Management."6 The report concluded that the episode had posed a threat 
to  financial  stability  as  a  result  of  a  breakdown  in  market  discipline  by  its  creditors  and 
counterparties, which allowed LTCM to become leveraged excessively. The report concluded 
that the most effective means of limiting systemic risk from hedge funds was to reinvigorate 
market  discipline.  To  that  end,  the  PWG  made  various  recommendations,  which  were 
directed  primarily  at  enhancing  credit  risk  management  by  hedge  funds'  creditors  and 
counterparties. 
Late  last  year,  the  PWG  reassessed  how  best  to  address  the  challenges  posed  by  the 
continued growth of the hedge fund sector. The results of that reassessment were reflected 
in the PWG's release on February 22 of this year of an "Agreement Among PWG and U.S. 
Agency  Principals  on  Principles  and  Guidelines  Regarding  Private  Pools  of  Capital.  "The 
term "private pools of capital" was intended broadly to describe pooled investment vehicles 
that  are  privately  organized,  administered  by  a  professional  manager,  and  not  generally 
available to the public. Thus, the definition includes hedge funds, private equity funds, and 
                                                 
6   www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/hedgfund.pdf 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 3
venture  capital  funds.  The  PWG  highlighted  certain  overarching  principles,  followed  by 
principles that specifically addressed investor protection and systemic risk.  
The balance of my testimony will focus on the application of the systemic risk principles to 
hedge funds. As I have noted, the overarching principle is that the most effective mechanism 
for limiting systemic risk from hedge funds is market discipline. In this regard, the 2007 PWG 
Principles are consistent with the 1999 PWG report. Four specific systemic risk principles set 
out by the PWG furnish guidance to four sets of parties that have important roles in imparting 
market  discipline:  creditors  and  counterparties,  investors,  hedge  fund  managers,  and 
supervisors of creditors and counterparties. 
The key creditors and counterparties of hedge funds are a relatively small group of global 
commercial and investment banks. These global banks provide credit to hedge funds through 
securities repurchase agreements (repos) and act as counterparties to the funds' OTC and 
exchange-traded  derivatives.  The  terms  at  which  these  global  banks  transact  with  hedge 
funds  can  act  as  an  important  constraint  on  hedge  fund  leverage.  Furthermore,  losses  to 
these global banks from their credit exposures to hedge funds or from market disruptions that 
could  accompany  liquidation  of  hedge  funds'  positions  are  the  most  plausible  channel 
through  which  excessive  leverage  by  hedge  funds  could  threaten  the  broader  financial 
system or the real economy. Thus, the management by these banks of their exposures to 
hedge funds is extremely important. 
The  PWG  Principles  call  upon  the  key  counterparties  to  commit  resources  and  maintain 
policies  and  procedures  consistent  with  best  practices  for  counterparty  risk  management. 
These  policies  and  procedures  relate  to  due  diligence;  exposure  measurement,  including 
stress  testing;  and  margin  requirements  and  other  credit  terms.  There  should  be  a  strong 
correlation between the information held by a counterparty about a hedge fund's risk profile 
and the terms on which credit is extended. The principles indicate that counterparties should 
seek  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  of a  fund's  exposures  to market  and credit  risk 
and its vulnerabilities to liquidity pressures from counterparties and investors. When sufficient 
information is not forthcoming from a fund, a counterparty should correspondingly tighten its 
margin requirements and other credit terms. 
Since  1999,  foundations,  endowments,  public  and  private  pension  funds,  and  other 
institutions  have  become  an  increasingly  significant  source  of  capital  to  the  hedge  fund 
sector.  These  institutions,  many  of  which  are  quite  sophisticated,  are  another  source  of 
market discipline on risk-taking by hedge funds. Accordingly, the PWG Principles call upon 
investors  to  carefully  evaluate  the  strategies  and  risk-management  capabilities  of  hedge 
funds and to ensure that a fund's risk profile is compatible with the investor's appetite for risk. 
The  Board  supports  the  PWG's  formation  of  an  "investors  group"  to  develop  detailed 
guidelines for best practices for investors in hedge funds, including practices relating to due 
diligence and ongoing assessments of a fund's risk profile. 
Managers  of  hedge  funds  also  can  contribute  to  limiting  the  systemic  risks  from  their 
activities. In particular, their management of funding liquidity risk is a crucial determinant of 
whether  losses  suffered  by  a  fund  in  adverse  market  conditions  spill  over  to  their 
counterparties. Since 1999, the Managed Funds Association, the International Organization 
of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  and  other  organizations  have  issued  and  updated 
guidance  on  sound  practices  regarding  valuation,  risk  management,  and  disclosure.  The 
PWG Principles call for fund managers to meet those industry sound practices. Furthermore, 
the hedge fund industry should periodically review guidance on sound practices, and when 
necessary, enhance it. The Board supports the PWG's formation of a hedge fund "managers 
group"  to  review  and  enhance  existing  guidance  on  sound  practices  in  light  of  the  PWG 
Principles. 
Finally,  because  all  the  key  counterparties  of  hedge  funds  are  subject  to  prudential 
regulation, their supervisors have a vital role to play in limiting systemic risks, including those 
that  may  emanate  from  hedge  funds.  The  PWG  Principles  call  for  supervisors  to 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2007
communicate clearly to counterparties their expectations regarding prudent management of 
the counterparties' credit exposures to hedge funds and to other leveraged counterparties. 
The  principles  also  emphasize  the  need  for  international  policy  coordination  among  the 
supervisors of the key counterparties, which are organized in the United States and several 
European countries. 
The Federal Reserve's responsibilities as a banking supervisor 
The  Federal  Reserve  continues  to  work  with  other  domestic  and  international  prudential 
supervisors to communicate supervisory expectations with respect to prudent management 
of  credit  exposures  to  hedge  funds  and  other  leveraged  counterparties.  After  the  LTCM 
episode, the Federal Reserve contributed substantively to a report by the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  that  identified  sound  practices  for  managing  such 
exposures.  These  practices  covered  the  overall  strategy  for  credit  risk  management,  the 
processes for information gathering and due diligence, the measurement and control of credit 
exposures, the limit-setting process, the use of collateral and other mechanisms for limiting 
losses,  and  the  ongoing  monitoring  of  positions  and  exposures.  IOSCO  issued  similar 
supervisory guidance around the same time. 
As  the  umbrella  supervisor  of  U.S.  bank  holding  companies,  the  Federal  Reserve  began 
issuing  supervisory  guidance  on  the  management  of  counterparty  credit  risks  in  the  early 
1990s. The BCBS sound practices were incorporated in this guidance to reflect the lessons 
learned  from  the  LTCM  episode.  Adherence  to  the  guidance  is  assessed  as  part  of 
examinations of the global banks that are among the principal hedge fund counterparties. 
The  Federal  Reserve's  supervision  of  counterparty  risk  management  practices  is  part  of  a 
broader, more comprehensive set of supervisory initiatives. The goal of these initiatives is to 
assess whether global banks' risk-management practices and financial market infrastructures 
are sufficiently robust to cope with stresses that could accompany a deterioration of market 
conditions,  including  a  deterioration  that  might  result  from  the  rapid  liquidation  of  hedge 
funds'  positions.  As  I  will  discuss  in  greater  detail,  those  supervisory  initiatives  include  (1) 
comprehensive  reviews  of  firms'  stress-testing  practices;  (2)  a  multilateral  supervisory 
assessment of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to 
hedge funds; (3) a review of the risks associated with the rapid growth of "leveraged lending"; 
(4)  a  new  assessment  of  practices  to  manage  liquidity  risk;  and  (5)  continued  efforts  to 
reduce risks associated with weaknesses in the clearing and settlement of credit derivatives 
and other OTC derivatives.  
Stress-testing 
1.  
Global  banks  perform  stress  tests  to  assess  the  potential  effects  of  a  variety  of  adverse 
scenarios, including the effects of greater market volatility or reduced liquidity on their market 
risks  and  counterparty  credit  risks.  They  also  consider  scenarios  in  which  their  access  to 
funding could be reduced, and develop contingency funding plans accordingly. A review of 
selected global banks' stress-testing practices that the Federal Reserve conducted in 2006 
indicated a need for the banks to enhance their capacity to aggregate credit exposures at the 
firmwide level, including across counterparties; to assess the potential for counterparty credit 
losses  to  be  compounded  by  losses  on  the  banks'  proprietary  trading  positions;  and  to 
assess  the  potential  effects  of  a  rapid  and  possibly  protracted  decline  in  asset  market 
liquidity. 
Management of exposures to hedge funds 
2.  
In the fall of 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York initiated a multilateral supervisory 
review of the leading global banks' current practices for managing their exposures to hedge 
funds. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Office of the Comptroller 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 5
of the Currency (OCC), and prudential supervisors in Germany, Switzerland, and the United 
Kingdom  are  participating  in  this  review.  The  first  phase of  the  review  was  completed  last 
December. The reviewers found that banks' current and potential future credit exposures to 
hedge funds were small relative to the banks' capital, largely because of the pervasive use of 
collateral  agreements.  It  was  not  clear,  however,  how  well  the  banks'  measurement  of 
potential  exposures  captures  the  possible  size  of  those  exposures  under  more  adverse 
market scenarios. The multilateral review is ongoing. 
Leveraged lending 
3. 
The Federal Reserve is focusing on the risks to U.S. bank holding companies from leveraged 
lending activities – that is, from lending to relatively higher risk corporate borrowers, often to 
finance acquisitions or leveraged buyouts. The largest U.S. banks typically distribute a large 
share of the loans that they originate to other banks and institutional investors. Nonetheless, 
the banks can be exposed to significant risks, and the review is intended to assess the scale 
of these risks and the effectiveness of the banks' associated risk-management practices. The 
Federal Reserve's efforts in this area are being coordinated with the OCC and the SEC. 
Liquidity risk management 
4.  
The financial system's capacity to cope with stress depends critically on the management of 
funding liquidity pressures that may arise, especially pressures on the large global banks that 
play a central role in financial markets. The Federal Reserve is beginning a review of liquidity 
risk-management  practices  at  the  largest  U.S.  bank  holding  companies,  focusing  on  the 
firms' efforts to ensure adequate funding in more adverse market scenarios. 
Weaknesses in clearing and settlement of OTC derivatives 
5.  
The  Federal  Reserve  first  brought  together  the  group  of  supervisors  participating  in  the 
multilateral review of management of hedge fund exposures in September 2005 to oversee 
derivatives  dealers'  efforts  to  address  weaknesses  in  settlement  practices  in  the  credit 
derivatives markets. Our intent has been to ensure that the clearing and settlement practices 
for all OTC derivatives are sufficiently robust that they would not be a source of increased 
risk  during  a  period  of  significantly  greater  price  volatility  or  trading  volumes.  Of  greatest 
concern in September 2005 was the widespread failure of derivatives dealers to enforce a 
contractual requirement that a counterparty receive the dealer's prior written consent before 
assigning  a  credit  derivative  to  another  dealer.  The  failure  to  enforce  this  requirement 
fundamentally compromised counterparty risk management by creating confusion about the 
identity  of  counterparties.  It  also  contributed  to  growing  backlogs  of  unconfirmed  credit 
derivatives trades. The assignment problem was quickly resolved by widespread adoption of 
an  industry  protocol  that  created  strong  incentives  to  obtain  prompt  written  consent  to 
assignments.  The  broader  problem  of  confirmation  backlogs  for  credit  derivatives  is  being 
addressed through more widespread use of an electronic confirmation platform. Building on 
the success of that initiative, the supervisors are now overseeing dealers' efforts to address 
confirmation backlogs in the over-the-counter markets for equity derivatives. 
Conclusion 
The  PWG  Principles  provide  a  sound  framework  for  addressing  the  public  policy  issues 
raised  by  the  growth  of  hedge  funds,  including  the  potential  systemic  risk  consequences. 
These principles are not an endorsement of the status quo. To the contrary, hedge funds, 
their  creditors  and  counterparties,  and  their  investors,  need  to  take  action  to  put  these 
principles fully into practice. The Federal Reserve has worked, and will continue to work, with 
the PWG and others to promote practices consistent with the PWG's Principles for Private 
Pools  of  Capital.  In  particular,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  work  with  other 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2007
supervisors to ensure that global banks manage their exposures to hedge funds prudently. 
More  generally,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  pursue  a  comprehensive  set  of 
initiatives 
that  banks'  risk-management  practices  and  market 
infrastructures  are  sufficiently  robust  to  cope  with  any  stresses  that  may  result  from  a 
deterioration of the benign financial conditions experienced in recent years. 
to  ensure 
that  seek 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 7
