Jean Claude Trichet: Welcome Malta! 
Speech by Mr Jean Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the event for 
launching the joint communication campaign for the euro changeover at the Central Bank of 
Malta, Valletta, 30 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to be here at this festive moment. This is to mark the 
launching of the joint communication campaign for the euro changeover in close co-operation 
with the Central Bank of Malta and with our friend, Michael Bonello, just 92 days before Malta 
adopts  the  euro  on  1  January  2008.  This  will  signify  a  great  milestone  in  Malta’s  history, 
especially since Malta only joined the European Union (EU) almost four years ago, on 1 May 
2004. Let me first offer my warm congratulations to all of those who have helped bring Malta 
to this point. In 2002 for the countries that were in the euro area at the time, as well as for 
Slovenia this year, it was a memorable moment and a positive step. So I can well imagine 
how the Maltese feel at the moment. 
You can be proud of Malta’s successful convergence process. In fact, we are very pleased 
about  the  fruitful  cooperation  between  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  Central 
Bank of Malta in the preparations for the changeover, be it at the technical level or through 
the participation of Governor Bonello as observer in the Governing Council since last July. 
Preparations for EU membership and the adoption of the euro have spurred a broad-based 
reform process. The adoption of the euro should not mark the end of this structural reform 
process.  In  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  euro  adoption  and  to  ensure  sustainable 
convergence,  this  process  should  continue.  As  you  know,  economic  and  monetary 
integration  between  countries  with  somewhat  different  characteristics  and  levels  of 
development  requires  careful  preparation.  However,  you  have  already  reached  this  stage 
and  your  planning  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  almost  complete.  Looking  ahead  the 
adoption of the euro will enhance your integration with all EU partners.  
Today  practical  preparations  towards  the  public  are  remarkably  advanced  and  the  euro 
campaign has been outstanding in Malta. Indeed, the Central Bank, and also the National 
Euro  Changeover  Committee  can  be  praised  for  their  excellent  work  paving  the  way  for  a 
smooth changeover. The ECB has contributed to this euro campaign by making the public 
acquainted  with  the  visual  appearance  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  and  the  security 
features.  The  framework  used  by  the  ECB  and  the  CBM  constitutes  an  optimal 
communication mix to ensure a good reach of the public. This means research, advertising, 
direct  marketing,  public  relations  (like  this  event  today)  or  addressing  the  vulnerable 
population. Overall, around 500, 000 copies of publications will be distributed by the CBM or 
via multipliers – so more than the actual population. 
I  am  pleased  to  see  that  the  recent  euro  barometer  showed  a  steady  progression  in  the 
satisfaction of  the  Maltese  with  the adoption  of the  euro  (from  40%  in  September  2005  to 
64% in June 2007). 
Let me hand over the euro star to Governor Bonello to symbolically flag that the Central Bank 
of  Malta  will  join  the  Eurosystem  on  1  January  2008.  We  look  forward  to  welcoming  you 
wholeheartedly into the euro area. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 1
