Thomas Jordan: Globalisation and financial markets – challenges and 
opportunities  
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at ETH Alumni Engineering & Management, Zurich, 13 November 2007.  
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 In  the  past  few  years,  globalisation  of  financial  markets  has  attained  a  remarkable  level, 
exceeding  that  of  goods  markets  in  a  number  of  respects.  The  future  is  likely  to  see 
considerable further development in this direction. In principle, the effects of financial market 
globalisation are positive. It leads to a higher level of efficiency in the international allocation 
of capital and allows for better risk distribution in investments. However, the globalisation of 
financial markets in Switzerland means that more companies are being taken over by foreign 
investors, while new risks arise in the case of investments abroad – risks that are difficult to 
quantify. 
The globalisation of financial markets confronts monetary policy with a  dual challenge. On 
the  one  hand,  it  changes  the  way  in  which  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism 
works, and the interpretation of economic models becomes more difficult. On the other hand, 
external shocks have a greater impact on both domestic financial markets and the domestic 
economy.  Consequently,  globalisation  of  financial  markets  results  in  greater  uncertainty  in 
monetary  policy  and  increases  the  necessity  of  monetary  policy  stabilisation  by  central 
banks.  
Overall, Switzerland – a small open economy with a highly developed financial sector – is in 
a position to derive particularly significant benefits from the globalisation of financial markets. 
It  is  important  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities.  Protectionism  when  foreigners 
acquire  companies  and  excessive  regulation  of  foreign  investment  should  be  avoided. 
Rather,  the  sale  of  Swiss  companies  below  their  real  value  can  be  avoided  through 
innovation, flexibility and good management, and excessive risks of foreign investments can 
be limited through more personal responsibility on the part of investors. 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 1
