Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Izvestia 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Izvestia, 
conducted by Ms Anna Kaledina on 11 October 2007. 
 - May I ask you your opinion about the global liquidity crisis? At what stage is it at the 
current  juncture?  After  the  difficulties  with  Northern  Rock,  it  seems  the  American 
crisis  spilled  over  into  Europe.  Is  this  the  case?  Or  are  the  problems  limited  to 
Deutsche Bank? 
First let me remind you that the ECB as well as the other central banks had indicated that 
there was a degree of under-pricing of risks in the global financial system and that financial 
institutions as well as market participants should prepare for the market correction to be as 
orderly and smoothly as possible. We are experiencing a significant market correction with 
episodes of high volatility and turbulence. As far as the ECB is concerned, we have clearly 
indicated  that  we  will  ensure  price  stability  in  conformity  with  our  primary  objective  and 
determine  our  monetary  policy  stance  accordingly.  Once  this  monetary  policy  stance  is 
decided, we have the responsibility to pave the way for the proper functioning of the money 
market. These two responsibilities are clearly separated and this has been well understood 
by market participants. 
- To solve the consequences of the subprime turmoil, did the ECB inject more liquidity 
than  the  US  monetary  authorities?  Why  are  Europe’s  monetary  authorities  the  main 
ones to act to get out of a crisis that is first and foremost American? In general, do 
you have any problems of cooperation with the US Fed? 
Each  and  every  central  bank  has  its  own  responsibilities,  within  the  context  of  economies 
that  are  different,  circumstances  that  are  different  and  challenges  that  are  not  alike.  The 
comparison of the volume of refinancing on both sides of the Atlantic is not pertinent because 
in the euro area, in normal times, the needs for refinancing are vastly superior to the needs in 
the United States. As regards the interventions in the money market I think we did well on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  And  I  am  very  proud  of  the  capacity  the  ECB  demonstrated  in 
working out a good diagnosis and embarking on decision-making which was expeditious and 
effective.  
- Doesn’t the rise of the euro to unprecedently high levels worry you? What level of the 
EUR/USD  bilateral  exchange  rate  would  pose  a  serious  threat  to  the  European 
economy? Does the ECB intend to take action to support the level of the USD? Among 
others, this is what the ECB’s opponent Nicolas Sarkozy is calling for. What do you 
think of his calls to see the euro depreciate? 
It is a very important issue, where I call on all partners in Europe, in the executive branches, 
to be highly responsible and to demonstrate verbal discipline. Let me repeat the position of 
the ECB, as well as the position of the euro area as a whole: Exchange rates should reflect 
economic fundamentals and excess volatility and  disorderly movements in exchange rates 
are undesirable for economic growth. In emerging economies with large and growing current 
account surpluses, especially China, it is desirable that their effective exchange rates move 
so that necessary adjustments occur. Concerning the dollar, I have noted with great attention 
that  the  US  authorities  have  reaffirmed  that  a  strong  dollar  is  in  the  interest  of  the  US 
economy.  Concerning  the  yen,  as  stated  by  the  Japanese  authorities,  the  Japanese 
economy is on a sustainable recovery path. These developments should be recognized by 
market participants and incorporated in their assessment of risks. Markets should be aware 
of the risks of one-way bets. 
- Will the ECB interest rates be changed in the near future? 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 1
I have nothing to add or withdraw from what I have said in my last press conference after the 
meeting of the ECB Governing Council in Vienna on 4 October.  
-  With  what  main  difficulties  are  you,  as  a  person  in  charge  of  the  euro  area, 
confronted with? As far as I understand, it is difficult to avoid imbalances in the euro 
area, which unites countries that are at very different stages of development.  
It is true that there are differences among euro area countries, but I would not say that these 
differences are bigger than those between the different states of the USA, and certainly also 
not bigger than the differences in economic landscape between certain parts of the Russian 
Federation.  From  that  standpoint  there  is  no  particular  difficulty  in  implementing  the  single 
monetary policy at the level of our very vast economy, for the euro area as a whole, which is 
of the size of the USA. 
That being said, we call for the implementation of structural reforms in order to fully achieve 
the  single  European  market  and  to  improve  the  flexibility  of  all  markets  of  goods  and 
services, of the labour market and of the financial market in the euro area.  
-  A  number  of  countries  (including  Lithuania  and  the  Czech  Republic)  postpone  the 
euro adoption. How can this be accounted for? Possibly, do they fear inflation or is 
their economy just not ready for such a step? And do you see Russia as a member of 
the EU? There is the view that our country should more lean towards Asia. What do 
you think about that? 
First let me say that we are all delighted that Cyprus and Malta are joining the euro area on 1 
January next year, after Slovenia joined on 1 January this year. It is very impressive to think 
that there will be 15 of us; that thanks to new countries there will be 320 million citizens in the 
euro area. As a comparison, the United States has 300 million citizens – so the populations 
are really of the same order of magnitude and it is impressive. It also shows that we are not a 
closed shop but an open area, provided that the Maastricht criteria are met. But we have to 
make an assessment of each country, case by case. And there are many differences within 
the group of countries that are in the European Union but not yet in the euro area. It is up to 
these countries to decide at what date they would like to join the euro area and to embark on 
the appropriate strategy of convergence. And it is up to the Commission, to the ECB, and to 
the  European  Council  to  judge  whether  these  countries  meet  the  Maastricht  criteria  and 
therefore qualify for the adoption of the euro.  
As regards the question on whether Russia would be a member of the EU in the future, of 
course  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  is  an  issue  which  is  not  covered  by  the 
mandate of the ECB. Therefore is not for the President of the ECB to say whether or not this 
is  a  realistic  option  for  Russia  to  become  member  of  the  European  Union,  both  from  the 
standpoint of Russia and from the standpoint of the European Union. As a French citizen and 
a European citizen I would say that in the very long run it is a decision which will be taken or 
not by the people of Russia and by the people of Europe. We are experiencing a formidable 
historical  evolution  in  Russia,  in  Europe  and  in  the  world.  The  biggest  mistake  we  could 
make would be to underestimate the rapidity of the pace of history. Everything is possible.  
2 
 BIS Review 116/2007
-  What  do  you  think  about  global  imbalances?  In  particular,  the  fall  of  the  USD  can 
only worsen these imbalances. How to solve this problem? 
As  regards  the  exchange  rate  I  already  said  what  my  position  was.  As  regards  global 
imbalances, this issue is constantly studied and discussed in the central bankers’ community; 
we have discussed it just recently with our colleagues from the Bank of Russia, earlier in a 
similar gathering we organise with Latin American central banks. Every two months in Basel I 
meet all my colleagues of other central banks at the level of the global economy. Together 
with  Chairman  Ignatiev  and  the  other  colleagues  we  look  at  the  best  ways  to  prevent  a 
disorderly unwinding of global imbalances and to pave the way for an orderly and smooth 
reduction of these global imbalances. 
-  How  do  you  assess  the  Russian  banking  system,  its  general  soundness  and  in 
particular at the current juncture? 
I  would  first  of  all  like  to  clarify  that  –  of  course  -  the  assessment  of  the  Russian  banking 
system is the responsibility of the pertinent Russian authorities. The Bank of Russia and the 
Eurosystem  discuss  relevant  financial  developments  and  stability  in  both  economic  areas, 
including  the  occasion  of  our  annual  seminars.  As  you  know,  during  2003-2005  the 
Eurosystem  implemented  a  very  important  technical  assistance  project  with  the  Bank  of 
Russia in the field of banking supervision. This project was financed by the EU and in the 
Bank of Russia it was implemented under the captaincy of the late First Deputy Chairman, 
Andrey  Kozlov.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  emotions  in  paying  tribute  to 
Andrey Kozlov, who was extremely dedicated to our central banking cooperation project. He 
is present in all our memories. 
- In our country many observers are in favour of taking away banking supervision from 
the central bank. What is your view? 
The  ECB  Governing  Council  has  indeed  expressed  a  clear  opinion  in  this  respect.  In  our 
case, financial stability and supervision, according to the Treaty the Eurosystem, contributes 
to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  authorities  in  charge  of  prudential 
supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system. The position of the 
Eurosystem is very clear: we are in favour of  a significant involvement of central banks in 
prudential supervision. We believe that this observation is valid for any free-market economy 
and is quite universal. In our case, maintaining the close involvement of the central banks in 
prudential  supervision  is  an  important  condition  for  allowing  us  to  contribute  adequately  to 
monitoring  the  risks  to  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  to  safeguard  smooth 
cooperation between the central bank functions and the supervisory functions, carried out at 
a national level. Let me add that we share this view with the Federal Reserve System of the 
US.  
- In general, what piece of advice can you give to your Russian colleagues? 
We  are  conducting  a  confident  and  friendly  dialogue.  This  dialogue  is  beneficial  for  both 
sides as we live in an increasingly globalised world, not only, but in particular, with regard to 
financial  markets.  At  the  same  time,  Russia  and  the  EU  are  neighbours,  and  real  and 
financial  integration  between  the  EU  and  Russia  is  advancing  rapidly,  also  reflecting  the 
growth  we  have  seen  in  both  economic  areas.  Clearly,  there  is  a  need  to  discuss  and 
exchange  views  on  the  central  banking  dimension  of  these  economic  and  financial  links. 
Thus, it is not a matter of giving advice but to engage in a confident and candid exchange of 
views as central bankers on the various issues which are at the core of our task.  
- Quite  recently French President Nicolas Sarkozy was visiting Russia and this visit 
raised questions on bilateral relations between the Russian Federation and the euro 
area. What would be your opinion in this respect?  
I am personally impressed by the developments in Russia and certainly the trade relations 
between  Russia  and  the  European  Union  are  very  intense,  supported  by  the  impetus  of 
robust  economic  growth  in  both  the  euro  area  and  Russia.  Let  me  also  say  that  I  am 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 3
impressed  by  the  importance  of  our  relationship  as  regards  foreign  direct  investment 
between  the  two  economies,  and  particularly  by  the  significant  augmentation  of  this 
investment  during  the  first  half  of  2007.  Three-quarters  of  the  foreign  direct  investment  in 
Russia comes from the European Union. So we have a very important relationship not only in 
trade, but also in direct investment. And this is exactly what we want; we want to embark on 
a really strategic relationship. I think that the relationship demonstrated during our seminar is 
a good example in this respect and I am sure that this relationship will also intensify in other 
areas.  
- How do you assess the cooperation between the ECB and the Bank of Russia? 
The  high-level  Eurosystem  –  Bank  of  Russia  seminar  which  has  just  taken  place  here  in 
Moscow demonstrates that cooperation between our institutions is excellent. Moreover, while 
this  has  been  the  fourth  event  of  its  kind,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  our  cooperation  goes 
deeper as there have been various forms of cooperation between our institutions at all levels. 
Our  partnership  has  the  full  legacy  of  the  bilateral  relations  that  several  national  central 
banks  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Bank  of  Russia  have  been  developing  since  the  1990s. 
With regard to technical cooperation, we are currently holding discussions among our staff 
and  with  the  EU  Delegation  to  Russia  to  prepare  a  new  important  technical  assistance 
project  which  in  terms  of  scope  and  time  would  closely  follow  the  first  project  I  have  just 
referred to.  
- Do you think Russia is a safe borrower and an appealing country for investors? 
The  facts  and  figures  are  quite  impressive.  I  would  observe  that  spreads  on  international 
Russian bonds have declined substantially over the last years, while the amount  of cross-
border  claims,  in  forms  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  bonds  and  loans,  has  been 
increasing  rapidly.  This  also  reflects  the  strong  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability  of  the 
Russian  economy  in  recent  years.  Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Russia  has  become  an 
important  destination  for  investors  in  general,  but  in  particular  for  investors  from  the 
European Union. For example, the European Union has become Russia’s largest single FDI 
partner,  both  in  terms  of  inflows  and  outflows.  The  recent  enlargements  of  the  EU  have 
further strengthened investor relations between our two economic areas. 
- In our country the most important problem for the population is how to earn money 
and where to put savings. Is this also the case in the euro area?  
I think that the issues you have mentioned are quite universal and valid for every household, 
every citizen all over the world. This is why central banks are so important as independent 
institutions  in  our  modern  societies.  We  are  there  to  deliver  price  stability,  to  preserve  the 
purchasing  power  of  all  our  citizens  and  particularly  to  preserve  and  to  protect  the  most 
vulnerable parts of the population, those who cannot hedge against inflation.  
- And yourself, where do you save and invest your own money? Is there a different 
approach of the ECB President and you as a citizen?  
In  this  respect  my  situation,  as  well  as  the  situation  of  my  colleagues  from  the  ECB 
Governing Council, is very clear. According to the Code of Conduct of the ECB Governing 
Council we shall strictly avoid any situation liable to give rise to a conflict of interest.  
4 
 BIS Review 116/2007
