Rachel Lomax: Current monetary policy issues 
Speech  by  Ms  Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Hull  & 
Humber Chamber of Commerce, Hull, 22 November 2007. 
I am very grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and to several other colleagues at the 
Bank of England for useful comments. 
 Tonight I want to talk about the current issues confronting the Monetary Policy Committee. 
It’s  hard  to  tell  the  story  of  an  economy  as  open  as  the  UK  without  starting  with  global 
developments. That’s not a point I need to labour here in Hull, the Gateway to Europe, and 
home to a brand new World Trade centre. And it’s never been more true than today. 
The past 4 years have seen the fastest growth in the world economy since the early 1970s1. 
But even more striking than its pace has been the change in the balance of global growth, 
with emerging economies contributing nearly three quarters of the increase in world output2. 
This has become even more pronounced over the past year, as Chinese growth has picked 
up even as the US economy has slowed. 
The world’s economic see-saw has tilted. That’s the new reality behind two dramas that have 
held the world’s attention since last August: the turmoil in financial markets; and the renewed 
surge in energy prices. 
Both these developments are highly unusual and very recent. No-one knows how they will 
play out. So you would be right to take all forecasts – including our own – with a large pinch 
of salt. But the MPC has to take a view, when it sets interest rates. My aim tonight will be to 
share some of that thinking with you. 
Financial market developments 
Let me start with the problems in global financial markets. 
Over  the  course  of  the  summer,  growing  arrears  in  the  US  sub  prime  mortgage  market 
triggered  a  global  loss  of  confidence  in  the  valuation  of  securities  backed  by  bundles  of 
mortgages and other loans. How could a relatively limited problem – confined to the bottom 
end of the US housing market – spark a global financial crisis? It’s a good question. 
The short answer goes as follows. Investors had come to rely too heavily on the ability of 
rating agencies to value what had become exceedingly complex financial instruments. The 
realisation  that  their  faith  had  been  misplaced  cast  doubt  on  the  value  of  a  wider  class  of 
asset  backed  securities.  Many  of  these  were  embedded  in  ever  more  complex,  highly 
leveraged, investment vehicles. 
This set the stage for a period of turmoil in international money and credit markets which has 
now been through several phases, and may go through several more. 
At its heart, the problem is one of uncertainty. 
First, there is great uncertainty about the eventual size of losses from defaults on US sub 
prime  mortgages  that  the  global  financial  system  will  have  to  absorb.  There  are  different 
estimates  and  they  change  all  the  time  as  the  news  from  the  US  housing  market 
deteriorates. 
                                                 
1   Calculated using purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates. 
2   Again, calculated at PPP exchange rates. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 1
Second, there is great uncertainty about where these exposures will end up. So banks have 
become more worried about the creditworthiness of their counterparties. 
And third, this lack of information, in a complex and globally interconnected financial system, 
breeds  fear:  of  ratings  downgrades,  of  fire  sales  and  just  of  unknown  consequences.  And 
fear breeds more uncertainty. 
So  banks  have  been  hoarding  liquidity,  to  protect  themselves  against  further  upsets;  and 
they have become more reluctant to lend to other banks. So the rates at which they lend to 
each other have risen, relative to the levels which are expected to be set by central banks. 
The squeeze in core liquidity markets has already been unusually prolonged. And it is very 
hard to say when conditions will return to something more like normal. When the dust has 
settled, the financial landscape may look a bit different. Investors may be more aware of risk 
and  warier  of  complexity.  Some  recent  financial  innovations  will  disappear.  Others  may 
survive but in modified form, and probably at an increased cost to final borrowers. 
What does all this mean for UK monetary policy? The MPC’s remit is to keep inflation at its 
2% target, so the key issue for us is how far the financial crisis will affect the wider economy. 
That will depend on the answer to three broad questions. 
First, in the short term, how far will the severe liquidity squeeze that has already happened 
turn  in  to  a  full  scale  credit  crunch  –  by  which  I  mean  a  sharp  tightening  in  the  price  and 
availability of credit to households and firms. 
Second,  how  well  placed  are  households  and  firms  to  weather  any  such  change  in  credit 
conditions? 
And third, in the longer term, will there be a significant lasting impact on credit conditions, for 
any given level of Bank Rate? 
It is too early to answer these questions with any great confidence, especially the last. But 
we do have some early evidence. 
There  are  signs  that  credit  conditions  facing  firms  have  already  tightened.  The  terms  on 
corporate bank borrowing are often directly linked to the rates that banks charge each other. 
These  rates  have  risen  and  remained  high.  Our  latest  intelligence  suggests  that  the  main 
lenders have tightened the terms on which they are willing to lend to businesses, and they 
plan  to  tighten  them  further.  UK  firms’  financial  position  is  currently  pretty  healthy,  on 
average,  and  large  corporate  borrowers  in  particular  may  have  good  alternatives  to  bank 
borrowing. But smaller and more highly geared firms may be more adversely affected. 
In  time  tighter  credit  conditions  could  mean  weaker  business  investment,  though  so  far 
forward indicators of investment intentions still point to fairly strong growth. And any marked 
increased  in  uncertainty  about  demand  conditions  could  lead  to  investment  plans  being 
shelved.  But  it  is  still  early  days  –  too  early  to  draw  strong  conclusions  about  the  size  of 
these effects. 
Even  more  uncertainty  surrounds  the  possible  impact  of  tighter  credit  conditions  on 
household spending, which alone accounts for three fifths of total domestic demand. There is 
already some evidence that banks are tightening the price and non-price terms on which they 
lend,  especially  to  borrowers  with  relatively  poor  credit  histories.  And  quoted  fixed  rate 
mortgage  rates  have  already  risen  relative  to  market  expectations  of  Bank  Rate  –  though 
since markets now expect Bank Rate to fall instead of rising, the pick up in actual mortgage 
rates remains quite small. 
Overall, households seem to be in a relatively strong position: debt has risen a lot relative to 
incomes,  but  so  too  have  holdings  of  financial  and  real  assets.  Mortgage  arrears  and 
repossessions  remain  well  below  their  peak  levels  in  the  early  1990s.  But  the  share  of 
income which needs to be devoted to interest rate payments was already set to rise sharply, 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2007
largely as a result of rising debt levels. And there is a growing minority of households who 
are reporting difficulties with their debts. 
In short, it looks as if events in financial markets are beginning to affect the terms offered to 
retail borrowers. This should act as a brake on consumer spending and investment. But the 
size of this effect is highly uncertain, partly because so far it seems to be focussed on certain 
groups. Much may depend on whether recent developments shake consumers’ confidence in 
future income growth and employment – and so far that does not seem to have happened. 
What about possible longer term effects on the price and availability of credit? 
Over the past three years, competition and financial innovation have put steady downward 
pressure on the rates at which banks have been prepared to lend, at any given level of Bank 
Rate.  Between  2003  and  the  beginning  of  this  year,  2-year-fixed  mortgage  rates  fell  by 
around 50bps relative to the wholesale interest rates they are usually priced off. This is one 
reason why credit has gone on rising so strongly, despite increases in official interest rates. 
At this stage, we can only speculate about what will happen next. My guess is that over the 
next 3-5 years, we will see a sustained – though not necessarily complete – reversal in these 
trends, as banks re-appraise the risks around certain business models and complex financial 
instruments.  This  would  increase  the  cost  of  credit  to  final  borrowers,  for  any  given  policy 
rate. 
If that happens, this summer’s crisis will influence the economy – and potentially the interest 
rates set by the MPC – for some time to come. 
Energy prices 
Let me now turn to the second of the global developments I mentioned earlier: higher energy 
prices. 
During the past month , the oil price has threatened to breach the $100 a barrel. Just last 
January a barrel of oil cost $55; four years ago, it cost less than $30. Some of this is due to 
the weakness of the dollar. But the rise in sterling terms has been pretty spectacular too – 
from £17 a barrel four years ago, to £27 last January, to around £45 now. At these levels, oil 
is almost back to its 1979 high, after correcting for inflation3. 
What’s going on? It’s always hard to disentangle underlying demand and supply factors from 
the speculative froth. It’s possible to point to some short run factors behind the recent surge. 
Stocks  of  oil  across  the  OECD  economies  have  been  falling,  at  a  time  of  year  when  they 
should  be  rising.  This  reflects  temporary  supply  disruptions  such  as  weather-related 
problems in Mexico and in the North Sea. As production comes back on stream, the market 
should ease. 
But  short-run  influences  can  only  have  this  kind  of  leverage  over  the  price  because 
underlying market conditions are so tight. World demand for oil has been boosted by a strong 
world economy, led by booming emerging markets. China alone has been responsible for a 
third  of  the  growth  in  global  oil  demand  over  the  past  four  years.  Meanwhile  supply  has 
struggled to keep pace – partly because of policy decisions by oil producing economies, but 
partly because it takes quite a long time for investment in extra production capacity to come 
on stream. 
What are the risks that oil prices will stay around their current level for a time – and maybe 
go even higher? It’s hard to say – but the market is not discounting the possibility of even 
higher  oil  prices.  Options  prices  point  to  an  increase  in  near-term  uncertainty  –  and  an 
increasing concern about further large price rises. 
                                                 
3   Using US consumer expenditure deflator to adjust for inflation. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 3
There are risks on the downside too: the last time the world economy slowed significantly, oil 
prices slumped. Could a slowdown in the world economy cause oil prices to collapse again? 
Projections for the growth in oil demand over 2007 and 2008 have been revised downwards 
a little recently. But much may depend on the pattern of any slowdown – and in particular 
whether China continues to expand strongly even as the US economy slows. 
What’s the likely impact of higher oil prices on the UK economy? Twenty or thirty years ago, 
sharp  increases  in  energy  prices  coincided  with  much  higher  inflation  and  much  lower 
growth. Over the last four years, our experience has been very different: inflation has been 
better  behaved,  and  growth  much  steadier.  There  are  several  reasons  for  that,  including 
major changes to the energy intensity and flexibility of the UK economy. But one important 
difference has been monetary policy. Unlike in the 1970s, the MPC’s focus has very clearly 
been on controlling inflation. 
Today,  higher  energy  prices  are  an  important  influence  on  interest  rate  decisions.  That  is 
because  they  have  an  immediate  impact  on  inflation,  which  has  the  potential  to  fuel 
inflationary expectations. And they may also affect the balance between overall demand and 
supply, though it is hard to judge the timing and size of this effect. Soaring oil prices were an 
important  reason  why  some  members  of  the  MPC,  including  myself,  were  reluctant  to  cut 
interest rates when the economy slowed in 2005. 
The policy dilemma 
Today, in 2007, global developments – in financial and oil markets – are posing downside 
risks to output as well as upside risks to inflation. That’s a very difficult combination. So how 
well placed is the UK economy to weather these headwinds? 
As far as output goes, we start from a strong position. The latest official figures show annual 
growth  still  above  its  average  rate,  as  it  has  been  for  more  than  a  year,  reflecting  robust 
domestic spending by households and businesses as well as a buoyant world economy. But 
in the last month, the businesses surveys have started to weaken – a few quite sharply. And 
retail  spending  may  be  slackening,  though  heavy  discounting  has  clouded  the  underlying 
picture. There are clearer signs that the slowdown in the housing market is gathering pace. 
But the impact of this on consumer spending and ultimately on inflation is highly uncertain. 
And that is what matters for monetary policy. 
So growth does now seem to be slowing. But what is less clear is whether the scale of this 
easing is likely to be broadly what we need to keep inflation on target in the medium term – 
neither too much nor too little. That’s not just because we don’t know how much slowing is in 
the pipeline. There are a couple of other important uncertainties too. 
First, it’s hard to judge the underlying strength of inflationary pressures. 
When inflation picked up quite sharply last winter, there was a lively debate about how far 
this reflected strong monetary growth, and how far it was due to the temporary effect of a 
very big jump in gas and electricity prices. Although inflation has now come down sharply, 
there  is  still  room  for  debate  about  the  margin  of  spare  capacity  in  the  economy.  Various 
indicators seem to be telling slightly different stories. On the one hand, overall wage growth 
seems to have been moderate, by past standards. On the other hand, business surveys of 
capacity pressures and price expectations remain above average. 
Second, there is a lot of uncertainty about the risks to inflation, if oil prices do continue at 
their  present  levels.  Should  we  take  heart  from  the  relatively  muted  impact  of  previous 
increases in oil prices? Or does the fact that workers had already absorbed the impact of a 
doubling in oil prices since 2004, even before the latest surge, make it more not less likely 
that they will hold out for higher pay? 
A key point for the MPC is that its own actions will help to determine how far oil prices have a 
lasting impact on inflation. There are always risks in signalling that policy will be eased, at a 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2007
time  of  rising  energy  prices.  This  is  all  the  more  so  after  a  year  when  inflation  has  been 
above target and on some measures remains uncomfortably high. 
On the other hand, we need to be very alert to the risk that the economy may be slowing too 
abruptly. At current interest rate levels, monetary policy may be on the restrictive side. 
And the duration and impact of financial turbulence is very hard to call. There must be a risk 
that  at  some  stage  it  will  spill  over  into  asset  and  property  markets  more  generally,  and 
trigger a damaging loss of confidence. 
Conclusions 
The  MPC  faces  a  tricky  period  as  we  try  to  weigh  the  risk  of  an  unduly  sharp  downturn, 
against  the  threat  to  inflation  posed  by  a  sharp  surge  in  global  energy  prices.  Much  will 
depend on developments in the rest of the world; on whether the slump in the US housing 
market causes a sharp slowing in the wider US economy: and on how far this acts as a brake 
on demand – and inflationary pressures – in the rest of the world, especially Asia and the 
euro area. 
The projections we published in last week’s Inflation Report were centred around a relatively 
mild slowdown, by historical standards – on the same scale as we experienced in 2005 – 
based on the assumption of a gradual and modest easing in interest rates over the next two 
years. But those projections are subject to a very wide margin of error – in both directions. 
The MPC’s monthly decisions are always grounded in a careful analysis of all the evidence. 
Given the uncertainties we face, now is a time to pay extra attention to the emerging data. 
We can, and should, respond quickly and flexibly to early signs of the changing economic 
weather. According to most recent official economic statistics, the weather is still set fair. But 
we know fouler weather is brewing off shore. What is still far from clear is whether we are in 
for a force 6 strong breeze, or a full force 8 gale. 
We will need to deploy all our meteorological skills. In the Inflation Report we highlighted a 
number of early warning indicators on both output and inflation, which will help us judge the 
strength  of  the  wind.  These  include  the  reports  from  our  own  Agents  around  the  country, 
drawing businesses such as your own. If you are one of our regular contacts, let me take this 
opportunity  to  thank  you  warmly  on  behalf  of  the  MPC  for  your  help.  We  may  be  making 
additional demands on you over the coming months. I hope my remarks tonight have helped 
to explain why your co operation is so necessary – and so valuable. 
BIS Review 136/2007 
 5
