Radovan Jelašić: Educating consumers of financial services in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the promotion 
of 
issued  by  ProCredit  Bank,  Belgrade, 
12 October 2007. 
the  brochure  “How 
to  Banks” 
to  Talk 
 financial  sector  unless  consumers  of 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  developed  world  pays  special  attention  to  consumer  education,  particularly  in  the 
aftermath  of  major  crises,  with  the  aim  of  not  only  ensuring  necessary  prerequisites  for 
economically feasible decision-making, but also with a view to strengthening confidence of 
the general public in the banking system. Worldwide practice shows that that there can be no 
efficient 
financial  services  are  sufficiently 
knowledgeable in their use. In the long last, it is the level of public trust that both profits and 
long-term  positioning  of  financial  institutions  in  a  particular  market  depend  upon.  For  this 
particular reason, financial institutions should be aware that it is in their best medium- and 
long-term interest to make the information about their products transparent, accessible and 
formulated in a language that can be easily comprehended by the general public. This line of 
reasoning is particularly important in Serbia since our citizens were deprived for quite some 
time  of  more  sophisticated  commercial  bank  services,  as  they  were  reduced  to  the  most 
fundamental ones in the course of the past decade and a half.   
Amid a tide of countless marketing campaigns and fast expansion of financial services, the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  recognized  on  time  the  need  to  provide  the  citizens  with  fair  and 
objective information on all aspects of the use of money! Hence, our first step was to set up a 
free-of-charge Call Centre in October 2005. However, we soon became aware of the need to 
broaden education of the public in a systematic and well organized fashion, and ultimately 
decided  to  set  up  of  a  Centre  for  Financial  Services  Consumer  Protection  and  Market 
Supervision in early 2007. The purpose of this Centre is to spread information and improve 
education of users of financial services, as well as to increase transparency of terms under 
which such services are offered. The Centre has so far prepared and published a number of 
leaflets  and  brochures  aiming  to  draw  attention  of  citizens  to  the  particular  features  of 
financial  products  they  should  pay  special  attention  to  when  making  decision  on  the 
purchase of a financial product. The Centre aims not to decide for the client, but to help the 
bank customers make informed decisions. 
The  ultimate  goal  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  is  to  encourage  banks  to  invest  more  in 
client  education  and  to  further  improve  communication  between  users  and  providers  of 
banking products and services. Therefore, we extend our warm welcome to the initiative of 
ProCredit Bank and the brochure “How to Talk to Banks”, which will doubtless make rights 
and obligations arising from the use of specific financial products and services more easily 
comprehensible  to  customers.  This  brochure  shall  certainly  also  contribute  to  better 
compliance with good business practices and improve the level of proficiency and expertise 
of members of staff of financial institutions.    
As  the  world  around  us  is  becoming  increasingly  complex,  financial  services  are  also 
evolving. More tailored to the needs of clients, financial services are at times very complex 
and difficult to understand, let alone put into practice. Instead of being angry with banks and 
the central bank, this and other brochures should be made good use of all the way from here 
to Frankfurt. “Lucky are those who know the limits of their knowledge and wish to broaden 
their horizons” for they are the ones who will make the best use of this brochure. 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
