Rundheersing Bheenick: Thinking globally, banking locally, and 
branching out… 
Address  by  Professor  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
official opening of Grand Bay Branch of the HSBC, Grand Bay, 18 December 2007. 
 I’m delighted to be here, opening a new branch, of a famous bank. The history of the HSBC 
Group,  in  Mauritius,  can  be  traced  back  to  1859,  when  the  Chartered  Mercantile  Bank  of 
India, London and China, established a branch in Port Louis. 
One well-known project, that this bank assisted in financing, was the construction of the Port 
Louis to Curepipe Section of the railway, in 1864. Those were the days! And how we struggle 
now to get back on to the fast track! 
Opening a new branch is always a pleasure; one only to be surpassed, for a central banker, 
by opening a new bank! This year we have done both. I come to open this branch, having 
only recently opened a newly-licensed commercial Bank in the country, and having just laid 
the foundation stone of a new branch of the Bank of Mauritius in Rodrigues. It is one of those 
habits I don’t want to break. 
I hope this trend, reinforced today, in our 40th anniversary year, will be continued in 2008, 
the 40th anniversary year of the Independence of Mauritius, bringing new life and strength to 
the banking sector. 
About  this  time  last  year,  contemplating  the  prospect  of  becoming  Governor  of  a  central 
Bank, I speculated that my life might be even more exciting than that of James Bond. You 
will recall that 007 had a singular license to kill. We central bankers have a triple license, and 
it seems none of then come with the risks Bond was running from fast cars, faster guns, and 
still faster women. 
The dream of a central banker is first to have that wonderful Midas touch, a golden gift, at 
this time of the year: 
• 
and then he gets that really expansive gift: 
• 
And finally the third great gift, that salutary power: 
• 
But you may be pleased to know, that today, as your invited guest, on this opening day of a 
new branch, I have brought none of these licenses with me! 
I must say I am glad to be here as a guest of an expanding Bank, which has such a well-
deserved worldwide reputation, as a safe pair of hands. That is good news for you and your 
staff; good news for your customers; and very good news for the country as a whole. 
I recall, from the not-so-distant past, a famous phrase in the money business. 
• 
Do you remember that one? It just seemed to go out of use in banking circles in 2007! Safe 
as houses! Which is interestingly translated into French, in Harrap’s dictionary, by 
• 
Now there is a language lesson in great need of some urgent revision for us all, as we move 
together towards Basel II. 
“cela ne presente aucun risque”! 
The license to open new banks,  
The license to close them again! 
The license to print money! 
“Safe as houses!” 
BIS Review 151/2007 
 1
“c’est de l’or en lingots” 
Safe as a Bank, or, even safe as the Bank of England  
Or dare I recall another, once timely, banking phrase? 
• 
Harrap’s renders that as: 
• 
I trust this branch of this Bank will serve to revive such public faith in banking. 
Service to the customer must be our new gold standard, even if there remains uncertainty 
about our reserve currency in the future, as the dollar hovers on the brink of something we 
know not what! 
If  we  have  learned  one  lesson  from  this  traumatic  year,  2007,  it  is  that  all  banks  need  to 
revisit  their  criteria  for  decision-making;  commercial  banks  in  judging  today’s  risks,  and 
central banks for using those triple licenses we hold on your behalf, and on that of the people 
of this country. 
In 2002, HSBC launched a campaign to differentiate its brand from those of its competitors, 
with that pithy phrase: 
“The world’s local bank” 
A Bank, safe as houses; qui ne présente, a nous, aucun risque. 
Now we do not speak for the world but you and your bank are most certainly “local” around 
here. 
In 2006, you incorporated a subsidiary in Mauritius, the HSBC Bank (Mauritius) Ltd. Thus, 
you are now able to enjoy a multitude of advantages, such as tax benefits and independence 
at the level of your Board. 
One does not agree to be the Governor of a central Bank to be loved; and I have not been 
entirely disappointed in that. Indeed, I sometimes rank my position in public life, as a central 
banker, little higher than that of an honest policeman, whose usefulness would disappear if 
there were no malefactors in the risk business. 
As  a  policeman,  however,  I  have  every  confidence,  that  those  working  in  this  branch,  will 
only enhance the fine reputation that HSBC has so well established in the world of banking. 
• 
We look to banks, such as yours, to save us from the contagious risks of the growing, global, 
credit delinquency of the past decade. This, previously subterranean, force erupted in 2007, 
sweeping like a terrifying tsunami, across the oceans of the banking and finance world. 
And we, as bankers, were, frankly, as ill-prepared, as were the tourists and hoteliers, faced 
with the Indian Ocean tsunami, at this festive season, just three years ago. 
And now as a climate change is approaching, I look to you and all our colleagues in banking, 
to find the courage and leadership to adapt our early warning systems and take corrective 
action.  There  are  few  white  knights  left  to  come  to  our  rescue.  Our  destiny  is  in  our  own 
hands. 
We must never forget, that, despite our splendid buildings, and may I say your kind festive 
hospitality, despite these smart new surroundings, each bright new dawn, that you will see 
rising here over the beauties of Grand Bay, is not the herald of paradise to come, but merely 
a fresh light on the cold realities of the banking world. Banks are fragile institutions. Banking 
is a delicate business. For banks are like pretty girls and roses; they last, while they last! 
In the Global Business sector, HSBC is a market leader. We are all looking to such global 
leadership to help to move us from the tidal waves of 2007 into calmer waters in 2008. 
Mauritius  is  at  a  critical  phase  in  its  economic  development.  The  country  is  undergoing 
significant reforms. Inflation is coming down into single digit, the currency is stronger, tourism 
and investment are growing. Banks, like yours, have a vital role to play with their potential to 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2007
promote  the  principles  of  sustainable  development  through  sounder  lending  and  wiser 
investment. 
I trust you will continue to play your undisputable role in promoting the continued social and 
economic welfare of this country. 
In Mauritius, bank branching, remains an indispensable strategy for banks. Customers view 
nearness to a branch as a determining factor in the choice of their banks. HSBC has thus 
extended its network and now has 11 branches and 13 ATMs across the country. Today, this 
new branch is for us, and for the people of Mauritius, a most welcome addition to the family 
of 20 licensed banks, with a total of 180 branches both in Mauritius and Rodrigues. 
I wish this infant branch a happy and profitable future. And I wish a prosperous New Year, 
2008, to all your staff, in all your branches, and in your headquarters. But I especially wish 
prosperity to all our customers, on whose patronage, ultimately, we all depend. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 151/2007 
 3
