Krzysztof Rybiński: Poland and EURO 
Panel speech1 by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Poland, at 
a  debate  organised  by  demosEUROPA  –  Centre  for  European  Strategy  and  Ebert 
Foundation, Warsaw, 26 November 2007. 
 In my speech2 in June this year I outlined the key benefits and costs of adopting the euro. 
Let me briefly restate what they are: 
On  the  benefits  side  of  adopting  a  common  currency  economists  usually  mention  the 
following factors: lower transaction costs, lower interest rates, financial integration and trade 
creation.  When  speaking  about  costs  economists  usually  cite  two  groups  of  factors: 
asymmetric  shocks  and  arising  micro-  and  macroeconomic  imbalances.  It  is  important  to 
note that some costs will materialize if asymmetric shocks hit the enlarged eurozone. We do 
not know the likelihood of such shocks though, so it is impossible to calculate the expected 
value of costs related to these events. We know, however, that the probability of asymmetric 
shocks declines with rising similarity or progressing real convergence of the EU economies. 
Let  me  also  stress  that  the  magnitude  of  costs  depends  crucially  on  domestic  policy  – 
prudent banking sector supervision, labor market reforms and sound fiscal policies to name a 
few.  Adoption  of  proper  policies  reduces  future  potential  costs  related  to  eurozone 
membership and, at the same time, enhances future benefits. In my view, given the evidence 
that  reforms  have  been  halted  in  many  countries  after  entering  the  eurozone,  these 
measures should be taken before the euro area accession. 
The last twenty years have been unusually good for the global economy. Growth was high 
and  less  volatile,  inflation  fell  to  low  levels  in  both  developed  economies  and  in  emerging 
markets. Real returns enjoyed by investors in bond and equity markets were higher than ever 
in  the  post-war  history.  There  are  however  signs  that  this  “Great  moderation”  era  may  be 
coming to an end. If this is the case then the coming years may prove truly challenging for 
the central banks in EMU-graduation zone. Let me explain in some detail several factors that 
justify such claim. 
1. 
Agflation, is the rise of inflation due to increase of food prices. In recent months we 
have witnessed a significant increase of food prices, grain and oilseeds being the 
leaders. Prices of food products on international markets has risen by almost 40 per 
cent  within  last  two  years  and  prices  of  grain  and  oil  seeds  has  almost  doubled 
within  this  period.  Many  forecasters  suggest  that  this  trend  will  not  end  in  the 
nearest  future.  There  are  several  explanations  of  such  situation.  Firstly,  rising  oil 
prices increase demand for alternative sources of energy, biofuels being high on the 
agenda in many regions. In effect industrial demand for food commodities will further 
rise. By the way, it is worth to mention what may be the ecological consequences of 
growing  biofuels  production.  Spiegel  online  on  26th  September  2007  described  a 
research led by the Nobel-price winning chemist Paul Crutzen which had found that 
biofuels  emit  even  70  percent  more  greenhouse  gases  than  fossil  fuels.  In  effect, 
global warming may accelerate and lead to further increase in frequency of disasters 
such as floods, droughts, and unexpected weather changes that may have negative 
                                                 
1   Views presented today are my own and do not necessarily represent the official position of the National Bank 
of Poland and the Polish Financial Supervision Authority. 
2   Rybinski K. (2007) “The Role of the EURO for the Future of Poland”, speech by Krzysztof Rybinski, Deputy 
2007, 
National 
Poland, 
June 
Governor 
Bank 
http://www.nbp.pl/publikacje/wyklady/rybinskiadesti.pdf 
the 
15 
of 
of 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
effects on crops. Secondly, food prices will be lifted up by an increasing demand for 
agriculture products in the emerging markets, especially in Asia, as the catching-up 
process  progresses.  It  is  worth  keeping  in  mind  that  the  share  of  food  in  the  CPI 
basket  is  some  10  pp.  higher  in  Poland  than  in  the  eurozone,  so  agflation,  if  it 
materializes, will lead to inflation divergence.  
One cannot exclude a possibility that other commodities prices may continue 
to rise as well. Demand for commodities has already substantially risen in recent 
years. The “problem” lies again in the emerging markets. Fast growing economies 
create still growing demand for all sorts of commodities, especially metals and fuels 
(for  example:  oil  consumption  in  China  has  doubled  within  last  10  years).  As  the 
result,  prices  of  metals  and  energy  commodities  have  doubled  since  the  end  of 
2004. Although prices of these products do not affect consumer inflation directly, in 
the medium term will contribute to further increase of inflation volatility.  
Migration.  One  of  the  major  obstacles  is  the  massive  emigration  of  workforce 
observed  in  the  New  Member  States  after  joining  the  European  Union.  In  Poland 
and the Baltic states some 4 to even more than 7 percent of a labour force attracted 
by higher wages, job availability and better living conditions migrated so far to the 
EU-15. This has led to severe tensions in many industries pushing wages and unit 
labour  costs  up.  High  corporate  profits  have  provided  a  cushion  yet,  but,  if  this 
situation  continues,  many  companies  will  be  forced  to  raise  prices  to  remain 
profitable.  
Rising unit labour costs.  Growing  tension  on  the  labour  market  is  present  in  all 
CEE  countries,  but  Baltic  and  Balkan  States  seem  to  be  the  most  threatened  by 
rising  labour  costs.  Annual  average  dynamics  of  unit  labour  costs  in  the  second 
quarter  of  2007  in  CEE  accounted  to  8  per  cent  and  in  the  group  of  Baltic  and 
Balkan states the figure was over two times higher. This shows that sooner or later 
(rather sooner) enterprises will stop cutting their profit margins and will be forced to 
pass growing operational costs on consumers.  
Challenges  to  keep  fast  productivity  growth.  We  live  in  a  global  knowledge 
economy,  which  is  driven  by  innovation  –  technological,  business-process  or 
customer related. The crucial factor to succeed in the global knowledge economy is 
the country’s ability to develop intellectual capital. Only those who understand the 
importance of innovations for growth will thrive and prosper in the coming decades. 
Unfortunately, CEE region lags badly behind the leaders in terms of its current and 
future ability to generate innovation. One of indicators measuring current ability to 
innovate  is  the  number  of  researchers.  In  the  mid-1990s  CEE-4  (the  Czech 
Republic,  Hungary,  Poland  and  Slovakia)  and  Asian  NIEs  had  similar  number  of 
researchers per million people, while two years ago NIEs had almost twice as many 
persons  employed  in  R&D  per  million  people  in  comparison  with  CEE-4.  Future 
knowledge  potential  of  particular  country  or  region  can  be  measured  by  tertiary 
enrolment  ratio.  Tertiary  enrolment  ratio  in  the  CEE-4  countries  improved  to  50 
percent in 2004, but still remains well below 62 percent in the EU-15 and 82 percent 
in  the  United  States..  Because  of  a  relatively  small  population  and  a  number  of 
structural deficiencies it is very unlikely, that increase in the number of students in 
CEE-4  that  have  occurred  in  recent  decade  will  translate  into  higher  innovation 
potential  in  the  coming  years,  unless  a  dramatic  change  in  policies  in  CEE-4  is 
made. This is also confirmed by a dramatically low number of patents registered in 
the CEE countries and extremely low number of scientific publications. As the ability 
to generate great ideas in the CEE region is limited, it seems that in the transition 
period the most important modernization channel in the region was through foreign 
direct investments. Indeed CEE became a very large recipient of FDI, with FDI stock 
to GDP ratio topping 40 percent in CEE-4 region. Only NIEs economies managed to 
attract  higher  FDI  stock  in  relation  to  GDP  and  enjoy  higher  FDI  annual  inflows. 
BIS Review 138/2007
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 However,  in  the  global knowledge economy  it  is  important  to  attract  foreign  direct 
investments to sectors that can become globally competitive, in particular to these 
sectors that export high-technology, i.e. high value added goods or services. While 
CEE-4 significantly improved the structure of exports, the high-tech goods account 
for only 12 percent of manufactured exports, which is the world worst result, lagging 
even behind Latin American countries. NIEs are world leaders and China is about to 
take over the second post from the United States. Above data suggests that in the 
long run low ability to generate innovation combined with low value added FDI may 
harm the CEE ability to improve productivity. 
On  top  of  above-mentioned  factors  I  should  also  add  that  in  the  last  few  years  we  have 
witnessed  very  fast  growth  rates  of  asset  prices  in  CEE.  The  amount  of  loans  granted  to 
households  increased  3.5  times  since  2004  and  almost  10  times  since  2000.  Low  deposit 
rates and economic upturn in CEE after EU accession encouraged both financial institutions 
and individuals to move toward more risky forms of investment. As a result, real estate prices 
soared  after  2004  and  equities  listed  on  stock  exchanges  reached  historical  highs.  Since 
2003 major stock exchange indexes in CEE increased on average by almost 300 percent. 
While part of this asset price and credit growth may be explained by structural factors often 
referred  to  as  “convergence”,  the  observed  rates  of  growth  are  clearly  unsustainable  and 
they  contribute  to  economic  imbalances.  This  poses  additional  policy  challenge  for  central 
banks and financial market regulators in the region and may warrant further actions aimed at 
maintaining prudential lending practices.  
And  finally  one  comment  about  the  eurozone  entry.  According  to  official  government  and 
NBP forecasts Poland will fulfill all eurozone entry criteria this year (fiscal deficit, public debt, 
inflation,  long-term  interest  rates).  The  only  criterion  not  met  will  be  two-year  ERM2 
membership without significant currency depreciation. If Poland had joined the ERM2 in the 
first half of 2005, as I formally proposed in January 2005, we would have been able to join 
the  eurozone  in  January  2008.  This  opportunity  has  been  lost,  and  now  meeting  the 
Maastricht criteria will become more challenging. If agflation is with us to stay, and central 
banks decide to keep CPI close to the target, high sacrifise ratio implied by flat Phillips curve 
may  require  significant  growth  slowdown.  In  such  case  meeting  fiscal  criteria  will  be 
challenging amid slowing tax revenues. If, on the contrary, central banks treat agflation as a 
typical negative supply shock, then meeting inflation criterion will be challenging. Finally, if 
strong exchange rate appreciation continues, we may just make it will both fiscal and inflation 
criteria, but we will enter eurozone with heavily overvalued exchange rate, which may harm 
growth for many years if not decades. 
This is a real “Gordian knot” to be solved by CEE central banks, financial market regulators 
and governments. The “Alexandrian solution” would be massive acceleration of productivity 
enhancing reforms, especially in the area of knowledge economy, where the CEE countries 
are badly lagging behind other regions. If we don’t accelerate reforms we may still be lucky, 
there could be few years in a row with good global crops, or someone will finally produce 
cheap hydrogen-powered car to replace gasoline, resulting in a collapse of oil prices. But I 
would not bet the country future on the assumption of being lucky. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
