Y V Reddy: Evolving role of the Reserve Bank of India – recent 
developments 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion of the 
Foundation Day of the Institute of Development Studies, Jaipur, 30 June 2007. 
Dr. Reddy is thankful to Mr. Kanagasabapathy, Adviser-in-Charge (Retd.), Reserve Bank of 
India, for his valuable advice. 
 Respected Professor Vyas, distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  indeed  thankful  to  the  Institute  of  Development  Studies  and  Professor  Vyas  for 
providing me this opportunity to share my thoughts with you today on the “Evolving role of 
the Reserve Bank of India: Recent Developments”.  
My  association  with  Professor  Vyas  has  been  long,  but  it  became  closer  since  November 
2000,  when  he  was  appointed  as  a  director  on  the  Central  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India. Professor Vyas was also the Chairman of the “Advisory Committee on Flow of Credit 
to Agriculture and Related Activities from the Banking System”, which was constituted by the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  in  December  2003.  Many  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
Committee have since been implemented with good results. Professor Vyas is easily among 
the  most  eminent  agricultural  economists  of  the  world  and  had  been  associated  with  the 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  of  the  United  Nations,  where  he  made  a  significant 
contribution. As a person, he is extremely soft spoken and very scholarly, but his scholarship 
and erudition sit very lightly on his shoulders. Humility is a trait which comes very naturally to 
him. It is my pleasure and honour to be here at his invitation. 
The Institute of Development Studies, set up in 1981 at the initiative of a group of academic 
scholars  and  the  Government  of  Rajasthan,  has  had  the  benefit  of  Professor  Vyas’ 
leadership.  The  Institute  aims  to  contribute  to  the  understanding  of  the  development 
processes broadly defined, besides providing a forum for better understanding of the issues 
involved in resolving the problems unique to the State of Rajasthan. Given the track record of 
the  Institute,  I  am  confident  that  it  will  continue  to  make  a  meaningful  contribution  to  the 
development  process  of  the  Indian  economy  in  general  and  of  Rajasthan  in  particular  – 
especially those of bypassed sections. 
Evolving role of RBI 
I.  
The Reserve Bank, established through the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 commenced its 
operations  in  1935.  It  draws  its  powers  and  responsibilities  through  other  legislations  also 
such as the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The RBI has over the years been responding to 
changing  economic  circumstances  and  these  organisational  developments  have  been 
documented in a recent Report on Currency and Finance for the year 2004-05, the theme of 
which was “The Evolution of Central Banking in India”. Today, I would like to highlight some 
recent  developments  and  discuss  certain  issues  of  contemporary  relevance  relating  to  the 
evolving role of RBI.  
First, compared with several countries which introduced rapid reforms in central banking law 
and governance in the last about two decades, the Indian experience reflects an evolution or 
adaptation of central banking to new economic realities. These changes were brought about 
both through some legislative measures and changes in operating procedures.  
Second, this evolution has inter alia contributed to imparting some autonomy to the central 
bank, de facto, particularly in the areas of monetary management and financial regulation.  
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
impact 
Third,  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  situation  before  1991,  since  then,  apart  from  a  transparent 
communications  policy  and  a  broad  based  consultative  approach  to  policy  making, 
Governors’  speeches  and  appearances  on  the  electronic  media  and  the  press  have  been 
substantial, having significant influence on markets and opinions. In the process, the RBI has 
gained reputational bonus and public credibility.  
Fourth, thanks to related developments in the last 15 years, financial and external sectors in 
India have also become relatively more efficient and resilient.  
Fifth,  while  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  has  improved  significantly  to  meet  the 
evolving  demands,  some  constraints  are  persisting,  which 
the  choice  and 
effectiveness of our policy framework.  
In  reviewing  the  evolving  role  of  RBI,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  an  exclusive 
monetary authority and a generic central bank, which performs not only monetary functions, 
but also other functions, in particular, banking supervision. A recent survey by the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS) has shown that over sixty per cent of central banks across 
developed and developing countries have banking supervisor’s role exercised by a central 
bank. India has adopted a middle path. Banking Supervision continues to be with RBI, but it 
has  been  accorded  a  distinct  semi-independent  status.  A  Board  for  Financial  Supervision 
(BFS), a Committee of the Central Board of RBI, was set up in 1994 and meets at least once 
a  month  to  guide  and  oversee  the  RBI's  supervisory  functions.  The  BFS  includes  four 
independent  members  drawn  from  the  Central  Board  of  Directors  of  RBI  with  relevant 
professional background and experience. 
While  it  is  true  that  globally  the  general  tendency  recently  has  been  to  stress  the 
independence  or  autonomy  of  central  banks  in  general  and  monetary  management  in 
particular,  this  has  been  brought  about  by  different  countries  in  a  variety  of  means: 
constitutional  changes,  legal  amendments,  treaty,  obligations,  policy  reorientation  or  by 
changes in practices, procedures and overall environment of public policy. Evolution, thus, 
does  not  exclude  legislative  changes  to  meet  the  challenges  of  globalisation  and  new 
economic realities, though in India most changes have thus far been effected within the basic 
structure  of  the  original  legislation  in  terms  of  mandate,  governance  procedures  and 
instruments.  A  notable  legislative  measure  in  the  recent  past  (The  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
Amendment  Act,  2006)  nevertheless  relates  to  greater  flexibility  to  RBI  in  regard  to  cash 
reserve  requirements,  deployment  of  forex  reserves,  and  clarity  in  regulation  over  money, 
forex and government securities markets. 
The independence of a central bank sometimes is rigidly associated with a single objective, 
such  as  price  stability.  But,  in  practice,  there  are  many  instances  of  dual  or  multiple 
objectives with equal or different weights and there are many cases of hierarchy of objectives 
for a central bank. In the overall context of its policy and operations, the RBI in practice is 
subject  to  the  current  legal  framework  and  operates  as  a  monetary  authority  with  multiple 
objectives and multiple functions assigned to it. Within such a mandate, efforts are made to 
(a) articulate the hierarchy of objectives in a given context; (b) impart transparency through 
enhanced communication, emphasise participative nature of decision making in its activities, 
including  monetary  management,  through  advisory  committees;  and  (c)  move  towards 
greater autonomy in operations relating to monetary policy while ensuring harmony in macro 
policies in coordination with the government.  
RBI autonomy: de jure versus de facto 
II.  
The RBI was established under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 on April 1, 1935 as a 
private  shareholders'  bank,  but  since  its  nationalisation  in  1949,  is  fully  owned  by  the 
Government of India. The RBI is placed under the Entry 38 of List 1 of Schedule VII of the 
Constitution of India, which is the Union List.  
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
The Preamble to the RBI Act describes the basic objective as "to regulate the issue of Bank 
notes  and  keeping  of  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and 
generally, to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage". Thus, 
there is no explicit mandate for price-stability or formal inflation targeting. The twin objectives 
of monetary policy in India have evolved over the years as those of maintaining price stability 
and ensuring adequate flow of credit to facilitate the growth process. The relative emphasis 
between  the  twin  objectives  is  modulated  as  per  the  prevailing  circumstances  and  is 
articulated in the policy statements. Consideration of macroeconomic and financial stability is 
also subsumed in the articulation of policy.  
The  RBI  is  also  entrusted  with  the  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  are 
reflected  in  its  balance  sheet.  While  RBI  is  essentially  a  monetary  authority,  its  founding 
statute mandates it to be the manager of public debt of the Government of India and banker 
to the Government. In terms of Section 20 of the RBI  Act  1934, RBI has the obligation to 
undertake  the  receipts  and  payments  of  the  Central  Government  and  to  carry  out  the 
exchange, remittance and other banking operations, including the management of the public 
debt  of  the  Union.  In  the  recent  past,  a  functional  separation  of  monetary  and  debt 
management was debated and the Union Budget for 2007-08 has announced a proposal to 
setting up of an autonomous Debt Management Office to keep the debt management distinct 
from monetary management. Further, as per Section 21 of the said Act, RBI has the right to 
transact Government business of the Union in India.  
While, as per statute, RBI is the monetary authority of the country, the RBI has also been 
entrusted with the work relating to Banking and Supervision by an enactment in 1949. The 
RBI  exercised  a  tight  regime  of  exchange  control  particularly  under  the  Foreign  Exchange 
Regulation  Act  (FERA),  1973;  but,  a  qualitative  change  was  brought  about  in  the  legal 
framework to enable liberalization by the enactment of the Foreign Exchange Management 
Act (FEMA) in June 2000 replacing the earlier FERA. With this, the objectives of regulation 
have been redefined as facilitating trade and payments as well as orderly development and 
functioning of foreign exchange market in India.  
It is significant to note that the RBI Act, Section 19 precludes RBI from performing certain 
business which protects the integrity of the institution, such as trading or taking any direct 
interest  in  commercial,  industrial  or  other  undertaking,  purchasing  shares  or  giving  loans 
against  shares,  and  advancing  money  on  security  of  immovable  property,  drawing  or 
accepting  bills  payable  otherwise  than  on  demand.  Because  of  the  last  provision,  the  RBI 
evolved  the  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme  through  an  MoU  with  the  Government,  for 
undertaking stabilisation operations.  
On practical considerations, central bank independence may be viewed as related broadly to 
three areas, viz., management including personnel matters; financial aspects; and conduct of 
policy. Managerial independence refers to the procedures for appointment, term of office and 
dismissal procedures of top central bank officials and the governing board. It also includes 
the  extent  and  nature  of  representation  of  the  Government  in  the  governing  body  of  the 
central bank and Government’s powers to issue directions. Financial independence relates to 
the  freedom  of  the  central  bank  to  decide  the  extent  to  which  Government  expenditure  is 
either  directly  or  indirectly  financed  via  central  bank  credits.  Direct  or  automatic  access  of 
Government  to  central  bank  credits  would  naturally  imply  that  monetary  policy  is 
subordinated to fiscal policy. Finally, policy independence is related to the flexibility given to 
the central bank in the formulation and execution of monetary policy, under a given mandate. 
While  the  Central  Government  may  give  such  directions  to  the  RBI  after  consulting  the 
Governor as it may consider necessary in the public interest, the overall management of the 
Bank’s  affairs  and  business  rests  with  the  Central  Board  of  Directors.  The  Governor  is 
appointed  by  the  Central  Government  and  may  be  removed  from  office  without  specifying 
any reason. All Deputy Governors are also appointed by the Central Government and may 
be  similarly  removed.  All  Directors  of  the  Central  Board  are  nominated  by  the  Central 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 3
Government  with  one  Government  official  as  a  participant  in  the  Board  deliberations.  The 
Directors  hold  office  during  the  pleasure  of  the  Central  Government  which  can  also 
supersede the RBI’s Central Board. 
The  staffing  pattern  is  left  to  the  RBI,  but  rules  governing  their  service  conditions  and 
compensation are not out of alignment with public sector in general and banking sector in 
particular. There is legal protection to the Bank and also to its officers for actions taken in 
good  faith.  There  have  been  no  noticeable  changes  in  the  recent  past  in  the  relationship 
between the Government and RBI on managerial/personnel matters.  
On financial aspects of RBI vis-à-vis Government, however, there have been several positive 
developments. Since the 1990s, as the case for according greater operational flexibility to the 
RBI  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  regulation  of  the  financial  system  became 
stronger, the practice of automatic monetisation of the Government’s fiscal deficit through the 
issue of ad hoc treasury bills came under severe criticism (Rangarajan, 1993). In subsequent 
years, the phasing out of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficits by 1997 and the enactment 
of  FRBM  legislation  in  2003  are  two  important  milestones  in  the  direction  of  providing 
safeguards  to  monetary  policy  from  the  consequences  of  expansionary  fiscal  policy  and 
ensuring a degree of de facto autonomy of the RBI.  
It is interesting to note that the above autonomy in financial matters was obtained by the RBI 
through exchange of letters and agreements whereby automatic monetisation through ad hoc 
Treasury  Bills  was  discontinued  since  April  1997.  The  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management (FRBM) Act, 2003, further strengthened the position by prohibiting the RBI from 
participating in primary issuances of all government securities.  
The  RBI  has  gradually  withdrawn  from  the  practice  of  providing  concessional  finance  or 
refinance  for  specified  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  industry  and  export,  though  the  legal 
provisions  continue  to  enable  it.  In  the  same  view,  as  part  of  strengthening  monetary 
management, only notional provisions are made out of RBI profits for Agriculture, Industrial 
and Housing Credit Funds. No doubt, there are persistent demands on RBI to reverse the 
process,  but  the  RBI  advocates  direct  fiscal  support  to  development  activities  so  as  to  be 
transparent,  accountable  and  quantifiable  rather  than  through  monetary  operations  of  RBI, 
which would tantamount to quasi-fiscal operations.  
Transfer of the balance of profits, after necessary provisions, to the Central Government has 
been  rationalised  as  part  of  the  reform  process  in  1997.  The  present  arrangement  is 
governed by the objective of reaching a stipulated level of reserves in RBI’s balance sheet 
over a period – though the timeframe to reach the level is extended by mutual consent to 
accommodate immediate fiscal compulsions.  
In  technical  parlance,  accountability  of  an  institution  like  RBI  goes  together  with  a  specific 
mandate  and  operational  independence  or  autonomy  to  achieve  the  said  mandate.  In  the 
absence  of  these,  in  practice,  the  RBI  is  accountable  indirectly  to  Parliament  through  the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Government  of  India.  At  times,  it  is  summoned  by  Parliamentary 
Committees,  and  even  in  such  cases,  it  generally  plays  only  a  supportive  role  to  the 
executive wing of the government.  
In  a  recent IMF  Working  Paper  published  in  April  2007,  where  the  indices  of  central  bank 
autonomy  have  been  calculated  for  163  central  banks  as  of  end-2003,  in  a  group  of  32 
emerging markets, India has scored 0.25 for political autonomy of the central bank as against 
the average score of 0.56 for the group of emerging markets and scored 0.75 for economic 
autonomy of the central bank which is the same as the average score for that group. 
Dr.  Bimal  Jalan  at  the  time  of  laying  down  office  as  Governor  in  2003  remarked:  "the 
autonomy  of  a  central  bank  is  best  set  by  convention  rather  than  by  statute,  especially  in 
emerging countries. There should be harmony between the government and the central bank 
with  shared  objectives,  though  the  instrumentalities  in  achieving  the  objectives  may  be 
different”.  
4 
 BIS Review 125/2007
Harmonious relations between Government and RBI have no doubt generally contributed to 
the  successful  policy  outcomes  thus  far,  but  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  conclude  that 
there  are  no  differences  in  analysis,  approaches,  judgements  and  instrumentalities.  In  the 
given legal and cultural context, while making every effort to give its views either informally or 
formally, but as unambiguously as possible, the RBI generally respects the wishes and final 
inclination of the government. The RBI, however, has to accept the responsibility for all its 
decisions and actions, while being generally conscious of the impact of its articulation and 
actions  on  the  credibility  for  central  banks  operations.  The  Government,  for  its  part, 
recognises  the  dilemmas  posed  to  RBI,  and  accord  significant  weight  to  central  bank’s 
judgements.  
In sum, de jure, RBI has not been accorded autonomy on par with recent trends in some of 
the  industrialised  as  well  as  emerging  economies;  but,  de  facto,  the  experience  reflects  a 
growing  degree  of  autonomy.  During  the  period  of  reform  since  1991,  there  has  been  a 
gradual  and  mutually  agreed  progress  towards  greater  autonomy  in  matters  relating 
particularly to financial markets and, in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Monetary policy framework 
III.  
The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 sets out in a way broadly the tone of 
RBI’s  monetary  policy  objectives:  “to  regulate  the  issue  of  Bank  notes  and  the  keeping  of 
reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to  operate  the 
currency and credit system of the country to its advantage”. I can do no better than quote 
one of my distinguished predecessor and current Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to 
the Prime Minister, Dr. C. Rangarajan on this subject:  
"In  a  broad  sense,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  can  be  no  different 
from  the  overall  objectives  of  economic  policy.  The  broad  objectives  of 
monetary policy in India have been: (a) to maintain a reasonable degree of 
price stability; and (b) to help accelerate the rate of economic growth. The 
emphasis  as  between  the  two  objectives  has changed  from  year  to  year, 
depending upon the prevailing conditions." (1997) 
Thus, although, unlike the current trend in many countries, there is no explicit mandate for 
price  stability,  the  twin  objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India  have  evolved  as  those  of 
maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors of 
the economy. Of late, considerations of macroeconomic and financial stability have assumed 
an added importance in view of increasing openness of the Indian economy.  
In India, the broad money (M3) emerged as the nominal anchor from the mid-1980s based 
on the premise of a stable relationship between money, output and prices. In the late 1990s, 
in  view  of  the  ongoing  financial  openness  and  increasing  evidence  of  changes  in  the 
underlying  transmission  mechanism  with  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  gaining  in 
importance vis-à-vis quantity variables, it was felt that monetary policy exclusively based on 
the demand function for money could lack precision. The RBI, therefore, formally adopted a 
multiple indicator approach in April 1998 whereby interest rates or rates of return in different 
financial  markets  along  with  data  on  currency,  credit,  trade,  capital  flows,  fiscal  position, 
inflation,  exchange  rate,  etc.,  are  juxtaposed  with  the  output  data  for  drawing  policy 
perspectives. Such a shift was gradual and a logical outcome of measures taken during the 
reform  period  since  the  early  1990s.  The  switchover  to  a  multiple  indicator  approach 
provided  necessary  flexibility  to  respond  more  effectively  to  changes  in  domestic  and 
international economic environment and financial market conditions.  
In the context of monetary policy making, let me highlight some recent developments: 
First,  the  availability  of  instruments  to  manage,  in  the  context  of  large  capital  flows  and 
sterilisation,  has  been  strengthened  with  open  market  operations 
through  Market 
Stabilisation Scheme (MSS), which was introduced in April 2004. Under the MSS, the RBI 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 5
was allowed to issue government securities as part of liquidity sterilisation operations in the 
wake of large capital inflows and surplus liquidity conditions. While these issuances do not 
provide  budgetary  support,  interest  costs  are  borne  by  the  fisc;  as  far  as  Government 
securities market is concerned, these securities are also traded in the secondary market, on 
par with the other government stock.  
Second, another development in the recent period has been to fix a numeraire to inflation. 
The  RBI’s  self-imposed  medium-term  ceiling  on  inflation  at  5.0  per  cent  has  had  salutary 
effect on inflation expectations and the socially tolerable rate of inflation has come down. In 
recognition of India’s evolving integration with the global economy and societal preferences 
in this regard, going forward, the resolve would be to condition policy and expectations for 
inflation  in  the  range  of  4.0-4.5  per  cent.  This  would  help  in  maintaining  self  accelerating 
growth,  keeping  in  view  the  desirability  of  medium-term  inflation  at  around  3  per  cent  to 
ensure India’s smooth global integration. 
Third, while the preferred instruments are indirect, and varied, there is no hesitation in taking 
recourse to direct instruments also, if circumstances so warrant. In fact, complex situations 
do  warrant  the  dynamics  of  different  combination  of  direct  and  indirect  instruments,  in 
multiple forms, to suit the conditions affecting transmission mechanism. 
Fourth, there are occasions when the medium-term goals, say reduction in cash reserve ratio 
for banks, conflict with short-term compulsions of monetary management requiring actions in 
both  directions.  Such  operations  do  warrant  attention  to  appropriate  articulation  to  ensure 
policy credibility. Drawing a distinction between medium-term reform goals and flexibility in 
short-term  management  is  considered  something  critical  in  the  current  Indian  policy 
environment. 
Fifth, while there is considerable merit in maintaining a broad distinction between monetary 
and  prudential  policies  of  the  central  bank,  the  RBI  did  not  hesitate,  as  a  complement  to 
monetary  tightening,  to  enhance  the  provisioning  requirements  and  risk  weights  for  select 
categories  of  banking  assets,  namely  real  estate,  housing  and  capital  market  exposures. 
These measures were needed to specifically address the issues of rapidly escalating asset 
prices  and  the  possible  impact  on  banks’  balance  sheets  in  a  bank  dominated  financial 
sector. This combination, and more important, readiness of the RBI to use all instruments, 
has a credible impact, without undue restraint on growth impulses. 
Sixth, some of the important factors that shaped the changes in monetary policy framework 
and operating procedures in India during the 1990s were the delinking of budget deficit from 
its automatic monetisation by the RBI, deregulation of interest rates, and development of the 
financial  markets  with  reduced  segmentation  through  better  linkages  and  development  of 
appropriate 
technological 
infrastructure.  With  the  enactment  of  the  FRBM  Act  in  2003,  the  RBI  has  withdrawn  from 
participating  in  the  primary  issues  of  Central  Government  securities  with  effect  from  April 
2006.  The  recent  legislative  amendments  enable  a  flexible  use  of  the  CRR  for  monetary 
management,  without  being  constrained  by  a  statutory  floor  or  ceiling  on  the  level  of  the 
CRR.  The  amendments  also  removed  the  statutory  floor  of  25  per  cent  on  the  Statutory 
Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  –  which  would  further  improve  the  scope  for  flexible  liquidity 
management by the RBI.  
trading,  payments  and  settlement  systems  along  with 
Major issues in analytics of monetary policies 
IV.  
Let  me  now  discuss  some  major  issues  in  the  analytics  of  monetary  policy  in  India.  It  is 
generally recognised that monetary policy framework, to be efficient and effective requires a 
reasonable  assessment  of  potential  output,  a  measure  of  unemployment,  and  above  all  a 
convincing  measure  of  inflation.  Monetary  authorities  are  acutely  aware  of  inherent  and 
growing difficulties in regard to all these three but in India, perhaps the problems  are less 
than fully appreciated.  
6 
 BIS Review 125/2007
First, the measurement of potential output, a key prerequisite for forward looking monetary 
policy, is generally difficult and more so in an increasingly globalising economies like India. 
Recent studies have shown that the measurement of potential output is extremely sensitive 
to  the  choice  of  methodology.  In  respect  of  India,  empirical  exercises  have  projected 
potential  output  in  India  in  the  range  of  6  to  8  per  cent,  based  on  alternative  approaches 
(Ranjan et al, 2007). Besides the wide range of estimates, which in itself is indicative of the 
uncertainties surrounding potential output, it needs to be noted that these estimates do not 
fully  factor-in  fast  and  significant  structural  changes  of  the  more  recent  period  which  are 
expected  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  potential  output.  Similarly,  reliable  estimates  of 
inventories, unit labour costs, coefficient of capacity utilisation and the like, which can serve 
as  proximate  determinants  of  potential  output,  are  not  readily  available.  Thus,  what  would 
appear in standard analysis as an elegant formulation of the monetary policy operating rule is 
extremely difficult to estimate and fashion, in terms of policy formulation, in India. 
Second, lack of an economy-wide measure of the rate of unemployment makes the conduct 
of monetary policy in India complex. While framing appropriate policy responses to trends in 
output and inflation, policymakers would like to make some assessment as to whether the 
economy is operating beyond or short of full employment. In the absence of comprehensive 
data  on  employment,  any  measure  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  (NRU)  would  be 
inadequate for policy formulation. Given that only a small part of the Indian labour force, say 
about  ten  per  cent,  is  employed  in  the  organised  sector  and  the  greater  majority  is  in  the 
unorganised sector, estimation of unemployment is rendered difficult. Moreover, even within 
the organised sector, the process of gradual outsourcing of jobs compounds the problem of 
measurement.  
A  third  set of  issues  which  represents  a  gap  in  monetary  policy  analysis  and,  therefore,  a 
constraint  on  operational  autonomy,  is  the  assessment  of  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy. In terms of commodity prices, the issue relates to the choice of price index and 
RBI  has  to  depend  on  those  which  are  readily  available.  In  India,  there  are  two  sets  of 
indices,  viz.,  wholesale price  index  (WPI)  and  consumer  price  indices  (CPIs).  The  latter  is 
based on occupational classification and category of residence (rural or urban). Four broad 
measures of CPIs are available at the national level to capture prices of a defined basket of 
goods  and  services  consumed  by  a  particular  segment  of  the  population  :  (i)  CPI  for 
Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL); (ii) CPI for Rural Labourers (CPI-RL); (iii) CPI for Industrial 
Workers (CPI-IW); and (iv) CPI for Urban Non-Manual Employees (CPI-UNME). While these 
various  measures  of  CPI  do  move  together  in  the  long  run,  significant  variations  are 
observed in the short-run. Moreover, food and fuel items together, having a weight of 52.6 
per cent in CP-IW, are prone to supply shocks, both domestic and global, which contribute to 
sudden spikes in the inflation rate. As a result, this renders the assessment of inflationary 
pressures difficult which, in turn, complicates the process of monetary policy formulation. The 
recommendation of the National Statistical Commission (NSC) regarding the importance of 
developing  an  appropriate  index  is  relevant  in  this  regard  and,  when  implemented,  may 
alleviate the situation. The NSC has recommended: 
“As the current CPI series does not provide changes in the prices for the 
entire rural and urban population since they are designed to measure the 
changes  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  consumed  by  specific 
segments of the population, there is a need to compile the CPI separately 
for  the  entire  rural  and  urban  population.  TAC  on  SPCL  should  give  a 
methodology  for  compilation  of  CPI  of  rural  and  urban  areas  separately 
using  quinquennial  NSS  Consumer  Expenditure  Survey  Data  for  the 
preparation of the weighting diagram. TAC should also give a procedure for 
compiling  a  combined  index  based  on  these  two  indices.  The  existing 
system  of  price  data  collection  should  be  suitably  streamlined  and 
augmented so as to provide price data for compilation of CPI for rural and 
urban areas.” 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 7
Instruments and transmission of monetary policy: dynamics 
V. 
The instruments that the central bank uses in day-to-day implementation of monetary policy 
can  be  broadly  classified  into  direct  and  indirect  instruments.  Typically,  direct  instruments 
include cash and/ or liquidity reserve ratios, directed credit and administered interest rates. 
The  indirect  instruments  generally  operate  through  price  channel  which  cover  repurchase 
(repos)  and  outright  transactions  in  securities  (open  market  operations),  standing  facilities 
(refinance) and market-based discount window. The RBI currently uses multiple instruments 
to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained in the system, consistent with the objective 
of price stability, so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met. Towards this end, the 
RBI  pursues,  inter  alia,  a  policy  of  active  management  of  liquidity  through  open  market 
operations including liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), market stabilisation scheme and cash 
reserve ratio, and deploys the policy instruments at its disposal, flexibly, as warranted by the 
situation. Changes in fixed reverse repo/repo rates set by the RBI from time to time for the 
conduct of its LAF, under which the central bank conducts daily auctions for the banks, have 
emerged  as  the  main  instruments  for  interest  rate  signalling  in  the  Indian  economy. 
Institutional  mechanisms  have  been  evolved  in  parallel  to  improve  transparency  and 
communication of monetary policy.  
Traditionally, four key channels of monetary policy transmission are identified, viz., interest 
rate, credit aggregates, asset prices and exchange rate channels. The interest rate channel 
emerges as the dominant transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Nevertheless, it is fair 
to  regard  the  credit  channel  as  running  alongside  the  interest  rate  channel  to  produce 
monetary effects on real activity. Changes in interest rates by the monetary authorities also 
induce  movements  in  asset  prices,  which  generate  wealth  effects  in  terms  of  market 
valuations  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities.  With  the  increasing  integration  of  the  Indian 
economy with the global economy the significance of exchange rate channel has increased. 
In the recent period, a fifth channel – expectations – has assumed prominence in the conduct 
of forward-looking monetary policy in view of its influence on the traditional four channels.  
In  a  market-oriented  economy,  policy  signals  are  transmitted  through  an  integrated  and 
efficient  money,  government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets  combined  with  a 
robust  payments  and  settlement  system.  The  RBI  has  therefore,  been  engaged  in 
developing,  widening  and  deepening  of  various  markets and  institutions.  Development  of 
these markets has been done in a calibrated, sequenced and careful manner such that these 
developments are in step with those in other markets in the real sector. The sequencing has 
also been informed by the need to develop market infrastructure, technology and capabilities 
of market participants and financial institutions in a consistent manner.  
A  wide  range  of  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  were  introduced  in  a  planned  manner 
over a period to improve the efficiency of financial markets. These included development of 
market micro structure, removal of structural bottlenecks, introduction / diversification of new 
players  /  instruments,  free  pricing of  financial assets,  relaxation  of  quantitative  restrictions, 
better  regulatory  systems, 
trading 
infrastructure, clearing and settlement practices and greater transparency. Prudential norms 
were introduced early in the reform phase, followed by interest rate deregulation and gradual 
lowering  of  statutory  pre-emptions.  These  policies  were  supplemented  by  strengthening  of 
institutions,  encouraging  good  market  practices,  rationalised  tax  structures  and  enabling 
legislative and accounting framework.  
Going forward, a judicious mix of appropriate policy, strong macro economy and a sound and 
resilient financial system would be necessary as the Indian economy moves up in the ladder 
from  an  emerging  market  economy  towards  a  more  mature  economy.  As  development  of 
financial markets is an ongoing process, initiatives to further deepen and widen the various 
segments  of  financial  markets  would  have  to  be  continuously  pursued.  As  the  economy 
ascends a higher growth path, with greater opening up and financial integration with the rest 
of the world, the financial sector development in all its aspects will need further scaling up 
introduction  of  new 
improvement 
technology, 
in 
8 
 BIS Review 125/2007
along with corresponding measures to continue regulatory modernisation and strengthening. 
Since  the  overall  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  context  of  economic  growth 
and  financial  stability  will  remain,  the  effort  will  be  to  harmonise  the  deregulation  and 
liberalisation  of  financial  markets  with  the  domestic  developments  in  real  as  well  as  fiscal 
sectors  and  global  developments  in  international  financial  architecture.  The  medium-term 
framework  is  to  keep  developing  the  financial  markets,  preserving  the  integrity  of  financial 
markets and thereby, improving the transmission of monetary policy impulses. 
Constraints on conduct of monetary policy 
VI.  
The  reform  period  in  India  is  characterised  by  gradual  but  impressive  improvements  in 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  High  growth  along  with  price  and  financial  stability  has 
been  maintained  while  improving  the  sophistication  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy. 
There have been three important constraints on conduct of monetary policy even within the 
existing legal framework but these are being gradually overcome.  
First, the fiscal dominance which, no doubt, is getting reduced, impedes the efficient conduct 
of monetary policy. Progress in this regard is conducive to improved monetary management.  
Second, the predominance of publicly-owned financial intermediaries as well as non-financial 
public enterprises has created a blurring of the demarcation between funding of and by the 
Government vis-à-vis public sector as a whole. The joint family approach to public sector still 
persists to a significant extent.  
Third,  despite  significant  progress,  the  maturation  of  financial  markets  is  yet  incomplete 
which also reduces, at least partly, the effectiveness of monetary policy instruments.  
It is essential to recognise that there has been considerable alleviation on all fronts. Fiscal 
deficits are being progressively reduced though the total public debt as a proportion of GDP 
is  still  high  by  global  standards.  Share  of  wholly  publicly  owned  financial  intermediaries  is 
reduced though share of institutions with public sector character remains high. The financial 
markets especially money, forex, government securities and equity markets, are noticeably 
well developed now. There is scope for further improvements in reform of financial markets 
but  the  progress  in  this  regard  is  linked  to  improvement  in  fiscal  management  and  the 
dominant  public  sector  in  financial  intermediation  especially  their  governance  and  risk 
management skills.  
With  progressive  deregulation  and  development  of  financial  markets,  available  empirical 
evidence suggests some improvement in the pass-through from policy rates to lending and 
deposit  rates.  Interest  rates  are  emerging  as  a  more  potent  instrument  of  monetary  policy 
than before. In this context, however, the continued existence of administered interest rates 
distorts  the  interest  rates  structure  and  blunts  its  efficacy  in  monetary  policy  transmission. 
Currently, several of administered interest rates are prescribed over a range of deposit and 
lending  activity,  roughly  accounting  for  a  third  of  overall  banking  business  in  India.  While 
bank term deposit rates stand deregulated, small savings and provident funds continue to be 
administered,  thereby  imparting  a  degree  of  rigidity  to  the  interest  rate  structure. In  recent 
times, there has been some tendency to widen the net of administered interest rates to cover 
bank loans for agriculture. While such a tendency may not be an unlikely outcome, given the 
predominance of publicly-owned financial intermediaries, it needs to be recognised that the 
current  system  of  pricing  of  bank  loans  appears  less  than  satisfactory.  There  is  a  public 
perception  that  banks’  risk  assessment  and  risk  management  processes  are  less  than 
appropriate  and  sub-optimal  and  that  there  is  under  pricing  of  credit  for  corporates,  while 
there could be overpricing of lending to agriculture and the small scale industries. In addition 
to formal prescription of interest rates, public sector banks which account for over seventy 
per  cent  of  banking  assets  in  a  bank-dominated  economy  are  called  upon  by  the  majority 
shareholder  to  discharge  social  obligations  to  reflect  public  policy  priorities,  through 
continuous interaction and periodical reviews with chief executives.  
BIS Review 125/2007 
 9
In  a  way,  moral  suasion,  the  traditionally  potent  weapon  with  a  central  bank  may,  on 
occasions, be exercised by the government to sub-serve public policy, broadly defined. While 
the initiatives in the public sector, in some cases, add to the effectiveness of monetary policy 
intent, they could operate in the opposite direction also, especially when the perceptions and 
relative  weights  accorded  to  credit  expansion,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  by  the 
government and RBI significantly differ. In a financial system, where banks play a dominant 
role  in  non-banking  activities  also,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  through  both  credit 
and monetary channels is also impacted in this environment.  
In  brief,  the  operation  of  monetary  policy  in  India  has  to  be  oriented  around  the 
predominantly public sector ownership of the banking system. This plays a critical role not 
only  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  but  also  in  other  public  policy 
considerations which may overlap or even dominate monetary policy objectives.  
Concluding remarks 
VII.  
To conclude, the role of RBI has been redefined through gradual evolution and adaptation, 
along with some statutory changes, and not through any radical restructuring. Further, while 
assessing the autonomy of the RBI, one should recognise that RBI is not a pure monetary 
authority  but  is  responsible  for  several  other  functions  also,  as  a  central  bank.  The 
developments in the recent past lead one to the conclusion that,  de facto, there has been 
enhancement of the autonomy of the RBI.  
As regards monetary policy framework, the objectives remained the same but the framework 
has  been  changed  from  time  to  time  in  a  gradual  fashion  in  response  to  the  evolving 
circumstances.  Contextually,  there  are  three  important  issues  in  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy  viz.,  the  assessment  of  potential  output,  the  measurement  of  unemployment  and 
appropriate measure of inflation. 
While the policy tries to cope with these issues, a combination of instruments is necessarily 
used in a flexible manner to meet these complexities. Every effort has been made to improve 
the transmission channels especially through the financial markets, and through regulatory 
and institutional reforms. In addition, there are some constraints in the conduct of monetary 
policy,  in  particular,  the  fiscal  impact,  predominant  public  ownership,  prevalence  of 
administered  interest  rate,  etc.  While  these  challenges  and  dilemmas  persist  in  the  Indian 
context, every effort is made by the RBI to meet the broader objectives set forth, from time to 
time.  
Let me conclude by thanking Professor Vyas for giving me this opportunity to be with you. I 
enjoyed being here despite the onset of uncertainties in my travel back to Mumbai due to 
disruptions caused by the monsoon conditions in Mumbai. 
Thank you. 
References & bibliography 
Reserve Bank of India. (2006). Report on Currency and Finance, 2004-05.  
Balachandran, G. (1998). “The Reserve Bank of India: 1951-1967”. Oxford University Press, 
Delhi. 
Bank for International Settlements (2007). 77th Annual Report: 1 April 2006-31 March 2007. 
Basel, June 24.  
Chandavarkar,  A.  (2005).  “Towards  an  Independent  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  India  :  A 
Political Economy Agenda for Reconstitution”. Economic and Political Weekly, August 27. 
10 
 BIS Review 125/2007
37,  No. 
and  Political  Weekly,  Vol. 
Demaestri, E. and F. Guenero (2003). “The Rationale for Integrating Financial Supervision in 
Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean”.  Sustainable  Development  Department  Technical  Paper 
Series, Inter-American Development Bank. Washington D.C. 
Hansda, Sanjay and Patha Ray (2006). “Employment and Poverty in India during the 1990s: 
Is  There  a  Diverging  Trend?”.  Economic  and  Political  Weekly,  Vol.  41,  No.  27  and  28, 
July 08-July 21.  
Lybek, Tonny (2004). “Central Bank Autonomy, Accountability and Governance: Conceptual 
Framework”. Available at http://imf.org/external/np/leg/sem/2004/cdmfl/eng/lybek.pdf 
Nachane, D. M, Partha Ray, Saibal Ghosh (2002). “Does Monetary Policy Have Differential 
State-Level  Effects?”  Economic 
47, 
November 23-November 29. 
Rangarajan,  C.  (1993).  “Autonomy  of  Central  Banks’,  Fifty  Years  of  Central  Banking: 
Governors Speak”. Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai. 
Rangarajan,  C.  (1997),  “Dimensions  of  Monetary  Policy’,  Fifty  Years  of  Central  Banking: 
Governors Speak”, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai  
Ranjan, Rajiv; Rajeev Jain and Sarat C. Dhal. (2007). “India’s Potential Economic Growth: 
Measurement Issues and Policy Implications”, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 42, No. 
17, April 28-May 04, 2007.  
Reddy, Y.  V. (2001). Autonomy of the Central Bank : Changing Contours in India, speech 
delivered at Indian Institute of Management, Indore. 
Reddy, Y. V. (2002). Lectures on Economic and Financial Sector Reforms in India, Oxford 
University Press, New Delhi.  
Reddy, Y. V. (2006). “Economic Reforms and Changing Role of the Reserve Bank of India”, 
Radhakrishna  R.,  et  al  “India  in  a  Globalising  World:  Some  Aspects  of  Macroeconomy, 
Agriculture and Poverty, Essays in Honour of C.H. Hanumantha Rao, Academic Foundation, 
New Delhi. 
Vasudevan. A. (2005). “On Central Bank Reforms”. Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 40, 
No. 42, October 15-October 21, 2005. 
Capie, Forrest; Charles Goodhart; Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadt (1994). The Future 
of  Central  Banking:  The  Tercentenary  Symposium  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge  
Government  of  India.  (2001).  Report  of  the  National  Statistical  Commission,  Available  at 
http://mospi.nic.in/nscr/mp.htm (paragraph 11.2.14(v) 
Marco,  Anone;  Bernard  L.  Laurens;  Jean-Francois  Segalotto  and  Martin  Sommer.  (2007). 
“Central Bank Autonomy: Lessons from Global Trends”. IMF Working Paper No.WP/07/88. 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 11
