Rundheersing Bheenick: Bank of Mauritius – brief review of activities in 
2007 
Speech  by  Professor  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
launching ceremony of new notes and coins, Port Louis, 6 December 2007. 
 I welcome you all to this finale of the celebratory events of our 40th anniversary year. 
Over the last four months, on a more serious theme in our festivities, we have had a series of 
lectures on banking, money and finance. Professor Bishnodat Persaud addressed us from 
the West and spoke on trade, finance and currency. This was preceded by two reviews of 
monetary policy from Sweden by Professor Stefan  Gerlach from the Bank for International 
Settlements, which is the central bank of central banks. 
Then,  from  Switzerland,  we  had  Professor  Philippe  Bacchetta  on  Financial  Market 
Development and Economic Growth. 
This week, we had a fascinating review of the changing axis of global finance and the rise of 
India and China by Dr Y. Venugopal Reddy, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Finally, only yesterday, we had a special address at the Bank from my good friend Dr Paul 
Acquah,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ghana  who  covered  the  raging  debate  on  the 
performance of the IMF over the past decades. 
The  heart  of  our  job,  or  rather  what  we  formally  call  our  Corporate  Responsibility,  is  to 
contribute to and I quote from the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004: 
“the orderly and balanced economic development of Mauritius”. 
As part of this, we are giving special attention to the importance of being a good corporate 
citizen. One special moment for me was in laying the foundation stone of our new building in 
Rodrigues to better serve the large community of our sister island. But the corporate function 
probably  works  best  when  it  is  done  with  a  lighter  heart  and  a  looser  step  than  was  the 
practice of bankers of the distant past with their bowler hats and their pin stripe suits. 
Let me mention now some of our other activities in this anniversary year. 
• 
We  have  launched  what  we  called  originally  a  “Financial  Literacy  and  Outreach 
Programme”.  Now,  if  you  mull  over  the  acronym  of  a  “Financial  Literacy  and 
Outreach Programme”, “FLOP”, you will understand why we changed this name to 
“Consumer Outreach Programme”, for “COP” sounds better than “FLOP”. 
We have opened our doors to over-the-counter sales of security bills and bonds. 
We  had  a  Charity  Dinner  in  this  very  venue  in  aid  of  the  Epilepsy  and  Alzheimer 
associations. 
Last  week,  I  inaugurated  with  the  Minister  of  Agro  Industry  and  Fisheries,  Dr  A. 
Boolell, a bamboo garden at Midlands and we trust that other banks present here 
will follow suit with their own contributions to sustain the bio-diversity of our island. 
We have also sponsored the Inter Clubs Youth Championships for boys and girls. 
You have just heard about the Banknote Design Competition that we launched. The 
idea behind this was that people of my generation normally look to the past for our 
heroes and then we proceed to put their faces on our notes and their effigies on our 
coins  and  we  thought  that,  perhaps,  the  younger  generation  may  have  a  different 
take on this issue. So, we thought to give them a chance to design the future family 
of  our  banknotes.  The  results  of  this  competition  were  just  announced  by  the 
   BIS Review 151/2007 
 1
Chairman of the Jury Panel, Mr Tristan Bréville. I would like here to thank Mr Bréville 
and all his colleagues who worked on the Jury Panel and all those who participated 
in the competition and of course, a special word of congratulations to the winners. 
I am now pleased to move to the next stage of our event. We have three different launching 
events here tonight: 
(i) 
The  first  is  the  launching  of  a  special  commemorative  coin  which  marks  our  40th 
anniversary.  It  is  a  silver-proof  coin  and  will  go  on  sale  as  from  Monday  10 
December. 
The next, a sort of double first, is the twenty rupee coin we are launching today, the 
first of its kind in Mauritius. And the second part of this double first, is that this new 
coin, is the first bimetallic coin we have ever had in Mauritius. 
And the next item today involves a triple, a triple signature. As you know, the Central 
Bank now has two Deputy Governors. The new banknotes being issued today from 
the old family carry, for the first time, three signatures. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
So,  if  I  may  say,  rather  pleasingly,  we  celebrate  today  a  first,  the  commemorative  coin;  a 
double  first,  the  bimetallic  twenty  rupee  coin;  and  a  triple  first,  the  new  notes  with  three 
signatures. 
Now  it  is  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  invite  our  Vice-President,  the  Honourable  Angidi 
Chettiar to unveil the coins and notes which will join our family of notes and coins. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2007
