Savenaca Narube: Launch of a modern payments system in Fiji 
Speech by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of the 
RTGS system or FIJICLEAR, Suva, 16 October 2007. 
 Chairman of the Association of Banks in Fiji, Mr. Laurie Melsop; 
Invited Guests; 
Ladies and Gentleman: 
Introductory remarks 
A very good afternoon to you all. 
One of my visions after rejoining the Reserve Bank in 2000 was to modernize the payment 
system. This vision was driven by the need that I saw to make the payment system more 
efficient and secure. In my view, such a modern payment system would act as a launching 
platform for other modernization in our entire financial system. 
It therefore gives me great pleasure that this vision is now a reality. I am delighted that we 
are  officially  launching  this  modern  payment  system  today.  I  welcome  everyone  to  this 
ceremony and thank you for joining us to celebrate this important milestone in the history of 
Fiji’s financial system development. 
As  some  of  you  are  aware,  the  system  went  live  on  30th  August  and  I  am  glad  and 
somewhat relieved to say that the system has been running smoothly for over 6 weeks now. 
FIJICLEAR 
Central  banks  normally  give  a  name  to  their  real  time  settlement  system.  For  instance, 
Trinidad and Tobago named theirs “SafeTT”; Philippines, “Philpass”; and the Thai system 
is  called  “BahtNET”.  We  have  decided  to  name  our  RTGS  system,  “FIJICLEAR”:  “FIJI” 
denotes a nationwide system while “CLEAR” signifies secure clearing process. 
We  started  the  ground  work  on  the  project  almost  5  years  ago.  I  was  delighted  when  the 
commercial  banks  readily  shared  our  vision  to  get  the  project  rolling.  We  issued  a  joint 
statement with the Association of Banks in Fiji and set up a working committee to oversee 
the project. The formal contract with the software vendor was signed in March 2006. 
The projects like many other projects had its share of hurdles. For the Reserve Bank, the 
biggest  challenge  was  to  get  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  scope  of  this  rather  technical 
project which none of us had any prior experience in. In addition, we lost the lead manager of 
the  project  program  half  way 
like  secure 
communication channels was not that easy as you may appreciate in Fiji. Lastly, we had to 
negotiate  the  difficult  issue  of  cost  sharing  with  our  commercial  banks  colleagues.  I  am 
extremely glad that we were able to overcome all these hurdles. 
The  project  was  initially  expected  to  go  live  late  last  year.  But  due  to  these  hurdles  it  is 
delayed by about one year. We were very mindful that we have to get the system right from 
the very beginning in order to safeguard the confidence in this new real time system. We just 
had to do it right the first time. 
through.  Establishing 
infrastructure 
the 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 1
Financial intermediation 
The payments system is the backbone of a country’s monetary and financial system and it 
plays a critical role in a country’s economic development. It is through the payments system 
that  money  goes  around.  It  allows  money  to  be  transferred  between  savers  and  lenders, 
buyers and sellers or from one point to another. By reforming and developing the payments 
system,  it  is  possible  to  reduce  the  overall  transaction  costs  and  improve  the  efficiency  of 
financial transactions in an economy. And these efficiency, convenience and security have 
favourable flow- on effects to the whole economy. 
The central bank inevitably plays a key role in  this payment process. This stems from our 
primary functions of providing liquidity to commercial banks and clearing payments between 
banks. This clearing service in Fiji has evolved over the years. I still recall this clearing being 
done here in our banking hall where all commercial banks would come in once a day to clear 
their  payments  under  our  monitoring.  Then  commercial  banks  themselves  took  over  the 
entire  process  with  approved  rules  and  guidelines.  And  today  we  are  lifting  the  bar  with  a 
modern real time payment system. 
I  believe  that  we  need  a  modern  payments  system  now.  Some  have  said  to  me  that  the 
system  is  too  early  for  a  small  country  like  Fiji  where  the  transactions  are  not  that  many. 
Others say the investment is too costly and would not fetch the required economic returns. 
These  may  well  be  true  for  now.  The  full  benefits  of  this  system  are  however  difficult  to 
quantify. I am of the view that we must be proactive and look to the future. We can influence 
this future ourselves by what we do now. As I have said, this payment system is bound to 
catalyze other innovation in the financial system. 
I also expect the financial system to continue to grow in size and sophistication. Fiji’s banking 
assets have grown briskly and today they are in excess of $3.5 billion. Commercial banks’ 
profitability is high, capital is strong and liquidity is more than adequate. Today, Fiji enjoys a 
reasonable degree of financial innovation. We have many modern banking technologies in 
the  world  like  ATMs,  Credit  and  Debit  Cards,  EFTPOS  and  online  and  internet  banking.  I 
believe that Fiji is at par to what is offered internationally. 
It  is  critical  that  we  in  the  financial  sector  are  ahead  of  the  wider  economic  reforms.  It  is 
inadequate for us to be following behind these reforms. In fact, we should be driving them. 
The  complexities  in  the  financial  intermediation  are  increasing  with  the  development  of 
modern products to better suit the evolving demands of customers. Inevitably, it is the central 
bank  that  takes  a  lead  role  in  the  modernization  of  the  payments  system  because  of  its 
importance to the economy and the entire financial system. At the same time, such a system 
facilitates our work as custodian of financial stability. Today, payments systems are the top 
agenda for most central banks. 
Payment  modes  are  wide  ranging.  Cash  is  the  common  mode  of  payment.  However,  the 
inconvenience  of  carrying  cash  and  increasing  security  threats  has  encouraged  the  move 
towards other payment media. But paper based instruments like cheques and drafts are not 
so  convenient.  In  modern  times,  cards  and  electronic  payments  are  regarded  as the  most 
convenient and safer instruments, although they too are subject to certain risks. 
Some  experts  use  the  analogy  of  the  “plumbing  design”  to  describe  payment  system 
where nobody cares if everything is in running condition. However, if one of the pipes burst 
or the plumbing malfunctions, we will find ourselves in a wet and nasty mess”. 
The manual payments system that we have used up to now has served us adequately. But it 
has its shortcomings. The major one is that it takes too long to clear cheques and this has 
implications on cash flows and financial performances. Second, as I have said, carrying cash 
has its risks. Thirdly, the cost of paper based instruments like cheques is relatively high in Fiji 
adding to the cost of doing business. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2007
As  I  have  said  before,  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  payment  and  settlement  system 
contributes  to  financial  stability.  With  the  introduction  of  FIJICLEAR,  where  settlement  of 
individual inter-bank fund transfers is on real time all throughout the day, a major source of 
systemic risk in the financial system has been reduced substantially. 
Financial innovation 
FIJICLEAR is now another instrument available in Fiji to customers through which they can 
make payments to one another. 
The  global  trend  is  toward  electronic  real  time  payment  system.  World  wide  the  financial 
landscape has changed driven by a number of factors including growth in financial markets, 
cross  border 
information 
technology, changing macroeconomic factors, and globalization of markets and business. It 
is therefore pleasing to know that Fiji is keeping up there with the global trend. 
technological  advancement 
in  communication  and 
flows, 
What is FIJICLEAR? 
What  is  FIJICLEAR?  FIJICLEAR  enables  the  processing  of  payments  to  be  done  as  and 
when they happen – hence the term “real time”. It is an electronic way of making payments 
within a country and getting immediate settlement of those payments. 
In simple terms it means that instead of waiting for several days for funds to be available for 
use, the receiving party or beneficiary will have funds in their account within one business 
day  or  in  some  cases  almost  instantaneously.  Similarly,  the  party  making  the  payment  is 
assured of safe and immediate delivery of those funds. 
The  key  elements  of  FIJICLEAR  are  speed,  certainty,  reliability,  safety  and  security, 
convenience and cost. 
The system is for the transfer and settlement of Fiji dollar denominated funds only. It enables 
payments instructions to be processed and settled individually and continuously throughout 
the  working  day.  All  settled  transactions  are  considered  as  final  and  irrevocable.  Thus  the 
receiver will be able to use the funds immediately without being exposed to the risk of the 
funds not being settled. This is in contrast to the previous manual system which operated on 
a deferred net settlement system, where payments are processed throughout the day but the 
actual entries are only affected at the end of the day. 
Benefits FIJICLEAR 
There  are  a  number  of  benefits  of  using  FIJICLEAR.  I  had  pointed  out  already  the  wider 
benefits to the economy and the financial system. 
To the Payee i.e. the person receiving money, the benefits include: 
• 
Funds are credited into the account straight away. So there is no waiting of 3-7 days 
for funds to be cleared when using a cheque; 
There  is  time  savings  as  one  does  not  have  to  physically  visit  a  bank  to  deposit 
cheque; 
There  is  no  uncertainty  of  any  dishonoured  cheques  with  the  associated  charges 
and loss of income; 
Immediate crediting of account means that any overdraft limit is reduced and hence 
lower interest charges; 
Immediate crediting of funds will help in cash flow; and 
    BIS Review 118/2007 
 3
Reduced overhead or staff cost as there is less paper work. 
• 
There are also benefits to the Payer i.e. those making the payment: 
• 
• 
• 
I  therefore  strongly  encourage  businesses  as  well  as  individuals  to  use  this  modern 
payments  system  to  make  transactions.  The  Payee  should  insist  on  the  Payer  to  use  this 
new system for payments. 
There is less risk of transporting cheques; 
There is savings in time and charges; and 
There is better business relationship with creditors. 
FIJICLEAR payments to date 
I am encouraged by the results so far of the use of the new system. On the first day of its 
operations,  total  payments  that  went  through  the  system  was  about  $172  million  of  which 
commercial bank payments was about $10 million. Gross payments over the last 6 weeks 
have  averaged  above  $850  million  of  which  commercial  bank  payments  exceeded  $120 
million every week. Customer payments are rising and we have seen payments as low as 
$90 being made through FIJICLEAR. 
The  number  of  transactions  is  also  rising.  The  system  has  the  capacity  to  process  1,000 
transactions every 5 minutes. So there is a lot of space for growth. I am confident that we will 
see more and more payments made via FIJICLEAR in future. 
Security 
I would like to assure everyone that the payment system is secure. We have established a 
secondary site which is on line which means that if necessary we can operate the system 
from this alternative site. The site also acts as data backup. In addition, the communication 
lines are dedicated to the system and are secure. There is a dedicated team in the Reserve 
Bank  monitoring  and  overseeing  the  transactions  during  the  day.  This  team  will  provide 
adequate liquidity during the day to allow the system to work smoothly. IT backup support 
and service agreement is in place. I am confident that with these measures, the system is 
extremely secure and reliable. 
Charges 
Let me say something about the cost of using FIJICLEAR. Because of what we believe the 
importance  of  the  system  nationwide  and  the  financial  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
shouldered  all  the  establishment  costs.  After  some  discussions,  we  have  agreed  with  the 
commercial  banks  to  a  fixed  operating  cost  for  the  first  year  which  in  my  view  is  quite  a 
reasonable sum. We will review this maintenance charge after the first year of operation. In 
turn, I am confident that commercial banks will review their charges of using the system if 
they have not done so already and pass on the savings to their customers. We will monitor 
these charges closely. 
RTGS software provider 
LogicaCMG, a listed company on the London Stock Exchange provided the software and will 
also  provide  support  and  maintenance  services.  It  is  a  leading  payment  software  provider 
with a long list of central bank clients all over the world, including the European Central Bank 
and  central  banks  of  Chile,  Turkey,  Sri  Lanka  and  Philippines.  It  has  also  contracted  a 
leading local IT firm to provide appropriate back up support. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2007
Concluding remarks 
I believe we have a very robust and secure system in FIJICLEAR. I am proud to say that Fiji 
is the first of the Pacific Island nations to have the system in place. You will all appreciate 
that  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system  is  essential  for  the  proper  functioning  of  our 
financial market. Its benefits are obvious. I believe that this will also boost confidence in Fiji 
as the system will bring us on par with developed countries. 
I wish once again to encourage businesses and the public to take advantage of this system. 
Finally, I wish to commend the support provided by the commercial banks and LogicaCMG 
which  has  helped  RBF  realise  this  vision.  I  look  forward  to  the  continued  support  of  the 
commercial banks in making this project a success. 
I also take this opportunity to thank the International Monetary Fund and Bank Indonesia for 
providing technical assistance to the RBF. 
Let  me  also  wish  to  acknowledge  others  that  have  worked  hard  to  bring  this  project  to 
completion.  I  thank  the  joint  working  committee  of  the  commercial  banks  and  the  RBF.  I 
extend  my  greatest  appreciation  to  the  RBF  project  team  for  their  perseverance  and 
dedication. Without you, the project would still be a dream. 
It is now my pleasure to officially launch FIJICLEAR and wish it every success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 5
