T T Mboweni: What is happening in financial markets?  
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Cape 
Town Club, Cape Town, 5 October 2007. 
Honoured guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to address you this evening on the recent 
turmoil experienced in global financial markets which began in July this year. At the time of 
our last Monetary Policy Committee meeting in August, the turbulence on the international 
financial markets had intensified and it was unclear how developments would unfold. As we 
prepare  for  the  MPC  meeting  next  week,  the  dust  appears  to  have  settled.  In  fact,  if  one 
looks at the conditions in the financial and commodity markets today and compares them to 
the  conditions  prevailing  in  mid-July,  one  would  not  think  there  had  ever  been  any 
disruptions.  My  remarks  to  you  this  evening  will  focus  on  the  developments  in  the 
international and domestic financial markets, potential implications for global growth and the 
policy implications. 
The build-up to the turbulence 
2.  
For  the  past  few  years  now,  global  financial  markets  have  prospered and  seen  innovation 
and integration on an unprecedented scale, leading to more prominent roles being played by 
investors such as hedge funds, and new derivative instruments and structured products. This 
boom in financial markets was a result of low interest rates in developed markets, and the 
financial system being flooded with liquidity. Investors, in an attempt to earn higher returns, 
invested  in  riskier  assets.  As  more  and  more  investors  jumped  on  the  bandwagon,  and 
demand  for  riskier  assets  increased,  the  excess  yield  these  assets  offered  diminished. 
However, this strategy remained beneficial given that the global economy was characterised 
by low and falling inflation and robust economic growth. This demand for excess yield gave 
rise to, amongst other things, the boom in the US sub-prime market. 
The  economic  and  financial  environment  has  almost  been  a  utopia  situation  in  certain 
respects,  displaying  a  remarkable  resilience,  even  during  recent  periods  of  correction. 
However, this resilience only served to increase the level of complacency about the nature of 
the risks involved. The central banking community had consistently expressed concern about 
the level of pricing observed in markets, which did not seem to adequately reflect the level of 
risk being taken. Now, the sub-prime “bust” has led to a tightening of both liquidity and credit 
conditions,  creating  turmoil  in  financial  markets.  I  am  reminded  of  a  comment  by  Warren 
Buffet: “It’s only when the tide goes out that you learn who’s been swimming naked.” 
Recent financial market turbulence 
3.  
A  rising  wave  of  risk  aversion  prompted  by  increasing  foreclosures  in  the  US  sub-prime 
mortgage market resulted in an abrupt deterioration in global financial market conditions in 
August 2007. Rising foreclosures and delinquencies were linked to sub-prime borrowers who 
had taken out adjustable rate mortgages. As interest rates reset to higher levels, in line with 
the  rising  US  interest  rate  environment,  these  borrowers  found  it  difficult  to  pay  their 
mortgage loans. This turbulence was not confined to the US sub-prime market, spreading to 
the broader mortgage market and financial markets more generally. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 1
In mid-June and July, the ratings agencies cut the ratings on a number of securities backed 
by  sub-prime  loans  and  put  on  review  a  number  of  mortgage  backed  securities  for 
downgrade. Soon after, US foreclosures were reported to be almost 90 per cent higher than 
the previous years’ level. Two large hedge funds were shut down as a result of exposure to 
the sub-prime market. Thereafter, some large sub-prime lenders collapsed, while holders of 
sub-prime  residential  mortgage  backed  securities  also  suffered  losses.  These  events 
resulted in a tightening in underwriting standards, with fewer households qualifying for sub-
prime  loans.  Investors  reassessed  their  tolerance  for  risk,  most  notably  for  structured 
financial products and for securities of highly leveraged firms. 
All  of  these  events  culminated  in  increasingly  impaired  short-term  and  interbank  funding 
markets in August. Many issuers of asset-backed commercial paper programs found rolling 
over  their  paper  increasingly  difficult.  This  occurred  due  to  a  lack  of  transparency  in  the 
financial  system,  with  no-one  quite  sure  of  whom  owns  what  and  therefore  uncertainty 
regarding the losses faced by financial institutions and their counterparties. Investors started 
treating all counterparties with suspicion. 
The exposure to the sub-prime market became all the more pervasive, with banks and hedge 
funds in the US, UK, and Australia, to name a few, indicating exposure to this market. The 
global nature of the problem was particularly highlighted when the second largest bank in the 
Eurozone froze access to certain of its investment funds on 09 August 2007. Risk aversion 
increased over this period, as clearly witnessed in the almost 200 basis points drop in the US 
three-month  Treasury  Bill  yield  in  early  August.  Banks  began  to  hoard  cash  to  cover  their 
funding  needs  and  as  interbank  liquidity  dried  up,  banks  found  it  difficult  to  raise  term 
funding.  Surging  liquidity  demand  spilled  over  into  the  short-term  money  market,  causing 
overnight interest rates to soar. 
Volatility in financial markets, as measured by the VIX1 index, moved from 14 index points on 
17 July to touch a record 31 index points on 16 August. Volatility at levels of around 20, has 
generally led to a re-pricing of riskier assets. Major equity markets lost between 8 and 12 per 
cent, with the Japanese equity market worst affected as it was dealt a double blow with the 
appreciation  of  the  Japanese  yen.  Emerging  market  equity  markets  followed  their 
international counterparts lower as risk aversion increased and investors fled to safe haven 
assets.  The  Morgan  Stanley  Capital  International  (MSCI)  index  for  emerging  markets  lost 
over  16  per  cent.  The  “flight  to  safety”  led  to  a  precipitous  fall  in  developed  bond  market 
yields.  In  the  space  of  a  month,  the  two-year  US  Treasury  yield  dropped  almost  70  basis 
points,  below  4,00  per  cent.  The  EMBI  plus  spread  above  US  Treasuries  widened  by  82 
basis points to 250 basis points. 
Currency markets also experienced increased volatility. The USD appreciated from USD1,38 
to  USD1,34  against  the  euro,  and  appreciated  against  most  major  and  emerging  market 
currencies.  The  Japanese  yen  (JPY)  was  the  exception,  as  it  appreciated  by  9,0  per  cent 
against the USD from over JPY122 at the end of July to JPY112 in mid-August, reflecting the 
role  that  Japanese  interest  rates  played  in  supporting  risk-taking  in  recent  years.  The 
unwinding of carry trades in particular supported the JPY. The same trend was witnessed in 
the International Monetary Market data which showed a significant turnaround in speculative 
forward  currency  positions  from  net  short  JPY  positions  in  July  to  net  long  positions  in 
August. 
                                                 
1   VIX is the ticker symbol for the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index, a measure of the implied 
volatility  of  S&P  500  index  options.  It  represents  one  measure  of  market's  expectation  of  volatility  over  the 
next 30 day period. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2007
Central banks react 
4.  
Central  banks  responded  in  order  to  prevent  a  potential  financial  crisis  caused  by  near-
dysfunctional  money  markets  in  developed  countries.  Since  9  August  2007,  the  Fed  and 
ECB  offered  three-month  term  funding,  and  together  with  other  central  banks  injected 
significantly  more  liquidity  into  the  financial  system.  The  types  of  securities  against  which 
banks  could  borrow  were  broadened  by  the  Fed  and  ECB  to  include  mortgage  backed 
securities – the Fed went a step further and accepted asset-backed commercial paper. The 
relaxation  of  key  restrictions  on  lending  between  banks  and  broker/dealers  also  helped  to 
reduce liquidity pressures as it allowed banks to fund their own and other non-bank dealers 
more easily. On 16 August, the Federal Open Market Committee lowered its discount rate by 
50 basis points, returning some calm to markets. In the case of the United Kingdom, it was 
necessary for the Bank of England to provide emergency liquidity assistance to one financial 
institution, Northern Rock. As central banks rarely provide  this kind of assistance easily to 
one institution, financial markets will continue to keep a watchful eye on possible subsequent 
developments in the United Kingdom. 
The most significant action, however, was the 50 basis points reduction in the target federal 
funds rate and a further 50 basis points reduction in the discount rate by the FOMC in mid-
September. This had a pronounced impact on financial markets. Risk appetite returned, and 
the VIX index declined from over 31 index points to 19 index points by 21 September. Stock 
markets  rebounded  between  7  and  16  per  cent  and  bond  yields  increased  as  investors 
moved back into riskier assets. The increased risk appetite over this period led to the JPY 
reassuming its depreciating trend, from JPY112 in mid-August to JPY116 on 21 September. 
The USD, however, depreciated to over USD1,40 against the EUR, breaching the USD1,40 
level  for  the  first  time  on  20  September,  pressured  by  interest  rate  expectations.  Market 
expectations of monetary policy have changed markedly since these events from a general 
environment  of  tighter  monetary  policy  to  easier  monetary  policy.  Commodity  prices  have 
reached highs not seen for over 20 years. The gold price has moved above USD740 per fine 
ounce, but sadly, oil prices have also risen, to over USD80 per barrel. 
Emerging  markets  also  regained  their  composure  since  the  Fed  lowered  its  target  federal 
funds rate. The MSCI for emerging markets gained over 25 per cent since mid-August and 
the EMBI plus spread declined by 56 basis points. It is notable however, that throughout this 
crisis,  there  has  been  limited  reaction  from  emerging  markets.  One  can  ascribe  this  to 
healthy economic fundamentals. Emerging markets over the past few years have increased 
their reserve levels significantly, reduced their external balances and debt servicing. Equally 
important is the fact that debt buybacks have continued and net external debt reduction is 
still  prevalent  in  many  key  emerging  market  countries.  Thus,  overall,  it  would  appear  that 
emerging markets are far less susceptible to credit events than they may have been in the 
past. 
South Africa’s experience 
5.  
South  African  money  markets  were  relatively  unaffected  by  these  events  as  our  banking 
system  had  negligible  exposure  to  the  subprime  market.  Liquidity  conditions  domestically 
remained  healthy,  and  there  was  no  need  for  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  to  provide 
extra liquidity to markets. 
However, South African financial markets did not go unaffected. After trading below R6,80 
against the USD in July, the rand depreciated to over R7,60 in mid-August. Domestic bond 
yields increased and the Alsi retreated quickly from the almost 30 000 level reached in July 
to  below  26  000  in  August.  As  calm  returned  to  the  markets,  so  the  rand  appreciated  to 
below R7,00 against the USD, the Alsi ratcheted up gains above the 30 000 level, surpassing 
the record highs reached before the crisis, and government bond yields declined. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 3
As with many other emerging economies, South Africa’s macroeconomic position places it in 
good  stead.  Despite  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets,  non-resident  interest  in  South 
African  assets  remained  positive.  In  fact,  for  the  month  of  August,  South  Africa  witnessed 
record  purchases  of  domestic  bonds  by  non-residents.  Nonresident  purchases  of  South 
African  shares  exceeded  R10  billion.  Nonetheless,  the  sustainability  of  these  inflows  will 
depend  in  part  on  global  liquidity  conditions  as  well  as  domestic  growth  prospects. 
Conditions  in  the  local  foreign  exchange  market  also  allowed  for  further  accumulation  of 
foreign exchange reserves. 
There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  evidence  at  this  stage  that  the  recent  turbulence  in  the 
international  financial  markets  will  have  marked  effects  on  the  domestic  growth  outlook, 
although  this  will  depend  to  some  extent  on  the  impact  of  these  developments  on  the  US 
growth performance. 
Implications for global economic growth 
6.  
Whilst initially the developments in the financial markets appeared to be limited to a liquidity 
problem, they later transpired to present a credit problem as well. The big question now is to 
what extent these developments will affect the real economy. 
It  seems  logical  that  the  US  economy  will  bear  the  brunt  of  the  damage  of  the  sub-prime 
crisis. The tightening of lending standards and therefore the restrictions of credit extension to 
weaker  households  could  exacerbate  the  housing  downturn  in  the  US  even  further. 
Dampened  business  sentiment  and  falls  in  the  equity  market,  combined  with  the  weaker 
housing  market  and  deterioration  in  consumer  sentiment  could  mean  a  more  intense 
negative  impact  on  wealth.  The  most  recent  evidence  by  way  of  economic  data  releases 
seems  to  suggest  that  the  problems  in  the  housing  market  may  be  deeper  than  initially 
assumed and harbour real risks for consumption and growth. The recent policy actions from 
the FOMC very much seem to acknowledge this change in prospects. 
As  the  IMF  has  noted,  most  of  the  world  will  likely  emerge  relatively  unscathed  from  this 
crisis. The recent shifts away from the US as being the key driver of global growth, together 
with the better balance achieved during the last two years represents significant support for 
the  global  economy.  However,  the  ramifications  of  any  sharp  slowdown  in  the  US  always 
remain  and  should  not  be  underestimated.  As  for  emerging  markets,  lower  external  debt, 
better  reserves  levels,  more  prudent  fiscal  management,  leading  to  much  more  improved 
fundamentals, have undoubtedly already delivered dividends. 
Whilst  the  global  economy  is  deemed  to  be  robust  enough  to  shake  off  US  weakness, 
contagion effects means that the sub-prime problems can contaminate other countries. As 
noted, emerging markets are better prepared for, but certainly not immune to global financial 
market risks. A reduction in global risk appetite would curb net capital inflows into emerging 
markets, placing downward pressure on emerging market currencies and in turn exacerbate 
inflationary pressures. 
Policy implications 
7.  
The recent events and actions by central banks around the world have raised an interesting 
debate  on  “moral  hazard”.  It  raises  the  question  of  whether  central  bank  support  of  the 
markets does not amount to a bail-out of careless investors, thereby paving the way for more 
careless behaviour in future. In a recent speech by Federal Reserve Bank Chairman, Ben 
Bernanke,  he  noted  that  well-functioning  financial  markets  are  essential  for  a  prosperous 
economy. Central banks need to ensure the functioning of financial markets, but in a very 
difficult balancing act, also need to guard against recreating conditions of careless lending 
that preceded the market turmoil. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2007
In this context it is important to point out that central banks can ill-afford to take any chances 
with systemic risks. In the process of addressing problems “for the greater good” there could 
be some by-product of unintentionally providing help to those who do not quite deserve it. 
This  was  the  dilemma  faced  by  the  Bank  of  England  when  it  eventually  had  to  provide 
assistance to Northern Rock. But this should never allow financial market participants to work 
on any assumption of some inbuilt automatic guarantees against failure. 
As the IMF points out in its September 2007, Global Financial Stability Review, policymakers 
and market participants need to learn from the present situation and make amendments to 
the global financial system in order to strengthen it. Key in this is the recognition that there 
needs to be improvements in a wide range of areas: 
• 
Greater transparency between on- and off-balance sheet entities, so that the market 
is able to properly differentiate and price risk. 
better risk monitoring; 
improvements by ratings agencies; 
better valuations of complex financial instruments and products; and finally 
wider risk perimeters that go beyond the accounting and legal perimeters. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Policy makers in both mature and emerging markets therefore face considerable challenges 
going  forward,  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  continued  healthy  global 
growth. 
Conclusion 
8.  
In recent weeks, the present situation has been likened to events in 1998 or 2001. However, 
what should be borne in mind is that the current situation has occurred against the backdrop 
of broad-based strength in the global economy. A deeper understanding of what led to the 
turmoil is required, lessons need to be drawn and where necessary, improvements made. 
The correction we have observed may have proven painful for many, and I have little doubt 
that  the  pain  is  not  yet  over.  Ultimately,  the  correction  should  be  seen  as  positive  for  the 
financial sector and the economy overall, especially if spill-over to the real economy can be 
contained.  Hopefully  it  will  allow  for  more  differentiation  in  pricing  of  credit  and  less 
aggressive  mortgage  lending  and  leveraged  loan  practices,  and  in  so  doing,  compensate 
investors and lenders more appropriately for the risks they are taking. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 5
