Ric Battellino: Challenges and opportunities for the funds management 
industry in Australia 
Opening remarks by Mr Ric Battellino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to 
the 20th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, 12 December 2007. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here to open the 20th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference. 
Over the past twenty years, the Conference has provided a stimulating forum for discussion 
of  a  wide  range  of  issues  facing  the  banking  and  finance  industry,  and  it  has  played  an 
important role in helping to promote Australia as a major financial centre. I’m sure this year 
will be no exception. 
This  morning’s  Business  Forum  on  the  challenges  and  opportunities  for  the  funds 
management industry has already generated a number of interesting points for discussion. 
The schedule for the next two and a half days will take the discussion into a broader range of 
topics in the field of banking and finance but for the moment I will focus my remarks on the 
funds management industry. 
Industry size 
Let me begin by recapping some facts on the size and growth of the industry. 
As  we  have  heard,  the  funds  management  industry  in  Australia  has  expanded  at  a 
remarkable  pace  over  the  past  couple  of  decades.  Since  1990,  the  value  of  funds  under 
management has grown at an annualised rate of 12½ per cent, and now stands at around 
$1.7 trillion. This is equivalent to about 160 per cent of GDP, up from about 50 per cent in 
1990. 
By  international  standards,  Australia’s  funds  management  industry  is  among  the  largest  in 
the world, not only as a ratio to GDP but also in absolute terms. Some reports rank Australia 
as  the  fourth  largest  funds  management  industry  in  the  world  in  terms  of  assets  under 
management.  The  data  underlying  this  ranking  are  compiled  by  the  Investment  Company 
Institute, an industry association for US mutual funds. This measure covers investments in 
mutual  funds  and  unit  trusts,  and  therefore  favours  countries  such  as  Australia  where  this 
type of investment vehicle is quite common. On the other hand, it understates the size of the 
funds management industry in countries that tend to use other investment structures. 
An alternative approach for measuring the size of the funds management industry is to add 
up  all  of  the  assets  of  pension  funds,  life  insurance  companies  and  other  managed 
investments, regardless of the precise legal structure in which they reside. This provides a 
broader  view  of  the  funds  management  industry  and  one  that  is  more  comparable  across 
countries. This exercise is not straightforward, however, as consistent international data are 
difficult to obtain.  
After  taking  into  account  some  of  these  measurement  issues,  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank 
estimate  that  the  Australian  industry  is  among  the  world’s  ten  largest,  though  more  likely 
towards the bottom of this group than in the top half. It is difficult to be more precise than this 
but,  nonetheless,  it  is  clear  that  the  Australian  funds  management  industry  is  large  by 
international standards. 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 1
Reasons for growth 
What has been behind this rapid expansion in the industry? 
A large part of the growth over the past couple of decades has been due to superannuation. 
Superannuation  fund  assets  have  grown  by  an  average  of  14½ per  cent  per  annum  since 
1990, and now comprise about half the funds under management in Australia. This rise in 
superannuation assets reflects a number of government initiatives, such as the introduction 
of compulsory superannuation contributions in the early 1990s and the concessional taxation 
of superannuation. 
Other parts of the funds management industry, however, have also grown quickly, reflecting 
more  general  reasons  such  as  the  increased  financial  awareness  of  households  and  the 
associated  search  for  higher  returns  than  those  offered  by  traditional  investments  such  as 
bank  deposits;  the  strength  of  world  equity  markets;  and  the  demographic  trend  of  “baby 
boomers” entering the wealth-accumulation phase of their lives. 
As well as investing in what might be considered to be fairly conventional financial products, 
it  is  also  notable  that  in  Australia  there  has  been  significant  direct  participation  by  retail 
investors in the markets for sophisticated financial products. For example, retail and high net 
worth investors account for about two-thirds of the assets of Australian-based hedge funds, 
compared with less than half globally. The available evidence for Australia also suggests a 
larger retail presence in the market for collateralised debt obligations than is the case in other 
markets. Over the past five years, retail investors are estimated to have purchased around 
15 per cent of the CDOs issued in Australia. 
One of the reasons for this higher participation by Australian retail investors in these markets 
is  that  the  regulatory  regime  in  Australia  does  not  restrict  retail  access  to  any  financial 
products as long as the provider meets certain disclosure requirements. 
This  approach  has  been  beneficial  in  terms  of  providing  investors  with  a  greater  range  of 
wealth-generating opportunities, but it does raise some important challenges. 
I  want  to  spend  the  rest  of  my  time  today  outlining  these  and  other  challenges  facing  the 
funds management industry. 
Challenges 
One of the most important challenges raised by a disclosure-based regime is that it places a 
significant  premium  on  financial  literacy.  This  is  because  it  relies  heavily  on  the  ability  of 
investors  to  understand  the  information  that  is  presented  to  them  and  make  appropriate 
decisions  based  on  that  information.  Some  retail  investors  may  not  be  in  this  position.  A 
particularly telling statistic comes from a recent survey conducted by the Financial Literacy 
Foundation, in which only about a third of adult respondents indicated that they considered 
both risk and return when choosing an investment. The fact that some retail investors had 
apparently devoted the bulk of their savings to buying unsecured, high-yielding debt issued 
by  some  recently  collapsed  property  companies  also  suggests  that  some  people  have 
difficulty understanding the financial risks of investment products. 
The  Australian  Government,  through  the  Financial  Literacy  Foundation,  has  a  number  of 
initiatives  underway  to  improve  financial  education  and  literacy  standards.  ASIC  has  also 
been  active  in  educating  retail  investors  about  financial  products,  and  a  range  of  private-
sector initiatives are underway to help improve financial literacy standards. 
One way that the financial services industry can help retail investors make better investment 
decisions  is  by  providing  clear  and  concise  information  about  their  financial  products.  For 
some  time  now  there  have  been  concerns  about  the  length  and  complexity  of  product 
disclosure statements and prospectuses. 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2007
ASIC has been trying to address some of these concerns through various initiatives. It has 
also  recently  introduced  regulatory  guidance  to  improve  the  quality  of  disclosure  to  retail 
investors in unlisted debentures. 
A related challenge facing the industry is financial advice, and how this is paid for. 
There appears to be a general reluctance on the part of retail investors to pay for financial 
advice  on  a  fee-for-service  basis.  Instead,  there  has  been  a  preference  for  commission-
based advice, despite the conflicts of interest that can arise in this situation. This reluctance 
to pay for advice upfront appears to be a form of money illusion, whereby investors may feel 
that  they  are  somehow  paying  less  for  financial  advice  if  the  cost  is  buried  in  reduced 
earnings in the future.  
The  regulatory  environment  in  Australia  has  tried  to  deal  with  potential  conflicts  in 
commission–based  advice  by  making  it  a  requirement  for  advisors  to  provide  their  clients 
with a written statement of advice that sets out, among other things, the basis on which the 
advice is given, any potential conflicts of interest, and the dollar value of commissions they 
stand to receive. 
But the question remains as to whether full disclosure is enough to deal with the potential 
conflicts of interest associated with commission-based fees, or whether there is merit in the 
industry moving further in the direction of offering advice on a fee-for-service basis. 
The cost of providing investment services to retail investors is also a challenge that needs to 
be addressed. Recent research published by APRA compared the average net returns – that 
is, returns after all fees, expenses and taxes – for different types of superannuation funds. 
APRA found that over the decade to 2006, $1,000 invested in the average retail fund would 
have risen to $1,650 after fees, expenses and taxes, compared with $1,888 for an industry 
fund and about $2,100 for corporate and public sector funds. Of course, these figures are 
averages and there would have been significant variation in the returns of individual funds. 
While  it  is  difficult  to  isolate  the  exact  cause  of  the  underperformance  of  retail  funds,  an 
important  contributing  factor  would  have  been  that  fees  and  expenses  on  retail  funds  are 
typically higher than for industry and corporate funds. That said, I think it is encouraging that 
competition has been putting downward pressure on expense ratios across most categories 
of superannuation funds. 
Another issue which has received attention is what level of superannuation contributions is 
necessary to ensure an adequate retirement income. 
Determining  the  adequacy  of  contribution  rates  is  difficult  because  the  modelling  relies  on 
various  assumptions  about  future  investment  returns,  income  growth,  length  of  retirement 
etc. There is also a need to specify what is meant by “adequate”. 
Most  of  the  recent  research,  however,  suggests  that,  to  ensure  an  adequate  replacement 
income in retirement, the current level of superannuation guarantee contributions will need to 
be  supplemented  by  the  old-age  pension  for  lower-income  households,  or  by  voluntary 
contributions for those households not eligible for the pension.  
The issues I have raised today are, I am sure, well known to those of you in the industry. 
There are many considerations to be taken into account in resolving them, and there will no 
doubt need to be a large input from the industry in doing so. 
Conclusion 
For  the  moment,  however,  let  me  conclude  by  recording  that  the  transformation  of  the 
superannuation industry over the past couple of decades has been one of the great success 
stories in the Australian financial sector. While further work needs to be done, conferences 
such as this play an important role in raising and resolving issues. 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 3
I hope that your discussions over the next couple of days prove to be both thought–provoking 
and rewarding.  
4 
 BIS Review 148/2007
