Njuguna Ndung’u: Recent economic developments and policy direction 
for the banking sector 
Keynote address of Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
Kenya Institute of Bankers Annual Dinner, Nairobi, 23 November 2007. 
 Chairman, Kenya Institute of Bankers 
Distinguished Members of the Council 
Management and Members of the Kenya Institute of Bankers 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  evening  at  this  auspicious  occasion  which 
celebrates an important annual event for the Kenyan Banking Fraternity. I therefore thank the 
officials of Kenya Institute of Bankers for inviting me to this annual dinner and for according 
me the privilege of addressing this distinguished audience. 
This Annual event gives us a unique opportunity to meet, share experiences, reflect on the 
achievements we have made in the banking sector during the year, the missed opportunities 
and the challenges we face going forward. 
At the outset, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to recognize the important role that KIB 
has  played  in  capacity  building  within  Kenya’s  banking  and  financial  sector.  During  my 
opening remarks at the 7th East African Banking School hosted by KIB earlier in the year, I 
did mention that capacity constraints would halt the sector’s vibrancy. I am happy to learn 
that  a  good  number  of  staff  in  most  commercial  banks  have  gone  through  the  Institute’s 
training and have contributed to the improvement of banking and professional standards in 
the industry. 
The  country  achieved  several  milestones  in  2007.  Economic  performance  during  the  year 
was  tremendous  with  real  GDP  growing  by  7.1  percent  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year 
compared  with  5.8  percent  in  2006.  Growth  begets  growth  –  that  is  one  of  my 
conclusions  in  some  of  my  research  works.  This  growth  was  supported  by  improved 
performance in the manufacturing, tourism, transport and communications, and of course the 
financial  services  sectors.  The  good  performance  is  expected  to  continue  supported  by 
continued  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  increased  investments  in  infrastructure 
facilities  in  the  2007/2008  financial  year,  and  consolidation  of  financial  sector  to  mobilize 
development finance, regional economic integration and increased investments in both public 
and private sector. As we continue to solve the underlying constraints. 
One of the major successes in the banking sector has been the expansion of branch network 
of  the  key  banking  institutions  in  Kenya.  However,  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  the 
opportunities to increase access to financial services by a majority of the population, and our 
target  is  to  be  a  regional  hub  for  banking  and  financial  services  and  the  economy  to  be 
completely monetized. 
During  the  year,  the  National  Economic  and  Social  Council  developed  a  vision  for  Kenya. 
Vision 2030 seeks to transform Kenya into a globally competitive middle-income country with 
a high quality of life by the year 2030. To realize this vision, the Kenyan economy requires a 
sustained annual growth of 10% during this period. This will require maximum contribution of 
each and every key sector of the economy, including the banking and financial sector. The 
banking and financial sector, for instance, is expected to increase the savings rates to 30% 
of GDP which will be achieved by increasing bank deposits and increasing the pool of funds 
through  reforms  of  the  pension  industry  and  the  capital  markets.  This  may  require 
transformation  of  banking  institutions  into  larger,  stronger  banks  with  attractive  savings 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 1
products and extension of credit referencing services. The insurance services sector will also 
require reforms to make the players stronger and able to support a larger economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: One of my objectives when I joined the Central Bank as Governor 
this year, was to oversee an effective monetary policy that is consistent with the development 
agenda of the country and the development of an appropriate financial sector in which you 
play a key role. 
During the year, the Central Bank pursued a monetary policy designed to support economic 
growth  projections  of  the  economy,  contain  underlying  inflation  at  below  5%,  and  refine 
monetary  policy  operating  procedures  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  monetary  policy 
instruments.  These  developments  have  worked,  but  there  are  challenges  on  the  inflation 
front brought about by the external shocks arising from increasing pass through effect of oil 
prices and sometimes domestic food prices. 
The  monetary  policy  also  facilitated  adequate  credit  expansion  to  the  private  sector  which 
grew by 15% on average over the last 3 years. 
Short  term  interest  rates  remained  stable  with  a  gradual  upward  trend  in  2007,  and  are 
expected  to  continue  to  remain  stable  in  the  medium  term  on  account  of  continued 
Government  commitment  to  fiscal  discipline,  inflation  expectations  anchored  on  continued 
low  and  stable  underlying  inflation  and  an  independent  monetary  policy  guaranteed  by  a 
flexible exchange rate. 
Interest rate spreads also narrowed from 9.4% in January 2007 to 8.5% by September 2007. 
I wish to commend the banks for their effort in reducing the lending rates though we believe 
we can still do more to bring the spread to much lower levels. Perhaps we will have time to 
share our survey and analytical results on factors sustaining large spreads in Kenya. 
A challenge for us all – deposits have remained low and most of the time negative in real 
terms. This is not a good way to attract savings. 
Let me touch on Banking Sector Development: The banking sector recorded strong growth in 
the  year  to  September  2007  against  a  backdrop  of  buoyant  economic  conditions.  The 
highlights of the sector’s performance in the year to September 2007 were as follows: 
• 
The sector’s total assets expanded by 20 percent while deposit liabilities increased 
by 18 percent during the period. The increase in the deposit base was attributed to 
aggressive  marketing  campaigns  for  new  deposits  by  some  institutions  and  rapid 
expansion of branch network of banking institutions. The banking sector remained 
well  capitalised  with  capital  and  reserves  increasing  by  22  per  cent  as  a  result  of 
fresh capital injection and retention of profits. 
As at September 2007 gross Non-Performing Loans declined to 12.7% of total loans 
compared with 22.7% in 2006. The sharp reduction in the level of non-performing 
loans was attributed mainly to write-offs against provisions held and recoveries by 
some of the banks during the period under review. Additionally, the resolution of non 
performing  assets  by  the  Government  in  one  of  the  leading  banking  institutions 
contributed greatly to this reduction in NPLs. 
Pre-tax profit for the nine months period ending September 2007 increased by 36.4 
per cent to stand at Ksh 26.6 billion compared with Ksh 19.5 billion in September 
2006. The improved profitability was attributed to an increase in interest income on 
loans and advances, government securities and non-funded income, all attributable 
to the vibrancy in the sector. 
  Mr.  Chairman,  allow  me  to  commend  your  members  for  the  excellent  performance  in  the 
banking  sector.  On  our  part,  we  remain  committed  to  fostering  a  stable  market  based 
financial system as mandated by law. We will continue to develop and enforce a legal and 
regulatory framework that fosters a safe, efficient and accessible financial system. You will 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2007
agree  with  me  that  a  sound  financial  system  is  indeed  a  catalyst  for  the  high  economic 
growth that the country needs to move to new development frontiers. 
Let  me  also  salute  the  commercial  banks  for  the  various  innovative  niche  products 
introduced  during  the  year.  It  is  only  through  such  new  products  that  we  can  counter  the 
“negative innovation” that saw the proliferation of pyramid schemes in 2007. At the CBK, we 
are  consulting  with  other  market  players  including  the  banking  sector  with  a  view  to 
conducting  sensitization  and  awareness  programmes  to  enlighten  Kenyans  about  these 
unscrupulous schemes. One conclusion we have arrived at in CBK is that once barriers 
to  entry  and  transaction  costs  of  maintaining  bank  accounts  are  solved,  the 
downstream market will be vibrant and lucrative thereby improving financial access. 
The Banking landscape has become very dynamic. During the year Central Bank licensed 
two  fully  fledged  Sharia  compliant  Banks,  First  Community  Bank  and  Gulf  African  Bank. 
These  banks  are  expected  to  introduce  novel  Sharia  compliant  products  adding  to  the 
existing  variety  in  the  sector.  We  believe  this  is  in  tandem  with  national  aspirations  of 
developing  Kenya  into  a  premier  financial  services  hub  in  the  region  with  a  variety  of 
competitive products on offer. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I will spend the next few minutes to highlight the various initiatives 
undertaken in the course of 2007 in order to enhance the legal and regulatory framework for 
the sector. 
The comprehensive review of the Banking Act that commenced in 2006 was completed in 
May this year, and the revised Draft submitted to the Minister of Finance in June. The draft is 
currently  being  reviewed  by  the  Attorney  General  and  will  be  put  to  another  round  of 
stakeholder  consultations  before  publication  and  tabling  in  Parliament.  The  overarching 
objective  of  the  review  was  to  align  the  Act  to  best  practice  as  stipulated  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and to take into account emerging issues in the sector. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  the  lack  of  credit  information  sharing  has  in  the  past  been  a 
contributory  factor  to  the  high  levels  of  non  performing  loans  in  the  sector.  Furthermore, 
banks  have  tended  to  rely  more  on  physical  rather  than  on  “personal”  collateral  in  their 
lending decisions. Following the enactment of the Finance Act, 2006 that made the sharing 
of information on non-performing loans compulsory, the Central Bank in partnership with the 
sector  formulated  regulations  on  Credit  Reference  Bureaus.  The  regulations  which  are 
currently under review by the Attorney General will provide the framework for the licensing 
and  oversight  of  Credit  Reference  Bureaus  by  the  Central  Bank.  Credit  Information 
Sharing  will  reduce  the  incidence  of  non-performing  loans  and  enhance  access  to 
credit  by  individuals  in  the  informal  sector  and  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  who 
can  rely  on  “personal”  collateral,  or  other  innovative  forms  of  collateral  that  the 
market may develop. 
A  sound  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  money  laundering  prevention  and  control  is 
critical  to  safeguarding  the  integrity  of  the  Kenyan  financial  system.  In  this  regard,  the 
Proceeds of Crime and Money Laundering Prevention Bill was tabled in Parliament in May 
2007.  The  Bill  has  since  lapsed,  but  we  anticipate  it  will  be  retabled  in  Parliament  in  the 
coming  year.  On  our  part,  we  will  continue  enforcing  without  exception,  the  Guideline  on 
Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Money  Laundering  (Prevention)  to  deter  the  use  of  the  Kenyan 
banking system for money laundering purposes. 
A  survey  released  early  this  year  indicated  that  38%  of  Kenyans  lack  access  to  financial 
services. This population has been kept away from banks due to fear of costs and barriers to 
entry. Once the income side is solved through economic growth and an enabling legal and 
regulatory framework for Microfinance Institutions is created, it is our strong belief that this 
will go a long way in pushing forward the “Kenyan access to financial services frontier”. 
As  you  will  recall,  the  Microfinance  Act  was  assented  to  in  December  2006  and  the 
regulations  to  operationalise  the  Act  are  currently  under  review  by  the  Attorney  General. 
Once gazetted, the regulations will provide the Central Bank with a platform to license and 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 3
oversee  Microfinance  Institutions.  This  means  more  players  and  more  flexibility  and 
competitiveness within the financial sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: It would be remiss of me not to address the current “buzz word” in 
supervisory circles, “Basel II”. As you are aware, the Basel Committee issued the Basel II 
Capital  Framework  in  June  2004.  Basel  II  was  ready  for  implementation  among  the 
Committee’s 13 member countries from the end of 2006. It is, however, widely acknowledged 
that Basel II will only be implemented in emerging economies such as Kenya at a later date 
as  they  put  the  requisite  supervisory  infrastructure  in  place.  This  position  was  indeed 
adopted by the Central Banks of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania in 2005. 
Since then, we have focused on putting in place the requisite supervisory infrastructure as I 
have alluded to in my remarks this evening. I am delighted that we have made substantial 
progress  towards  this  end.  Accordingly,  we  commenced  in  September,  a  consultative 
process  with  the  Banking  Sector  that  will  lead  to  the  formulation  of  a  policy  position  on 
implementation of Basel II in Kenya in the course of 2008. 
The  financial  sector  will  be  facilitated  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  achieving  these  objectives 
through reforms aimed at achieving: 
• 
STABILITY  in  the  sector  to  ensure  that  all  banks  and  financial  institutions  taking 
deposits safely handle the public’s savings and ensure that the chances of financial 
crises are minimized. 
Greater EFFICIENCY in the delivery of financial services to ensure that the costs of 
services become increasingly affordable and that the range and quality of services 
better caters to the needs of both savers and investing businesses. 
Improved ACCESS to financial services and products for a much larger population 
of Kenyans. 
  Let me reiterate that a consultative approach will be followed to ensure that the best interests 
of  the  banking  sector  and  national  development  aspirations  are  taken  into  account  in 
formulating the policy position. 
The Payments System has undergone active modernization that began in 1998 to develop a 
world-class payment system to ensure: increased efficiency and effectiveness of the clearing 
and  settlement;  provision  of  a  variety  of  instruments  and  mechanisms  for  an  integrated, 
modern and technologically sound payment system for transfer of funds between transacting 
parties; reduction and containment of systemic and other payment related risks; reduction of 
settlement  cycles;  enhanced  access  to  financial  services  and  promotion  of  Kenya  as  a 
competitive regional and international financial center. 
Given the importance of payment and settlement systems in the economy, the Central Bank, 
with the support of Kenya Bankers Association, implemented a Real Time Gross Settlement 
system two years ago going by the acronym KEPSS (Kenya Electronic Payment Settlement 
System).  The  Central  Bank  is  happy  with  the  way  that  the  Banking  Sector  adapted  to  its 
usage  especially  for  inter-bank  payments.  I  commend  the  banking  fraternity  for  this  co-
operation. The total value of transactions processed through the system increased by 71.4% 
from  Kshs  496.3  billion  in  August  2005  to  the  current  level  of  Kshs  850.7  billion.  A 
commercial  bank  survey  conducted  in  July  2007  indicated  that  75.1  percent  of  the  users 
were corporate while 24.9 percent were individuals. 
Central Bank is, however, convinced that this system’s usage for third party payments can 
still  be  enhanced  and  accordingly,  the  Bank  is  seeking  your  support  in  achieving  this 
objective  by  way  of  pricing  the  service  competitively  among  other  contributions.  The  Bank 
has also initiated action in a number of areas namely: linking the Central Government and 
Kenya Revenue Authority to KEPSS and capping the value of payments processed through 
the clearing house in order to reduce systemic risk associated with the large value payments 
while at the same time increasing the number of transactions processed on a RTGS basis. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2007
Turning to the retail payment sector, the Central Bank has observed increased use of plastic 
money  or  payment  cards  and  the  use  of  mobile  phones  to  transfer  money  in  Kenya.  In  a 
recent survey carried out by the Central Bank, ATMs in Kenya grew from 648 in June 2006 
to 844 in June 2007. The mobile phone as a means of transferring money was introduced 
early in the year and is recording rapid increase in usage especially for rural to urban funds 
transfers. This phenomenal growth is evidence of the modernization and innovations taking 
place in payments in the country. In order to facilitate this growth further, banking institutions 
are encouraged to expand access to the rural areas without ignoring the fact that enhanced 
reliability of these new technologies is equally important. 
The  above  developments  notwithstanding,  Central  Bank  recognizes  the  fact  that  a  sound 
legal  framework  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  proper  functioning  of  payment  and  settlement 
systems  and  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole.  To  this  end,  a  proposed  National  Payment 
Systems  Bill,  2007  has  been  forwarded  to  the  Attorney  General’s  office  where  it  is 
undergoing  final  drafting  to  reinforce  the  existing  general  legal  infrastructure  that  affects 
payment systems. The law will provide a legislative framework for governing the operations 
of  national  payment  systems  and  payment  instruments  in  Kenya  when  enacted.  It  is 
important that legislation takes place when the infrastructure is in place and the players are 
prepared. It is our hope that this will be realized by end of the first quarter of next year. 
In closing, let me underline the Central Bank’s commitment to partnership with the banking 
industry  in  facilitating  the  development  of  a  sound  banking  system  with  highly  trained 
professionals  that  would  improve  the  standards  and  mobilize  the  substantial  resources 
required for our country’s development. 
Finally,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  head  towards  the  festive  season,  I  take  this 
opportunity to wish each and every one of you a Merry Christmas, a peaceful electioneering 
period and a prosperous New Year. Thank you. 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 5
