Donald L Kohn: John Taylor rules 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Conference on John Taylor's Contributions to Monetary Theory and 
Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas, 12 October 2007.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 The role of simple rules in monetary policymaking 
It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honor  to  speak  at  this  conference  honoring  John  Taylor  and  his 
contributions  to  monetary  theory  and  policy.  As  you  have  already  heard  from  Chairman 
Bernanke and the other speakers today, John has made a number of seminal contributions 
to the field of macroeconomics. What has distinguished John's work, in my view, is that he 
takes policymaking in the real world seriously.1
Taking  policymaking  seriously  involves  understanding  the  constraints  imposed  on  our 
decisions by partial information and incomplete knowledge of economic relationships. It also 
implies the use of empirically valid models that acknowledge the efforts of households and 
businesses to anticipate the future and maximize their welfare over time. In the late 1980s 
and  early  1990s,  macroeconomics  was  focused  mainly  on  real  business  cycles  and 
endogenous  growth  theory.  During  this  period,  John  was  one  of  a  very  small  number  of 
academic economists who continued to pursue research aimed at informing the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  John's  Carnegie  Rochester  conference  paper  published  in  1993  is  an 
excellent example of this research.  
Importantly, John's legacy to the Federal Reserve has not been confined to enhancing our 
understanding  of  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  he  has  turned  out  legions  of  students  who 
have followed in his footsteps in their interest in policy. Many of them have spent time in the 
Federal Reserve, producing a rich array of contributions to policymaking and research.  
John  and  I  have  spent  countless  hours  discussing  how  the  Federal  Reserve  arrives  at 
decisions about monetary policy and how it should arrive at decisions. Those conversations 
began in earnest in the late 1980s, when John was on the Council of Economic Advisers, 
and  they  have  continued  to  the  present  day.  They  have  occurred  not  only  in  offices  and 
classrooms in Washington and Stanford and at numerous conferences around the globe, but 
also around dinner tables in Washington and Palo Alto and on hiking trails from Vermont to 
Wyoming. Those conversations made me a better policy adviser and then policymaker, and 
they have had the added and very special bonus of allowing Gail and me to count John and 
Allyn among our friends. I can't think of a better way to honor John's contributions than to 
continue that discussion around the dinner tables of Dallas by reflecting on the role of simple 
rules in informing policymaking.  
Three benefits of simple rules in monetary policymaking 
In  his  Carnegie  Rochester  conference  paper,  John  considered  a  simple  policy  rule  under 
which the nominal federal funds rate is adjusted in response to both the gap between real 
                                                      
1  
I am sure my colleagues join me in honoring John. However, my thoughts on policy rules are my own and not 
necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Jinill Kim and Andrew Levin, of 
the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 1
and  trend  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  and  the  gap  between  the  inflation  rate  and 
policymakers' target. Based on data for the previous few years, John calibrated the long-run 
target for inflation and the two parameters that determine the responsiveness of the federal 
funds rate to the two gaps. The equilibrium real interest rate was based on a longer history of 
actual real interest rates. In the handout, Figure 1A depicts the actual nominal funds rate and 
the Taylor rule prescriptions between 1987 and 1992, as presented in John's paper. Despite 
its simplicity, this policy rule fits the data remarkably well; it described a period of generally 
successful policymaking; and it adhered to the Taylor principle of adjusting the nominal rate 
more than one-for-one with changes in the inflation rate, so it provided a plausible template 
for future success. It is no wonder that John has been such a dedicated salesman and that 
his efforts have been so well received in academia and policy councils. 
 Following John's seminal contribution, many other economists have engaged in research on 
similar policy rules and, together with John, have identified several benefits of such rules in 
conducting monetary policy. I will elaborate on three of them. 
The  first  benefit  of  looking  at  a  simple  rule  like  John's  is  that  it  can  provide  a  useful 
benchmark  for  policymakers.  It  relates  policy  setting  systematically  to  the  state  of  the 
economy  in  a  way  that,  over  time,  will  produce  reasonably  good  outcomes  on  average. 
Importantly,  the  emphasis  is  on  levels  and  gaps,  not  growth  rates,  as  inputs  to  the  policy 
process. This emphasis can be a problem when a level, say of potential GDP, is in question, 
but in many respects it is also a virtue. For the United States, the two gaps relate directly to 
the  legislative  mandate  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to  achieve  stable  prices  and  maximum 
employment.  Moreover,  those  two  gaps  fit  directly  into  most  modern  macroeconomic 
theories, which tell us something about their relationship and how that relationship can be 
affected by the type of shock hitting the economy.  
Model uncertainties make the simplicity of the rule particularly important for the policymaker 
because research suggests that the prescriptions from simple rules can be more robust than 
optimal-control  policies.  Optimal-control  policies  can  depend  critically  on 
the  exact 
specification  of  the  model,  and  clearly  there  is  no  consensus  about  which  model  best 
describes the U.S. economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 116/2007
Federal Reserve policymakers are shown several versions of Taylor rules in the material we 
receive before each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I always look 
at  those  charts  and  tables  and  ask  myself  whether  I  am  comfortable  with  any  significant 
deviation of my policy prescription from those of the rules.  
A  second  benefit  of  simple  rules  is  that  they  help  financial  market  participants  form  a 
baseline for expectations regarding the future course of monetary policy. Even if the actual 
policy process is far more sophisticated than any simple rule could completely describe, the 
rule  often  provides  a  reasonably  good  approximation  of  what  policymakers  decide  and  a 
framework for thinking about policy actions. Indeed, many financial market participants have 
used the Taylor rule to understand U.S. monetary policy over the past fifteen years. Investors 
and other market participants are going to form expectations about policy and act on those 
expectations. The more accurate and informed those expectations are, the more likely are 
their actions to reinforce the intended effects of policy.  
A third benefit is that simple rules can be helpful in the central bank's communication with the 
general  public.  Such  an  understanding  is  important  for  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy. Giving the public some sense of how the central bank sees the output and 
inflation gaps and how they are expected to evolve will help it understand the central bank's 
objectives and how policymakers are likely to respond to surprises in incoming data.  
Four limitations of simple rules 
Simple rules have limitations, of course, as benchmarks for monetary policy. To quote from 
John's  Carnegie  Rochester  paper,  "a  policy  rule  can  be  implemented  and  operated  more 
informally by policymakers who recognize the general instrument responses that underlie the 
policy rule, but who also recognize that operating the rule requires judgment and cannot be 
done by computer" (p. 198). In that context, four limitations of simple rules are important.  
The first limitation is that the use of a Taylor rule requires that a single measure of inflation 
be  used  to  obtain  the  rule  prescriptions.  The  price  index  used  by  John  in  the  Carnegie 
Rochester  paper  was  the  GDP  price  deflator.  Other  researchers  have  used  the  inflation 
measure based on the consumer price index (CPI). Over the past fifteen years, the Federal 
Reserve has emphasized the inflation rate as measured by changes in the price index for 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE). Many researchers have also explored the use of 
core  price  indexes,  which  exclude  the  volatile  food  and  energy  components,  as  better 
predictors  of  future  inflation  or  as  more  robust  indicators  of  the  sticky  prices  that  some 
theories say should be the targets of policy.  To be sure, over long periods, most of these 
measures  behave  very  similarly.  But  policy  is  made  in  the  here  and  now,  and  the  various 
indexes can diverge significantly for long stretches, potentially providing different signals for 
the appropriate course of monetary policy.  
Second, the implementation of the Taylor rule and other related rules requires determining 
the level of the equilibrium real interest rate and the level of potential output; neither of them 
are  observable  variables,  and  both  must  be  inferred  from  other  information.  John  used 
2 percent as a rough guess as to the real federal funds rate that would be consistent with the 
economy  producing  at  its  potential.  But  the  equilibrium  level  of  the  real  federal  funds  rate 
probably varies over time because it depends on factors such as the growth rate of potential 
output,  fiscal  policy,  and  the  willingness  of  savers  to  supply  credit  to  households  and 
businesses.  Inaccurate  estimates  of  this  rate  will  mislead  policymakers  about  the  policy 
stance required to achieve full employment. In a similar vein, real-time estimates of potential 
output can be derived in a number of ways and – as shown by Orphanides (2003) and others 
– they are subject to large and persistent errors. If policymakers inadvertently rely on flawed 
estimates, they will encounter persistent problems in achieving their inflation objective.  
The third limitation of using simple rules for monetary policymaking stems from the fact that, 
by their nature, simple rules involve only a small number of variables. However, the state of a 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 3
complex economy like that of the United States cannot be fully captured by any small set of 
summary statistics. Moreover, policy is best made looking forward, that is, on the basis of 
projections of how inflation and economic activity may evolve. Lagged or current values of 
the small set of variables used in a given simple rule may not provide a sufficient guide to 
future economic developments, especially in periods of rapid or unusual change. For these 
reasons, central banks monitor a wide range of indicators in conducting monetary policy. In 
his Carnegie Rochester paper, John mentioned the stock market crash of October 1987 as 
an example of how other variables can and should influence the course of monetary policy in 
some situations.  
The  final  limitation  I  want  to  highlight  is  that  simple  policy  rules  may  not  capture  risk-
management  considerations.  In  some  circumstances,  the  risks  to  the  outlook  or  the 
perceived costs of missing an objective on a particular side may be sufficiently skewed that 
policymakers will choose to respond by adjusting policy in a way that would not be justified 
solely by the current state of the economy or the modal outlook for output and inflation gaps.   
Policy rules around 2003 
Some of the ambiguities and potential pitfalls in the use of simple policy rules are highlighted 
by considering their prescriptions for a period earlier in this decade. Turning to Figure 1B, the 
solid  line  indicates  the  actual  federal  funds  rate  between  the  first  quarter  of  1993  and  the 
second quarter of 2007, and the dashed line shows the prescriptions of the Taylor rule using 
the same methodology that John used in his Jackson Hole remarks this year.2 For the earlier 
part of the sample, the prescription from this simple rule tracks the actual funds rate relatively 
well. As John pointed out, a notable deviation happened beginning in 2002, and I would like 
to discuss that period to illustrate the limitations I noted earlier. 
                                                      
2   Following John, the rule specification and the data used for the prescriptions closely follow the implementation 
of the Taylor rule in Bill Poole's speech in August 2006 (Poole, 2007). The inflation measure used for this rule 
is the four-quarter average headline CPI inflation rate,  with the benchmark value set to 2 percent. Through 
2001, the gap between real GDP and its potential is the value measured in real time by the staff of the Board 
of Governors. Because subsequent staff estimates of the output gap are not yet publicly available, the rule 
prescriptions  for  the  post-2001  period  are  computed  with  the  real-time  output  gap  as  constructed  by  the 
Congressional Budget Office. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2007
 Inflation measure 
The  first  limitation  is  related  to  the  measure  used  for  the  inflation  variable  included  in  the 
rules.  The  rule  prescriptions  depicted  by  the  dashed  line  in  Figure  1B  are  based  on  the 
headline  CPI.  But  as  you  know,  the  FOMC  often  looks  at  core  inflation,  stripping  out  the 
effects of energy and food prices, as a better indicator of future price behavior. The dotted 
line  represents  the  rule  prescriptions  based  on  the  chain-weighted  core  CPI,  which  the 
Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  has  produced  since  2000.  Using  this  measure  lowers  the 
prescribed  funds  rate  by  about  2  percentage  points  during  2003,  bringing  the  rule 
prescriptions  much  closer  to  the  actual  path  of  policy.  The  reason  for  the  improvement  is 
evident from Figure 2A, on the other side of the handout: Even though the headline and core 
CPI  measures  were  broadly  similar  in  the  mid-  to  late  1990s,  these  measures  diverged 
substantially between 2003 and 2005.  
BIS Review 116/2007 
  5
Potential output 
The second limitation relates to the challenge of judging the level of potential output in real 
time. To illustrate this point, Figure 2B plots three measures of the output gap. The solid line 
is  the  real-time  estimate  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  that  was  used  in  the 
Taylor  rule  prescriptions  in  Figure  1B,  while  the  dashed  line  depicts  the  CBO's  ex  post 
estimate of the output gap as of the third quarter of 2007. Back in 2003, the CBO estimated 
that output at that time was below potential by only 1 percent. With the benefit of four more 
years of data, the CBO currently estimates that the output gap for the first half of 2003 was 
considerably wider – about 3 percent. In addition, the dotted line represents an alternative 
measure of resource utilization derived from the unemployment rate and an estimate of the 
natural rate of unemployment (NAIRU) taken from the Board staff's FRB/US model. In fact, 
the  unemployment  rate  was  rising  through  the  middle  of  2003,  so  the  FOMC  had  every 
reason to believe that the output gap was widening at that time. Using this unemployment-
based  measure  rather  than  the  real-time  CBO  measure  would  reduce  the  prescriptions  of 
simple policy rules by roughly 1/2 percentage point in early 2003.  
 Other variables 
The third limitation in my list was that the small set of economic measures included in simple 
rules may not fully reflect the state of the economy. Around 2003, financial market conditions 
may not have been adequately summarized by the assumed 2 percent equilibrium federal 
funds  rate.  Accounting  scandals  caused  economic  agents  to  lose  confidence  in  published 
financial  statements  and  in  bond  ratings.  The  result  was  higher  uncertainty  about  the 
financial health of firms, and credit spreads widened substantially. Figure 2C shows that risk 
spreads on corporate bonds were elevated in this period. Other things equal, such spreads 
would reduce the federal funds rate needed to achieve full employment, perhaps explaining a 
portion of the gap between the actual federal funds rate and the outcome from the policy rule 
during this period. 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2007
 Risk management 
The  last  item  on  my  list  of  limitations  was  that  simple  rules  do  not  take  account  of  risk-
management considerations. As shown in Figure 2A, the core CPI inflation rate for 2003 was 
falling toward 1 percent. The real-time reading of the core PCE inflation rate (not shown) was 
on average even lower than the comparable CPI figure. Given these rates, the possibility of 
deflation could not be ruled out. We had carefully analyzed the Japanese experience of the 
early 1990s; our conclusion was that aggressively moving against the risk of deflation would 
pay  dividends  by  reducing  the  odds  on  needing  to  deal  with  the  zero  bound  on  nominal 
interest  rates  should  the  economy  be  hit  with  another  negative  shock.  This  factor  is  not 
captured by simple policy rules. 
A final note 
I have offered this analysis in the spirit of so many of the discussions I have had with John. 
His framework has been enormously important to policymaking in the Federal Reserve, and 
it  has  yielded  many  benefits.  Nevertheless,  it's  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  some 
significant practical limitations also are associated with the application of such rules in real 
time. In other words, it's not so simple to use simple rules!  
References 
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation," Journal of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. 
Poole, William (2007). "Understanding the Fed," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, 
vol. 89 (January/February), pp. 3-14. 
Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, pp. 195-214. 
_________ (2007). "Housing and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Housing, Housing 
Finance, and Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 7
