Philipp Hildebrand: Global financial system developments and the Swiss 
banking sector 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2007. 
 Six months ago, when our Financial Stability Report was published, I stated that "the global 
financial  system  and  the  Swiss  banking  sector  (…)  are  moving  forward  at  a  pretty  fast 
speed". In view of the credit market turmoil we have experienced since then, I would like to 
give  you  a  brief  updated  assessment  of  the  situation.  I  will  then  talk  about  some  initial 
lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  latest  developments.  In  particular,  I  will  present  some 
proposals as to how similar situations could be prevented or at least mitigated in future. 
Deterioration of the situation in the banking sector as a result of the credit market 
crisis 
Let me first give you my assessment of the current situation. On the whole, the position of 
the most important international banks in Switzerland is not as good as it was last June. The 
deterioration was mainly triggered by the crisis on the US sub-prime mortgage market. The 
slowdown  in  the  US  real  estate  market  as  well  as  surging  interest  rates  in  sub-prime 
mortgages  led  to  a  rise  in  loan  defaults.  Consequently,  from  July  the  prices  of  mortgage-
backed  securities  (MBS)  collapsed,  after  having  remained  practically  constant  for  a  long 
time. Even top-rated securities were affected by this slump. In the last few days, these prices 
have recovered a little, but volatility remains unusually high (cf. graph 1). 
Graph 1: prices of securities backed by sub-prime mortgages with AAA ratings1
 
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
10.10.06
29.11.06
18.01.07
09.03.07
28.04.07
17.06.07
06.08.07
25.09.07
14.11.07
                                                   
1 US Subprime Residential Mortgage Backed Securities price index (ABX.HE, subprime RMBS), 2-2006 vintage 
with AAA rating. Source: Markit. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
Crisis caused by high risks, insufficient transparency and inadequate risk 
management 
The sub-prime segment accounts for 12 to 15 percent of the US mortgage market. The US 
mortgage market, in its turn, corresponds to significantly less than 10% in value terms of total 
bonds and shares traded worldwide. How was it possible, then, that problems which were 
initially  limited  to  just  one  segment  could  spread,  triggering  such  widespread  turmoil? 
Unfortunately, a lot of what has been unfolding has confirmed our fears of last June. 
First,  it  has  become  evident  that  the  risks  incurred  by  many  banks  were  too  high  overall. 
There was an ever increasing willingness on the part of banks to accept high risk, which, for 
example,  resulted  in  strong  growth  in  lending  and  expanding  balance  sheets.  Moreover, 
markets  probably  assessed  existing  risks  too  optimistically,  as  was  evident  in  view  of  the 
extraordinarily low risk premiums on bonds, for example. 
Second, banks' increasing uncertainty about their own risks in the structured credit market 
and  the  creditworthiness  of  their  counterparties  turned  out  to  be  a  handicap.  Even  the 
affected banks themselves did not know which contingent liabilities should be recorded on 
their  balance  sheets.  Moreover,  they  had  a  lot  of  difficulty  gauging  the  creditworthiness  of 
their  counterparties  quickly  and  with  sufficient  accuracy.  This  confidence  problem  was 
particularly  apparent  in  the  interbank  market.  The  risk  premium  for  unsecured  interbank 
loans has more than tripled since the onset of the US mortgage crisis. 
And, third, it has become clear that risk management has its limitations. In the area of market 
risk, events have occurred that – according to the models used – should not even have been 
possible, or at least would have been considered extremely unlikely. In the case of liquidity 
risks, it has become clear that assumptions and precautions based on normal times are not 
appropriate in extraordinary market situations.  
Possible risks: contagion effects in related markets and deterioration of environment  
What comes next? Is the worst already past? Unfortunately, there is no clear answer to this 
question. A risk analysis reveals that, ultimately, the future course of the crisis is likely to be 
determined by two major risks.  
First,  it  is  not  impossible  that  problems  which  have  so  far  been  limited  to  a  few  partial 
markets could spill over to additional markets. Such a danger of contagion mainly exists for 
related credit markets that have so far been largely unaffected by the turmoil. These include, 
for example, commercial real estate. Risk premiums on these securities have been pointing 
in a clear upward direction of late (cf. graph 2). The same development can be observed for 
US corporate bonds. However, by historical standards, the delinquency rate on credit card 
loans remains at a very low level, even though it rose in the third quarter (cf. graph 3).  
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
Graph 2: Risk yield premiums on commercial mortgage-backed securities2
Graph 3: Delinquency rate on credit card loans3
 
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
   
The second risk is that the excellent economic environment in which we have operated until 
now might deteriorate. Of particular note here is the global economy, which so far has proved 
to  be  extremely  resistant  to  the  sub-prime  crisis.  The  same  applies  to  the  stock  markets. 
Save for a few corrections, they have held up fairly well since the middle of the year. This 
has  strengthened  banks'  earnings  situation  in  areas  outside  of  the  real  estate  business, 
thereby enabling banks affected by the credit crisis to compensate part of their losses. If the 
                                                 
2   Benchmark index of credit default swaps (CDS) on  US securities covered by commercial mortgage-backed 
securities (commercial MBS), 2-2006 vintage with AAA rating. Source: Markit. 
3   "Delinquency Rate on Credit Card Loans (All Commercial Banks)", USA. Source: Federal Reserve. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
general economic environment were to deteriorate, this previous important source of stability 
would be adversely affected. Nevertheless, we must stress that the banks are still operating 
in a stable real economic environment, and that economic data from Europe, Latin America 
and Asia continue to provide evidence of robust growth momentum.  
What can be learned from the current crisis? 
How can we ensure that the kind of market turmoil we are experiencing at present can be 
avoided in the future, or at least does not occur on this kind of scale? And how can we make 
sure that the banking sector will be in a position to emerge from comparable or even worse 
disruptions unscathed? Once again we need to stress that definitive conclusions cannot yet 
be  drawn  because  the  current  crisis  has  not  yet  been  overcome.  However,  as  initial 
provisional lessons from the crisis, the following points seem particularly important to me. 
First,  banks  need  to  improve  their  transparency  on  a  sustainable  basis.  The  fact  that,  last 
summer, most banks came out with information on their positions in the sub-prime market 
only  hesitantly,  providing  an  incomplete  picture,  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
uncertainty in the interbank market. Consequently, we are reiterating our request that banks 
do  a  better  job  in  making  information  available  on  their  existing  risks.  In  order  to  promote 
market discipline, it must be possible for outsiders to be able to assess a bank's resilience 
under both normal and stress conditions.  
Second,  recent  events  highlight 
limitations  of  risk-weighted  capital  adequacy 
the 
requirements.  The  problems  in  risk  management  have  made  it  clear  that  the  modelling  of 
bank risks will always remain imperfect. In interpreting capital adequacy requirements which 
are based on such risk models, we must therefore proceed with appropriate caution. This is 
particularly  relevant  in  view  of  the  new  capital  adequacy  requirements  that  will  also  be 
introduced in Switzerland next year. The main change under these requirements, known as 
Basel  II,  is  that  capital  adequacy  requirements  will  rely  more  heavily  on  banks'  own  risk 
assessments. Bearing this in mind, the lesson learned last summer may well have come at 
the right time. This now begs the question as to whether – in addition to the complex, risk-
weighted capital adequacy requirements – other criteria, such as volume limits or the simple 
debt-equity  ratio  should  not  also  be  considered.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  higher  this 
ratio, the greater the leverage effect of losses on the soundness of a bank. It is not that I 
intend  to  question  the  concept  of  risk-weighted  requirements  in  any  way.  Rather,  it  is  my 
wish  to  possibly  strengthen  these  requirements  by  introducing  supporting  measures.  For 
example,  compared  with  risk-weighted  requirements,  volume  limits  or  the  debt-equity  ratio 
have the advantage that such key figures are basically very transparent and are not based 
on complex models. Moreover, they calculate the only element that is relevant in a crisis, and 
that is the size of the buffer that a bank needs to absorb losses.  
Third,  it  is  a  striking  fact  that,  to  date,  hedge  funds  have  not  been  a  focus  of  the  current 
crisis.  To  a  considerable  extent,  this  is  attributable  to  a  much  improved  management  of 
counterparty  risk  in  recent  years.  It  is  my  view  that  banks  should  strengthen  their  risk 
management as regards their own refinancing decisions and risk allocation and not just with 
respect  to  external  customers  such  as  hedge  funds.  The  kind  of  internal  subsidising  of 
refinancing  costs  for  individual  business  areas  observed  in  some  cases  creates  false 
incentives. In future, the refinancing costs that a bank charges its internal risk centres should 
constitute an integral element of its risk management approach.  
To sum up, I would like to state that it is certainly true that the current situation in the credit 
markets is very serious. At the same time, I want to stress that, fundamentally, the earnings 
capacity  of  our  international  banks  is  high,  thanks  to  their  diversified  business  model,  and 
this increases their resilience. In this respect, the measures announced by UBS, which are 
aimed  at  strengthening its  capital  base,  are  to be  welcomed.  The  fact that  UBS  has  been 
able to attract a large and internationally recognised Asian investor for this purpose serves 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2007
as an illustration of one of the ways in which globalisation of financial markets has been to 
our advantage.  
BIS Review 150/2007 
 5
