Hermann Remsperger: Remittances 
Welcome speech by Professor Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  G8  outreach  meeting  on  "Remittances",  Berlin, 
29 November 2007. 
 I. 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this dinner on the occasion of the G8 Outreach Meeting 
on  “Remittances”.  I  would  also  like  to  welcome  you  on  behalf  of  Karin  Kortmann, 
Parliamentary Secretary of the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development.  
As far as I know, this is the first time that the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 
Development and the Bundesbank jointly host such a dinner. I could well imagine that there 
will be further opportunities to do so in the future. 
As  a  central  bank,  we  take  a  keen  interest  in  financial  sector  issues,  because  monetary 
stability and financial stability go hand in hand. Therefore, we are closely following the World 
Bank’s  financial  market  activities,  including  its  strategies  for  strengthening  the  financial 
systems in developing and emerging market economies.  
In this context, let me mention a conference we organised jointly with the Federal Ministry of 
Finance in Frankfurt in May this year. This conference provided input for the G8 action plan 
for the development of local bond markets in emerging market and developing countries.  
And  I  am  happy  to  say  that  we  will  continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  this  area.  In  close 
cooperation with the Finance Ministry, the Bundesbank is organizing a workshop at the end 
of January which will primarily deal with the broadening of the database on local currency 
bond markets in the light of financial stability.  
Furthermore,  the  Bundesbank  has  also  built  up  direct  ties  with  the  Ministry  for  Economic 
Cooperation and Development. This gives us a useful insight into the activities of the World 
Bank and the Regional Development Banks. Equally, we are happy to share our technical 
expertise  on  financial  market  issues  with  your  ministry,  Ms  Kortmann,  as  background 
information for the German position at these institutions. 
II. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  here  today  in  the  Museum  for  Communication.  I  think  this 
location was well chosen. Communication and remittances have some things in common – 
both involve a sender and a receiver. If the process of relating the sender to the receiver is 
well designed, it should be beneficial to both.  
In  the  context  of  remittances  and  seen  from  the  perspective  of  an  individual  receiver, 
remittances can be a substantial part of household income. At the same time, remittances 
can have a major positive impact on the development of a receiving country as a whole.  
At the macroeconomic level, remittances have positive effects on the balance of payments. 
For the receiving country, remittances are non-debt creating inflows, comparable to foreign 
direct investment. 
The exhibition in this museum vividly illustrates the origins, the development and the future 
prospects of the information society. Again, there are some parallels with our conference. 
First, we are looking at the origins of remittances within the context of international migration. 
Then,  we  are  also  examining  the  development  of  the  flow  of  remittances  against  the 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 1
backdrop  of  technological  progress  and  changes  in  migration  patterns.  Finally,  we  are 
discussing measures to improve the framework for remittances.  
More specifically, we will look into issues such as  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
lowering the cost of remitting,  
bringing both senders and receivers into the financial system,  
increasing the benefits migrants can gain from the financial system,  
counteracting adverse macroeconomic impacts, and  
improving the collection of remittance data. 
III. 
The Bundesbank has prepared a paper for the conference which provides an overview of the 
German  remittance  market.  This  paper  shows  that  Germany  is  one  of  the  most  important 
sending  countries  for  remittances  and  is  number  four  worldwide.  Last  year,  Germany 
received Euro 5.2 billion from the rest of the world and remitted Euro 9.5 billion. 
Roughly one-third of remittances sent from Germany go to countries of the European Union. 
Turkey  and  Serbia  receive  the  bulk  of  those  remittances  which  go  outside  the  European 
Union.  Almost  all  payments  from  Germany  to  EU  countries  are  executed  by  banks,  which 
highlights  the  fact  that  a  well-functioning  market  infrastructure  and  cost-effective  payment 
systems are in place.  
There is evidence and growing awareness among banks of the commercial potential of the 
remittances  business.  In  Germany,  competition  in  the  financial  sector  ensures  quite 
reasonable prices for remittance services, at least as far as sending costs are concerned.  
In  the  case  of  Turkey,  the  most  important  receiver  country  of  German  migrant  payments, 
remittances  are  processed  mainly  by  Turkish  banks  in  Germany  or  by  financial  service 
providers  with  a  close  link  to  Turkish  banks.  In  some  other  countries,  money  transfer 
providers  outside  the  banking  sector  play  an  important  role.  The  decision  to  involve  a 
remittance provider other than a bank depends on the degree of development of the banking 
system in the recipient country. And, here, the degree of confidence is key. 
IV. 
Efforts  to  channel  remittances  through  banks  and  other  licensed  or  registered  financial 
service  providers  are  to  be  welcomed  for  several  reasons. One  important  point  is  that  the 
balance of payments can more accurately reflect economic transactions of migrants who are 
working abroad and transferring money home.  
Therefore, we are ready to support initiatives to ensure that everybody has the possibility of 
transferring money home in an easily accessible, secure and efficient way.  
For  example,  the  Bundesbank  took  part  in  the  task  force  on  remittances  set  up  by  the 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the World Bank. This task force agreed 
on “General principles for international remittance services”, which focus on payment system 
aspects.  
Furthermore,  we  take  part  in  international  efforts  to  improve  the  data  on  remittances.  My 
colleague Jens Walter pointed out this morning that the remittance market has to cope with 
various  statistical  problems.  Owing  to  the  multitude  of  channels  used  for  remittances,  it 
remains difficult to capture the whole picture of personal cross-border remittances.  
The channels vary with respect to the country concerned and the individual remitter involved. 
In  this  regard,  different  demographic  structures  and  financial  systems  of  the  residing  and 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2007
receiving countries, convenience and cost of the remitting method are important. Owing to 
the  –  usually  –  small  amounts  remitted  per  transaction  and  the  multitude  of  channels,  the 
compilation of exact and complete statistics remains a difficult task. 
I am convinced that our conference will contribute to a better understanding of the economic 
role of remittances. Remittance flows are an important and stable source of funds for many 
countries. They are a substantial part of financial inflows for countries with a large migrant 
labour force.  
Although  not  all  money  transfers  are  captured  in  official  statistics,  formal  remittances 
nevertheless  constitute  the  second  largest  source  of  external  funding  for  developing 
countries,  exceeded  only  by  foreign  direct  investments.  They  are  ahead  of  both  capital 
market flows and official development assistance.  
For  some  developing  countries,  remittances  account  for  an  even  higher  share  than  FDI. 
Current trends suggest that remittance flows will continue to increase in the next few years. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  firmly  believe  that  this  conference  will  help  to  make  remittances 
easier,  cheaper  and  more  secure. Even  if  Germany  offers  the  best  possible conditions  for 
sending remittances, improvements might still be needed in some receiving countries. The 
important  role  remittances  can  play  on  a  micro  and  macroeconomic  level  are  worth  every 
effort undertaken to achieve that end. 
BIS Review 143/2007 
 3
