Su Ning: The evolution of a credit information system for China 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the International 
Seminar  on  the  Application  of  Credit  Information  Products  in  Managing  Credit  Risks  of 
Commercial Banks, Tianjing, 20 June 2007. 
 Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good Morning. 
I am very pleased to attend the International Seminar on the Application of Credit Information 
Products  in  Managing  Credit  Risks  of  Commercial  Banks.  First,  on  behalf  of  the  People’s 
Bank  of  China,  I  would  like  to  express  gratitude  to  our  co-sponsor  of  this  seminar,  the 
International  Finance  Corporation.  Also,  I  would  like  to  extend  warmest  welcome  and 
gratitude  to  experts  from  abroad  countries  and  delegates  presenting  here.  Taking  this 
opportunity, I would like to share with you my observations on several aspects. 
I.  
Credit information services have started to play a role in promoting China’s 
economic and financial development.  
that  provides  credit 
Credit  information  system  serves  as  a  solid  foundation  for  the  performance  of  modern 
financial system and an indispensable infrastructure for credit market development. In recent 
years,  in  order  to  meet  the  needs  of  global  credit  market  development,  122  countries  and 
regions  have  established  credit  reporting  agencies 
information 
registration services.  The  international  community  has  reached  a  consensus  in  developing 
credit  information,  preventing  risks  and  expanding  credit  services  to  promote  economic 
development.  Building  up  a  credit  information  system  according  to  a  country’s  specific 
circumstances and with reference to international best practice constitutes an important part 
in  improving  economic  and  financial  system.  At  present,  while  developing  countries  have 
started to build credit information systems, some developed countries also steadily improve 
their  credit  information  systems,  in  particular  on  how  to  establish  a  centralized  credit 
information  registration  system  to  comprehensively  collect  both  positive  and  negative 
financial  or  non-financial  information  from  enterprises  and  individuals,  and  protecting  the 
rights of borrowers in legal forms in terms of access to such information and etc. 
In  recent  years,  to  fulfill  the  obligation  assigned  by  the  State  Council  of  “regulating  credit 
information  sector  and  promoting  the  construction  of  a  social  credit  system”,  the  People’s 
Bank  of  China  (PBC)  has  set  up  the  national  unified  enterprise  and  individual  credit 
information  databases  with  joint  efforts  of  banking  institutions.  The  individual  credit 
information  database  was  founded  from  scratches,  while  enterprise  credit  information 
database  was  upgraded  based  on  the  bank  credit  registration  and  consultation  system 
established in 1997. The two databases were officially put into operation in January and July 
2006  respectively,  which  greatly  improved  China’s  credit  environment.  Measured  by  the 
benchmark  in  the  Doing  Business  issued  by  the  World  Bank  Group,  after  establishing 
enterprise and individual credit information databases, China’s credit information index rose 
to 4 from 3 in 2005, comparing with the average level of 1.9 for Asia, 5 for OECD countries 
and  6  for  the  United  States,  which  was  the  highest.  Accordingly,  China’s  access  to  credit 
ranked  among  the  top  16  countries  in  the  world,  higher  than  the  overall  improvement  of 
China’s business environment in 2006.  
The enterprise and individual credit information databases were established based not only 
on China’s own circumstances but also on international best practice, which mainly reflected 
in the following aspects: 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 1
the 
two  databases  have  covered  commercial  banks,  non-bank 
First, they were national unified databases. The databases were established with an aim to 
fully reflect the credit status of enterprises and individuals. Therefore, as people move from 
region to region and business of enterprises covers many regions, only when the information 
collected from all regions across the country are included in the databases, can the credit 
status of enterprises and individuals be fully recorded. At present, the nationwide database 
network supports any institution’s access from any province, city or county, and it includes 
the credit data of enterprises and individuals from all over the country. 
Second, the database has a wide coverage of institutions. One of the goals to establish such 
databases  was  to  share  information  among  specialized  credit  extension  institutions. 
Currently, 
financial 
institutions,  rural  credit  cooperatives  and  housing  provident  fund  centers.  Efforts  are  now 
being  made  to  explore  ways  of  including  other  institutions  such  as  collateral  companies, 
leasing  companies,  telecommunication  enterprises  and  public  utility  enterprises  in  the 
databases.  
Third,  the  databases  has  a  wide  coverage  of  data.  Over  the  past  two  or  three  years,  the 
databases have set up unified credit files for more than 560 million people and 11.6 million 
enterprises.  The  information  collected  in  the  database  could  be  divided  into  several 
categories: first, basic information of enterprises and individuals, such as ID, address, etc. 
With the strong support of the Ministry of Public Security and the General Administration of 
Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, the online verification of citizens’ identity and 
institutional  codes  on  the  counter  of  commercial  banks  will  be  launched  in  the  near  term. 
Through  this  way,  commercial  banks  could  verify  individual’s  identity  and  enterprise’ 
institutional code online when opening settlement account or conducting credit business, etc. 
Second, banking credit information, such as information of loan, credit card, collateral, etc. 
Third, debt information of enterprises and individuals when fulfilling their legal obligations in 
economic activities outside the banking system, including information on enforcement of civil 
cases, announced tax arrears, social insurance fees payment, payment of public utility fees 
such as water, electricity, gas and phone calls, and administrative enforcement information 
such  as  environmental  protection  and  quality  inspection.  At  present,  credit  information 
collected from financial institutions have already been fully recorded in the database, and the 
PBC has reached a consensus with relevant departments to include on a pilot basis other 
information  such  as  tax  payment  arrears,  social  security  contribution  payment  and 
administrative enforcement information on environmental protection, quality inspection in the 
databases in the near future. 
Fourth,  the  databases  have  strong  social  functions.  Recording  the  above  mentioned 
information  in  the  enterprise  and  individual  credit  report  is  conducive  to  fully  reflecting  the 
credit  status  of  enterprises  and  individuals  and  helps  commercial  banks  to  prevent  and 
manage  credit  risks.  Meanwhile,  government  departments  could  effectively  spread 
administration  enforcement  information  through  the  national  information  network  of  the 
database,  which  helps  to  strengthen  government  enforcement,  improve  the  administrative 
management and enhance the credit awareness of enterprises and individuals in other fields. 
For instance, since the information of enterprises’ irregularities on environmental protection is 
included  in  the  databases,  some  banks  have  refused  to  issue  loans  to  such  enterprises, 
which  is  of  great  significance  to  prevent  credit  risks  and  improve  China’s  environmental 
protection.  
The  databases  are  widely  used  after  their  establishment,  and  have  provided  nearly  200 
thousand inquiry terminals to the outlets of banking institutions across the country, with daily 
inquiries averaging 260 thousand and the daily inquiries in April 2007 alone exceeding 340 
thousand.  Inquiring  the  credit  report  of  enterprises  and  individuals  has  become  a  formal 
procedure  of  examination  before  financial  institutions  grant  loans.  Some  banks  have  also 
included the database inquiry in the electronic procedure of lending to individuals and small 
enterprises, and quantitative models are employed to realize quantitative management and 
pricing of credit risks of individual and small enterprise customers.  
2 
 BIS Review 121/2007
Nevertheless,  we  should  be  clearly  aware  that  the  products  and  services  provided  by  the 
individual and enterprise databases are not diversified, since at present the databases only 
provide credit report. Therefore, how to better use the databases, develop diversified credit 
information  products,  improve  credit  risk  management  and  credit  business  of  commercial 
banks, and further expand credit market have become important challenges confronting the 
credit information sector and credit market. According to a research on world credit market 
by  International  Finance  Corporation  in  2004,  every  improvement  in  credit  information 
system, such as updating from sharing only negative information to sharing both positive and 
negative  information,  could  trigger  loan  extension  of  financial  institutions  by  6  percent  of 
GDP;  while  every  increase  of  credit  information  index  would  push  up  GDP  growth  by  0.9 
percentage points and productivity growth by 0.7 percentage points. The credit information 
industry  in  the  US  and  European  countries  was  quite  mature.  With  the  development  and 
adoption of value added products such as credit score of individuals as well as small- and 
medium-sized enterprises, commercial banks and other financial institutions have started to 
share  techniques  and  skills  on  credit  risk  management  rather  than  simply  sharing  credit 
information. As China’s enterprise and individual credit information databases have already 
established  good  framework  according  to  international  best  practice,  credit  reporting 
agencies and commercial banks should make concerted efforts to study how to fully use the 
database  to  develop  various  value  added  products  to  strengthen  the  role  of  database  in 
promoting  commercial  bank  risk  management,  credit  market  development  and  economic 
growth.  
II.  
Continued efforts should be made to create a favorable environment to ensure 
sound and sustained development of credit information industry. 
First, measures should be taken to strengthen the credit information legislation. The PBC has 
always focused on actively promoting credit information legislation based on China’s specific 
circumstances and practice to create a favorable legal environment for the development of 
credit information industry. The promulgation and implementation of the PBC Decree NO. 3, 
i.e.  the  Provisional  Rules  on  Individual  Credit  Information  Database  Management  in  2005 
regulates the performance of the database and protects the legitimate rights and interests of 
individuals  and  credit  information  safety,  and  lays  a  practical  basis  for  credit  information 
legislation  at  a  higher  level.  Meanwhile,  the  PBC  has  conducted  in-depth  research  on  the 
purpose  and  principle  of  credit  information  legislation,  its  regulatory  scope  and  major 
problems  to  be  resolved  and  solicited  comment  of  experts  both  at  home  and  abroad.  At 
present, the Administrative Rules on Credit Information (Draft) is being revised and improved 
in order to be released and implemented at an early day.  
Second, the overall planning of credit information market should be strengthened. At present, 
establishing a centralized and unified credit registration system is the development trend of 
countries’  credit  information  system  to  fully  reflect  the  credit  status  of  enterprises  and 
individuals. If each area established its own database, the credit status of enterprises and 
individuals  could  not  be  fully  reflected,  and  social  resources  would  be  grossly  wasted. 
According to the Several Guidelines by the General Administration Department of the State 
Council on the Building of A Social Credit System, “a nationwide credit reporting institution 
system with the coexistence of financial credit reporting agencies and social credit reporting 
agencies that provide diversified services shall be established”, and the main responsibility of 
financial credit reporting agencies all over the country shall be to build up national centralized 
individual  and  enterprise  credit  information  databases  and  “provide  convenient,  quick  and 
highly  efficient  credit  information  services  to  government  departments,  financial  regulatory 
departments, financial institutions, enterprises and individuals according to law”. Meanwhile, 
“all regions and departments shall actively support the building and development of financial 
credit information system and make full use of its credit information resources to strengthen 
credit building and management”.  
BIS Review 121/2007 
 3
Third, supervision should be intensified to cultivate and regulate the credit information market 
development.  The  effectiveness  of  legislations  and  rules  will  be  compromised  without  an 
effective  law  enforcement  mechanism.  Therefore,  the  PBC  will  continue  to  strengthen  the 
supervision over credit information market to protect legitimate rights and interests of market 
participants,  regulate  credit  information  service  market,  foster  the  compliance  of  credit 
reporting agencies and create a credit information environment for orderly competition and 
fair service. In addition, efforts will be made to actively expand the use of credit information 
products,  cultivate  market  needs  for  credit  information  services,  and  establish  an  effective 
mechanism  to  encourage  credit  information  product  innovation  and  development  so  as  to 
satisfy  the  diversified,  specialized  and  multi-layered  needs  for  credit  information  services. 
Under the precondition of strict supervision, improved system and safeguarding the safety of 
information, the credit service market will be opened in a sequenced and appropriate way, 
and advanced management experience and skills of foreign countries will be introduced.  
Fourth, public education of credit information should be enhanced. Enterprise and individual 
are the main providers of credit information data, and constitute an important part of credit 
information  system  building.  Strengthening  the  public  education  of  credit  information, 
enhancing  the  enterprises  and  individuals’  awareness  of  credit  information  system  and 
encouraging  their  active  participation  are  indispensable  for  the  sound  and  sustained 
development  of  credit  information  system.  With  the  efforts  made  in  recent  yeas,  social 
awareness  of  credit  information  is  basically  in  place,  and  enterprises  and  individuals  are 
more aware of abiding by laws, keeping promise, respecting contract and paying debt. Over 
the past year since the databases were launched, nearly 300 thousand people have inquired 
their  credit  reports  at  their  own  initiative.  About  180  thousand  enterprises  who  have  not 
borrowed from the bank established their own credit files on a voluntary basis, which have 
enhanced their transparency and broadened their financing channels.  
In the future, under the guidance of the State Council, the PBC will actively cooperate with 
relevant government departments and continue to create a benign external environment so 
as to promote the sound and sustained development of credit information industry.  
III.  
The important role of credit institutions should be brought into full play in the 
building of a credit information system. 
Credit  information  system  building  is  a  system  engineering  involving  many  aspects,  and 
credit  extension  institutions  play  a  key  role  in  building  the  system.  At  present,  priorities 
should be placed in the following aspects. 
First,  great  importance  should  be  attached  to  the  quality  of  data  and  related  working 
mechanism should be improved as soon as possible. Relevant institutions should, according 
to  the  PBC  Decree  No  3  (2005),  strictly  follow  the  criteria  of  individual  credit  information 
database  issued  by  the  PBC  and  report  credit  information  to  the  database  in  a  accurate, 
complete and timely manner to ensure the quality of data in the database, which is key to the 
success  of  credit  information  system  building.  Enterprise  and  individual  credit  information 
databases serve as a platform for banking institutions to share information. As our foreign 
colleagues often say “Rubbish in, Rubbish out”, you get what have inputted in the database. 
We hope that the heads of financial institutions and other credit extension institutions highly 
value this issue, and take concrete steps to improve the quality of data.  
Second,  efforts  should  be  made  to  resolve  disputes  properly  and  establish  a  flexible  and 
highly efficient dispute resolution mechanism. Dispute resolution is important to the building 
and operation of individual credit information database. On the one hand, it helps us to detect 
mistakes in the database and enhance the quality of the database. Moreover, whether there 
is  an  efficient  dispute  resolution  mechanism  have  a  direct  bearing  on  rights  protection  of 
parties involved and the public image of the databases and banking institutions. Since the 
databases were put into use, they have received extensive attention and support form the 
general public and media, which is a good start for credit information development. However, 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2007
we  should  be  fully  aware  that,  without  an  efficient  dispute  resolution  mechanism,  public 
support to and recognition of the databases and banking system will be definitely weakened, 
resulting in unnecessary troubles.  
Thirdly, credit officers should be well trained to make full use of the information provided by 
the  enterprise  and  individual  credit  information  database.  First,  credit  officers  should  be 
trained to properly understand the information of credit report. Second, credit officers should 
be  trained  to  make  enquiry  with  the  Database  in  line  with  the  requirements  and  receive 
written authorization from the applicant for enquiry in case of application examination. Third, 
credit officers should be trained to turn down loan applications in a proper manner, to avoid 
misleading the public to regard the enterprise and individual credit information database as a 
system of black lists. 
Fourthly,  wider  use  of  the  enterprise  and  individual  credit  information  database  should  be 
encouraged. As shown in the evolution of other countries’ credit information industries, there 
has been an inter-action between the improvement of credit information service and that of 
loan management of commercial banks. On the one hand, demands of lending institutions 
drive  the  development  of  credit  information  institutions.  On  the  other  hand,  new  products 
initiated  by  credit  information  institutions  help  to  improve  risk  management  and  credit 
management of lending institutions. We hope that lending institutions and credit information 
institutions  can  make  concerted  efforts  to  promote  development  and  application  of  value-
added  credit  information  products,  which  will  help  to  increase  consumer  loans,  boost 
consumption  growth,  improve  economic  structure,  and  maintain  sound  and  sustainable 
development of the economy. 
IV. 
Grasp the spirit of the Property Law and promote the development of 
movables-collateralized financing business. 
On  March  16  of  this  year,  the  National  People’s  Congress  promulgated  the  Property  Law. 
The Law expands the range of assets that can be used as collaterals, ensuring that account 
receivables can be used in pledge financing, which will be of great significance to ease the 
small-  and  medium-  enterprises  financing  difficulties  and  boost  economic  growth.  The 
Property Law stipulates in Article 228 that , As regards the pledge of receivables, the parties 
concerned shall enter into a written contract, and the pledge right shall be established after 
the related credit rating institution has handled the registration of the pledge. Let me take this 
opportunity to give you some background information. 
In  the  financing  structure  of  China’s  enterprises,  banking  loan  is  one  of  the  main  external 
financing  channels  for  small-  and  medium-enterprises  and  lack  of  collaterals  hampers  the 
availability  of  loans.  As  estimated  by  a  survey,  non-collateralized  loans  account  for  27 
percent  of  loans  lending  to  big-enterprises,  compared  with  only  5  percent  in  small-
enterprises’  loans;  while  small-enterprises’  loans  need  more  collaterals  support.  Account 
receivables and inventories account for around 60 percent of overall assets of China’s small- 
and  medium-enterprises.  At  the  moment,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have 
launched the account receivables financing business in terms of factoring and repro-transfer 
and  so  on.  According  to  the  statistics  of  International  Factors  Group,  factoring  business 
accounts for 2 percents of account receivables on average globally, while the percentage in 
China is less than 1 percent. Therefore, there is a potential and substantial market demand 
for  the  development  of  account  receivables-pledged  financing  business  in  China.  The 
Property Law has provided a legal basis for such business, and it is conductive to easing the 
financing difficulties of small- and medium-enterprises. 
Account  receivables,  as  a  kind  of  unoccupied  and  invisible  collateral,  is  prone  to  be  re-
pledged in practice, which might hurt the rights and interests of the creditor as well as other 
third  parties.  Registration  can  effectively  announce  the  existence  of  claims  and  record  the 
time  of  pledge,  enabling  third  parties  to  know  all  the  claims  on  account  receivables 
immediately, conveniently, and accurately, which is conductive to controlling the re-pledged 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 5
risk  in  account  receivables  -pledged  financing  business.  At  the  moment,  the  PBC  is 
preparing  to  build  a  public  announcement  system  for  the  account  receivables  pledge 
registration  based  on  the  Internet  and  will  launch  it  the  day  when  the  Property  Law  takes 
effect  on  October  1,  2007.  All  the  related  institutions  should  grasp  the  spirit  of  movables 
pledge  provision  of  the  Property  Law,  conduct  study  and  develop  account  receivables-
pledged financing in an active manner. 
The evolution of China’s credit information collecting system has a long way to go. We need 
to rely on not only our own strength but also international exchanges and co-operation. With 
the  support of  the  World  Bank  Group,  two  international  seminars  were  jointly  organized  in 
Beijing and Shanghai in 2004, in addition to several other training and consulting programs. 
Here  I  would  like  to  express  our  sincere  appreciation  to  the  World  Bank  and  International 
Financial Corporation for the help during such a long time. 
Finally, I wish the seminar a success and everybody a good time in Tianjin.  
6 
 BIS Review 121/2007
