Philipp Hildebrand: The challenge of sovereign wealth funds  
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies,  Geneva, 
18 December 2007. 
I would like to thank Signe Krogstrup for her valuable support in drafting this speech. I also want to thank Rita 
Kobel, Urs W. Birchler, Daniel Heller and Bertrand Rime for helpful comments and discussions. 
 Introduction 
1.  
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  in  Geneva.  The  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking 
Studies  (ICMB)  provides  a  wonderful  platform  to  discuss  a  wide  range  of  economic  and 
monetary  policy  challenges.  On  behalf  of  my  ICMB  Foundation  Board  colleagues,  I  would 
like to thank Charles Wyplosz for his successful and long-standing stewardship of the ICMB. 
Tonight, I want to talk about Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs). Broadly defined, SWFs are 
government-owned  investment  corporations.  For  the  most  part,  they  invest  their  funds  in 
foreign currency assets. SWFs are usually managed separately from central bank reserves. 
Unlike other publicly owned pools of capital, such as social security funds or public pension 
funds,  SWFs  have  no  explicit  liabilities.  As  you  can  see  in  slide  1,  the  estimated  assets 
currently managed by SWFs exceed the combined pool of assets managed by hedge funds 
and private equity firms. Total assets held by SWFs remain small, however, in comparison to 
the  combined  assets  managed  by  pension  funds  and  mutual  funds  worldwide.  The  rise  in 
SWFs is closely linked to the global macroeconomic imbalances that have characterized the 
world economy since the mid 1990s. Since these imbalances are unlikely to unwind in the 
near term, SWFs are likely to keep growing disproportionably for some time.  
The  rapid  rise  of  SWFs  has  undoubtedly  brought  a  number  of  benefits.  One  of  them  has 
recently  become  particularly  evident.  Against  the  backdrop  of  the  current  market  turmoil, 
SWFs have been a welcome source of capital, strengthening the vulnerable balance sheets 
of some of the world’s largest financial institutions. I will return to this important point at the 
end of my lecture. 
But the investments made by SWFs have also given rise to considerable political controversy 
and  media  coverage.  Slide  2  provides  a  sample  of  some  of  the  most  pertinent  recent 
headlines. The political controversy does not derive from the fact that SWFs are new. They 
are  not.  Political  leaders  are  anxious  because  the  rapid  rise  of  SWFs  and  their  increasing 
visibility as large investors in mature markets challenge some long-held assumptions about 
how the global economy works. In the process, the investment decisions of SWFs run the 
risk of triggering defensive reactions in mature countries. If left unchecked, this process could 
feed  financial  protectionism,  which  would  clearly  be  to  the  detriment  of  global  economic 
welfare. 
To provide some context, I will first describe the rise of SWFs. I will then discuss in more 
detail what I view to be the primary challenge arising from SWFs. Finally, I will briefly touch 
upon a number of recent policy proposals. On the basis of these ideas, and drawing on the 
history of central banking, I will then offer some personal reflections on what a  simple but 
effective policy response might look like. In closing, I will briefly comment on the Government 
of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC), one of the most prominent SWFs in the world. 
As  you  know,  UBS  last  week  turned  to  the  GIC  for  a  substantial  capital  injection  in 
connection with losses in the sub-prime credit markets.  
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
The rise in sovereign wealth funds  
2.  
I  noted  at  the  outset  that  the  rapid  growth  in  SWFs  is  largely  a  by-product  of  global 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  Slide  3  shows  that  the  current  account  deficit  of  the  US  has 
increased  every  year  since  1992.  The  deficit  surpassed  USD  800  billion,  or  6  percent  of 
GDP, in 2006. Such a large current account deficit is unprecedented in US history.1 This rise 
in the US current account deficit has been mirrored almost one to one in the combined rise of 
surpluses in South East Asian countries and oil exporting countries. I will refer to these two 
country groupings as the surplus regions. By definition, the surplus regions are investing less 
than  they  are  saving,  and  hence,  both  regions  are  accumulating  net  financial  claims  on 
foreigners. But the underlying reasons for the current account surpluses in the two regions 
are distinct. 
The South East Asian countries saw an increase in savings and a fall in investment in the 
wake of the Asian financial crisis.2 Since then, these countries have generally continued to 
pursue  a  macroeconomic  policy  mix  in  support  of  an  export-led  growth  strategy  which 
sustains these savings-investment patterns. Meanwhile, in the oil exporting countries, export 
revenues have been boosted by the increase in the price of oil since 2000. You can see this 
in  slide  4.  Since  domestic  investments  in  these  countries  have  not  increased  at  the  same 
pace, the result has been a rise in net savings in the oil exporting countries. 
The  two  surplus  regions  have  one  thing  in  common.  In  both  cases,  foreign  assets  are 
accumulated almost entirely by the official sector. In the oil exporting countries, oil revenues 
primarily  accrue  to  governments.  Higher  oil  revenues  therefore  translate  into  higher 
government budget surpluses. In South East Asia, where the currencies shadow the dollar, 
foreign assets are accumulated primarily by the central banks in the form of official foreign 
exchange reserve accumulation. Slide 5 shows that the global macroeconomic imbalances 
have led to a rapid accumulation of global official foreign exchange reserves.3 Let me now 
leave you with five stylized facts about SWFs.  
First, as I already pointed out, SWFs are not a new phenomenon. With its Caisse des Dépots 
et Consignations, France set up a SWF in 1816.4 Slide 6 shows the year of establishment of 
each  of  the  14  largest  SWFs  currently  in  operation.  The  Kuwait  Investment  Authority  was 
established in 1953. Since then, SWFs have been set up essentially in two waves. The first 
one  occurred  in  the  second  half  of  the  1970s.  The  second  wave  began  in  1996  with  the 
setting up of Norway’s Government Pension Fund – Global. The steep increase in oil prices 
since  2000,  the  widening  of  global  imbalances  and  the  resulting  accumulation  of  foreign 
exchange reserves suggest that other countries will follow suit. By applying a simple rule to 
identify which countries potentially hold excess reserves, we can readily identify the countries 
that are obvious candidates for future SWFs. Slide 7 shows a list of countries that meet the 
following  two  conditions.5  They  have  no  SWF  at  present  and,  judging  by  the  Greenspan-
Guidotti rule, they hold excess reserves of at least USD ten billion.6  
                                                 
1   Note  that  according  to  SNB  staff  calculations,  the  US  current  account  deficit  currently  absorbs  about  60 
percent  of  the  world's  aggregate  current  account  surpluses.  The  remaining  deficits  are  located  largely  in  a 
handful of EU countries (Spain, Italy, Greece, France and the UK, 30 percent), in Central and Eastern Europe 
(8 percent). The final 2 percent originate in developing countries. 
2   The exception is China, which has attracted even more investments since the Asian crisis, while savings have 
also increased faster. See, for example, Genberg et. al. (2005). 
3  
In some countries, the reserve accumulation has been further magnified by private capital inflows. 
4 
I am grateful to Benoit Coeuré of the French Treasury for this comment (see Coeuré, 2007). 
5   Summers (2007) has a similar table which also includes countries that already have SWFs. 
6   The Greenspan-Guidotti rule is based on the definition of a sufficient level of reserves as equal to the level of 
short-term foreign currency debt of the country. Excess reserves are calculated as reserves in excess of this 
level. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
Second, in terms of size, SWFs have become important financial market participants. The 14 
largest  SWFs  are  estimated  to  have  approximately  USD  2.2  trillion  under  management.7 
Some market estimates put combined assets as high as 3.5 trillion dollars.8 The estimated 
combined assets of the world's 14 largest SWFs now constitute nearly half the size of the 
world’s total official foreign exchange reserves.9 As I pointed out at the beginning, however, 
the  assets  of  the  world’s  SWFs  are  still  much  smaller  than  the  assets  invested  in  mutual 
funds (USD 19.3 trillion) or global pension funds (USD 21.6 trillion).10
Third, SWFs are likely to grow substantially in coming years. Market forecasts, which assume 
that high oil prices and the large current account surpluses in South East Asia will persist, 
project that SWFs will increase three to fivefold in nominal dollar terms over the next five to 
ten years.11 My own view is that such simplistic linear forecasts will likely prove to have been 
flawed.  Nonetheless,  it  is  difficult  to  argue  with  the  basic  direction  of  these  forecasts.  The 
fundamental  dynamic  behind  the  recent  rise  of  SWFs  will  not  disappear  over  night.  As  I 
mentioned,  estimated  excess  reserves  are  very  large.12  In  all  likelihood,  at  least  some  of 
these excess reserves will be transferred to SWFs in coming years. Moreover, even if global 
imbalances were to unwind quickly, for instance in association with a sharp and protracted 
recession  in  the  United  States,  the  power  of  compound  return  will  continue  to  be  a 
substantial source of growth for SWFs that already exist.  
Fourth, SWFs have so far been initiated predominantly in the Middle East and in Asia. Slide 
8 shows that these two regions account for 77 percent of the assets of the largest SWFs. 
Nonetheless,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  16  percent  of  the  assets  of  the  14 
largest SWFs are held in developed countries.13
Fifth,  SWFs  will  increasingly  attempt  to  diversify  their  holdings.  They  will  do  so  gradually, 
given the prevailing size and liquidity constraints. Like central banks, SWFs have traditionally 
been  investors  in  highly  rated  fixed  income  assets.  Going  forward,  SWFs  will  increasingly 
look  for  investments  in  equity  markets,  both  public  and  private  ones.  Several  of  these 
investments have recently produced headlines in the global financial press. Slide 9 depicts 
some of them.  
The challenges 
3.  
In my introductory comments, I suggested that much of the anxiety surrounding SWFs stems 
from the fact that their increasing presence in mature markets presents a challenge to some 
long-held assumptions about how the global economy works. Let me elaborate a little bit on 
three such assumptions. As you will see, they are very much interlinked.  
                                                 
7   This is shown in table 1 in the appendix. Sources: Truman (2007a, 2007b), IMF, Morgan Stanley, FT. 
8   Morgan  Stanley,  Standard  Chartered,  Deutsche  Bank  and  Merrill  Lynch  all  recently  produced  estimates, 
ranging from USD 2.5 to 3.5 trillion. 
9   Global  reserves  amounted  to  USD  4.7  trillion  in  the  second  quarter  of  2007,  according  to  IMF's  COFER 
database. 
10   2006  estimate  by  Mckinsey  Global  Institute.  The  size  of  pension  fund  assets  held  by  OECD  countries  is 
estimated at USD 13.2 trillion by the OECD. 
11   The  estimates  of  Merrill  Lynch,  Deutsche  Bank,  Morgan  Stanley  and  Standard  Chartered  are,  respectively, 
that SWFs will grow to USD 7.9 trillion by 2011, USD 9 trillion by 2015, USD 12 trillion in 2015 and USD 13.40 
trillion by 2017. 
12   According to SNB calculations, excess reserves of developing countries according to the Greenspan-Guidotti 
rule reached USD 2.5 trillion in the second quarter of 2007.  
13   These are located in the US (Alaska Permanent Reserve Fund), Australia and Norway. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
First,  since  the  early  1980s,  we  have  witnessed  broad-based  and  sustained  political 
momentum  to  deregulate  and  liberalise  economic  structures,  enhance  the  role  of  market 
forces and attempt to reduce the role of governments in the global economy. Looking back, 
Ronald  Reagan’s  confrontation  with  the  air  traffic  controllers  union  in  1981  marks  the 
beginning of this process. Most of you in this room would probably concur with the premise 
that  the  secular  trend  to  strengthen  the  role  of  free  markets  and  competition  as  the 
overarching organising principles of the global economy has contributed significantly to the 
long  period  of  prosperity  that  the  world  economy  has  enjoyed.  In  this  context,  SWFs 
represent  a  potential  threat.  Sizeable  state-sponsored  foreign  investments  in  mature 
economies  can  be  perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  free  market  forces.14  Moreover,  such 
investments run the risk of triggering protectionist reactions in the recipient countries. 
Second,  one  of  the  basic  premises  of  open  global  capital  markets  is  the  idea  that  capital 
flows freely worldwide in search of investment opportunities that yield optimal risk-adjusted 
rates of return. The fact that large and government-controlled investment companies make 
substantial  investments  in  privately  owned  companies  in  other  countries  raises  concerns 
about the validity of the hypothesis that capital seeks optimal risk-adjusted rates of returns. 
Governments  of  recipient  countries  may  have  doubts  about  the  motivation  behind  such 
investments. Are SWFs in pursuit of a variant of the traditional motive to maximise returns? 
Or  could  a  particular  government  be  tempted  to  use  its  SWF  as  a  financial  instrument  in 
pursuit of a particular political objective? The mere fact that such questions arise could serve 
as a trigger for protectionist policies in recipient countries, thus again undermining the proper 
functioning of free markets. 
Third, as a general rule, capital has historically tended to flow from the core of an economic 
system to its periphery.15 Most recently, global capital flows from the periphery to the core 
are  clearly  on  the  rise.  SWFs  play  a  potentially  important  role  in  what  appears  to  be  a 
reversal  of  global  capital  flows.  The  economics  students  here  will  recognise  that  this 
apparent  reversal  in  capital  flows  is  not  really  a  new  phenomenon,  but  a  new  and 
unexpected variant of the Lucas Paradox which Bob Lucas described in a seminal paper in 
1990.16 Nonetheless, the sense that capital increasingly flows from the periphery to the core 
is  raising  a  variety  of  political  sensitivities  in  the  core  countries.  I  fear  that  many  of  these 
sensitivities will likely be protectionist in nature. 
As  you  can  see,  in  all  three  cases,  the  real  or  perceived  activities  of  SWFs  play  a  role  in 
challenging these deeply held assumptions about the world economy. In my view, the most 
important challenge associated with the rise of SWFs is therefore to ensure that the policy 
reactions  in  the  recipient  countries  of  potential  and  actual  SWF  investments  do  not 
degenerate into what ultimately amounts to financial protectionism.  
Let me simply mention that there are other potential challenges associated with SWFs, such 
as  concerns  that  SWFs  could  pose  a  risk  to  financial  stability.17  A  related  concern  is  that 
asset allocation changes by some of the larger SWFs could result in disorderly market price 
adjustments.18  While  it  is  impossible  to  rule  out  such  effects,  these  risks  are  clearly  not 
unique to SWFs. Moreover, they strike me as being second-order problems, compared to the 
threat of the activities of SWFs unleashing a vicious cycle of financial protectionism.  
                                                 
14   SEC  Chairman  Christopher  Cox,  for  example,  points  out  possible  conflicts  of  interest  arising  from  foreign 
government ownership of businesses (Cox 2007).  
15   Bernanke  (2006)  also  points  out  that  capital  as  a  general  rule  has  historically  been  flowing  from  core  to 
periphery.  See,  for  example,  Jones  and  Obstfeld  (2000)  and  Obstfeld  and  Taylor  (2003)  for  historical 
evidence. 
16   Lucas (1990). 
17   See, for example, Lowery (2007) and Johnson (2007). 
18   See for example IMF (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2007
Policy response 
4.  
Let me now turn to the question of how to respond to the risks associated with SWFs. As I 
said in my introduction, I would like to provide you with my own judgment on what kind of 
policy response will likely be required to address adequately the risks I have tried to outline. 
But  before  I  do  so,  let  me  briefly  touch  upon  four  policy  ideas  that  are  currently  being 
circulated.  
First, a number of European politicians are calling for increased transparency requirements 
relating  to  actual  portfolio  positions  of  SWFs.19  A  more  far-reaching  development  are  the 
calls  for  legislation  that  would  block  SWFs  from  taking  major  stakes  in  companies  in  any 
strategic sectors.20  
Second,  a  number  of  politicians  have  proposed  the  principle  of  reciprocity  as  a  guiding 
principle  for  granting  market  access  to  SWFs.21  For  example,  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  the 
Luxembourg  Prime  Minister  and  Euro-group  president,  has  stated,  "Countries  that  protect 
their own markets cannot expect to be allowed to make unimpeded investments in Europe."22 
In a strict sense, the principle of reciprocity means that SWFs are only allowed to invest in a 
foreign country if companies in that country are allowed to invest freely in the home country 
of the SWF. Since many SWFs are located in countries which are financially less open than 
a  typical  OECD  country,  a  strict  application  of  the  reciprocity  principle  would  place  strong 
limitations on SWF investments.  
Third, Larry Summers has suggested that if SWFs were to invest through intermediary asset 
managers,  most  risks  associated  with  SWFs  would  be  mitigated,  if  not  avoided.23 
Incidentally,  Summers  argues  that  the  added  benefit  of  such  an  indirect  investment 
philosophy is that it generates a better risk-return profile.  
Fourth, there is now considerable political momentum behind the idea of a code of conduct 
or a set of guidelines for SWFs. The idea that is emerging is that SWFs would adopt such a 
code on a voluntary basis in an attempt to alleviate concerns in the most important mature 
market. At the October 2007 IMF/World Bank Annual meetings in Washington, the finance 
ministers and central bankers of the G7 countries discussed the issue in a private meeting 
with a number of leading SWFs. They subsequently stated that they “see merit in identifying 
best  practices  for  sovereign  wealth  funds  in  such  areas  as  institutional  structure,  risk 
management,  transparency  and  accountability.”24  Since  then,  G7  treasury  officials  have 
continued to engage with a number of leading SWFs. The US has called on the International 
Monetary Fund to try to identify possible best practices, noting that these should be modeled 
on best practices for managing international reserves.25 So far, Ted Truman has developed 
                                                 
19  For  example,  Joaquín  Almunia,  the  EU  Commissioner  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  summarised  the 
general  position  of  the  European  Commission  as  calling  on  SWFs  operating  in  EU  member  countries  to 
increase  the  transparency  of  their  operations  and  investments.  Interview  with  the  Financial  Times  on  28 
September 2007. 
20   In  Germany,  legislation  has  been  drafted  that  would  enable  the  German  government  to  veto  any  foreign 
investors intending to take a stake of 25% or more in a German company that may threaten national security; 
Süddeutsche Zeitung, 30 September 2007. 
21   Reciprocity has also been raised by Alistair Darling in response to SWFs, see, for example, "Chancellor backs 
G7 move to get tough on sovereign wealth funds", The Guardian, 20 October 2007. 
22   Germany's Handelsblatt newspaper, 19 October 2007. 
23   Larry Summers on SWFs, Financial Times, 30 June 2007. See also Summers (2006). 
24  Statement 
by  G-7  Finance  Ministers 
(http://www.mof.go.jp/english/if/g7_071019.pdf) 
and  Central  Bank  Governors,  Washington,  DC. 
25   The US policy stance has been relayed to the public by US Undersecretary for International Affairs, David H. 
McCormick,  in  testimony  before  the  Senate  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing  and  Urban  Affairs  on  14 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 5
they  have  generally  been  given  statutory 
the most extensive set of proposals for best practices for SWFs.26 He calls it a “standard to 
guide  the  activities  of  SWFs".  The  standard  sets  out  norms  for  transparency  and 
accountability  with  respect  to  four  different  aspects.  They  are:  objectives  and  investment 
strategy, governance, actual investment portfolios and fund management behaviour.  
The effort by the authorities of the largest industrialised countries and the leading SWFs to 
develop jointly a set of “good governance guidelines” is timely and clearly sensible. There is 
a  risk,  however,  that  these  efforts  will  fail,  or  will  prove  to  be  counterproductive  if  the 
demands  from  the  industrialised  countries  are  too  ambitious,  or  if  such  guidelines  are 
ultimately  motivated  by  the  desire  in  mature  markets  to  impose  veiled  barriers  to  foreign 
investments.  
In my view, a future code of conduct or a set of guidelines must cover two central issues if 
they  are  to  be  effective.  First,  to  quell  the  concerns  of  recipient  countries  with  respect  to 
politically motivated investments, a code of conduct must contain governance prescriptions 
that  ensure  that  the  investment  decisions  of  SWFs  are  not  driven  by  political  objectives.  I 
believe  the  institutional  design  of  modern  central  banking  can  offer  some  clues  as  to  the 
appropriate  form  of  these  governance  prescriptions.  Central  banks  and  SWFs  obviously 
pursue  fundamentally  different  objectives.  But,  in  principle,  they  are  both  at  risk  of  being 
hijacked  by  governments  for  political  aims.  In  the  case  of  central  banks,  this  problem  has 
been  successfully  addressed  by  the  adoption  of  an  institutional  design  based  on  two 
powerful features. Central banks have a clear mandate, typically focused on or around price 
stability.  Moreover, 
from 
governments  in  pursuing  their  mandate.  This  simple  institutional  design  has  become  best 
practice and has made an important contribution to keeping politics largely out of monetary 
policy. 
Second,  to  preclude  a  resurgence  of  state  ownership  in  our  economies,  SWF  guidelines 
need to spell out upper limits to investment stakes in foreign private companies. It is difficult 
to determine what such limits should be. As I alluded earlier, it is not just a matter of pre-
empting  majority  stakes  of  SWFs  in  foreign  companies.  “Cross-border  nationalisation”  of 
private companies is simply the most extreme version of a broader unwelcome trend.27 For 
this  reason,  I  believe  that  to  alleviate  fears  about  excessive  meddling  of  governments  in 
private companies, a SWF code of conduct will have to set the limit for individual stakes at a 
level significantly below the typical threshold of a controlling minority, let alone an absolute 
majority.  
As long as a recipient country can be confident that a particular SWF operates in accordance 
with  these  two  paramount  guidelines,  there  is  no  reason  to  demand  intricate  levels  of 
portfolio  transparency  from  SWFs.  Transparency  is  an  attractive  answer  to  intractable 
problems. But it is unlikely to solve the problems I have tried to outline here. Indeed, I fear 
that, in some cases, extensive transparency requirements for SWF portfolios could actually 
end up triggering protectionist reactions in mature markets. It is also important to remember 
that most stock exchanges already impose various disclosure requirements for large equity 
holdings in listed companies. 
There  are,  of  course,  a  host  of  reasons  why  SWFs  should,  over  time,  become  more 
transparent. Many of these reasons have to do with the presumed desire of the citizens of a 
SWF  country  to  demand  accountability.  Once  again,  the  history  of  central  banking  may 
provide some valuable insights here. The more independent central banks have become, the 
independence 
                                                                                                                                                      
November, 2007. McCormick moreover stressed that the US remains open and welcoming to investment from 
Sovereign Wealth Funds. 
26   Truman (2007a). 
27   As far as I know, Larry Summers has coined this term. 
6 
 BIS Review 150/2007
more they have recognised their obligation to be accountable to the public. Typically, more 
accountability has meant more transparency. An independent central bank is therefore likely 
to be transparent about how it pursues its mandate. The same may turn out to be true for 
SWFs.  
There  are  a  number  of  difficult  questions  that  need  to  be  addressed  before  a  set  of  SWF 
guidelines can become operational. What exactly do we mean by a non-political investment 
mandate? How do we gauge to what extent there might or might not be political interference 
in the pursuit of such a mandate? Will there be a need for a referee to determine whether a 
SWF complies with a particular set of guidelines? What happens if a SWF initially signs up to 
a code of conduct but subsequently fails to comply with its guidelines? As you can see, much 
work remains to be done and the timeframe is tight. Ideally, a first set of guidelines will be 
agreed upon jointly between the G7 countries and the most prominent SWFs by the 2008 
spring meetings of the IMF and the World Bank. If well designed and agreed upon, such a 
set of guidelines could serve as a basis for determining which SWFs will continue to enjoy 
full market access in mature economies.  
Conclusion 
5.  
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about the capital participation of the GIC in UBS 
that  was  recently  announced.  As  you  know,  the  GIC  recently  committed  to  subscribe  to 
CHF 11 billion of a mandatory convertible bond which will be issued by UBS in an effort to 
raise capital in the aftermath of losses on large sub-prime mortgage positions. Subject to the 
UBS  shareholders’  approval,  the  GIC  will  in  due  time  become  a  significant  shareholder  in 
UBS. In the process, UBS will significantly strengthen its balance sheet and thereby maintain 
a  substantial  capital  cushion  relative  to  the  regulatory  minimum.  A  strengthened  capital 
cushion is to be welcomed. First and foremost, it serves as a confidence-building measure. 
Moreover,  in  uncertain  times,  a  solid  capital  cushion  provides  insurance  against  a  further 
potential deterioration in the global macroeconomic environment.  
Who is this new Asian investor in the largest Swiss bank? The GIC was set up in May 1981 
with  an  original  seed  capital  of  several  billion  dollars  from  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore (MAS).28 The central bank reserves had grown steadily throughout the 1970s as a 
result  of  public  sector  surpluses.  The  GIC’s  objective  was  to  invest  the  portion  of  foreign 
reserves,  which  was  surplus  to  the  needs  of  the  central  bank  for  its  monetary  policy 
management, in longer-term assets. The mandate of the GIC is to preserve at a minimum 
the  international  purchasing  power  of  its  assets  against  inflation  and  global  exchange  rate 
risk.  The  objective  of  the  GIC  is  commercial,  focusing  on  long-term  investment  returns.  In 
many ways, it is similar to the objectives of the large European public pension funds. In fact, 
the GIC has exceeded that mandate and has generated an average return of 9.5 per cent in 
US dollar terms since inception. The size of the assets managed by the GIC is not publicly 
known. The GIC has stated that it manages more than USD 100 billion but some estimates 
have put their assets under management at over USD 300 billion. The assets of the GIC are 
invested  in  ten  asset  classes  –  developed  market  public  equities,  emerging  market  public 
equities,  private  equity,  infrastructure,  nominal  bonds,  inflation-linked  bonds,  real  estate, 
commodities, hedge funds and short-term assets including currency overlay. Geographically, 
its investments are concentrated in the US, Europe and Japan, but span almost 50 countries.  
Based on what is known about the GIC, and judging by the reasoning I have outlined in my 
lecture this evening, there is little cause for concern about the UBS equity stake the GIC will 
likely  acquire.  Over  the  past  quarter  century,  the  GIC  has  gained  a  solid  reputation  as  a 
                                                 
28   The  original  idea  of  setting  up  a  dedicated  government  investment  institution  separate  from  the  MAS  was 
conceived by the then Deputy Prime Minister Dr Goh Keng Swee and endorsed by the then Prime Minister 
Lee Kuan Yew, who continues to serve as the GIC’s Chairman of the Board. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 7
global investor. With regard to the specific topic of my lecture this evening, I expect the GIC 
to  demonstrate  leadership  in  the  coming  months  to  help  shape  an  agreement  with  the 
governments of the most important mature countries on a set of guidelines for SWFs that will 
hopefully help to address the challenges I discussed this evening.  
To summarise, SWFs have become an important source of capital flowing from the periphery 
to the core of today’s global economy. As such, they can play a constructive role in mature 
markets.  At  the  same  time,  SWFs  pose  a  challenge  to  the  international  community.  The 
challenge is to preclude an outcome where the activities of SWFs trigger policy responses in 
mature markets that ultimately lead us down the path of financial protectionism. It is in the 
interest of mature markets and developing countries alike to avoid such an outcome. A set of 
guidelines addressing the threat of politically driven investment decisions and resurging state 
involvement in the global economy represent the best currently available option to respond to 
the challenge of SWFs. 
Let me close with a broader Swiss perspective. Switzerland has in absolute terms the sixth 
largest  current  account  surplus  in  the  world.  Last  year,  foreign  investments  by  Swiss 
companies and Swiss individuals generated net income receipts equivalent to 12 per cent of 
our  GDP,  or  approximately  CHF  60  billion.  In  other  words,  we  are  experts  at  making 
profitable  cross-border  investments.  This  means  that  we  have  as  strong  an  incentive  as 
virtually any country in keeping global financial markets open.  
References  
Bernanke, Benjamin S. 2006, "Global Economic Integration: What's New and What's Not?", 
Speech held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Thirtieth Annual Economic 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August. 
Coeuré, Benoit, 2007, "Faut-il Avoir Peur Des Fonds Souverains?", forthcoming, Les 
Cahiers, Le Cercle des économistes. 
Cox, Christopher, 2007, "The Role of Governments in Markets". Speech at Harvard on 24th 
October 2007 (http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2007/spch102407cc.htm). 
Genberg, H., McCauley, R., Park, Y. and Persaud, A. 2005, Official Reserves and Currency 
Management in Asia: Myth, Reality and the Future. London, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research. 
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, 2007, Capital Flows to Developing Countries: 
The Allocation Puzzle, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6561. 
Hildebrand, Philipp M., 2007, Hedge Funds and Prime Broker Dealers: Steps towards a best 
practice proposal, in: Banque de France, Financial Stability Review – Special issue on 
Hedge Funds,” No. 10, April. 
International Monetary Fund, 2007, Global Financial Stability Report. Washington D.C. 
September. 
Johnson, Simon, 2007, "The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds, Finance and Development, 
September 2007, Volume 44, Number 3, International Monetary Fund. 
Jones, Matthew T. and Maurice Obstfeld, 2000, "Saving, Investment, and Gold: A 
Reassessment of Historical Current Account Data", in Calvo, Guillermo A., Rudiger 
Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds., Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in 
Honor of Robert A. Mundell, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000. 
8 
 BIS Review 150/2007
Lowery, Clay, 2007, "Remarks by Acting Under Secretary for International Affairs Clay 
Lowery on Sovereign Wealth Funds and the International Financial System", June 21st, San 
Francisco. 
Lucas, Jr., Robert E., 1990, Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? The 
American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and 
Second Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (May, 1990), pp. 92-96. 
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor, 2003, "Globalization and Capital Markets". In Michael 
Bordo, Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson, Globalization in Historical Perspective, 
Chicago, The University of Chicago Press. 
Summers, Lawrence, 2006, Reflections on Global Account Imbalances and Emerging 
Market Reserve Accumulation, Speech delivered at the Reserve Bank of India, March 24, 
2007. 
Summers, Lawrence, 2007, Opportunities in a era of large and growing official wealth, in 
Johnston-Calari, Jennifer and Malan Riedveld (eds.), Sovereign Wealth Management, 
Blackrock and Central Banking Publications, London. 
Truman, Edwin M. 2007a, Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Need for Greater Transparency 
and Accountability, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 07-6. 
Truman, Edwin M., 2007b, The Management of China's International Reserves: China and a 
SWF Scoreboard, Paper prepared for the Conference on China's Exchange Rate Policy, 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, October 19tt, 2007.  
BIS Review 150/2007 
 9
Appendix 
Table 1. Sovereign Wealth Funds with assets estimated above 20 billion US dollars 
Region
Country
Name
Year of Establishment and Estimated Size
Singapore
Singapore
China
Brunei
Japan
South Korea
UAE
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Algeria
Libya
Qatar
Russia
Norway
Temasek
GIC
China Investment Co.
Brunei Investment Authority
Announced intension to 
create one
Korea Investment 
Corporation
ADIA (Abu Dhabi)
Various
Kuwait Investment Authority 
(KIA) and Futures Generation 
Fund
Revenue Regulation Fund
Libya Investment Authority
Qatar Investment Authority
Stabilization Fund
Government Pension Fund - 
Global
US (state of Alaska) Alaska Permanent Reserve 
Australia
Fund
Australian Future Fund
Asia
Middle East 
and Africa
Other 
Emerging 
Markets
Developed 
Countries
Totald:
Year
1974c
1981c
2007
1983c
n.a.
2006c
1976c
n.a.
1953c
2000c
2007a
2005c
2003c
1996c
1976c
2004c
Size, bn USD, 2007.
100b
100-330b,c
200b
30b
n.a.
20b
250-875b
250+b
160-250b
43c
40a
50c
127b
308b
35b
42b
2227.5
a) Source: Financial Times on 18th October 2007, interview with the executive director of the Libya Investment Authority.
b) Source: IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, September 2007
c) Source: Truman, Edwin, 2007, "Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Need for Greater Transparency and Accountability", Policy 
Brief 07-6, Peterson Institute for International Economics.
d) Sum of assets of SWFs above an estimated USD 20 billion in size (for GIC, ADIA and Kuwait's funds, where a range is 
estimated, the mid-range size of assets is used for computing the sum. For Saudi Arabia, the lower limit of USD 250 billion is 
used). 
  10 
 BIS Review 150/2007
    BIS Review 150/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 150/2007
    BIS Review 150/2007 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 150/2007
 BIS Review 150/2007 
 15
