Nout Wellink: The labour market in 2040 – greyer but full of vitality 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  symposium  “Demographic  ageing:  a  broader 
view”, Science center NEMO, Amsterdam, 11 October 2007. 
 Imagine: it is the year 2040. Those who turn 32 this year will then be 65 and so are now half-
way there. Demographic ageing will have reached its pinnacle in 2040. More than 4 million 
Dutch people will then be older than 65, working out at a quarter of the population, whereas 
that age group now makes up less than 15%. For every person over-65, there will be just two 
compatriots aged between 20 and 651. 
In such a greying society, our cities and towns will look quite different to now. Amsterdam city 
centre is likely to be a largely pedestrian zone, allowing for wider footpaths. Political pressure 
will have forced the monument conservation authority to relax its rules. Large groups of older 
people  in  the  city  will  have  been  obliged  to  remove  thresholds,  install  stair  lifts  and  knock 
through walls. The two universities in the capital will have been forced to merge because of 
the  smaller  inflow  of  new  students.  Only  a  handful  of  the  many  places  of  entertainment 
around  Rembrant  Square  will  still  remain,  but 
the 
Concertgebouw  and  the  Muziektheater  aan  ’t  IJ  will  be  sold  out  every  night.  Subsidies  for 
museums  may  even  have  been  scrapped  owing  to  the  overwhelming  increase  in  visitor 
numbers. And here, in NEMO, where today’s children make their first discoveries in the area 
of science and technology, there may be a shopping mall with stores full of books, golfing 
equipment, spectacles, hobby accessories, fine chocolates and garden tools.  
Of course this is mere speculation. Time will tell what life will really be like in 2040. But it’s a 
sure  thing  that  the  older  people  of  the  future  will  have  a  major  influence.  Today  we  are 
looking at the economic consequences of population ageing. I want to talk to you about the 
impact of ageing on the labour market and how we can prepare ourselves for it. 
the  classical  performances  at 
Labour force in 2040 
For a start, the average worker in 2040 will be older than at present and so have more work 
experience. Owing to the rise in the number of pensioners, he will have fewer competitors in 
the labour market, unless there is a spectacular rise in birth or immigration rates. Because 
work  will  become  scarcer,  but  also  because  of  the  trend  rise  in  labour  productivity,  his 
disposable income is likely to be far higher than it is now. 
But population ageing will absorb a huge share of the employees’ rise in income if the current 
schemes continue unchanged. To illustrate, if we assume that income in 2040 has risen by 
60% [at, say, 1.4% per year], more than a quarter of this rise in income will be “eaten-up” by 
higher contributions and taxes for the state old age pension2.  
Some sectors will be faced by bigger changes in the labour market than others. At present, 
older  workers  are  overrepresented  in  education  and  health  care.  Shortages  could  arise  in 
these sectors if there is no increase in the inflow of young employees. In education, this is 
                                                      
1   These figures were derived from the population forecast 2006-2050 published by Statistics Netherlands. 
2  
If the grey pressure doubled, and all other circumstances remained unchanged, the burden of contributions 
and taxes related to the state old age pensions would also double, from 9% at present to 18% in 2040. That 
means that net disposable income would not rise by 60%, but by 44%. 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 1
already expected to lead to problems in the short term3. In the longer run, the effects will be 
mitigated by the decline in the number of schoolgoing children. An added problem for health 
care is that population ageing will generate greater demand. Working conditions in the health 
care sector merit extra attention if we are to avert staff shortages in the future. 
Retirement age 
Looking  at  the  labour  market  in  2040,  we  cannot  skirt  problematic  pension  issues.  The 
number of pensioners will increase, because the group of people reaching retirement age is 
expanding while life expectancy has risen too. The latter is a great achievement, of course. 
In 1960, 40-year-old men had an average life expectancy of more than 74 years, compared 
to just above 78 in 2008. The life expectancy for 40-year-old women has risen by five years, 
to something over 82. And there has also been a significant gain in the number of years lived 
without the need for intensive health care4. 
The price we pay for this progress is that bottlenecks may arise in the funding of the state old 
age  pensions  and  supplementary  pension  schemes.  We  can  of  course  absorb  these  by 
either  raising  contributions,  or  by  letting  benefits  fall  behind  them.  But  such  measures  hit 
people directly in their pockets, and I think that better solutions are available to improve the 
sustainability of the pension system. One of these is to widen the contribution base through 
greater labour participation. There is still scope for widening participation in the Netherlands, 
notably  among  women,  youths  from  ethnic  minorities,  people  with  occupational  disabilities 
and,  most  definitely,  among  older  workers  themselves.  Population  ageing  apart,  higher 
participation is a good thing in itself. Our prosperity will benefit from the optimum deployment 
of  available  workers.  Moreover,  older  people  are  staying  active  for  longer,  thanks  to  the 
higher  life  expectancy  and  good  health  care.  They  look  after  their  grandchildren,  perform 
voluntary work and play a full part in society. An obvious path is to stimulate older people to 
use their active attitude to life to stay on longer in the workplace. This would also reinforce 
the solidarity between working and non-working people. 
But let’s not go too far. Employees in sectors such as construction, the fire brigade and the 
army have often started working at a very young age. It would not be reasonable to expect 
these groups to work for more than 50 years of their lives, whereas people in less demanding 
positions  are  hard  pressed  to  work  for  40  years.  Especially  as  these  jobs  are  physically 
taxing.  The  collective  labour  agreements  for  such  physically-taxing  occupations  generally 
arrange  for  pension  funding  that  enables  employees  to  stop  work  before  reaching  the 
statutory  retirement  age.  That  is  understandable,  and  may  continue  on  broadly  the  same 
lines as far as I am concerned. 
It is difficult to exactly determine what percentage of the labour force hold physically-taxing 
jobs,  but  in  all  likelihood,  it  would  be  reasonable  and  possible  for  the  greater  part  of  the 
labour force to prolong their careers. An additional factor is the structural decline in the share 
of  physically-taxing  jobs  owing  to  the  diminishing  share  of  industry  in  our  economy.  This 
employment shift to services set in many years ago, but is still ongoing. In 1980, industry still 
accounted for 15% of employment, but this share has now dwindled to less than 10%5. The 
share of construction in our economy remained stable over this period at around 5.5%. 
                                                      
3  
In  education,  the  percentage  of  employees  aged  55-64  is  19.2%,  whereas  the  average  rate  is  11.8%.  In 
addition, in its report Vergrijzing en vervanging (Ageing and Replacement), the Council for Work and Income 
expects bottlenecks in education in the short term. 
4   The Rapportage Ouderen 2006 (Report on Older People 2006) by the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, 
shows that in 2003 the so-termed life expectancy without physical impairments of a 65-year-old man was 77.3 
years, compared to 75 in 1989. For 65-year-old women, these figures were 77.4 and 74.1 respectively. 
5   “Less welfare growth in the service economy”, DNB Quarterly Bulletin, September 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2007
Will staying on in the workplace alleviate the impact of ageing on the labour market? Yes, 
most  definitely!  For  employers,  it  means  that  labour  supply  will  not  decrease  as  rapidly, 
making  it  easier  for  them  to  fill  vacancies.  And  the  bigger  the  working  section  of  the 
population, the better the labour market for both employers and employees because of the 
lighter marginal tax burden. If more people continue working, not just until they turn 65 but 
afterwards too, and delay drawing the state old age pension, there would be less state old 
age  pension  claimants  and  more  potential  contributors.  The  level  of  contribution  for  the 
working  part  of  the  population  would  then  be  lower.  So  it  works  both  ways.  Older  people 
themselves  benefit  from  prolonging  their  working  lives  as  a  means  of  safeguarding  the 
sustainability of the pension system. For they enjoy higher disposable income. 
Retaining older workers 
The  reality  is  that  labour  participation  among  those  aged  between  55  and  64  is  relatively 
low6. And participation among the over-65s is negligible, the reason being the various legal 
and socio-cultural impediments discouraging older people from working for longer than they 
generally do now.  
A  major  obstacle  is  that  many  collective  labour  agreements  provide  for  termination  of 
employment on reaching 65. It is subsequently quite unappealing – for both employer and 
employee – to enter into a new contract. Having reached retirement age, the employee has 
much less financial incentive to work, because he is then entitled to a state old age pension 
as  well  as  his  supplementary  pension  benefits.  For  the  employer,  entering  into  an 
employment contract with someone over 65 represents a risk, seeing as he is obliged to offer 
all his employees occupational disability insurance. The employer may choose to place this 
risk  with  the  Employee  Insurance  Administration  Agency  or  to  run  it  himself,  possibly  by 
taking out private insurance. If cheaper in their case, employers generally choose the latter 
option.  This  choice  applies  for  their  entire  payroll.  But  a  problem  is  that  insurers  do  not 
provide occupational disability insurance for employees over 65. So it is up to employers to 
carry  the  risk  of  occupational  disability  for  these  employees.  Moreover,  the  risk  of  an 
employee becoming sick increases as he gets older. Since the Sickness Benefits Act obliges 
employers  to  continue  paying  sick  employees  for  two  years,  this  could  be  very  costly  for 
employers. 
The  statutory  retirement  age  thus  constitutes  an  obstacle  for  older  workers  and  their 
employers, even though prolonging working lives would be of general benefit. Germany has 
opted for gradually raising the retirement age from 65 to 67 as of 2012. During the first twelve 
years, Germany will raise the retirement age by one month a year, and in the six following 
years  by  two  months  a  year,  completing  the  process by  2030.  So  German  employees  will 
have the opportunity to prepare for a later retirement age, and no one will have to carry on 
working unexpectedly. We could likewise raise the retirement age in the Netherlands step-
by-step  to,  say,  67  too.  This  would  make  it  easier  and  more  rewarding  to  stay  on  in  the 
workplace.  
But it is vital to encourage older workers to continue working, even before the retirement age 
of 65. Because too many people are now taking early retirement without being prompted by 
the physically-taxing nature of their job. With this in mind, the government has already voiced 
its desire to partly fund the state old age pension by taxing older people’s incomes. In itself, 
the idea of funding state pensions from public resources seems a good idea: older people 
would then help carry the collective burden of population ageing. All other things being equal, 
it would allow for a reduction in general tax rates, and it is also expected to boost total labour 
participation. Moreover, the funding of state pensions from public resources forms a direct 
                                                      
6   According  to  Eurostat  figures,  average  labour  participation  among  people  aged  55-64  in  2006  was  50.5%, 
whereas it was 77.1% for those aged 15-65. 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 3
incentive to older workers to keep working. However, the impact of this inducement will be 
contained,  because  the  change  in  funding  will  mainly  affect  the  more  well-off  pensioners. 
Research by De Nederlandsche Bank7 has shown that when it comes to choosing their own 
retirement date, this group is less sensitive to changes in their pension wealth. Besides the 
said  income  effect,  the  move  to  finance  state  pensions  from  public  resources  also  has  a 
substitution  effect:  the  positive  effect  that  continuing  to  work  would  have  on  the  level  of  a 
pension would be less if this pension were subject to tax. However, our research shows that, 
on balance, funding state pensions from public resources would stimulate older workers to 
stay on. 
In addition to funding state pensions from public resources, there are conceivable measures 
to reward older workers for continuing to work. In part, the current system already contains 
such features. Owing to the fixed accrual of pensions, the years leading up to the age of 65 
are relatively lucrative. And the earned income tax credit is higher for employees over 57. 
Nonetheless, this now gives older workers who prolong their careers no more than EUR 500 
a year. One possibility would be an incentive in the form of a considerable hike in this earned 
income tax credit. 
Helping older people find work 
Besides older people who are already employed, there are of course those who have lost 
their job through, say, a reorganisation. Many of them would like to keep working but find it 
difficult  to  find  a  new  job.  In  this  respect,  we  need  to  look  at  older  workers’  salary  and 
productivity. Older workers are often more expensive than their younger colleagues, because 
their salary has increased over the years. However, their expertise is often less up-to-date. 
In part, the wider experience of older workers makes up for their perhaps outdated expertise. 
However, this experience often proves to be most useful for the organisation in which it was 
acquired. It is also difficult for employers to assess the precise nature of experience gained in 
other enterprises. To what extent do the tasks and corporate culture resemble those in their 
own company? How much responsibility did the job applicant actually hold? How well did he 
perform?  All  too  often  there  is  no  satisfactory  response  to  such  questions,  prompting 
employers to choose the safer option of a younger, cheaper candidate. 
[This means that older job seekers have often been job hunting for some time when they file 
job applications. Existing prejudices about older people, generous severance payments and 
overestimation of their own employability make it harder to find work. The longer older people 
seek work, the worse their labour market position becomes.] 
To enable older workers to actually stay in the workplace, it is hence not enough to gradually 
raise retirement age and increase financial incentives. Employers and employees will need to 
make a joint effort. Employees will need to continue developing their skills to strengthen their 
labour  market  position.  And  employers  will  have  to  be  prepared  to  give  older  workers  a 
chance. For it is in their own interest to quickly fill vacancies and to take on good employees. 
Importantly,  employers  should  realise  that  older  workers  are  indeed  able  to  acquire  new 
knowledge and  skills. And  that  they  can  win  commitment  from  a  motivated  employee  who 
they are likely to retain in service for longer than a job-hopping employee in their twenties or 
thirties. 
                                                      
7   Bruinshoofd,  Allard  en  Sybille  Grob  (2006),  Do  changes  in  pension  incentives  affect  retirement?  A  stated 
preferences approach to Dutch retirement considerations, DNB Working Paper no. 115. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2007
