Caleb M Fundanga: Integrity and professionalism in finance, industry 
and business  
Keynote speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the ACCA 
Professionalism and Ethics Event for Employers, Lusaka, 7 November 2007. 
 • The Chairman 
• Mr Sundeep Takwani, ACCA Head of Ethics and Regulation – Professional Standards 
• Mr Chintu Mulendema, ZICA President 
• Senior Government Officials 
• Heads of Corporates 
• All protocols observed 
• Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am honoured to stand before you to discuss the matter of “integrity and professionalism in 
finance, industry and business”. I commend ACCA Zambia for organising this forum which 
allows us to discuss matters which have long been considered of primary importance in the 
financial sector. I am certain that the importance of this subject extends beyond the financial 
sector to all sectors of the economy. 
Mr Chairman, this event, the first in the series of ACCA professionalism and ethics events to 
be  held  in  Zambia  coincides  with  the  launch  of  the  ACCA  new  professional  qualification, 
which will be first examined in December 2007. Named the ACCA qualification, it will build 
on the success of the current professional scheme, which has become the world’s fastest-
growing international accounting qualification. 
Mr  Chairman,  The  new  ACCA  qualification  is  designed  to  provide  accounting  knowledge 
skills  and  professional  values  which  will  deliver  finance  professionals  who  are  capable  of 
building  successful  careers  across  all  sectors,  whether  they  are  working  in  the  public  or 
private sectors, practising in accounting firms or pursuing a career in business. 
ACCA has designed a qualification which embeds the global accounting education standards 
set  by  the  International  Federation  of  Accountants  (IFAC).  There  is  a  strong  focus  on 
professional values, ethics and governance. 
These skills are essential as the profession moves towards strengthened codes of conduct, 
regulation  and  legislation  with  an  increasing  focus  on  professionalism  and  ethics  in 
accounting. They will be examined at the highest level in the new ACCA Qualification, and 
will be a core element of students’ practical experience requirements. 
Mr Chairman, allow me now to dwell on the main theme of our discussion this evening. 
Going through the literature one finds it difficult to obtain explicit definitions as regards the 
concepts  of  “integrity”  and  “professionalism”.  However,  the  associated  behaviours  and 
characteristics  of  the  two  concepts  are  fairly  unproblematic.  In  this  regard,  behaviours 
associated with “integrity” include honesty, sincerity, truthfulness, punctuality, ethics, fairness 
and justice while professionalism is characterised by expertise, generalised and systematic 
knowledge, a high degree of self control and governance by a code of ethics. 
Mr Chairman, the behaviours and characteristics described are virtues which are desirable in 
finance, industry and business. I note that this forum is for employers and one fundamental 
aspect about being an employer is that you may not be involved in the day-to-day operational 
issues of your organisation, hence the need to have professional employees of integrity. This 
gives  comfort  as  regards  reliability  of  financial  reporting,  compliance  with  laws  and 
regulations,  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  operations  and  safeguarding  of  assets.  These 
issues which give comfort are encompassed within the framework of corporate governance. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
Mr Chairman, in the recent past the world has witnessed a number of corporate failures such 
as Enron, Worldcom and Parmalat brought about largely by fraud on the part of employees. 
This has brought the discussion of corporate governance to the fore in finance, industry and 
business.  The  behaviour  of  corporations  and  the  people  that  run  these  corporations  have 
come  under  increased  scrutiny  by  stakeholders  and  the  wider  public,  not  least  of  all,  the 
financial  sector  in  Zambia  following  the  banking  failures  which  we  experienced  in  the  late 
90’s.  The  financial  sector  thus  provides  a  critical  example  of  the  need  for  integrity  and 
professionalism, and the Bank of Zambia has a keen interest in ensuring that these principles 
are upheld by players in the financial sector. 
The Bank of Zambia’s interest stems from its mandate to protect depositor’s interests as well 
as to ensure financial system stability. As the examples of Enron, Worldcom and Parmalat 
have shown us, poor corporate governance may lead to corporate failures. For the financial 
sector,  this  can  cause  significant  public  costs  and  consequences  due  to  the  potential 
negative impact on the payment systems and the loss of confidence in the financial sector as 
a  whole.  As  a  result,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  issued  “Corporate  Governance  Guidelines  for 
Commercial  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions”  in  November  2006  in  an  attempt  to  instil 
corporate responsibility in the financial sector. 
Mr Chairman, the corporate governance guidelines issued by the Bank of Zambia offer vital 
lessons to other economic sectors with regard to integrity and professionalism. In this regard, 
allow me, Mr Chairman, to outline just four of the principles out of a total of 15 principles that 
are contained in the guidelines: 
Principle 2 – ethical standards and corporate values 
“The board of directors, in keeping with their responsibilities to the shareholders and other 
stakeholders, is committed to the achievement of business success and the enhancement of 
long-term shareholder value with the highest standards of integrity and ethics. Each director, 
as well as each member of senior management, is therefore expected to lead by example in 
a  culture  that  emphasizes  trust,  integrity,  honesty,  judgment,  respect,  responsibility  and 
accountability.” 
The  guidelines  for  this  principle  essentially  call  upon  the  board  to  ensure  that  senior 
management  implements  strategic  policies  and  procedures  that  are  designed  to  promote 
good and acceptable ethical behaviour. 
Principle 3 – board responsibilities and composition 
“The board of directors’ role is to oversee the proper functioning of the institution. In order to 
achieve this, the board shall have clear, well-defined and understood responsibilities. There 
shall be a balance of skills, knowledge, experience and perspectives among directors so that 
the board works effectively to ensure the long-term safety and soundness of the institution.” 
The guidelines in this respect expect the board of directors to exercise professionalism by 
having a formal charter that sets out its responsibilities, having a rigorous formal processes 
for evaluating its performance along with that of board committees and individual directors 
and,  ensuring  that  the  institution  complies  with  all  relevant  laws,  and  codes  of  business 
practice,  and  that  it  communicates  with  its  shareholders  and  relevant  stakeholders  openly 
and promptly 
Principle 6 – roles of senior management 
“It is the responsibility of management, under the direction of the chief executive officer, to 
conduct the institution’s business and affairs in an effective, responsible and ethical manner, 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
consistent  with  the  principles  and  direction  established  by  the  board  through  the  strategic 
plan.” 
Apart  from  reflecting integrity  in  their  management  of  the  institution,  the  guidelines  for  this 
principle require that senior management be appropriately qualified to run the affairs of the 
institution.  The  expectation  is  that  people  of  appropriate  qualifications  will  reflect  the 
professionalism that is required of their respective professions. 
Principle 7 – reporting and disclosure 
“The board shall demand integrity both in financial reporting and in timeliness and balance of 
disclosures on the institution’s affairs.” 
The guidelines for this principle require that the institution’s financial statements fairly present 
the state of affairs of the institution as at the end of the financial year and the profit or loss 
and cash flows for the reporting period. Furthermore, the annual report is expected to state 
whether the corporate governance guidelines have been adhered to or, if not, where there 
has not been compliance the institution is expected to give reasons. 
Mr Chairman, as you will note the four principles highlight the fact that the Bank of Zambia 
places a great deal of importance on integrity and professionalism in the financial sector. Our 
expectation is that this should extend to other economic sectors as well. Lessons can thus be 
drawn  from  the  work  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  done  and  can  be  applied  to  the  other 
sectors. 
Mr. Chairman, the prevalence of fraud in institutions all over the world has culminated with 
regulatory  authorities  in  several  jurisdictions  instituting  jail  terms  and  fines  against  the 
scourge. The famous Sarbanes-Oxley is one such response. Our own corporate governance 
guidelines have a strong linkage to the Banking and Financial Services Act which when not 
adhered to may result, upon conviction, to a fine or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
two years or to both. 
Mr. Chairman, the international work that is being done in respect of money laundering and 
corruption  payments  or  terrorist  financing  is  such  that  trade  and  service  companies,  like 
banks, are now being held accountable for what they deal in and whom they trade with – as 
suppliers as well as buyers. The implications of anti-money laundering (AML) are such that 
they extend to all forms of finance, industry and business. It is thus critical that the principles 
of integrity and professionalisms are applied in all spheres of institutional activities. 
Mr Chairman 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 3
