Ingimundur Friðriksson: The impact of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ingimundur  Friðriksson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
University of Akureyri, Akureyri, 3 October 2007. 
 in 
fiscal  policy  and 
lending  decisions  by 
Iceland’s economy has been characterised by strong imbalances in the recent past, and still 
is. The current expansionary episode was driven by large-scale investments in the aluminium 
and power sectors that were launched several years ago, and in structural changes in the 
mortgage  loan  market  that  led  to  a  surge  in  credit-driven  private  consumption.  Disposable 
income  has  also  grown  at  an  exceptionally  fast  pace.  Just  over  a  year  ago,  inflation 
measured 8½%. The current measurement is just over 4%, while underlying inflation is likely 
to be in the range 6-7%. In spite of overheating and excess demand, the inflation rate has 
thus been slowed down. Primarily, this result has been achieved with tight monetary stance. 
Without  it,  inflation  would  have  been  much  higher,  with  all  the  exchange  rate  volatility, 
erosion  of  living  standards  and  disruption  to  business  operations  that  this  would  have 
entailed.  Many  claims  have  been  made  recently  about  the  inflation  target  and  the  Central 
Bank’s recourses for attaining it – or the lack of them. The problem now is not the framework 
of  monetary  policy  or  its  implementation,  but  rather  the  lack  of  necessary  support  for  the 
Central Bank’s measures. The tight monetary stance will be maintained and tightening is also 
needed  elsewhere, 
financial  companies. 
Macroeconomic  balance  will  be  difficult  to  achieve  otherwise.  An  easing  of  the  monetary 
stance now would simply be misguided and have unforeseeable consequences. The Central 
Bank  would  be  failing  in  its  mandatory  duties  if  inflation  were  temporarily  “let  loose”  to 
achieve supposed results in other areas. In the following speech I shall present arguments in 
support of this view.  
After  maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  for  more  than  a  decade,  Iceland  adopted 
inflation targeting in March 2001 with a joint declaration by the Government and the Central 
Bank. The target is a twelve-month rate of increase of 2½% in the CPI. For much of the time 
the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  served  its  purpose,  but  towards  the  end,  following  the  full 
deregulation  of  cross-border  capital  movements,  more  exchange  rate  flexibility  was  clearly 
required than the fixed regime could allow, even after the tolerance bands had progressively 
been widened from their original 2¼% to 9%, i.e. the króna was permitted to deviate by up to 
9% from its central rate when the policy was abandoned. A return to a fixed exchange rate 
regime is out of the question. Since it could never be credible in practice, it can be ruled out – 
unless currency restrictions were to be reimposed, which is hardly on anyone’s agenda.  
Inflation targeting has proved a successful tool of monetary policy in many parts of the world. 
Well over two dozen central banks now target inflation, including those of various industrial 
countries  such  as  the  UK,  Sweden,  Norway,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  The  European 
Central Bank can also be said to target inflation in practice, without a formal commitment. 
Broadly speaking, all these central banks have a similar approach. Inflation targeting requires 
careful preparation of forecasts for economic aggregates – not least inflation – a high degree 
of central bank transparency and effective instruments and transmission channels for policy 
measures.  
Iceland  moved  onto  an  inflation  target  under  fairly  difficult  conditions.  The  króna  had 
weakened substantially and was close to the lower tolerance limits when the new policy was 
adopted.  It  then  depreciated  rapidly  in  spring  2001.  The  consequence  was  a  surge  in 
inflation, which peaked at around 9½% at the beginning of 2002. Subsequently it declined 
sharply, not least on account of the tight monetary stance, and the 2½% target was attained 
later the same year. For some time inflation remained below or around target, but since the 
first half of 2005 it has overshot, and was well above target for a while. The various reasons 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 1
for this development have been described in detail in recent Central Bank publications and I 
shall not elaborate them upon over and above the causes I have already mentioned.  
In  order  to  attain  its  inflation  target,  the  Central  Bank  has  a  single  instrument:  the  policy 
interest rate. The policy rate applies to Central Bank facilities for financial companies and its 
impact  is  transmitted  through  them  into  the  economy.  When  inflationary  pressures  are 
looming or building up, the Central Bank raises its policy rate in order to make credit more 
expensive and reduce investment and consumption, encouraging saving at the same time. 
The policy rate is not applied to achieve other objectives than the inflation target. Thus it is 
pointless to set other objectives for monetary policy except by abandoning the objective of 
price stability, which would be particularly imprudent.  
Steady enhancements have been made to the conduct of monetary policy. Forecasting has 
strengthened with a new and much more powerful macroeconomic model. A landmark was 
reached  this  year  when  the  Bank  began  publishing  its  staff’s  projection  for  the  policy  rate 
path  that  is  compatible  with  attaining  the  inflation  target  within  an  acceptable  timeframe. 
Previous  interest  rate  assumptions  had  proved  unsatisfactory  and  even  misleading. 
Publication of the policy rate path has been welcomed and has facilitated the Central Bank in 
exerting the impact that it intends to have on market expectations. International agencies and 
foreign  analysts  who  monitor  economic  developments  in  Iceland  have  praised  the  Central 
Bank’s monetary policy implementation, transparency and professionalism. It is interesting to 
note that these assessments are at odds with widespread attitudes in Iceland at the moment. 
In  the  climate  that  has  prevailed  recently,  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate  hikes  have 
admittedly affected the exchange rate of the króna first, then demand much later. Among the 
explanations is that policy rate hikes have not had what should have been their normal effect. 
This has complicated the Bank in its efforts to constrain inflation in recent times. One factor 
has been the changes that took place in the mortgage loan market in autumn 2004 when the 
commercial  and  savings  banks  began  competing  with  the  Housing  Financing  Fund  (HFF). 
The  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate  hikes  impact  the  interest  rates  of  non-indexed  lending  by 
commercial banks and savings banks and the non-indexed end of the domestic bond market. 
However, for a long time they had little impact on long-term interest rates. Some critics cite 
this  as  proof  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  measures  do  not  have  the  same  effect  as 
those  of  other  central  banks.  Yet  the  development  in  Iceland  is  by  no  means  an  isolated 
occurrence. The US experience offers an immediate example. The Federal Reserve began 
raising its federal funds rate early in 2005 in progressive steps until early this year, from 1% 
to 5.25%. These hikes had no effect on long-term interest rates in the US, which have been 
broadly steady since 2005 apart with only minor fluctuations in either direction. US monetary 
authorities  were  puzzled  by  this  development.  I  cite  this  example  because  it  has  been 
claimed  that,  unlike  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  decisions,  the  impact  of  changes  in  the 
Federal Reserve’s rates is immediately transmitted in full to long-term interest rates.  
One reason for Iceland’s limited success in keeping inflation in check has been precisely that 
the  impact  of  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate  hikes  has  not  been  transmitted  in  full  to  the 
mortgage loan market. In particular this is because one of the players there, the HFF, enjoys 
Treasury guarantees on its borrowing, enabling it to meet its funding requirement by issuing 
bonds at very long maturities with lower yields than on shorter issues, so that it can avoid 
raising interest rates on its new lending, which under normal circumstances would have been 
warranted and called for by the Central Bank’s monetary stance. Since autumn 2005, market 
yields on indexed bonds have risen in the range ½ to 2 percentage points, depending upon 
the issues involved. At the same time, HFF interest rates have gone up by half a percentage 
point.  So  it  cannot  be  said  that  Iceland  faces  the  same  conundrum  as  the  US  about  why 
long-term interest rates have not risen in the wake of policy hikes.  
House  prices  began  to  increase  significantly  again  last  spring,  in  the  teeth  of  general 
expectations, and have been the main driver of the CPI in recent months. It is not unlikely 
that the latest wave of price rises in the housing market is at least partly due to decisions by 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2007
the  government  and  HFF  last  winter  to  raise  the  loan-to-value  ratio  and  mortgage  ceilings 
and to lower interest rates on new lending. Even though neither the changes nor amounts 
involved  were  large,  there  is  little  doubt  that  they  had  some  effect  and  prompted  a  new 
marketing  drive  by  the  banks.  In  a  climate  of  rapidly  growing  disposable  income,  house 
prices began to soar again.  
The  Central  Bank  has  emphasised  the  need  to  change  the  public  sector  mortgage  credit 
system  but  has  not  stated  an  official  view  as  to  how  this  should  be  done.  Nonetheless, 
immediate reforms are vital to give monetary policy more leverage over the mortgage loan 
market. Another important consideration is that whatever mortgage loan arrangements that 
are developed should provide a solid foundation for the domestic bond market. The Central 
Bank has been making these points for several years with little result. International agencies 
have agreed that a review of the role of the HFF is long overdue. Particular mention may be 
made of the IMF, most recently this summer. The Fund’s reports show that its analysts have 
striven to make an in-depth study of mortgage credit arrangements in Iceland. In its Article IV 
Consultation  report  published  in  June,  the  IMF  claimed  that  a  higher  policy  rate  than 
otherwise had been needed as a result of the HFF’s activities.  
It should be added that one reason for the limited success in keeping the lid on inflation has 
been an enormous increase in disposable income in 2006 and 2007, driven by both wage 
rises  and  tax  cuts.  These  factors  and  others  have  fuelled  domestic  demand  and  thereby 
inflationary pressures. 
The Central Bank has pointed out how the small amount of outstanding Treasury bonds in 
the  market  hinders  policy  rate  changes  from  being  transmitted  with  the  necessary  weight. 
Price  formation  in  the  bond  market  is  imperfect.  The  Bank  has  aired  the  idea  that  the 
Treasury should issue bonds with the explicit purpose of maintaining an active bond market. 
Of course, such a suggestion must be qualified by the fact that the Treasury is on the verge 
of  eliminating  its  net  debt  and  has  no  need  to  borrow.  The  Central  Bank’s  standpoint, 
however,  is  that  given  the  significance  of  domestic  capital  markets,  the  importance  of 
facilitating  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  measures  and  long-term  strategies  for  Treasury 
funding, it is in the Treasury’s interest to maintain a smooth bond market, even though it has 
no  direct  funding  requirement.  One  example  of  Treasury  issuance  on  such  principles  is 
Norway, which has had even less need to borrow than the Icelandic government.  
Claims have been heard that the Central Bank’s monetary policy is either impotent or wrong, 
and that the Icelandic króna is the root of macroeconomic instability. The Central Bank has 
pointed  out  that  one  consequence  of  globalisation  and  Iceland’s  integration  with  global 
capital markets, coupled with the exceptionally intense upswing experienced in recent years, 
has been that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy has altered. In this climate, 
the impact is transmitted with greater force to the exchange rate, and only later to domestic 
demand, as I mentioned earlier. This is reflected in a stronger króna than otherwise, which 
other things being equal delays the adjustment of the current account deficit. Nonetheless, it 
is  impossible  to  demonstrate  that  monetary  policy  is  impotent.  Anecdotal  evidence  about 
households and businesses being squeezed by high interest rates confirms that the opposite 
is  true.  Monetary  policy  does  work,  and  will  eventually  impact  demand  and  thereby  the 
current account deficit.  
Inflation soared in the recent term to peak at 8½% just after mid-2006, as I mentioned before. 
The  Central  Bank  made  a  particularly  sharp  response  to  the  deteriorating  inflation  outlook 
last year with a large hike in the policy rate on the back of sizeable earlier increases. There is 
no  question  that  the  tight  monetary  stance  entailed  by  these  measures  reversed  the 
development  and  drove  inflation  down,  as  subsequent  data  have  shown.  In  its  Monetary 
Bulletin published in July this year, the Central Bank forecast that inflation would be close to 
target in 2008 and it would be attained in full in 2009. Of course events are unfolding in this 
way as a result of the tight monetary stance and it is absurd to claim otherwise. It can even 
be argued that the Bank should be criticised instead for not raising rates enough and quickly 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 3
enough. I am referring here to the shortcomings I mentioned in the transmission of policy rate 
hikes and insufficient restraint in other areas of the economy.  
A tighter Central Bank monetary stance makes borrowing more expensive. The aim of such 
tightening is to dampen demand. Competition with the HFF doubtless made the commercial 
banks reluctant to raise their mortgage lending rates, in spite of having full grounds for doing 
so.  This  situation  has  changed  recently  and  a  sizeable  spread  has  developed  between 
mortgage  lending  rates  of  the  banks  and  the  HFF.  In  other  words,  the  tighter  stance  is 
beginning to be felt in the banks’ mortgage rates. Competition with the HFF has undoubtedly 
prompted the banks to be more aggressive in marketing their mortgage loans denominated 
in  foreign  currencies,  which  in  the  present  climate  can  be  expected  to  offer  them  better 
returns than indexed lending in domestic currency. It is a different matter whether borrowers 
in foreign currencies have been fully aware of both the exchange rate and interest rate risks 
entailed by doing so, which the Central Bank has repeatedly cautioned against.  
It has also been claimed that the Central Bank has raised its policy rate excessively and that 
it  is  now  far  too  high.  The  only  possible  inference  is  that  critics  of  these  measures  would 
have preferred a much higher rate of inflation. Had the Central Bank not made these policy 
rate hikes, the outcome would have been much higher inflation, falling living standards and a 
heavier debt burden for households, the majority of which have a high level of indexed debt. 
Another consequence would have been to drive up inflation expectations, which experience 
shows are difficult to unwind. Inflation cannot be switched on and off at will. If the Central 
Bank  had  not  maintained  a  tight  monetary  stance  and  not  raised  the  policy  rate  as  it  has 
done, it is almost certain that the economy would be swept into a familiar spiral of inflation, 
currency  depreciation  and  wage  rises,  benefitting  no  one  but  harming  us  all,  as  historical 
experience has taught us.  
One  of  the  fiercest  critics  of  Central  Bank  monetary  policy  has  been  the  Confederation  of 
Employers.  They  have  dismissed  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  as  having  no  effect,  while 
claiming that inflation excluding the housing component of the CPI has been only 2½% for 
some  time,  and  then  infer  that  monetary  policy  has  had  no  impact  on  that  development, 
however  they  manage  to  reach  that  conclusion.  The  Confederation  of  Employers  has 
suggested monetary policy reforms along the following broad lines: First, to relax the inflation 
target; second, to remove house prices from the target CPI; and third, to impose a corridor 
for Iceland’s policy rate differential with abroad, e.g. the European Central Bank. The Central 
Bank  does  not  consider  that  any  of  these  proposals  would  improve  monetary  policy 
implementation. On the contrary. Easing the inflation target is highly inadvisable. That would 
probably drive up inflation expectations of households and businesses and anchor inflation at 
a higher rate than would be tolerated in neighbouring economies, with correspondingly bad 
consequences. We should not set less ambitious goals than others.  
The Central Bank has previously declared its firm support for including house prices in the 
CPI on which the inflation target is based. Since the housing component reflects an important 
share of the cost of living for households, it is natural to include it. Also, the CPI including 
mortgage costs is a more stable gauge of inflation than if they are excluded. House prices 
are  a  leading  indicator  as  well.  A  sharp  rise  signals  private  consumption  growth  later  on, 
enabling  the  Bank  to  respond  more  quickly  to  demand  pressures.  Finally,  if  the  housing 
component were removed from the index now, inflation would probably measure higher than 
otherwise in the period ahead, assuming that house prices increase by less than the general 
price level, as has been forecast for some time. Thus it is difficult to envisage the gains from 
removing the housing component now. A more obvious measure would be to make it easier 
for the Central Bank to impact mortgage interest rates, as I discussed earlier.  
A  cap  on  the  policy  interest  rate  differential  with  abroad  would  merely  cause  problems. 
Simply consider what would have happened had Iceland not been allowed to set its policy 
rate  more  than  two  percentage  points  higher  than  the  ECB  in  recent  times  –  which  is  the 
differential  proposed  by  the  Confederation  of  Employers.  It  is  almost  certain  that  Iceland 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2007
would be struggling with very high inflation and all the disruption this would entail. Precluding 
such consequences would have called for a draconian fiscal stance and constraints on wage 
rises.  Both  would  have  been  very  difficult  to  achieve  and  are  outside  the  Central  Bank’s 
sphere of influence anyway.  
Yet another allegation has been that the Central Bank is in a straitjacket and will never be 
able to lower the policy rate. The Bank disagrees. I have already mentioned changes made 
to  the  Bank’s  forecasting  techniques  earlier  this  year  which  included  publishing  the  policy 
rate path that, in the staff’s assessment, would suffice to bring inflation to target within an 
acceptable  timeframe.  The  Central  Bank  has  repeatedly  stated  that  the  policy  rate  will  be 
brought  down  as  soon  as  conditions  allow  this  to  be  done,  but  not  before.  The  forecast 
published  in  July  implied  that  the  policy  rate  would  be  lowered  in  the  first  half  of  2008.  I 
should  point  out  that  Iceland  has  run  up  a  huge  current  account  deficit.  This  will  narrow 
somewhat this year and is forecast to decline slowly but surely. A wide current account deficit 
creates  uncertainty  concerning  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna.  A  smaller  current  account 
deficit  reduces  this  uncertainty,  so  that  conditions  could  remain  for  ongoing  glacier  bond 
issuance, for example, despite the narrower interest rate differential with abroad.  
More  views  have  been  aired  recently.  One  was  that  the  prevailing  global  financial  climate 
presents a unique opportunity for the Central Bank to cut its policy rate. In the same breath it 
was  underlined  that  the  Bank  needs  to  cool  the  economy.  These  two  perspectives  are 
incompatible. The need to review the assumptions on which the Central Bank Act was based 
when it entered into force in 2001 has also been mentioned. Let us recall that at the end of 
2000, the Prime Minister assigned a committee representing the four largest political parties 
in parliament with the task of drafting new Central Bank legislation. A complete draft bill was 
delivered in March 2001, backed by the entire committee. This was passed as law virtually 
unamended with the unanimous support of all 56 members of parliament who were present 
for  its  final  reading.  The  Act  represented  a  major  reform.  It  granted  the  Bank  increased 
independence,  simplified  its  objectives  and  made  greater  demands  for  transparency  and 
professionalism. A review of the assumptions behind this legislation or amendments to it will 
obviously not reduce the current macroeconomic imbalances. Other action is needed.  
The  issue  is  actually  very  straightforward.  Iceland’s  economy  has  been  overheating  for  a 
long  time.  This  is  the  result  of  massive  domestic  investments,  radical  changes  in  the 
domestic  financial  sector  when  the  banks  began  providing  mortgage  loans  in  competition 
with the HFF, and exceptionally large increases in household disposable income stemming 
from  increases  in  pay  and  tax  reductions.  All  this  happened  under  external  conditions  in 
which  interest  rates  were  at  a  historical  low.  The  consequence  was  buoyant  domestic 
demand, private consumption and investment, which have been reflected in inflation and a 
large  current  account  deficit.  Macroeconomic  imbalances  have  been  too  pronounced  for 
monetary policy alone to contain them, exacerbated by special conditions that have hindered 
measures from having the necessary effects. Other aspects of economic policy would have 
needed  to  be  tightened,  in  particular  the  fiscal  stance,  even  though  the  Treasury  is  much 
better placed than in most other countries, with virtually zero net domestic and foreign debt 
which  by  itself  is  a  notable  achievement.  Financial  companies  would  also  have  needed  to 
show more prudence in their lending decisions and they should be encouraged to display the 
utmost caution in this respect.  
In public debate in recent weeks and months, there have been occasional calls for Iceland to 
adopt a different currency. Without expressing any opinion on the issue here, I would point 
out that this cannot be done overnight and it is crucial not to act rashly. The current debate 
appears  to  be  prompted  by  the  recent  volatility  of  the  króna.  I  hardly  need  to  mention  the 
great volatility that has been witnessed in capital markets, exchange rates, interest rates and 
securities prices around the world in recent weeks. Iceland has not escaped this trend any 
more  than  other  countries,  but  the  fluctuations  it  has  experienced  have  not  been  sharper 
than  in  many  others.  A  key  precondition  for  joining  a  monetary  union  is  to  achieve 
macroeconomic balance. Whatever the outcome of the currency debate, the problems of the 
BIS Review 111/2007 
 5
day will not vanish without being tackled, and that takes time. They will not be solved with 
miracle  cures  or  ill-advised  changes  to  individual  aspects  of  monetary  policy  conduct. 
Monetary  policy  works.  However,  it  needs  support,  along  with  necessary  reforms  to 
strengthen its effectiveness. There are no alternatives. But under today’s conditions, where 
developments in global markets have more direct impact on the Icelandic economy, it is vital 
for all economic policy measures to have a coordinated focus on restoring macroeconomic 
stability.  This  must  be  the  priority.  The  same  principle  applies  in  all  countries  in  a  similar 
position, not least in relatively small and open economies. Relaxing the stance of monetary 
policy is by no means the answer and it is important not to undermine its credibility.  
On September 6 this year, the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland decided to 
leave the policy interest rate unchanged at 13.3%, as it has been since December 2006. The 
Board  of  Governors  considered  that  the  short-term  inflation  outlook  had  deteriorated 
somewhat  since  the  previous  interest  rate  decision  in  July,  but  long-term  prospects  were 
unchanged.  Exchange  rate  developments  were  highly  uncertain  and  would  largely  be 
determined by developments in global financial markets. The Board of Governors concluded 
its  announcement  by  reiterating  its  commitment  to  attaining  the  inflation  target  within  an 
acceptable  timeframe.  The  next  interest  rate  decision  by  the  Board  of  Governors  will  be 
announced on November 1, 2007, coinciding with the publication of  Monetary Bulletin and 
the Bank’s new macroeconomic and inflation forecasts.  
The twelve-month rise in the CPI in September measured 4.2%. This was a higher rate of 
inflation than the Central Bank had expected. Revised macroeconomic aggregates published 
in mid-September also showed that the economy is more robust than preliminary statistics 
had  indicated.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  labour  market  is  still  extremely  tight,  with 
unemployment of less than 1% in spite of large-scale imports of labour. The only conclusion 
that  can  be  drawn  is  that  inflationary  pressures  are  still  stronger  than had  been  expected, 
and the challenge ahead correspondingly greater. I repeat that this will not be solved with a 
laxer  monetary  policy  or  changes  to  the  monetary  policy  framework.  Reining  in  inflation  is 
vital  for  the  interests  of  households  and  businesses.  Iceland  now  has  the  same  monetary 
policy framework as many other countries. Most of them have been more successful than we 
have in containing inflation. Neither have they had to accommodate investments on the scale 
that Iceland has witnessed, relative to the  size of the economy, and their domestic capital 
markets have not undergone as extensive and sharp changes as Iceland experienced when 
the banks entered the mortgage loan market. At the same time it is unlikely that household 
disposable income in any country has risen on the scale seen in Iceland over the past two 
years. 
In  most  countries  it  is  considered  natural  to  set  price  stability  as  an  objective  for  central 
banks.  They  can  only  have  a  short-term  impact  on  other  aggregates.  Under  present 
conditions Iceland has no option of a different monetary policy framework. Failing to support 
monetary policy in efforts to achieve the intended results would be an act of surrender and 
have dire consequences. 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2007
