Hamad Al-Sayari: Economic and structural policy reforms in Saudi 
Arabia 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Hamad  Al-Sayari,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary 
Agency,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Finance,  INC  MENA  Regional  Economic  Forum, 
Riyadh, 7 November 2007. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  at  this  important  gathering  organized  by  the 
Institute of International Finance and hosted by the National Commercial Bank. 
I would like to thank the organizers for inviting me to speak to this distinguished audience. I 
understand that for the next two days, the participants will be deliberating on the state of the 
global economy in general and the opportunities and challenges facing the Middle East and 
North Africa (MENA) economies in particular. 
The  Gulf  Cooperation  Council  Countries  (GCC)  are  an  important  constituent  of  the  MENA 
region,  a  marketplace  that  is  undergoing  significant  transformation  where  the  member 
countries  are  opening  up  their  markets  and  significant  structural  policy  reforms  are  taking 
place. 
Let me begin by providing you with an overview of the ongoing economic liberalization and 
structural policy reforms currently underway in the Kingdom. Since the discovery of oil in the 
early  1930s,  the  oil  sector  has  remained  the  linchpin  of  Saudi  Arabian  economy. 
Nevertheless  over  the  past  three  decades,  a  strategic  decision  was  made  to  diversify  and 
expand the base of our economy. Towards this goal, a series of wide ranging reforms and 
policies were implemented in order to improve the investment climate and to attract greater 
private  sector  participation  in  the  economy  as  well  as  facilitating  inflow  of  foreign  direct 
investment into the country. 
In the last decade, significant progress has been made and the Kingdom has enacted and 
implemented  forty-two  new  trade-related  laws  and  regulations;  nineteen  of  them  were 
required for our WTO accession in 2005. The last and most important of these initiatives was 
the  reform  of  the  Judicial  System.  In  addition,  to  stimulate  economic  activities  and  attract 
foreign investment, the rate of corporate taxation has been reduced from 45 percent to a flat 
20 percent, and the requirements for minimum start-up capital were abolished. The negative 
list  of  investment  was  also  revised  and  now  allows  foreign  investment  in  vital  sectors  like 
insurance  services,  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  air  and  train  transport,  and  communication 
services.  The  Government  has  set  itself  an  objective  to  place  Saudi  Arabia  amongst  the 
world’s top ten most investor friendly economies by 2010 and, therefore, the opening up of 
new economic sectors to FDI is in line with the ongoing economic reforms with the aim of 
improving the Kingdom’s investment climate. 
The Kingdom’s efforts towards economic reforms in order to attract foreign investment have 
come to fruition. According to a recent report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development  (UNCTAD),  Saudi  Arabia  emerged  as  the  largest  recipient  of  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) in the Arab world in 2006, attracting $18 billion in FDI, an increase of 51 
percent over 2005. The global rating agencies Standards & Poors and Fitch have also raised 
the  sovereign  credit  ratings  of  the Kingdom  to  A+.  Also, Saudi  Arabia  has  been  upgraded 
according to the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index from 38th place to 23rd place in 
2007. 
The Government has encouraged the establishment and growth of value-added industries in 
areas  where  the  Kingdom  has  competitive  advantages,  namely,  cheaper  energy,  strategic 
locations and availability of raw materials. King Abdullah has recently launched four mega-
economic cities in Rabigh, Hail, Al-Madinah and Jazan, which are expected to draw almost 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
SR  300  billion  in  investment  and  create  more  than  a  million  jobs.  It  is  worthy  to  note  that 
these economic zones are located in the less developed cities and in areas away from the 
existing  economically  developed  regions  and  are  specifically  selected  to  ensure  that 
development and employment opportunities are spread around the Kingdom. 
An important indicator of progress made in diversifying the economy is provided by the trend 
in our non-oil exports. Such exports were insignificant in early eighties, but they have been 
rising sharply in recent years. Since 2000, they have risen continuously. The non-oil sector 
exports were valued at about $21 billion in 2006 and constituted almost 6.0 percent of total 
GDP and 13.2 percent of non-oil GDP. 
During  2006,  the  national  economy  continued  its  remarkable  growth  for  the  fourth 
consecutive  year,  especially  in  the  non-oil  sector  which  grew  by  6.2  percent  following  its 
growth  rate  of  5.2  percent  in  2005.  The  non-oil  industrial  sector  was  the  fastest  growing 
sector of the economy recording a robust growth of 10.1 percent during the preceding year. 
The sector has continued its robust growth during the current year. 
Due  to  higher  economic  growth  and  receipt  of higher  than anticipated revenues,  the  fiscal 
position of the government has improved substantially in recent years. The budget surpluses 
since 2003 have enabled the government to reduce its domestic debt sharply and increase 
its expenditure on infrastructure and social sectors. The ratio of domestic debt to GDP has 
declined from 82 percent in 2003 to 27.9 percent in 2006 which was reflected positively on 
our public finance and macroeconomic stability. These trends are likely to continue against 
the  oil  revenue  cushion  and  fiscal  discipline  along  with  continuous  expansion  of  the 
economy. 
The foregoing policy initiatives, combined with the recent budgetary surpluses have enabled 
us to launch a number of key development projects that are designed to develop the county's 
physical and social infrastructure, especially spending on education and training, diversifying 
the economy, creating jobs and enhancing growth prospects. A key facet of the economic 
reforms has been the active participation of the private sector in all aspects of the economy 
particularly in the manufacturing, construction and services sectors. 
Now turning to the Kingdom’s goals and aspirations for the next decades. We have a clear 
vision  that  Saudi  Arabia  will  represent  an  industrial  hub  among  the  region's  countries, 
leveraging off on its strategic location, competitive supply of energy, size of the local market, 
ease  of  access  to  global  markets,  and  the  growing  partnerships  between  the  public  and 
private sectors. This strategy fulfils our State’s goal of diversifying our economic production 
base away from Oil. For this purpose, we have encouraged and will continue to encourage 
the  private  sector  by  providing  attractive  incentives,  including  the  setting  up  of  industrial 
zones in various parts of the country, equipping them with various infrastructural facilities and 
by increasing the capital base of specialized credit institutions to provide long-term loans to 
entrepreneurs. 
Nevertheless,  the  Saudi  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  challenges  the  most  important  of 
which is the increasing rate of inflation. Although inflation was less than 1 percent on average 
in the last two decades, it rose to 2.2 percent in 2006 and it continued to increase during the 
last  months,  exceeding  4  percent  in  last  August  according  to  the  Central  Department  of 
Statistics and Information. Our concern is that factors that caused accelerating inflation are 
still  in  existence.  These  include  external  ones  such  as  higher  prices  of  foodstuffs  and 
commodities, and internal factors such as the remarkable rise in rents in the main cities due 
to  the  economic  expansion,  increasing  demand  for  housing  and  offices  resulting  from  an 
increase in spending on investment, and the expansion of services sector especially in the 
financial and construction sectors. 
Although the inflation rate in the Kingdome is less than that in most countries of the region 
due  to  the  size  of  domestic  production  base  and  due  to  the  availability  of  directly  and 
indirectly  subsidized  goods  and  services  such  as  flour,  fuel,  water,  electricity,  and  some 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
foodstuffs, the continuing increase in inflation requires SAMA to keep a close watch on it and 
adopt all possible policies to confront this challenge. 
Dear audience, 
The banking system’s performance has continued to strengthen over the years with proactive 
monitoring  and  guidance  from  SAMA.  Saudi  banks  achieved  good  profits,  such  as  the 
average Return on Equity and average Return on assets. They have not been affected by 
turmoil in global markets. The banks also have average Basel Capital Adequacy Ratios of 
over 21 percent well above the mandated international standard of 8 percent. To ensure the 
continuation  of  this  trend,  we  continue  to  accord  high  priority  to  appropriate  prudential 
regulations  and  close  supervision  of  banks.  During  2005,  SAMA  rolled  out  a  risk  based 
approach to bank supervision with on site and off site risk assessments undertaken on an 
ongoing basis. All Saudi Banks are on target to implement all 3 Pillars of the Basle II Capital 
Adequacy by January 2008, using the standardized approach. 
During the past decade, Saudi banks have made tremendous progress in terms of offering 
innovative products and services, introducing sophisticated technological delivery channels 
including ATMs, Internet and Phone Banking. In cooperation with SAMA, banks have set up 
advanced payment and settlement systems, including Automated Clearing Houses and real 
time  gross  value  electronic  funds  transfer  systems  such  as  SPAN  and  SARIE.  The 
introduction of technologically advanced systems has resulted in significantly improving the 
level  and  quality  of  customer  service,  a  reduction  in  transactional  costs  and  increase  in 
efficiencies and strengthening controls. 
Regarding the capital market, a number of measures have been taken by the Capital Market 
Authority to deepen and broaden the market which will enhance its role in the development 
of  the  economy.  The  Capital  Market  Authority  has  been  issuing  licenses  for  setting  up 
specialized companies devoted exclusively to conducting securities business in the Kingdom. 
So far, it has issued 70 licenses for the purpose. 
Our financial system is continuing to develop and grow in strength and sophistication. The 
insurance sector is being reorganized under the Cooperative Insurance Law of 2003, which 
has entrusted SAMA with the responsibility of supervising insurance business in the country. 
At  the  time  of  the  enactment  of  the  Law,  there  was  only  one  licensed  company  namely 
National  Cooperative  Company  for  Insurance  (NCCI)  operating  in  the  country.  Other 
companies  were  unlicensed.  Several  companies  have  applied,  and  Royal  Decrees  were 
issued approving the establishment of 21 insurance companies. Approvals were issued by 
SAMA  for  50  offices  to  provide  insurance  related  services  such  as  brokerage,  loss 
assessment and insurance consultations. Some offices completed necessary procedures to 
obtain commercial registrations and others are about to finalize necessary procedures. More 
licenses are expected to be issued soon. 
The banking system is also being expanded by allowing foreign banks to open branches in 
the Kingdom. So far ten licenses have been issued for that purpose to 5 GCC banks and to 5 
banks  from  other  countries.  All  of  them  have  already  established  their  branches  in  the 
Kingdom, or are likely to open their branches in the very near future. 
Also, in March 2006 the Council of Ministers approved the foundation of a Saudi joint-stock 
company under the name "Alinm'a Bank" with a capital of SR 15 billion to carry out normal 
banking  business  and  investment.  This  bank  is  likely  to  become  operational  in  the  near 
future. 
Saudi Arabia has one of the youngest populations in the world. This means that one of the 
challenges facing the national economy is to continue creating jobs for our young people to 
enter the labour market. This involves development of education and training to qualify the 
youth  and  prepare  it  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  labour  market.  This  subject  is  being 
given a high priority in the State's plans which envisage expansion in the establishment of 
more universities, specialized colleges, training centers and encouraging the private sector to 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
contribute to the effort in that direction. Notable progress has been made in providing most 
government jobs to Saudis. A major achievement of the Saudi Banking system has been in 
areas  of  human  resources,  where  banks  have  continued  to  increase  the  use  of  Saudi 
citizens. I am therefore pleased to note that in this regard the Banking sector is ahead of all 
other  industrial  sectors  and  currently  a  level  of  about  80  percent  Saudization  has  been 
achieved. The employment of Saudis at senior executive level has reached 70 percent. 
However,  one  of  the  most  important  challenges  currently  facing  the  financial  sector  is  the 
great increase in the need for qualified skills due to the expansion by banks in their business 
and establishment of financial services institutions and insurance companies and insurance 
related  services  and  free  professions.  This  will  result  in  a  great  pressure  on  available 
technical skills in these fields. This has been noted recently in the high rise in the wages for 
such specialized skills and competition by financial institutions to attract such skills. I hope 
that  exaggeration  in  this  competition  will  not  increase  the  rotation  of  the  manpower  in  this 
sector in a manner that would affect work in its institutions. 
The next stage in the Saudization policy is to increase the proportion of Saudis in the new 
jobs  that  are  being  created  by  our  expanding  economy.  The  government  has  recently 
launched  a  program  to  support  small-and-medium-size  enterprises  which  will  also  create 
employment opportunities for Saudis. 
The forthcoming stage of the Saudiization policy will focus on increasing the share of Saudis 
in  new  posts  created  by  economic  growth.  The  Government  has  recently  launched  a 
programme  for  supporting  small  and  medium  size  companies,  thereby,  new  jobs  will  be 
available for Saudis. 
There are also a number of challenges in deepening and broadening the financial sector with 
significant implications for the economy. These include the creation of a viable and vibrant 
mortgage industry, which would have significant impacts on housing, construction, durable 
goods  and  other  ancillary  sectors.  Also,  there  are  initiatives  in  place  to  establish  sound 
insurance  and  leasing  industries.  These  initiatives  are  also  aimed  at  enlarging  the 
institutional  investors'  base  that  can  channel  resources  in  developing  a  pool  of  expertise, 
professional skills and technical knowledge in the financial sector. 
I wish to conclude with the observation that Saudi Arabia's economy is currently undergoing 
through  a  stage  of  accelerated  growth  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy  at  a  level  and  pace 
unprecedented  in  the  past.  The  Government  is  spearheading  this  dynamic  growth  with  its 
avowed  policy  of  structural  reforms  and  liberalization  in  the  economy,  as  evidenced  by  its 
success in attracting the private sector and foreign direct investment into primarily the non-oil 
sectors of the economy. 
The  Saudi  economy  is  an  integral  part  of  the  global  economy  and  is  thus  susceptible  to 
systemic  risks,  although  Saudi  Arabia  did  not  feel  the  financial  turmoil  and  liquidity  crisis 
experienced  by  the  rest  of  the  world  as  a  result  of  the  recent  sub-prime  crisis,  we  are, 
nonetheless, vigilant in our efforts to continually monitor the domestic market and to ensure 
continuation and stability of policies and regulations. 
I wish all success to your forum and a good stay in the Kingdom. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2007
