John Hurley: The economic and financial environment in the Euro area 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, at the 6th Finance Dublin Securitisation Conference, Dublin, 27 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
I would like to begin by thanking the organisers of this conference for the invitation to speak 
to you today. I can see from the programme that the conference is dealing with many of the 
pressing issues facing financial markets at present and I very much welcome the opportunity 
to talk to market participants at this time.  
As you are well aware, developments in financial markets have been the centre of attention 
over the past few months and I will begin today by reviewing what has been happening in 
markets recently, and go on to look at the broader global situation as well as the impact in 
this country. I will also talk about how central banks and, in particular, the Eurosystem has 
responded and is responding to these developments. Finally, I will conclude by saying a little 
about the current economic situation in the euro area and the monetary policy stance. 
Recent developments 
After a long period during which financial market conditions were extremely buoyant, global 
markets have experienced considerable volatility in recent months. This follows a prolonged 
period when, in many parts of the world, asset prices were driven to excessive levels and 
with  undue  attention  being  paid  to  risk.  The  unwinding  of  these  excesses  has  contributed 
significantly to the recent increased turbulence in financial markets. 
The events of recent months are well known and, at this stage, do not require lengthy recall. 
The catalyst for the sharp move from risk-taking towards deleveraging over the Summer was 
triggered  by  escalating  concerns  about  the  state  of  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market. 
While,  a  priori,  the  expectation  was  that  these  problems  would  be  confined  to  that  market 
segment,  trouble  spread  rapidly.  Significant  disruption  occurred  in  the  asset-backed 
commercial  paper  (ABCP)  market  and,  in  turn,  moved  relatively  quickly  to  the  unsecured 
interbank money market, as concerns escalated about counterparty credit risks. At this point, 
which  was  reached  in  early  August,  the  broad  financial  system  became  affected  by  the 
turbulence and a wide range of markets were characterised by a significant lack of liquidity 
and heightened market volatility. 
The  depth  and  breadth  of  the  recent  turbulence  reflects  vulnerabilities  which  have  been 
uncovered about the way risks have come to be assessed, valued and distributed in today's 
markets. Once unmasked, these vulnerabilities appear to have combined in unforeseen ways 
to trigger a very severe episode of deleveraging and reintermediation. While the intensity of 
the problems across various markets has ebbed and flowed since August, it is clear that this 
process is still very much ongoing and is likely to persist, at least into the early part of 2008. 
Recent  developments  in  financial  markets,  such  as  the  temporary  closure  of  the  covered 
bond market, point to a further tightening in liquidity and reinforce the view that there is still 
some  way  to  go  before  we  see  a  return  to  more  normal  market  conditions.  Uncertainty  is 
likely to remain high and confidence will only return to markets when the impact on larger 
institutions and, indeed, their responses, becomes clearer. Until we reach that point markets 
may continue to remain fragile and vulnerable to bad news.  
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
Money market problems and central bank responses 
I  would  like  to  turn  now  and  talk  about  how  central  banks  have  reacted  to  these 
developments and what impact this has had. Within their sphere of influence, central banks, 
in  general,  responded  in  an  unprecedented  manner  to  counteract  disorderly  conditions  in 
money markets. In particular, the ECB, along with other major central banks moved quickly 
to  meet  the  increased  liquidity  needs  of  the  banking  system  and  liquidity  management 
policies  since  August  have  been  very  much  focused  on,  first,  restoring,  and,  then, 
maintaining calm in money markets. 
The ECB has been particularly active since the outbreak of turbulence and has used the full 
range of operational instruments at its disposal. It has added extra liquidity through special 
overnight and longer-term refinancing operations, as well as through more sizeable injections 
of liquidity in its main refinancing operations. There have also been changes to the pattern of 
liquidity  provision  within  the  Eurosystem,  with  significant  front-loading  of  liquidity  needs  to 
accommodate  the  demand  of  counterparties  to  fulfil  reserve  requirements  early  in  the 
maintenance period, and changes to the maturity composition, with much larger weight for 3-
month refinancing operations relative to 1-week refinancing operations. I would emphasise 
that these operations were all conducted within the existing operational framework.  
In participating in Eurosystem liquidity operations, market participants have been able to use 
a very wide range of collateral to access funding. Earlier changes to the collateral framework 
in  particular,  have  helped  in  supplying  the  liquidity  needs  of  the  euro  markets  in  a  timely 
fashion.  This  has  added  significantly  to  the  flexibility  of  the  Eurosystem's  operational 
framework in managing liquidity in the euro area money market in turbulent conditions. 
The actions undertaken in recent months have alleviated problems at the very short-end of 
the interbank market, although spreads between longer-term rates and policy rates remain 
relatively  high.  This  is  partly  a  reflection  of  increased  uncertainty  about  the  size  and 
distribution  of  exposures  and  losses  arising  from  the  developments  in  credit  markets.  In 
addition,  another  influence  has  been  uncertainty  on  the  part  of  the  banks  internationally 
about the likely calls on their own liquidity, which has created a strong preference on their 
part to retain liquidity and to avoid lending beyond the very short-term.  
To  try  and  further  calm  this  segment  of  the  money  market,  in  recent  weeks,  the  ECB 
signalled  that  it  will  rollover  the  two  outstanding  supplementary  long-term  refinancing 
operations and, last Friday, stated that, at least until after the end of the year, it will reinforce 
its  policy  of  allocating  more  liquidity  than  the  benchmark  amount  in  the  main  refinancing 
operations.  These  actions  should  help  considerably  to  reduce  concerns  about  end-year 
factors. 
In  summary,  although  overall  money  market  liquidity  is  adequate,  the  circulation  of  this 
liquidity has been disrupted. Activity in the interbank market remains well below normal and 
is likely to revert to previous levels only when a greater degree of confidence returns to the 
markets.  
Rationale for responding 
Given  the  scale  of  central  banks'  responses,  it  is  legitimate  to  ask  about  the  philosophy 
underlying  these  interventions  by  the  Eurosystem.  I  would  emphasise  that  this  was  not 
targeted liquidity assistance aimed at specific institutions. Rather, it was a series of money 
market  stabilisation  operations  aimed  at  reducing  undesired  volatility  in  short-term  interest 
rates around a given level of official interest rates. I would emphasise that there is a clear 
distinction between these type of money market operations and monetary policy decisions. 
Failure to respond to the interbank liquidity impact of the wider financial market turbulence 
would  have  added  a  serious  additional  dimension  to  the  problem.  For  example,  financially 
sound  institutions  could  have  found  themselves  in  need  of  emergency  funding  simply 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2007
because they could not access sufficient funds. Not to respond would have impacted on the 
entire banking system, most of which had little or no involvement in structured credit markets. 
Irish banks are a case in point.  
It is important for me to state again in this forum that the liquidity management operations 
carried  out  by  the  Eurosystem  were  aimed  at  reducing  the  volatility  of  short-term  interest 
rates around a given level of official interest rates. I would also emphasise that the actions 
undertaken were not in any way motivated by an attempt to mitigate losses for those who 
had  taken  excessive  credit  market  risks.  Rather,  the  substantial  injections  of  liquidity  by 
central  banks  were  intended  to  contribute  to  stability  in  the  interbank  market  at  a  time  of 
significant strain. 
The situation in Ireland 
In the recent Financial Stability Report of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, we have concluded that while the risks to financial stability have increased since 
last year, the stability and health of the banking system here remain robust when assessed 
by  the  usual  indicators  of  financial  health  such  as  asset  quality,  profitability,  solvency, 
liquidity  and  credit  ratings.  However,  like  their  international  peers,  Irish  banks  have  been 
operating  in  an  environment  where  liquidity  is  not  as  readily  available  as  heretofore.  In 
addition, notwithstanding the fact that the larger institutions have diversified their businesses 
outside the Irish economy, the banking sector is operating in an economy where growth will 
be slower by comparison with recent years. Investor sentiment towards the banking sector 
globally has been negative in recent times and Irish banks have not been immune from this. 
However,  the  current  situation  and  outlook  for  Irish  banks,  based  on  an  assessment  of 
developments  so  far,  is  positive.  Firstly,  the  sector's  shock  absorption  capacity  has  been 
largely  unaffected  by  the  turbulence  in  international  financial  markets.  A  survey  of  the 
exposures of Irish banks published in the Financial Stability Report shows that the domestic 
banking  system  has  no  significant  direct  exposures  to  US  sub  prime  mortgages  and 
essentially  negligible  exposures  through  investments  and  through  links  with  other  financial 
companies or special purpose vehicles. In addition, the exposure of domestic institutions to 
hedge funds and private equity is very low by international standards. Secondly, given the 
extent  of  the  disruption  to  normal  market  functioning  internationally  in  recent  months,  it  is 
inevitable that access to liquidity in the interbank market by Irish banks, like all banks, would 
be affected. However, the comprehensive liquidity framework within the Eurosystem and the 
significant  volumes  of  collateral  held  means  that  Irish  banks  are  well  positioned  to  access 
Eurosystem liquidity.  
Also,  a  fuller  assessment  of  the  funding  patterns  of  Irish  banks  indicates  that  there  is  a 
significant medium-term element to much of their funding, as well as a relatively wide range 
of funding options available to them. Finally, our stress-testing of the banking system and our 
extensive financial stability analysis indicate that Irish banks are solidly profitable and well-
capitalised. In this context, it is worth noting that they have one of the lowest rates of non-
performing loans among banks in all EU countries. 
I would add that we in the Central Bank, along with our colleagues in the Financial Regulator, 
have been monitoring our domestic situation very closely. From the detailed information we 
receive through this process and from the ongoing contact that the Bank and the Regulator 
have had with credit institutions at various levels, including the highest level, it is clear that 
they are effectively managing their liquidity in this challenging environment. 
Outlook and lessons 
As the evolution and duration of the current episode is uncertain, one needs to be careful in 
drawing firm conclusions at this stage. However, one can make a number of observations. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
The elements which came together to generate the recent turbulence involved a weakening 
of credit discipline, a build-up of leverage, with risks transferred in an opaque way through 
the  global  financial  system.  Added  to  this  was  a  degree  of  investor  complacency, 
encouraged by benign economic conditions and a long period of low market volatility, all of 
which  together  led  investors  to  focus  heavily  on  return  while  under-weighting  risk.  While  it 
was largely predictable that these risks would come back to bite, the problem has been the 
speed and severity with which they have done so and, the fact that strains have arisen in 
interbank money markets. 
With regard to drawing any conclusions, I have indicated in other fora that there needs to be 
a careful and balanced assessment made of the lessons to be learned from recent events. 
While  matters  in  relation  to  the  valuation  of  complex  products,  transparency  and  rating 
agencies  all  require  attention,  events  since  August  have  also  pointed  to  some  issues  in 
relation to the securitised model of capital markets. In particular, the “originate and distribute” 
model  behind  securitisation  has  changed  the  incentives  regarding  the  management, 
assessment and monitoring of credit risk and we need to look at the issues this raises. Some 
features of the securitised model, such as the conjunction of complex instruments and fragile 
off-balance sheet structures have proved problematic. This underlines the need for greater 
information  and  disclosure  about  where  financial  risks  lie.  It  also  argues  for  a  stronger 
connection between the location of risk and capital in the system. Addressing these issues 
could  help  to  create  a  more  robust  securitisation  model,  thereby  ensuring  that  the  many 
important benefits of this model are preserved. 
Economic impact 
I would like to turn now and talk about how recent events in financial markets may impact on 
economic  developments.  The  first  point  to  make  is  that  much  depends  on  how  market 
developments  and  financial  conditions  evolve  from  here  and  for  how  long  the  market 
turbulence continues. For this reason, it is difficult, at this point, to assess the extent to which 
activity may ultimately be affected. However, recent developments have not been favourable 
and  increase  the  risk  of  a  more  significant  spillover  from  financial  markets  to  broader 
economic activity.  
Looking first at channels of transmission, tighter financial conditions could reduce economic 
activity in a number of ways: for example, through increased credit spreads and higher term 
funding rates; through a fall in financial wealth or net worth as a result of the turbulence and, 
perhaps most importantly, through problems in credit and funding markets impacting on the 
overall supply of credit.  
The recent euro area Bank Lending Survey offers some early evidence on the response of 
euro area banks to the initial turbulence in credit markets. The results show a net tightening 
of lending standards which is greatest with respect to loans to enterprises, particularly for the 
financing of mergers and acquisitions and corporate restructuring. We have also seen signs 
in euro area retail interest rates of some rise in rates charged for personal consumer loans 
and also for lending to non-financial corporations. 
On the positive side, the resilience of the euro area economy is helped by the fact that it was 
growing  strongly  before  the  recent  outbreak  of  market  turbulence.  Underlying  economic 
fundamentals  remain  favourable,  with  strong  employment  growth  boosting  household 
incomes and corporate balance sheets quite healthy.  
Notwithstanding  these  supports,  however,  any  marked  slowdown  in  US  growth  would 
remove some impetus to activity. While US third quarter growth surprised on the upside, the 
indications for the quarter are not that favourable. The US housing market, which has been 
at  the  root  of  current  problems,  continues  to  deteriorate.  This  has  further  heightened 
concerns  about  the  risk  of  spillovers  to  US  consumer  spending,  which  has  been  the  main 
engine of growth in the US economy in recent years. There are some signs that this is now 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2007
beginning to happen and, if this continues, it is difficult to see how overall economic activity in 
the  US  will  remain  unaffected.  In  the  event  of  a  more  significant  slowdown  in  the  US,  the 
extent to which global economic activity stays decoupled from US developments remains to 
be seen. The likelihood must be that it could not remain immune from such developments. 
More generally, as is the case for the rest of the global economy, the broad repricing of risk 
and tightening of financial conditions has tilted the balance of risks to euro area growth to the 
downside.  The  Governing  Council  has  made  it  clear  that  it  is  determined  to  ensure  that 
inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored.  Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council  has 
signalled that there is a need to gather additional information and assess new data, including 
the new projections due in early December, before drawing further conclusions for monetary 
policy.  
Concluding remarks 
I  want  to  conclude  by  briefly  outlining  the  evolving  economic  environment  in  this  country. 
Ireland's  economic  fundamentals  –  as  evidenced  by  a  good  budgetary  position,  strong 
employment growth and an adaptable economy – continue to be sound. The Irish economy 
has performed solidly this year in circumstances where a rebalancing of economic activity is 
underway. The contribution of the domestic housing sector to economic growth is declining, 
though the overall construction sector remains strong. In these circumstances, judging by the 
overall level of growth, employment, output and exports, the economy has performed well in 
comparison with others in 2007. We expect the economy to grow next year by some 3 per 
cent. or so, and this in a situation where the rebalancing of economic activity will continue. 
Such  a  performance  would  undoubtedly  be  a  good  performance  particularly  given  the 
background of heightened uncertainty and serious market turbulence.  
Finally, with regard to the broader international picture, the outlook is not without risk. It is 
heavily  dependent  on  how  market  developments  and  financial  conditions  evolve,  and  how 
banks, households and firms respond. The performance to date of the core financial system 
in  the  euro  area,  and  here  at  home,  has  been  encouraging.  The  euro  area  operational 
framework  has  worked  well  and,  as  I  have  stated,  continues  to  respond  flexibly  to  the 
evolving  situation.  However,  uncertainty  remains  high  and  it  is  likely  to  be  some  time  yet 
before a broad measure of confidence returns to markets. 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 5
