Yves Mersch: Recent financial market developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  50th 
anniversary of ACI Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 12 October 2007. 
 Since my first invitation to an ACI event as a speaker a few months after assuming my first 
mandate 9  years ago, the markets  have undergone many  turbulent sequences, although I 
could not detect a correlation between market upheavals and my regular appearance at ACI 
events.  Let me  therefore  thank the  Luxembourg  chapter for  inviting  me  again  today.  I  feel 
honoured. 
After a first ripple in the first quarter of this year and an increasing number of central banks 
pointing to the need to reprice certain risks (I gave a warning in that respect at a conference 
by the European Institute in Washington in April) the market reaction over the last couple of 
months witnessed what needs to be seen as a basically healthy reaction to mispricing. This 
reaction  however  was  accompanied  by  the  unpleasant  effects  of  a  crisis  of  confidence 
among the participants of the global credit markets prompting central bank intervention. 
Since I agreed to speak about the turbulence in financial markets, many actions have been 
taken and a policy agenda for drawing the lessons is emerging. 
Allow me therefore briefly to highlight the main events, before commenting on the experience 
we  acquired  inside  the  Eurosystem  during  these  weeks  and  months  with  our  elaborate 
toolbox of instruments and operations. 
I will conclude with some tentative lessons to be drawn in terms of transparency, valuation, 
market functioning and supervisory framework adjustment. 
At this stage of collecting evidence, I will not dwell on the macroeconomic consequences of 
this  turbulence  which  took  place  against  the  background  of  a  strong  performance  of  the 
global economy. The momentum of past dynamics still outweighs potential downward risks to 
the baseline scenario. 
What happened in the markets 
I. 
If many expected turbulence, the specific features and the transmission mechanisms were 
less clearly anticipated. 
Many  were  barking  up  the  wrong  tree:  Hedge  funds  and  private  equity  were  not  the  main 
culprits but suffered. 
Let me sum up the unfolding of events in 6 points: 
1. 
Credit spreads reach record lows in the first half of 2007. 
The combination of relatively low interest rates for a long period of time, the trend to 
lay off credit risk out of balance sheets and to securitize and an increasing focus on 
short-term returns have led to a strong demand for credit risk, especially from non-
bank  investors.  As  a  result  credit  spreads  fell  to  all-time  lows,  leading  to  a  mis-
pricing  of  credit  risks.  Additionally,  many  investors  relied  greatly  on  credit  rating 
agencies  for  the  valuation  of  complex  financial  instruments  and  their  use  as 
collateral. 
Strong economies and higher commodity prices were fuelling expectations of 
tighter monetary policy before the crisis started. 
In  the  first  half  of  the  year  the  economic  situation  proved  to  be  very  robust.  Most 
major central banks were normalising interest rates. Strong demand for commodities 
2. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
put upward pressure on prices so that interest rates were rising in the first half of the 
year. 
Mortgage  rate  re-settings  at  higher  interest  rate  levels  caused  delinquency 
rates to rise, most pronounced in the sub-prime mortgage market.  
This led to losses in the hedge fund sector and increasing difficulties in finding a fair 
value price for structured deals. Moreover, investment funds experienced difficulties 
in  NAV  pricing,  resulting  in  the  temporary  closures  of  some  funds.  Asset-backed 
securities with high credit ratings have proved not to be as sound, nor as liquid as 
they  appeared.  Some  of  those  structured  investment  vehicles  or  conduits  were 
extensively leveraged and strongly dependent on short-term funding. In the absence 
of liquidity, sponsoring banks had to fund off-balance-sheet vehicles from their own 
balance sheet. This led to de-leveraging and forced asset sales.  
Higher default rates caused the first bankruptcies in the US and credit spreads 
started to rise. Risk aversion spread to all asset classes. 
Forced sales to cover margin requirements saw volatility rise sharply (VIX doubled 
from  15  to  30  %).  The  unwinding  of  riskier  positions  caused  stock  markets  to  fall 
(Stoxx50 -11 %) and carry trades were liquidated (EURJPY fell from 169 to 152, a 
10  %  appreciation).  As  markets  fell,  margin  requirements  rose  further.  The 
uncertainty about the pricing of some instruments added additional pressure.  
As the credit crisis spread further short-term liquidity evaporated.  
Short-term funding in the interbank market became unavailable, causing casualties 
amongst banks and funds. In Europe, IKB and Landesbank Sachsen were rescued 
from insolvency. Northern Rock followed later.  
Funding in the primary market was impossible for banks. Trading in the secondary 
market stopped, with the exception of government issues.  
The effective shut-down of the refinancing pipeline left banks to rely on short-
term funding from central banks.  
Neither  primary  issues  nor  short-term  papers,  such  as  ABS  or  ABCP,  could  be 
placed in the market. Banks hoarded liquidity in order to be safe from unexpected 
outflows  or  the  unknown  extent  of  write-downs.  Because  the  usual  market 
refinancing possibilities were blocked banks relied on highly rated collateral for their 
funding and the liquidity provided by the central bank.  
The spread between EONIA and three-month Euribor rose to the highest level ever 
at 70 bps and has remained high. Unsecured trading in the money market beyond 
one week effectively ceased to exist. 
Central bank reaction function 
II. 
As  liquidity  retracted  first  from  the  credit  markets,  then  money  markets,  intermediation 
vanishing,  central  banks  had  to  move  in:  to  restore  orderly  market  conditions;  ensure  the 
integrity  of  monetary  transmission  channels,  and  to  ensure  financial  stability  or  prevent  a 
systemic crisis.  
In view of the confidence crisis among market participants, due to uncertainty about financial 
individual exposures, the issues at stake were: 
1) 
2) 
to have money market rates evolve close to the policy rates; 
to address the term structure problem to the extent that it was threatening the first 
issue;  
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
3) 
and  thirdly  to  address  the  distributional  problem  of  liquidity  among  market 
participants for reasons of financial stability. 
The somewhat more complex and elaborate toolbox of the Eurosystem proved very valuable 
in this respect. 
- 
- 
- 
this applies to the instruments used to provide liquidity: the MRO and LTRO 
this applies to minimum reserve features 
this  applies  to  the  number  of  counterparties  with  direct  access  to  central  bank 
money 
this applies finally to the range of eligible collateral 
- 
Let me say a word about each of these features of the Eurosystem operational framework: 
1. 
At moments of term structure difficulties and shortening of the liquidity constraints, it 
is of advantage to have both: one-week and three-month liquidity providing tenders 
conducted weekly and monthly. Fine tuning operations and extraordinary additional 
tenders,  according  to  standard  procedures,  allowed  a  commensurate  response 
within a familiar context, rather than adding to prevailing uncertainty by introducing, 
in an emergency context, untested new facilities, instruments or procedures. 
In monetary policy operations, the Eurosystem grants direct access to liquidity to a 
large  number  of  credit  institutions.  All  euro-area  institutions  subject  to  minimum 
reserve  requirements  and  which  fulfil  the  relevant  contractual  or  regulatory 
arrangements  applied  by  their  respective  NCB,  may  access  the  standing  facilities 
and/or participate in open market operations based on standard tenders. At the end 
of August 07, 1 676 counterparties had access to the open market operations, 2 809 
to the facility, and 2 141 to the marginal lending facility. 
The  combination  of  relatively  high  reserve  requirements  at  2%  and  the  monthly 
averaging  principle  allowed  banks  to  dip  into  their  reserves  to  meet  their  liquidity 
needs. 
This  averaging  principle,  which  grants  the  banks  more  flexibility  in  meeting  their 
reserve requirements, is conducive to more orderly market conditions. 
Since  the  start  of  EMU  in  January  1999  the  ECB  has  been  providing  its  (weekly) 
refinancing to the euro area banking system based on the concept of a benchmark 
allotment. This benchmark allotment is defined by the ECB as the allotment amount 
which allows counterparties to smoothly fulfil their reserve requirements until the end 
of  the  day  before  the  settlement  of  the  next  MRO,  when  taking  into  account  the 
aggregate liquidity need of the banking system. 
The  Eurosystem  accepts  a  wide  range  of  collateral  to  underlie  its  operations, 
including marketable and non-marketable assets.  
The  Eurosystem  has  put  in  place  a  single  framework  for  eligible  collateral,  which 
covers  marketable  and  non-marketable  assets  that  fulfil  euro  area-wide  eligibility 
criteria.  
As far as marketable assets are concerned, there are four liquidity categories: The 
first  and  best  category  is  made  up  by  central  government  debt  instruments,  the 
second  by  jumbo  covered  bonds,  agency,  and  local  or  regional  government  debt 
instruments, the third by covered and uncovered bank bonds and the fourth by asset 
backed securities.  
There are two types of non-marketable assets that are accepted as collateral: credit 
claims  and  non-marketable  retail  mortgage-backed  debt  instruments.  Although 
different levels of haircuts are applied to the different categories, one might say that 
the Eurosystem also allows banks to use collateral easily where either the interbank 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 3
Repo markets are less liquid (such as in category 3+4) or where there is even no 
interbank Repo market at all (such as for non-marketable assets). 
Banks have the choice to use more or less liquid assets as collateral, a facility which 
constitutes  a  big  advantage  in  critical  liquidity  conditions  such  as  those  currently 
experienced by market participants.  
Some recent figures:  
The available eligible marketable collateral amounts to EUR 9 trillion. 
While  the  amount  submitted  to  the  Eurosystem  nearly  reached  11%  of  all  eligible 
collateral by 31 August 2007 (nearly EUR 1 trillion), around 6% is effectively used to 
collateralize outstanding credit operations with the Eurosystem. 
By  the  end  of  2006,  uncovered  bank  bonds  had  become  the  largest  single  asset 
class  put  forward  in  Eurosystem  operations  (31%),  surpassing  government  bonds 
for the first time (21%). ABS have also shown a steady growth, reaching 11.4 % of 
all  collateral  submitted  by  the  end  of  2006,  and  19%  by  the  end  of  August  2007 
(+4% in August 2007). 
The year 2007 has also shown a steady increase in the use of credit claims, which 
by end of July 2007 represented roughly 10% of all assets submitted as collateral to 
the Eurosystem. Even though handling procedures for credit claims are sometime 
more cumbersome, counterparties show an increasing interest for this asset class 
with very low opportunity cost. 
The bottom line of these figures is that the increasing use of lower opportunity cost 
collateral shows that a growing number of counterparties are becoming more active 
and efficient in managing their collateral, and thus their liquidity. 
Finally,  the  recent  market  turmoil  provided  tangible  evidence  that  the  collateral 
framework of the Eurosystem is broad enough to ensure that counterparties do not 
face collateral shortages, even in difficult situations. 
Where do we stand today? 
The  degree  of  uncertainty  concerning  risk  –  where  is  it?,  how  much?,  at  what  price?  –  is 
declining  with  every  forthcoming  disclosure.  Some  asset  classes  have  already  fully 
recovered their risk appetite.  
Bank profits will be impacted, but their capacity to absorb adverse developments has also 
been strengthened by buoyant results over the last years. 
However, we are not back to normal yet, especially in the unsecured interbank term money 
market.  We  are  not  fully  safe  from  a  low  probability  but  potentially  high  impact  negative 
event. 
Before drawing some tentative lessons, let me add that there is no trade-off between liquidity 
provision and monetary policy, with its primary objective of maintaining price stability to which 
we are resolutely attached. 
Key issues 
III. 
At the international and at EU level a tentative agenda is emerging around 4 axes for further 
examination. 
First: Transparency 
Enhance transparency for investors, markets and regulators (including improvements at the 
level of data reporting). Credit risk transfer has facilitated the dispersion and sharing of risks 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2007
across  the  financial  markets,  thus  potentially  enhancing  their  efficiency  and  stability. 
However, the recent market turbulence confirmed concerns about the risks stemming from 
the lack of transparency as to where the risks ultimately reside in the financial system, and in 
particular if those risks have been acquired by market participants that can properly manage 
them.  The  existing  reporting  requirements  of  the  banking  sector  did  not  allow  for  a  full 
assessment  of  banks’  exposures  to  the  structured  products,  leading  to  the  absence  of 
accurate and timely information. 
Are Basel II requirements sufficient concerning the sponsoring by banks of SPV? 
Is bank disclosure of securitization operations, and exposures to SIV adequate? 
Questions  also  arise  in  relation  to  the  functioning  of  markets  for  complex  financial 
instruments. 
How  to  inform  the  individual  investor  when  there  are  difficulties  in  measuring  risk  in 
structured finance products and valuate them? 
In this category of improved transparency, I shall also mention the need to implement ESCB-
CESR standards for payment and settlement including ICSDs and large custodians in order 
obtain more information on intraday market liquidity. 
Second: Valuation 
More work is needed on standards to ensure reliable valuation of assets particularly of those 
assets where markets are potentially illiquid in time of stress. At the same time compatibility 
with international financial reporting standards must be assured. 
Third: Market functioning 
I  have  to  mention  first  the  assessment  of  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies,  their  small 
number,  the  transparency  of  their  rating  methodology,  possible  conflicts  of  interest  in 
particular as regards structured finance instruments. Excessive exclusive reliance on credit 
ratings  by  investors  without  carrying  out  due  diligence  or  conducting  further  own  risk 
assessment is a problem as well. 
The road map also includes a reflection on the consequences of the originate and distribute 
model of banks for credit markets. Does it induce wrong incentives?  
A  last  item  in  this  list  relates  to  non-regulated  debt  markets  and  mortgage  markets,  which 
might deserve a hard look in the light of recent experience. 
Finally: The regulatory framework 
Above  all,  liquidity  risk  management  relating  to  complex  structured  products  needs  to  be 
investigated.  We  need  a  wider  concept  of  concentration  risk  including  wholesale  and 
interbank  markets  as  well  as  intragroup  exposures.  We  have  to  look  at  warehousing  and 
pipeline  risk,  deal  with  possible  regulatory  incentives  to  move  risk  off  balance  sheet  into 
SPVs. 
We have to assess the links between the regulated and the non-regulated part of the system, 
including  the  optimal  perimeter  of  supervision.  Special  purpose  investment  vehicles  and 
conduits were used as off-balance sheet investment vehicles. These were prone to liquidity 
mismatches between their assets and liabilities, causing contingent credit and liquidity lines 
to be drawn on banks, and resulting in an increased demand for money market liquidity. 
Closer examination of procyclical effects of credit market developments and the treatment of 
risk embedded in structured products held for trading is also warranted.  
BIS Review 120/2007 
 5
The Deposit Guarantee Schemes, in the light of recent events, also need to be revisited. This 
is  a  piece  of  advice  I  would  most  urgently  give  to  the  authorities  of  this  country  with  its 
unfunded DGS. 
Last but not least 
If  there  is  one  major  lesson  recent  market  developments  have  clearly  shown,  it  is  the 
shortcoming of a prudential framework which sidelines the central bank. 
Cooperation at international level is only as good as cooperation at domestic level. Liquidity 
issues  cannot  be  segmented  between  an  FSA  and  a  central  bank  with  no  contacts  of  an 
institutional nature. 
With this personal remark for domestic consumption I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2007
