Frederic S Mishkin: Headline versus core inflation in the conduct of 
monetary policy 
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Business  Cycles,  International  Transmission  and  Macroeconomic 
Policies Conference, HEC Montreal, Montreal, 20 October 2007.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 In discussing and thinking about the conduct of monetary policy, many central bankers focus 
on core inflation – that is, a measure of inflation that excludes the rate of increase of prices 
for certain volatile components in price indexes.1 The Federal Reserve, for example, pays 
particular attention to the rate of growth of the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) 
deflator,  which  excludes  food  and  energy  prices.  Indeed,  in  the  presentation  of  its  twice 
yearly  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the  Congress,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  reports  the 
projections of Federal Open Market Committee participants regarding core PCE inflation, not 
headline inflation, the latter of which includes all items in the price index. Here in Canada, 
unlike in the United States, the central bank maintains an explicit inflation target. The Bank of 
Canada  states  its  target  in  terms  of  the  headline  consumer  price  index,  and  although  this 
choice  of  inflation  measure  contrasts  with  the  Federal  Reserve's  preferred  index,  the 
difference is not nearly as great as it appears on the surface. In fact, the Bank of Canada 
monitors a number of inflation measures and uses core inflation as an "operational guide" in 
coming to its monetary policy decisions and discussing these decisions with the public.  
Does it make sense for a central bank to concentrate on core inflation? After all, households 
almost daily pay for energy and food items – which are excluded from the most prominent 
measures  of  core  inflation  –  when  they  fill  up  their  cars  at  gas  stations  or  visit  a  grocery 
store.  Households,  particularly  less-affluent  households,  spend  a  major  portion  of  their 
budgets on food and energy. A focus on core inflation, which excludes these items, might be 
viewed  as  indicating  that  monetary  policy  makers  are  out  of  touch  with  what  consumers 
really care about. Wouldn't it be better for monetary policy authorities to focus on headline 
inflation so that they include food and energy in their monitoring of consumer price inflation? 
As I will argue, this is not an either-or decision. It does indeed make sense for central banks 
to emphasize headline inflation when determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy 
over  the  medium  run,  but  policymakers  also  are  right  to  emphasize  core  inflation  when 
deciding how to adjust policy from meeting to meeting. Why? Because what central bankers 
are  truly  concerned  with  –  both  for  the  purposes  of  internal  deliberations  and  for 
communications with the public – is the underlying rate of inflation going forward, and core 
inflation can be a useful proxy for that rate. Thus, focusing on core inflation can help prevent 
a central bank from responding too strongly to transitory movements in inflation. 
Why monetary policy should focus on core inflation 
Because households care about the prices of all the items they buy, it clearly does not make 
sense  to  pretend  that  people  do  not  eat  or  drive.  Thus,  I  have  no  qualm  in  stating  that 
controlling  headline  inflation,  not  core  inflation,  is  –  along  with  maintaining  maximum 
                                                 
1  
I  thank  Alan  Kackmeister,  Jean-Philippe  Laforte,  David  Lebow,  Deb  Lindner,  and  Robert  Tetlow  for  their 
comments  and  assistance.  The  speech  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  others  on  the 
Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 1
sustainable employment – the ultimate aim of monetary policy. Nonetheless, I will argue that 
it is still useful for monetary policy makers to focus on core inflation when deciding how to 
respond to incoming economic news.  
Although monetary policy is capable of controlling overall inflation in the long run, it does not 
have the ability to control relative price movements such as those for food and energy. When 
a cold snap freezes the Florida orange crop or a tropical storm hits the gasoline refineries 
along the Gulf Coast, monetary policy cannot reverse the resulting spikes in prices for fresh 
orange juice or for gasoline at the pump. Temporary supply shocks such as these raise the 
prices of food and energy relative to other prices and can have substantial effects on inflation 
in  the  short  run.  By  including  all  items  –  including  particularly  volatile  items  like  food  and 
energy – headline measures of inflation are inherently noisy and often do not reflect changes 
in the underlying rate of inflation, the rate at which headline inflation is likely to settle and that 
monetary policy can affect.  
Measures of core inflation attempt to strip out or smooth volatile changes in particular prices 
to  distinguish  the  inflation  signal  from  the  transitory  noise.  Thus,  relative  to  changes  in 
headline inflation measures, changes in core measures are much less likely to be reversed, 
provide a clearer picture of the underlying inflation pressures, and so serve as a better guide 
to where headline inflation itself is heading. Of course, if a particular shock to noncore prices 
is not temporary but, rather, turns out to be more persistent, then the higher costs are likely 
to put some upward pressure on core prices. Central bankers must always be aware of this 
risk. However, research has shown that, over the past twenty-five years or more, headline 
inflation in the United States has tended to revert more strongly toward core inflation than 
core inflation has moved toward headline inflation.2 As that record suggests, core measures 
often  are  much  better  than  headline  indexes  at  providing  a  first  approximation  of  the 
permanent changes to inflation.  
When headline inflation has an important transitory component, a focus on core measures 
can  help  avoid  monetary  policy  mistakes.  If  the  monetary  authorities  react  to  headline 
inflation numbers, they run the risk of responding to merely temporary fluctuations in inflation. 
We can think about this danger by considering a supply shock, that causes the relative price 
of  energy  to  increase  sharply,  as  in  fact  has  happened  over  the  past  three  years.  Let  us 
suppose that we start out with both headline and core inflation at acceptably low levels.  
First,  let's  consider  a  supply  shock  that  temporarily  raises  the  price  of  energy  by  a  large 
amount. In this case headline inflation will rise well above its underlying trend as the price of 
energy rises but will soon fall well below its underlying trend as the price of energy falls back 
to its initial level. On average, inflation will remain unchanged without any monetary policy 
                                                 
2   These tests allow for a nonzero constant differential between headline and core inflation. The differential often 
turns out to be nontrivial and statistically significant. Cogley (2002) uses published CPI over the period from 
1967:Q2  to  1997:Q4  and  finds  that  it  may  take  about  8  quarters  before  there  is  substantial  reversion  of 
headline  inflation  to  core  inflation.  Clark  (2001),  using  12-month  CPI  inflation  from  1967  to  2000  finds  little 
reversion over the next 12 months but about 50 percent reversion over 24 months, though that level is still 
statistically insignificant. In contrast, he finds substantial and statistically significant reversion at both the 12- 
and 24-month horizons using data from 1985 to 2000. Rich and Steindel (2007) find significant reversion of 
headline CPI inflation to core CPI inflation over 12 quarters using methodologically consistent CPI data from 
1978 to 2004.  An earlier version of their  work (Rich and Steindel,  2005)  showed similar results using  PCE 
price inflation in the 1978-2004 and 1959-2004 periods. Internal work conducted at the Federal Reserve using 
15-year rolling-window regressions suggests that the reversion of headline PCE inflation to core PCE inflation 
has been much stronger in samples that start after the early 1980s and also that the reversion of core inflation 
to headline inflation has been much weaker in that period. 
  Results  for  other  countries  are  more  ambiguous.  In  recent  years,  Canada  appears  to  have  had  a  similar 
reversion  of headline  inflation to their version  of core inflation,  along  with little reversion  of core inflation to 
headline  inflation  (Laflèche  and  Armour,  2006;  also,  Armour,  2006;  Hogan,  Johnson,  and  Laflèche,  2001). 
However, the OECD (2005) has found that many countries show little reversion of headline inflation to core 
inflation and that, in fact, core inflation often reverts to headline inflation. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2007
action. But a tightening of monetary policy in reaction to the rise in headline inflation would 
lead  to  a  decline  in  employment  and  inflation;  and  because  of  the  long  lags  between 
monetary  policy  actions  and  changes  in  economic  activity,  that  decline  would  occur  some 
time down the road, when inflation would more likely be at or below its underlying trend. The 
outcome  of  such  a  policy  would  be  a  more  pronounced  fall  in  inflation  with  a  decline  in 
employment.  Such  a  policy  would  be  bad  indeed  because  it  would  increase  volatility  in 
inflation and employment, which is the opposite of what a central bank should be trying to 
achieve as it seeks to promote price stability and maximum sustainable employment. 
But what if a supply shock leads to a permanent shift in the relative price of energy? Indeed, 
almost all commentators characterize the current oil price shock that way, in part because 
they see the rise of new economic powers like China as adding to the demand for energy in 
the foreseeable future. Although in that case the rise in relative energy prices is not reversed, 
the  rate  of  change  in  energy  prices  does  not  persist:  Headline  inflation  will  rise  with  the 
increase  in  energy  prices,  but  once  energy  prices  reach  their  permanently  high  level, 
headline  inflation  will  revert  to  its  underlying  trend  rate.  Thus,  as  long  as  the  permanent 
change in relative energy prices does not lead to a change in the underlying trend rate of 
inflation – a crucial assumption – then headline inflation will come back down again. This is 
what we seem to have seen recently in the United States. From a low near $30 per barrel in 
late 2003, the price of oil rose to $70 per barrel by the middle of 2006, and it has stayed high, 
with the current price more than $80. That move increased headline PCE inflation to the 4 
percent level for a time, but it has since retreated to around 2 percent (figure 1).  
BIS Review 118/2007 
 3
Monetary  policy  clearly  can  do  little  about  the  first-round  effects  of  a  permanent  rise  in 
energy  prices,  which  include  both  its  direct  impact  on  the  energy  component  of  overall 
consumer  prices  and  the  pass-through  of  higher  energy  costs  into  prices  of  non-energy 
goods and services. But policy does have a critical role to play in determining the second-
round effects associated with changes in the underlying trend rate of inflation. Such second-
round effects are likely to be quite limited as long as the rise in the relative price of energy 
does not lead to a rise in long-run inflation expectations, as has largely been the case in the 
recent  period  (figure  1).  However,  the  stability  of  expectations  rests  on  the  central  bank's 
strong  long-term  commitment  to  providing  a  nominal  anchor,  which,  as  I  have  argued 
elsewhere  (Mishkin,  2007),  describes  the  situation  in  the  United  States.  With  such  a 
 4 
 BIS Review 118/2007
commitment firmly established, monetary policy then does not need to respond as much to 
the temporary rise in headline inflation to stabilize inflation over the longer run. Under these 
circumstances, if monetary policy is tightened appreciably in the face of a surge in headline 
inflation, the policy would likely be excessively tight and lead to an unnecessary decline in 
employment. 
Because the point about headline inflation is so important, I would like to illustrate it further 
with simulations of FRB/US, the model of the U.S. economy created and maintained by the 
staff at the Federal Reserve Board. To keep the experiments as clean as possible, I assume 
that  the  economy  begins  at  full  employment  and  with  both  headline  and  core  inflation  at 
desired levels. The economy is then assumed to experience a shock that raises the world 
price of oil about $30 per barrel over two years; the shock is assumed to slowly dissipate 
thereafter. In each of two scenarios, a Taylor rule is assumed to govern the response of the 
federal funds rate; the only difference between the two is that in one scenario the funds rate 
responds  to  core  PCE  inflation,  while  in  the  other  it  responds  to  headline  PCE  inflation.3 
Figure 2 illustrates the results of these two scenarios. The federal funds rate jumps higher 
and faster when the central bank responds to headline inflation rather than to core inflation, 
as would be expected (top-left panel). Likewise, responding to headline inflation pushes the 
unemployment rate markedly higher than otherwise in the early going (top-right panel), and 
produces an inflation rate that is slightly lower than otherwise, whether measured by core or 
headline  indexes  (bottom  panels).  More  important,  even  for  a  shock  as  persistent  as  this 
one, the policy response under headline inflation has to be unwound in the sense that the 
federal funds rate must drop substantially below baseline once the first-round effects of the 
shock  drop  out  of  the  inflation  data.  Responding  to  headline  inflation  is  therefore 
inappropriate because it generates extensive variability in the unemployment rate – variability 
that is much more subdued when policy responds to core inflation.4
                                                 
3   The Taylor rule is written as follows:   where   is the four-quarter inflation rate, either core or headline,   is the 
inflation target, taken to be the baseline inflation rate, and   is the output gap. This specification means that the 
response coefficients on each gap variable is 1. 
4   These  scenarios  were  constructed  using  a  rule  that  assumes  no  prior  knowledge  of  how  long  the  oil  price 
shock  will last. Research done by the staff at the Federal Reserve Board using other types of models also 
suggests that when the persistence of shocks is uncertain, using core inflation rather than headline inflation in 
central bank reaction functions can improve policy outcomes (Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri, 2007). 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 5
Of course, the pitfalls associated with reacting to realized headline inflation, as illustrated by 
this  simulation,  are  well  understood.  Accordingly,  advocates  of  targeting  headline  inflation 
generally have in mind a strategy of responding to forecasts of headline inflation – forecasts 
that try to take account of inflation movements that are likely to be transitory. This is a further 
 6 
 BIS Review 118/2007
illustration of my basic point, namely, that it is important to distinguish between transitory and 
persistent inflation movements, and focusing on core inflation can help achieve that end.5
The  focus  on  core  instead  of  headline  inflation  –  and  clear  communication  with  the  public 
about that focus – can have another benefit: It may help anchor inflation expectations when 
headline inflation increases temporarily but core inflation remains essentially unchanged. If 
the public understands that the central bank is using core inflation in formulating monetary 
policy and trusts that the central bank is right to do so, the public will realize that the central 
bank does not need to respond aggressively to a surge in headline inflation to keep inflation 
under  control.  And,  with  core  inflation  stable,  the  public  will  be  less  likely  to  think  that  the 
central  bank  has  weakened  its  commitment  to  a  strong  nominal  anchor  when  it  does  not 
tighten monetary policy to stabilize headline inflation. The result is that inflation expectations 
are likely to remain anchored, which may lead to better outcomes not only on inflation but on 
employment as well, because the central bank will not have had to tighten monetary policy 
as  much  in  response  to  the  energy  price  shock.  As  I  noted  earlier,  figure  1  offers  some 
support for this view: It shows that the rise in headline inflation in the 2004-06 period, when 
core inflation remained quite stable, did not lead to an appreciable rise in long-run inflation 
expectations, even with a substantial decline in unemployment during this period. 
Is inflation excluding food and energy the best measure of underlying inflation? 
The most popular core inflation measures used and published in the United States are quite 
straightforward:  They  simply  exclude  changes  in  food  and  energy  prices.  However,  such 
simple "exclusion" measures can likely be  improved upon. For example, many of  the food 
categories excluded in the standard measure of core inflation, such as food away from home 
(restaurants), are not highly volatile and so likely should remain in an optimal core inflation 
measure. On the other hand, some items that are not excluded from the U.S. core measures, 
such as airline fares, tobacco, and apparel, are extremely volatile and thus are unlikely to be 
included in an optimal core inflation measure. 
The  Bank  of  Canada,  for  example,  uses  a  more  targeted  approach  to  its  core  inflation 
indicator,  the  CPIX.  Of  fifty-four  consumer  product  categories,  it  excludes  eight,  which 
account for about 16 percent of the consumption basket (Macklem, 2001). Most of the eight 
items  are  also  excluded  from  the  standard  core  measure  in  the  United  States.  However, 
Canada's CPIX also excludes intercity transportation and tobacco, which are included in the 
U.S. core measures.6  
Another approach to estimating core inflation measures is statistical, in which certain prices 
are  excluded  at  each  point  on  the  basis  of  statistical  criteria.  Among  these  statistical 
measures  are  trimmed  indexes,  such  as  the  trimmed  mean  and  the  weighted  median 
consumer price indexes produced by the Cleveland Fed and the trimmed mean PCE price 
index produced by the Dallas Fed. Each month, these measures throw out the components 
                                                 
5   Economic theory also suggests an additional argument for focusing on a core measure of inflation. Because 
some  prices  are  "sticky,"  meaning  they  move  sluggishly  in  response  to  shocks,  higher  inflation  generates 
greater dispersion of relative prices and, with that, a misallocation of resources. Responding to a core inflation 
measure,  which puts more  weight on sticky prices, can minimize this distortion and promote relative prices 
that better reflect the true underlying demand and supply conditions in the economy (for example, Aoki, 2001; 
and Woodford, 2003, chap. 6). 
6   Canada’s  CPIX  also  excludes  mortgage  interest  costs,  which  are  never  included  in  measures  of  U.S. 
consumer  prices  because  the  prices  of  owner  occupied  housing  services  are  measured  on  a  rental 
equivalence  basis  in  the  United  States.  The  other  items  excluded  from  the  CPIX  are  fruits,  vegetables, 
gasoline, natural gas, and fuel oil and other fuel. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 7
with  the  largest  price  changes,  both  positive  and  negative  (though  the  Dallas  measure  is 
asymmetric).7  
Other  approaches  to  estimating  core  inflation  are  theory-based  measures  employing 
common trends, unobserved components, or a particular model of the economy.8 However, 
these theory-based approaches tend to be rather complex and require faith that the model 
they are based on is the right one. 
Each of these measures of core inflation can be evaluated according to a variety of criteria, 
including  the  ability  to  forecast  headline  inflation  over  some  period  and  the  degree  of 
correlation with alternative definitions of trend inflation. According to some of these criteria, 
statistical  and  theory-based  approaches  are  sometimes  found  to  outperform  simpler 
exclusion  measures  of core  inflation,  like  the  standard  one  excluding  food  and  energy.  As 
you  can  tell,  this  is  an  active  area  of  research,  but  recent  research  done  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York on U.S. data finds that no one particular core measure, including 
the standard one, dominates the others: The relative performance of different core measures 
varies  depending  on  the  choice  of  the  price  index,  the  sample  period,  and  the  criteria  for 
evaluating  their  performance  (Rich  and  Steindel,  2007).  Research  on  Canadian  and  U.K. 
data  comes  to  similar  conclusions  (Hogan,  Johnson,  and  Laflèche,  2001;  Mankikar  and 
Paisley, 2002).  
Does the lack of empirical support for any one particular type of core measure suggest that 
our focus on the standard core measure should be abandoned? I think not. The simplicity 
and long history of the standard core measure that excludes food and energy gives it several 
major  advantages.  Its  simplicity  makes  it  straightforward  to  explain  and  thus  more 
understandable to the public – assuming, of course, that we successfully communicate that 
we recognize the importance of food and energy items in people's consumption. Its simplicity 
also makes its estimation very transparent. That transparency and the fact that it has been 
around a long time – hence the characterization as "standard" – both prevent a central bank 
or a government authority from easily manipulating the measure to show good results. These 
features of the standard core measure therefore make it a credible device to keep inflation 
expectations anchored when supply shocks occur: If the standard measure remains stable, 
then a surge in headline inflation is less likely to unhinge inflation expectations, which as we 
have seen can lead to both better inflation and better employment performance. 
Why central banks should also focus on headline inflation 
Despite the advantages of core measures of inflation, their use in conducting monetary policy 
has  been  criticized.9  Core  measures  of  inflation  attempt  to  remove  the  most  volatile  or 
transitory components of the inflation measure. But, because the nature of price shocks may 
change over time, items that have been highly volatile in the past may not be so in the future; 
hence, any core measure will itself likely be subject to transitory shocks. Unfortunately, as 
noted above, empirical research suggests that no one measure of core inflation will work in 
all  situations.  Therefore,  central  banks  do  not  focus  solely  on  core  inflation;  rather,  they 
                                                 
7   Bryan and Cecchetti (1994); Robalo Marques, Duarte Neves, and Morais Sarmento (2003); Dolmas (2005); 
Brischetto and Richards (2007); Smith (2004). 
8   Recent examples include: the common trends approach of Bagliano and Morana (2003), the VAR approach of 
Quah and Vahey (1995); the unobserved components approach of Doménech and Gomez (2006) and Velde 
(2006); and the factor-models approach of Cecchetti (1997) and Cristadoro and others (2005). 
9   Laidler and Aba (2000); Clinton (2006); and Bean (2006) are critical of responding to core inflation; Blinder 
(2006) argues on the other side. 
8 
 BIS Review 118/2007
devote  considerable  resources  to  understanding  inflation  developments  in  an  effort  to 
distinguish signal from noise in the incoming data.10
Another reason to keep watch over the broader inflation picture is that, if the rate of change 
in the price of an excluded item receives a permanent shock, then the headline inflation rate 
can deviate from the core measure for an extended period of time. The longer this period of 
high headline inflation persists, the greater is the risk of second-round effects as the public 
begins  to  build  this  higher  inflation  into  its  expectations.  For  example,  from  1987  to  2002, 
energy  price  shocks  appear  to  have  been  temporary  in  that  energy  prices  were  mean 
reverting; as a result, in this period, the average difference between core and headline PCE 
inflation was quite small. Since 2002, however, the effect of energy price shocks have been 
more persistent, and headline inflation has averaged more than 1/2 percentage point above 
core inflation over this period. Over the past year, energy prices have about leveled off on 
balance – or at least that was the case until a couple of weeks ago – and the rate of headline 
inflation for most of this year has come down close to that for core, one hopes alleviating the 
risk of second-round effects. But the increases in oil prices in recent days provide another 
reminder that shocks can persist longer than one might have at first expected.  
A prolonged divergence between core and headline measures of inflation could complicate 
central  bank  communications  with  the  public  because  core  inflation  would  require  some 
adjustment  before  it  would  provide  a  clear  gauge  of  underlying  inflation.  For  example,  the 
weighted median CPI inflation rate, one popular measure of core inflation, has tended to be a 
biased  measure  of  headline  inflation.  The  weighted  median  is  exactly  equal  to  owners' 
equivalent rent nearly half the time because that component has an extremely large share of 
the  consumption  basket  and  fairly  low  volatility  (Bryan  and  Pike,  1991;  Hogan  and  others, 
2001;  and  Bryan  and  Meyer,  2007).  However,  the  productivity  growth  rate  in  residential 
construction is not terribly high, and so this sector is likely to have below-average productivity 
growth  and  above-average  price  increases.  Indeed,  the  weighted  median  CPI  exceeded 
overall CPI inflation on average by 1/4 percentage point per year over the decade from 1992 
to 2002, a period when energy prices were transitory. Of course, to the extent that such a 
bias in a core inflation measure is stable or predictable, the central bank could easily take 
this  into  account  in  setting  monetary  policy.  But  even  in  that  case,  differences  in  average 
rates  of  inflation  between  the  core  measure  and  overall  inflation  could  complicate 
communication with the public. 
Conclusion 
I have argued that a measure of core inflation that is easily understood and provides some 
greater  signal  about  persistent  movements  in  inflation  than  does  headline  inflation  itself  is 
extremely valuable for the conduct of monetary policy, and that is why the Federal Reserve 
pays so much attention to such measures. However, I have also argued that core measures 
have their limitations. A single core inflation measure cannot account for all types of shocks 
and  can  at  times  be  misleading  about  what  is  happening  to  the  underlying  rate  of  overall 
inflation. And if increases in headline inflation prove more persistent than initially expected, 
central  bankers  must  be  vigilant  to  ensure  that  they  do  not  become  embedded  into 
expectations  and  thereby  generate  substantial  second-round  effects  on  inflation.  Finally, 
because price stability ultimately involves control of overall, headline inflation, which after all 
is the inflation measure that households really care about, central bankers should and do pay 
attention to headline inflation as well as to core inflation measures. A core inflation measure 
should not be seen as a substitute for thorough and careful analysis of the forces that are 
driving our economy and the inflation process. 
                                                 
10   More details on inflation forecasting at the Board are in Bernanke (2007). 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 9
References 
Aoki,  Kosuke  (2001).  "Optimal  Monetary  Policy  Responses  to  Relative  Price  Changes", 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48 (August), pp. 55-80. 
Armour, Jamie (2006). "An Evaluation of Core Inflation Measures", Bank of Canada Working 
Paper 2006-10 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, March). 
Bagliano, Fabio C., and Claudio Morana (2003). "Measuring U.S. Core Inflation: A Common 
Trends Approach", Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 25 (June), pp. 197-212. 
Bean, Charles (2006). "Commentary: Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy (40 KB 
PDF)", speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 30th Annual Economic 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26, 
www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/Sympos/2006/sym06prg.htm. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting", speech delivered 
at  the  Monetary  Economics  Workshop  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research 
Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. 
Blinder,  Alan  S.  (2006).  "Monetary  Policy  Today:  Sixteen  Questions  and  About  Twelve 
Answers", in S. Fernandez de Lis and F. Restoy, eds., Central Banks in the 21st Century. 
Madrid: Banco de España, pp. 31-72. 
Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2007). "Optimal Monetary Policy 
in  a  Model  with  Distinct  Core  and  Headline  Inflation  Rates",  unpublished  paper,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Brischetto, Andrea, and Anthony Richards (2006). "The Performance of Trimmed Mean 
Measures of Underlying Inflation", Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper 
2006-10. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, December, 
www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/RDP. 
_________ (2007). "The Performance of Trimmed Mean Measures of Underlying Inflation", 
speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Conference on Price Measurement 
for Monetary Policy, May 24-25, www.dallasfed.org/news/research/2007/07price.cfm. 
Bryan, Michael F., and Christopher J. Pike (1991). "Median Price Changes: An Alternative 
Approach to Measuring Current Monetary Inflation (197 KB PDF)", Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, Economic Commentary, December 1, 
www.clevelandfed.org/Research/commentary. 
Bryan,  Michael  F.,  and  Stephen  G.  Cecchetti  (1994).  "Measuring  Core  Inflation,"  in  N. 
Gregory  Mankiw,  ed.,  Studies  in  Business  Cycles,  vol.  29:  Monetary  Policy.  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 195-215. 
Bryan, Michael F., and Brent H. Meyer (2007). "Methodological Adjustments to the Median 
and  16  Percent  Trimmed-Mean  CPI  Estimators",  Cleveland:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Cleveland, September, www.clevelandfed.org/research/inflation. 
Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1997). "Measuring Short-Run Inflation for Central Bankers", Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, vol. 79 (May/June), pp. 143-55. 
Clark,  Todd  E.  (2001).  "Comparing  Measures  of  Core  Inflation",  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, Economic Review, vol. 86 (no. 2), pp. 5-31. 
Clinton, Kevin (2006). "Core Inflation at the Bank of Canada: A Critique", Queen's Economics 
Department  Working  Paper  No.  1077.  Kingston,  ON,  Canada:  Queen's  University  (May), 
http://qed.econ.queensu.ca/pub/papers. 
Cogley, Timothy (2002). "A Simple Adaptive Measure of Core Inflation", Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 34 (February), pp. 94-113. 
10 
 BIS Review 118/2007
Cristadoro, Riccardo, Mario Forni, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Giovanni Veronese (2005). "A Core 
Inflation Indicator for the Euro Area," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (June), 
pp. 539-60. 
Dolmas,  Jim  (2005).  "Trimmed  Mean  PCE  Inflation",  Working  Paper  Series  0506.  Dallas: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, July, http://dallasfed.org/research/papers. 
Doménech,  Rafael,  and  Victor  Gómez  (2006).  "Estimating  Potential  Output,  Core  Inflation, 
and the NAIRU as Latent Variables," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol. 24 
(July), pp. 354-65. 
Hogan, Seamus, Marianne Johnson, and Thérèse Laflèche (2001). "Core Inflation", 
Technical Report No. 89. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, January, 
www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/res/tr. 
Laflèche, Thérèse, and Jamie Armour (2006). "Evaluating Measures of Core Inflation", Bank 
of Canada Review, 2006 (Summer), pp. 19-29. 
Laidler, David, and Shay Aba (2000). "It's Time to Ignore Core Inflation", C.D. Howe Institute, 
Backgrounder, vol. 2001 (November), pp. 1-8, www.cdhowe.org. 
Macklem,  Tiff  (2001).  "A  New  Measure  of  Core  Inflation",  Bank  of  Canada  Review,  2001 
(Autumn), pp. 3-12. 
Mankikar,  Alan,  and  Jo  Paisley  (2002).  "What  Do  Measures  of  Core  Inflation  Really  Tell 
Us?", Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 42 (Winter), pp. 373-83. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007).  "Inflation  Dynamics",  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual  Macro 
Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  San  Francisco,  March  23, 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.  
Organisation 
Assessing Underlying Inflation", OECD Economic Outlook, vol. 2005 (June), pp. 270-90. 
Quah,  Danny,  and  Shaun  P.  Vahey  (1995).  "Measuring  Core  Inflation",  Economic  Journal, 
vol. 105 (September), pp. 1130-44. 
Rich, Robert, and Charles Steindel (2005). "A Review of Core Inflation and an Evaluation of 
its  Measures",  Staff  Report  No.  236.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  December, 
www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports. 
_________ (2007). "A Review of Core Inflation and an Evaluation of its Measures", speech 
delivered  at  the  Conference  on  Price  Measurement  for  Monetary  Policy,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Dallas, May 24-25.  
Robalo  Marques,  Carlos,  Pedro  Duarte  Neves,  and  Luís  Morais  Sarmento  (2003). 
"Evaluating Core Inflation Indicators", Economic Modelling, vol. 20 (July), pp. 765-75. 
Smith, Julie K. (2004). "Weighted Median Inflation: Is This Core Inflation?", Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 36 (May), pp. 253-63. 
Velde,  François  R.  (2006).  "An  Alternative  Measure  of  Inflation",  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago, Economic Perspectives, vol. 30 (no. 1), pp. 55-65. 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2005).  "Measuring  and 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 11
