Njuguna Ndung’u: Implications of capital flight for macroeconomic 
management and growth in Sub-Saharan Africa 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
Senior  Policy  Seminar  on  Implications  of  Capital  Flight  and  Macroeconomic  Management 
and Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 30 October 2007. 
 Honorable Governors and Colleagues, 
Honorable Ministers, 
Honorable Ambassadors and Excellencies, 
Representatives of external partners and institutions, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  first  like  to  thank  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  and  particularly,  my  colleague 
Honorable Tito Mboweni, for hosting this important and timely event on the “Implications of 
Capital Flight for Macroeconomic Management and Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa”. 
I  would  also  like  to  thank  all  my  colleagues,  and  senior  officials  who  have  responded 
positively and are here to participate in the deliberations and contribute to the success of this 
important event, which has tremendous potential for investment, economic growth and more 
generally for the development of our continent. 
Africa  is  often  labeled  as  the  capital-scarce  region  of  the  world;  one  that  has  been 
marginalized in the landscape of global capital flows. The latest statistics published by the 
World  Bank  flagship  report  “Global  Development  Finance”  suggest  that  the  region 
received  less  than  4  percent  of  net  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  flows  to  developing 
countries in 2006. Interestingly the totality of these FDI inflows went to 5 countries (Angola, 
Equatorial Guinea, Nigeria, South Africa, and Sudan), all of which are oil and mineral-rich. So 
these  FDIs  went  to  extraction  sectors.  The  region  is  also  lagging  on  the  remittances, 
receiving  just  4  percent  of  total  remittances  to  developing  countries  –  by  far  the  smallest 
share. The average in other regions is in excess of 25 percent. 
As a result of chronic shortage of capital, investment prospects have been delayed, leaving 
the  majority  of  countries  in  the  region  undiversified,  commodity-dependent,  and  highly 
vulnerable to terms of trade and exogenous shocks. Over the years, most of these countries 
have been confronted with chronic balance of payments crises, and relied on external debt to 
bridge their ever growing financing gap. However, the accumulation of external liabilities over 
time took Africa’s external debt to unsustainable levels, when it reached the critical threshold 
of  US$230  billion,  about  45%  of  GDP  in  the  1990s.  And  as  external  debt  continuously 
increased,  so  did  debt  service  payments  whose  high  costs  undermined  investment  and 
growth potential even further. 
Paradoxically,  the  accumulation  of  external  liabilities  in  the  region  is  mirrored  by  massive 
outflows of resources in the form of capital flight – the voluntary exit of private residents’ 
own capital for safe havens away from the continent. The latest estimates published by 
UNCTAD suggest that capital flight from Sub-Saharan Africa is fast approaching half a trillion 
dollars, more than twice the size of its aggregate external liabilities. 
But why capital flight problem, just when the policy directions are clearer now than they were 
10 years ago in most SSA countries? 
The  costs  of  this  financial  hemorrhage  have  been  significant  for  African  countries.  In  the 
short  run,  massive  capital  outflows  and  drainage  of  national  savings  have  undermined 
growth by stifling private capital formation. In the medium to long term, delayed investments 
in support of capital formation and expansion have caused the tax base to remain narrow. 
Naturally and to the extent that capital flight may encourage external borrowing, debt service 
BIS Review 126/2007 
 1
increased  and 
further  compromised  public 
investment  prospects. 
payments  also 
Furthermore, capital flight has had adverse welfare and distributional consequences on the 
overwhelming majority of poor in numerous countries in that it heightened income inequality 
and  jeopardized  employment  prospects.  In  the  majority  of  countries  in  the  sub-region, 
unemployment  rates  have  remained  exceedingly  high  in  the  absence  of  investment  and 
industrial expansion. 
By  way  of  illustration,  at  the  height  of  the  Latin  America  debt  crisis  in  the  1980s,  Nicolas 
Brady, then US Treasury Secretary, who advocated policies to stem and reverse capital flight 
in response to that crisis, especially emphasized its costs for the US economy. In particular, 
he said, “As many as 400,000 new jobs could be created in the US economy if Latin America 
could  achieve  a  50  percent  reduction  in  current  debt  service.”  Sure  enough,  employment 
prospects would have been even higher in the source region if approximately 50 percent of 
flight  capital  was  used  to  fund  productive  investments  there,  instead  of  flying  to  “safe 
havens”. 
For  us  Central  Bankers,  massive  outflows  of  resources  pose  serious  challenges  for 
exchange rate management and monetary policy, especially for the majority of undiversified 
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, which rely on hard currency for most imports. Most of my 
colleagues  here,  and  especially  the  few  who  have  gone  through  it,  know  how  difficult 
monetary and exchange rate management becomes when foreign reserves go down to just a 
handful of months of imports. 
Interestingly and in spite of these costs, capital flight has continued to grow unabated in the 
region, including during the HIPC era, when the severely indebted countries were acceding 
to  debt  relief  under  the  Enhanced  HIPC  Initiative.  In  particular,  capital  flight  estimates 
between 1999 and 2004 are about US$80 billion, with more than US$35 billion recorded in 
2003  in  constant  US  dollars,  the  largest  single  annual  outflow  over  the  decades  following 
independence.  An  annual  outflow  of  this  magnitude  suggests  that  capital  flight  indeed 
remains  a  serious  problem  in  the  region  and  may  undermine  HIPC’s  effectiveness  and  its 
potential impact for domestic resources mobilization in support of investment and economic 
growth. 
However,  over  the  past  few  years,  the  costs  of  this  hemorrhage  for  Africa’s  development 
have become more apparent within the international community. This renewed interest at the 
global level has been partly motivated by the growing welfare and income gap between Sub-
Saharan Africa and the rest of the developing world, with the majority of countries slated to 
miss the MDG targets. In December 2000, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution 
55/188 in which it called upon countries to cooperate through the United Nations system by 
devising  ways  and  means  of  preventing  and  addressing  the  illegal  transfer  of  assets  and 
repatriating illegally transferred funds. And last month in New York, the United Nations Office 
of Drugs and Crime and the World Bank jointly launched the Stolen Assets Recovery (STAR) 
Initiative. 
This recent attempt to address the long-standing financial hemorrhage undermining Africa’s 
economic  growth  and  development  at  the  global  level,  and  particularly  within  the  UN 
platform, is indeed an important starting point, underlying the need for shared responsibilities 
in the face of persistent lopsided financial flows. Indeed, while massive resources have been 
fleeing African countries, their final destination has been outside African boundaries. Just last 
month, over US$30 million owned by one of the Nigerian Governors were frozen in London. 
In  light  of  these  developments,  this  Senior  Policy  Seminar  on  Capital  Flight  organized  in 
Africa,  is  relevant  and  germane  to  the  growth  and  development  challenges  facing  the 
majority  of  countries  in  the  continent.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  different 
organizing institutions which have invested immensely into the planning and organization of 
this event. 
I  would  also  like  to  congratulate  the  organizers  for  putting  together  a  very  comprehensive 
agenda, going beyond the nitty gritty of central bankers’ immediate concerns – implications 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2007
the causes and determinants of capital flight; 
estimation of capital flight and methodology; 
the link between external debt and capital flight; 
implications of capital flight for capital market development; 
implications of capital flight for banks and corporate performance; 
implications of capital flight for investment; 
the theoretical foundation of capital flight; 
mitigation of capital flight through institutional strengthening; 
expected benefits of capital flight repatriation; 
implications of current international financial architecture for capital flight. 
of  capital  flight  for  monetary  policy  and  macroeconomic  volatility  –  to  address  other  key 
issues such as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I  very  much  welcome  the  focus  of  this  learning  event  on  the  role  that  the  international 
financial architecture has played in the current asymmetric flows of resources from capital-
scarce regions of the developing world, and especially from Sub-Saharan Africa to higher-
wage areas in the more advanced economies. In particular, more than just emphasizing the 
safe haven nature of the destinations to which the scarce resources from Sub-Saharan Africa 
are flowing to, I would like to urge experts and scholars attending this conference to discuss 
the role that the bipolar international currency landscape dominated by the dollar and more 
recently the Euro has played in encouraging capital flight from Africa. 
I also welcome the emphasis on capital repatriation and institutional policies and measures 
to stem capital flight. In the face of the continued marginalization of Africa in the landscape of 
global  capital  flows,  the  success  of  the  region  in  achieving  robust  and  long-run  economic 
growth  very  much  depends  on  its  ability  to  generate  sufficient  resources  for  long-term 
investments.  In  this  regard,  the  massive  infusion  of  resources  through  a  repatriation  of  a 
sizable  or  even  part  of  the  half  a  trillion  US  dollars  that  escaped  for  safe  havens  via  the 
capital  flight  channel  could  play  a  great  deal  in  supporting  investments  in  critical  areas, 
including infrastructures, telecommunications and education. 
Harvard University is often praised for the size of its endowment, which, in excess of US$20 
billion dollars, is one of the largest in the world. How many Harvards could be established in 
this  continent  to  create  the  critical  mass  of  world-class  engineers  and  scientists,  and 
intellectual  leaders  needed  to  advance  Africa’s  development,  expand  industrial  output  and 
enhance  employment  creation  in  the  era  of  knowledge  from  the  half  a  trillion  US  dollars 
stored by a handful of Africans in save havens? 
Several  world-class  institutions  could  be  established  and  thousands  if  not  millions  of  jobs 
created from it, especially if repatriated funds were indeed used for productive investments 
and economic growth and not for consumption, which may further erode the current account. 
As concerted efforts are underway to recover stolen assets under the STAR initiative, I would 
like  to  urge  the  participants  to  this  Seminar  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the 
expected benefits of capital flight repatriation, but also the potential risks and risk mitigation 
strategies associated with such an effort. 
Additionally, I welcome the emphasis of the seminar on the possible causes of capital flight. 
Over the past few years, a number of economists have singled out portfolio diversification 
motives,  political  and  macroeconomic  instability,  particularly  conflicts  and  macroeconomic 
volatility,  fiscal  deficits  and  expected  devaluation  of  local  currencies  as  some  of  the  main 
causes of capital flight. However, recent data which suggest that capital flight has continued 
to  grow  unabated  even  in  recent  years,  where  fiscal  deficits  and  macroeconomic  volatility 
BIS Review 126/2007 
 3
have  been  jugulated,  suggesting  that  there  may  be  other  determining  factors,  particularly, 
corruption and poor governance. 
Let me illustrate this point further by taking you all the way to the America, to Haiti, the first 
Black  Republic  in  the world.  Prior  to  its  independence  in 1804,  William  Pitt,  the  UK  Prime 
Minister, referred to Haiti as the “Eden of the Western World” for its wealth and production. 
Then, Haiti’s production accounted for more than one third of France’s foreign trade, and its 
own foreign trade equaled that of the newly born United States. The Haiti that was so much 
coveted a couple of centuries ago is certainly not the one we all know today. Why? It has 
become a country saddled with external debt burden, excess capital flight and recurrence of 
conflicts. 
“The Haitian debt was accumulated not to finance productive investments, but to finance the 
government’s  patronage  employment  and  large  military  and  police  forces.  Corruption  has 
been endemic, so there is a suspicion that some of the proceeds of foreign loans found their 
way into the pockets of the rulers and foreign bank accounts. This is a description of Haiti’s 
experience in the 90s.” However, the 90s to which these facts refer are not the 1990s, but 
the 1890s. 
I do not believe that there is a fatality in the path to underdevelopment or poverty trap for 
countries  located  below  the  tropics  as  a  number  of  economists  have  alluded  to  in  the 
literature on post-conflict and economic geography. Many countries in the developing world, 
including Africa, have gone through the cycle of external indebtedness, corruption and capital 
flight, and external debt in a continuing loop. However, in the midst of all this, countries in 
Asia and Latin America have succeeded in escaping the infinite loop. Remember the East 
Asian  Tigers,  and  emerging  market  economies  in  Latin  America,  Chile  and  Argentina.  I 
believe there is a way out of this loop for African countries and hope that the deliberations 
coming  out  of  this  seminar  will  identify  concrete  policy  options  and  proposals  to  support 
ongoing efforts to stem capital flight and enhance repatriation in support of investment and 
economic growth across Sub-Saharan Africa; so that Africa in 3007 is not the mirror image of 
Africa in 2007; the one which has rightly or wrongly been associated with corruption, capital 
flight, HIPC and poverty. 
In wishing successful deliberations to all the delegates, I hereby declare this seminar open. 
Thank you all. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2007
