Y V Reddy: Global developments and Indian perspectives – some 
random thoughts 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bankers’ Conference 2007, Mumbai, 27 November 2007. 
 Dr. Khandelwal, Mr. Rao and distinguished friends, 
I am happy to be here with the banking fraternity to participate in the Bankers’ Conference 
2007. I find that there are several conference papers which are of high quality. In fact, they 
provoked me to think through some of the issues that emanate from the analysis and also 
some facets which might have escaped the attention of the authors. The result is an urge to 
share some consequential random thoughts on global developments and Indian perspectives 
as they interplay in a real world setting. 
Overall approach to reforms in the financial sector 
The overall approach to reforms in the financial sector in our country, in the context of global 
developments  is  worth  recalling  here.  First,  we  appreciate  and  analyse  relevant  theories. 
Second, we study international practices which are often divergent, even among advanced 
economies, and are far from being static. No doubt, it is convenient for analytical purposes to 
offer  comments  or  presume  what  constitutes  a  best  practice,  but,  for  practical  policy 
purposes, divergence in international practices is no less relevant than convergence. Third, 
the scope for, limits to and desirability of adoption of prevalent global practices are governed 
by  the  legal,  institutional  and  overall  socio-political  conditions  in  our  country.  Fourth,  the 
adoption,  in  our  country,  of  what  is  considered  an  appropriate  global  practice  is  often  a 
process that has to be managed carefully, sometimes gradually and often in a non-disruptive 
manner.  Fifth,  the  desired  reforms  to  align  with  what  are  considered  appropriate  global 
practices, in financial sector, in terms of timing and redesigning to suit our conditions must 
recognise the status and developments in the real sector, especially flexibilities, fiscal health 
and overall governance standards. Attempts to align the financial sector with global practices 
without similar alignment in the related areas mentioned above may invite avoidable risks. 
Hence, the pace of reform in the financial sector is governed not by assumed progress in 
reform in the related areas mentioned above but on a realistic assessment of the substantive 
movement towards global standards, in those areas.  
Benchmarking with global best practices 
An important feature of the reform of the Indian financial system has been the intent of the 
authorities to align the regulatory framework with international best practices keeping in view 
the developmental needs of the country and domestic factors. Hence, periodic assessments 
of the Indian financial sector have been undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
The  RBI  had  undertaken  a  self  assessment  with  regard  to  the  Core  Principle  for  Effective 
Banking  Supervision  in  1998  which  served  as  a  basis  for  several  regulatory  initiatives 
towards alignment with the international best practices.  
A  Standing  Committee  on  International  Financial  Standards  and  Codes  was  constituted  in 
1999  by  the  RBI  in  consultation  with  the  Government  of  India  to  identify  and  monitor 
developments  in  global  standards  and  codes  being  evolved  in  the  context  of  international 
developments; consider the applicability of these standards and codes to the Indian financial 
system; and chalk out a roadmap for aligning India’s standards and practices to the evolving 
international standards. The Standing Committee set up ten Advisory Groups in key areas of 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 1
the financial sector comprising non-official experts. The recommendations contained in these 
reports have either been implemented or are in the process of implementation.  
In 2004, a review of the recommendations of the Advisory Groups was undertaken to assess 
the  progress  on  the  implementation  of  the  2002  Report,  monitor  new  developments  in  the 
field of international financial standards and codes and provide a future agenda in this area. 
The  Report  provided  an  assessment  of  the  professional  staff  of  the  RBI  engaged  in 
monitoring the implementation of recommendations and benefited from the views of several 
inside and outside experts.  
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund jointly brought out, in September 2005, 
a comprehensive Handbook on Financial Sector Assessment. The Handbook is designed for 
use in financial sector assessments, conducted by country authorities themselves and by the 
World Bank and IMF teams. The Handbook, available to the public, is intended to serve as 
an  authoritative  source  on  the  objectives,  analytical  framework,  and  methodologies  of 
financial sector assessment as well as a comprehensive reference book on the techniques of 
such assessments.  
Following  the  publication  of  the  Handbook  by  the  IMF-World  Bank,  it  was  decided  to 
undertake  a  self-assessment  of  financial  sector  stability  and  development  using  the  new 
Handbook  as  the  base  as  also  any  other  pertinent  documents  for  financial  sector 
assessment. Accordingly, the Government of India decided, in consultation with the RBI, to 
constitute a “Committee on Financial Sector Assessment” (CFSA).  
The central plank of the self-assessment by the CFSA is based on three mutually reinforcing 
factors, namely, financial stability assessment and stress testing; developmental issues and, 
assessment of the status and progress in implementation of international financial standards 
and codes. To assist in the process of assessment, the CFSA has constituted four Advisory 
Panels.  These  are  on  Financial  Stability  Assessment  and  Stress  Testing,  on  Financial 
Regulation  and  Supervision,  on  Institutions  and  Market  Structure  and  on  Transparency 
Standards.  In  order  to  enhance  the  credibility  of  this  self-assessment,  the  Committee  has 
decided  that  the  reports  of  the  Advisory  Panels  would  be  peer  reviewed  by  a  panel  of 
international experts. These are expected to be available for public debate by March / April 
2008. I would urge all analysts to refer to the previous reports and comment extensively on 
the CFSA report in April to guide us on further policy initiatives.  
Country context 
We do recognise that the pace and context of globalisation is generally influenced by three 
factors,  namely  technological  progress,  inherent  desire  of  people  to  be  free  to  move  and 
overall  public  policies  of  the  relevant  countries.  Globalisation  of  financial  sector  is  one 
element of this process and related public policies are one of the many elements that impact 
the  process.  RBI’s  policies  are  one,  though  important,  part  of  the  overall  public  policy 
relevant to financial sector. In this background, it may be useful to put before you the current 
dominant considerations in the RBI’s policy relating to financial sector. 
First,  as  articulated  in  the  recent  monetary  policy  statements  of  the  RBI,  the  poor  tend  to 
reap the benefits of high growth with a time lag while rises in prices affect them instantly. In 
the short term, the impacts of high growth and price rises are asymmetrical between the non-
poor and the poor, warranting a greater emphasis on price stability at this juncture of high 
growth  for  maintaining  social  accord  as  well  as  securing  popular  mandate  for  the  reform 
process itself.  
Second, to the extent there are externalities in terms of financial sector – both positive and, 
on occasions, negative – the weight for stability in our policies has been higher in view of 
limited  capacity  of  the  poor  to  bear  risks  that  may  occur  in  the  real  sector  by  virtue  of 
developments  in  the  financial  sector.  The  lack  of  social  security  mechanisms  and  public 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2007
safety nets in India are also relevant. The design and pace of liberalisation of financial sector 
in India thus takes into account the due weight for stability. 
Third, to enhance efficiency and stability of the financial system and thus contribute to growth 
and  employment,  several  steps  have  been  undertaken  for  widening,  deepening  and 
integrating financial markets although it is “work in progress”.  
Fourth,  the  overall  objective  remains  growth  with  stability,  but  provides  for  elements  of 
selective fiscal support for ensuring inclusive and equitable growth. Currently, the aggregate 
annual  fiscal  burden  of  subsidisation  on  account  of  the  above  measures,  through  the 
financial  sector,  is  estimated  to  be  about  a  quarter  of  one  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  RBI’s 
recommended  approach  does  not  preclude  subsidisation  by  the  Government  but,  it 
disfavours excessive use of banking system to cross subsidise, especially if it were to favour 
non-poor. RBI favours a financial system that provides incentives to encourage flow of credit 
at  justifiable  terms  and  conditions  and  for  purposes  that  ensure  servicing  of  interest  and 
principal, i.e., bankability of schemes. 
Fifth,  an  important  instrument  for  influencing  allocation  of  credit  in  the  banking  system, 
keeping  in  view  the  compulsion  of  growth  and  employment,  has  been  the  stipulation 
regarding bank’s lending to priority sector. The definition of priority sector has been reviewed 
from time to time to match with the contemporary requirements. 
Sixth, in the reform process that commenced in 1992, the reform of the financial sector was 
early  in  the  cycle.  The  first  stage  of  the  process  concentrated  on  elimination  of  financial 
repression which was followed by  greater marketisation of financial sector and changes in 
regulatory regime, consistent with global standards. The process strengthened the financial 
sector, improved its efficiency, imparted stability, facilitated impressive growth and withstood 
several global and domestic shocks. The next phase clearly has been to ensure, what may 
be  termed  as,  “democratisation”  of  financial  sector.  The  process  which  was  initiated  two 
years ago aimed at ensuring hundred per cent financial inclusion. The process of financial 
inclusion consists of seeking each household and offering them options for inclusion in the 
banking  system.  A  beginning  has  been  made  to  enhance  financial  literacy  and  impart 
financial  education  to  enable  vast  numbers  of  new  entrants  into  employment  and  higher 
incomes, to better manage their finances in a rapidly marketising financial sector.  
Seventh,  the  institutional  reform  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  reinforced  governance 
standards and witnessed the disappearance of all who could not meet the capital adequacy 
standards.  But,  the  credit  needs  of  vast  section  of  population,  especially  of  unorganised 
sector, traders and rural areas are best met by revival, restructuring and revamping of what 
may  be  termed  as  community  based  banks.  These  include  Urban  Cooperative  Banks, 
Regional Rural Banks and rural cooperative credit system.  
Eighth, as the reform progressed, it was assumed that deregulation and competition would 
enhance  efficiency  and  ensure  better-than-before  quality  of  service  at  reasonable,  but 
competitive, cost to the customers. However, while many improvements have taken place, 
entirely  as  expected,  several  adverse  features  in  regard  to  retail  customers  were  noticed 
particularly in respect of a few banks. Apart from issues of appropriate pricing, instances of 
unequal  contracts,  unfair  trade  practices,  non-transparent  fees,  intrusion  into  privacy, 
excessive penalties, delays in cheque-clearing, arbitrary revision of interest rates or equated 
monthly  installments,  usurious  interest  charges  in  some  cases  and  excesses  by  loan 
recovery  agents  have  been  noticed  warranting  several  institutional,  policy  and  procedural 
interventions  by  RBI.  A  delicate  balance  between  competing  considerations  is  needed.  To 
the extent banks have special privileges, the regulator, who has granted such privileges, has 
a responsibility to ensure financial deepening and widening in an efficient, fair and equitable 
manner. 
Finally,  our  experience  shows  that  financial  sector  policies  and  instruments  need  to  be 
constantly  rebalanced  to  respond  not  only  to  financial  markets,  prices  and  overall  stability 
considerations but also to developments in real sector, in particular, trends in growth across 
BIS Review 138/2007 
 3
sectors, regions and sections of population. Such a comprehensive, but dynamic, approach 
to development of the financial sector enhances contribution of financial policies to growth 
and employment while maintaining stability. 
Likely impact of recent global developments 
Monetary policy statements and other messages from RBI have been, since 2005, drawing 
attention to global imbalances, under-pricing of risks, excess volatilities, dispersion of risks to 
unidentifiable sources etc. During this period, every effort has been made by the RBI to take 
advantage  of  favourable  global  financial  environment,  while  being  guarded  against  the 
evolving risks. In this background, the recent turbulence in the global financial markets was 
not  a  total  surprise  to  us,  though  the  manner  in  which  it  has  visited  was  not  anticipated. 
There  was  special  focus  on  financial  stability  in  recent  Policy  Statements.  The  Mid-Term 
Review of the Annual Policy for 2007-08 issued on October 30, 2007 stated, among other 
things, that the overall stance of the monetary policy is to be in readiness to take recourse to 
all possible options for maintaining stability and growth momentum in the economy in view of 
the  unusual  heightened  global  uncertainties  and  the  unconventional  international  policy 
responses to the developments in those financial markets.  
Subsequent developments have shown that there are continuing elements of uncertainties in 
the global environment which are unlikely to be clarified or resolved in the very near future. 
While  the  overall  analysis,  including  the  assessments  of  likely  impact,  made  in  Mid-Term 
Review remains valid, I would like to add a few words on what factors we are monitoring now 
and why we feel that extraordinary vigilance of the factors mentioned are warranted by RBI. 
We are monitoring (a) the process of restoration of full normalcy in global financial markets; 
(b)  the  evolving  financial  contagion;  and  (c)  the  possible  spill  over  to  the  real  sector  after 
accounting  for  the  possible  extent  of  “decoupling”.  The  major  reason  for  extraordinary 
vigilance  by  RBI  is  what  I  would  describe  as  simultaneous  volatilities  in  several  globally 
significant  markets,  namely,  money,  credit  and  currency  markets;  asset  prices;  and 
commodity prices, especially oil and food items. The current phenomenon of simultaneous 
volatilities should be viewed in the context of possible repositioning of the world’s dominant 
reserve currency, involving significant wealth, income and terms of trade effects.  
Similar stresses unlikely in India 
Our banks with overseas presence have confirmed that they have insignificant exposure to 
the US sub prime mortgage market.  
Some analysts have flagged the prospect of a sort of sub prime lending problem within India 
also. Though there are reports of accelerated emergence of non-performing assets in regard 
to consumer credit, housing and real estate in a few banks, our preliminary assessment, on 
the basis of information provided, is that these do not have systemic implications either in 
terms of solvency or liquidity. There are several reasons why Indian banking system may not 
invite disturbances akin to sub prime. First, pre-emptive monetary policy actions have been 
taken  to  address  evolving  monetary,  credit  and  inflation  environment.  Second,  several 
prudential  measures  have  been  taken  which  include  higher  risk  weights  and  higher 
provisioning in respect of sensitive sectors, namely capital market, housing, real estate etc. 
Third, the initial exposure of most banks to the sensitive sectors mentioned above has been 
very  modest. Fourth, intensive supervisory review of select banks was undertaken when it 
was  observed  that  their  off  balance  sheet  exposures  appeared  large  or  were  rapidly 
accelerating.  Finally,  as  part  of  our  regulatory  regime  in  regard  to  banks  and  financial 
markets, there has been what may be termed as “focus on liquidity”. Recent turbulence in 
global financial markets was characterized by liquidity issues and there is currently a global 
debate on the need to focus on liquidity. Hence, a more detailed account of our regulatory 
focus on liquidity is appropriate.  
4 
 BIS Review 138/2007
Regulatory focus on liquidity 
As you are aware, the overall liquidity in the system is actively managed by the RBI mainly 
through the operation of LAF on a daily basis. However, there are challenges in this regard 
due to volatility in capital flows and governments’ balances. 
In terms of the evolving global prudential framework, the emphasis has generally been more 
on capital, as a means of reducing vulnerability to risks, than on prudential requirements for 
liquidity  risk.  The  issue  of  liquidity  has  not  been  generally  addressed  in  as  structured  a 
manner as the issue of capital requirement. Aspects relating to liquidity have been largely left 
to each regulator to assess and prescribe a suitable framework under Pillar II of Basel II.  
In  the  Indian  context,  RBI  had  issued  broad  guidelines  for  asset  liability  management  and 
banks  have  flexibility  in  devising  their  own  risk  management  strategies  as  per  Board 
approved  policy.  However,  in  regard  to  liquidity  risks  at  the  very  short-end,  RBI  has  taken 
steps to mitigate risks at the systemic level and at the institution level as well.  
First, RBI had, early on, recognized the risks of allowing access to the unsecured overnight 
market funds to all entities and therefore restricted the overnight unsecured market for funds 
only to banks and primary dealers (PD). To enable this phase-out of all non-bank / non-PD 
participants from the uncollateralized money market, the repo markets – both bilateral repos 
and  collateralized  borrowing  and  lending  obligations  (a  form  of  tripartite  repos),  were 
developed. Since 2005, the overnight call market is a pure inter-bank market. The impact of 
this  has  been  that  the  volumes  have  shifted  from  the  overnight  unsecured  market  to  the 
collateralized market. 
Second,  greater  inter-linkages  and  excessive  reliance  on  call  money  borrowings  by  banks 
could cause systemic problems in two ways. One, if a bank is not able to repay the loan on 
the due date or the market perceives that the bank is having funding problems it may not be 
able to continue borrowing in the inter-bank market. If this results in non-payment, the bank 
which  has  lent  the  funds  could  itself  face  liquidity  problems  if  it  has  also  borrowed  on  an 
overnight basis to lend to this bank. The risk of financial contagion could also arise if other 
banks  in  the  system  that  are  similarly  placed  become  affected  by  such  concerns.  The 
external costs of failure – the costs that are not borne by the bank and are, therefore, unlikely 
to be taken into account in its own planning – are therefore greater. The RBI has therefore 
introduced prudential measures to address the extent to which banks can borrow and lend in 
the call money market in relation to the net worth. On a fortnightly average basis, call market 
borrowings outstanding should not exceed 100 per cent of capital funds (i.e., sum of Tier I 
and Tier II capital) of latest audited balance sheet. However, banks are allowed to borrow a 
maximum of 125 per cent of their capital funds on any day, during a fortnight. Similarly on a 
fortnightly average basis, lending in the call market should not exceed 25 per cent of their 
capital funds; however, banks are allowed to lend a maximum of 50 per cent of their capital 
funds on any day, during a fortnight.  
Third, recognising the potential of “purchased inter-bank liabilities” (IBL) to create systemic 
problems, RBI had issued guidelines in March 2007 prescribing that IBL of a bank should not 
exceed 200% of its net worth (300% for banks with a Capital to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) 
more than 11.25%).  
Fourth,  like  other  supervisors,  RBI  has  issued  asset  liability  management  guidelines  for 
dealing  with  overall  asset-liability  mismatches  taking  into  account  both  on  and  off  balance 
sheet  items.  While  prudential  limits  were  prescribed  for  the  first  two  time-buckets  of  1-14 
days and 15-28 days, the mismatches in the other time-buckets are determined by the banks 
themselves.  These  guidelines  have  been  recently  revised  to  provide  more  granularity  to 
measurement of liquidity risk by splitting the first time bucket (1-14 days at present) in three 
time  buckets  viz.  Next  day  ,  2-7  days  and  8-14  days.  The  net  cumulative  negative 
mismatches  in  the  three  time  buckets  have  been  capped  at  5  %  ,10%,  15  %  of  the 
cumulative cash outflows.  
BIS Review 138/2007 
 5
The RBI, in its supervisory oversight of banks’ activities, also monitors the incremental credit 
deposit  ratio  of  banks.  Although  banks  may  implement  sophisticated  risk  management 
strategies,  this  single  ratio  with  a  minimum  lag  indicates  the  extent  to  which  banks  are 
funding credit with borrowings from wholesale markets or what is now known as purchased 
funds. As part of supervisory review, RBI engages in a discussion with the banks which have 
high incremental credit deposit ratios. However, we have also raised these concerns in the 
monetary policy and encouraged banks to increase deposit mobilization for funding credit. As 
early as April 2006, the annual policy had stated that “It is, therefore, necessary to reiterate 
the  need  for  banks  to  review  their  policies  in  this  regard  (funding  sources)  and  make 
sustained efforts towards mobilising stable retail deposits by providing wider access to better 
quality  of  banking  services.  This  would  sustain  prudent  business  expansion  without  facing 
undue asset-liability mismatches.” In April 2007 it was again reiterated that “While buoyant 
deposit growth has, to an extent, alleviated the financial constraints on banks, incremental 
non-food  credit  deposit  ratios  remain  high  …  These  developments  are  likely  to  pose 
challenges to banks in managing liquidity.”  
The  RBI  guidelines  on  securitization  of  standard  assets  had  laid  down  detailed  policy  on 
provision of liquidity support to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). While the policy enabled a 
liquidity  facility,  by  the  originator  or  a  third  party,  to  help  smoothen  the  timing  differences 
faced  by  the  SPV  between  the  receipt  of  cash  flows  from  the  underlying  assets  and  the 
payments  to  be  made  to  investors,  it  was  subject  to  certain  conditions  to  ensure  that  the 
liquidity  support  was  only  temporary  and  got  invoked  to  meet  cash  flow  mismatches.  Any 
commitment to provide such liquidity facility, is to be treated as an off-balance sheet item and 
attracts  100%  credit  conversion  factor  as  well  as  100%  risk  weight.  The  facility  was 
specifically  proscribed  for  the  purposes  of  a)  providing  credit  enhancement;  b)  covering 
losses of the SPV; c) serving as a permanent revolving funding; and d) covering any losses 
incurred in the underlying pool of exposures prior to a draw down. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me hasten to reiterate that India cannot be immune to global developments but we, in the 
RBI, are actively monitoring the global developments, articulating our assessments as well 
as  responses  in  regard  to  impact  on  India  and  are  in  a  state  of  readiness  to  act,  as 
appropriate,  in  a  timely  manner.  The  RBI  appreciates  the  understanding  shown  and 
cooperation  extended  by  the  banking  community.  In  particular,  I  appreciate  collaboration 
between RBI and Indian Banks’ Association. 
Thank you and wish the conference all success. 
6 
 BIS Review 138/2007
