Randall S Kroszner: Loan modifications and foreclosure prevention  
Testimony by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 6 December 2007. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the 
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss recent problems in the subprime mortgage 
market and possible legislative responses. The challenges facing the housing market at the 
moment  are  significant. 
Increasing  numbers  of  homeowners  and  communities  are 
experiencing  problems.  We  continue  to  work  to  find  and  implement  the  best  and  most 
sustainable solutions to the current challenges.  
Background 
In  recent  years,  the  subprime  market  has  grown  dramatically,  enabling  more  and  more 
borrowers to obtain credit who traditionally would have been unable to access it. Increasing 
numbers of lenders entered this market, with underwriting standards, industry practices, and 
risk-based pricing evolving along with the subprime market. 
The  growth  of  this  market  is  well  recognized.  Also  well  recognized  are  the  problems  that 
have arisen with these changes. The Board believes that responsible subprime lending has 
an important role to play in expanding credit to traditionally underserved borrowers. It also 
recognizes,  however,  that  some  of  the  lending  undertaken  in  recent  years  was  neither 
responsible nor prudent.  
Mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates have increased substantially over the past few 
months. Over 17 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages were in serious delinquency 
at  the  end  of  September,  a  rate  over  three  times  higher  than  that  in  mid-2005.  Serious 
delinquencies  also  increased  among  near-prime  and  prime  mortgages,  although  these 
delinquencies  remain  much  lower  than  among  subprime  mortgages.  Lenders  initiated 
foreclosure proceedings for an average of 320,000 loans per quarter in the first half of this 
year, up from 240,000 loans per quarter in the preceding two years. 
One  significant  factor  in  the  increase  in  delinquency  rates  has  been  the  slowing  of  house 
prices. Prices decreased slightly for the nation as a whole in the third quarter of 2007, and 
declined more dramatically in some regions. Over a quarter of homeowners report that their 
houses decreased in value over the past year, just a bit above the level last seen in the early 
1990s.1 These price changes will affect homeowners' abilities to resolve financial troubles by 
refinancing their mortgages or pulling equity out of their homes, and may lead to increased 
defaults. In addition, some borrowers whose mortgage balances exceed their house values 
may be tempted to walk away from their loans. Borrowers who purchased properties solely 
for investment purposes may be more likely to default in this situation; indeed, the Mortgage 
Bankers'  Association  has  found  a  disproportionate  share  of  serious  delinquencies  are 
associated  with  non-owner-occupied  properties  in  some  of  the  states  with  the  highest 
increases  in  delinquencies.  A  recently  released  study  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
                                                 
1   Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, November 2007. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
Boston attributes most of the recent rise in foreclosures in Massachusetts to declining house 
prices.2
Borrowers  who  have  lost  their  jobs,  not  surprisingly,  may  have  difficulty  meeting  their 
mortgage payments. Thus, increases in unemployment in certain areas, such as states in the 
Midwest struggling with job cuts in the auto industry, are another major factor contributing to 
higher delinquency rates. 
The  final  major  factor  explaining  the  current  increase  in  delinquency  rates  is  the  apparent 
deterioration  in  underwriting  standards  beginning  in  late  2005.  An  increasing  number  of 
subprime  loans  were  made  with  layers  of  additional  risk  factors,  such  as  a  lack  of  full 
documentation  or  very  high  loan-to-value  ratios.  Much  of  this  weakening  in  underwriting 
standards  happened  outside  of  institutions  regulated  by  the  federal  banking  agencies.  For 
instance,  in  2006,  over  45  percent  of  high-cost  first  mortgages  were  originated  by 
independent mortgage companies.3 In addition, prior to late 2005, high demand for housing 
and  rising  house  prices  allowed  borrowers  to  recover  from  these  risks  through  profitable 
home  sales  and  refinancings,  hiding  the  weakened  underwriting  standards  from  view.  The 
slowdown in house prices, coupled with shifts in underwriting standards, are the most likely 
explanation for the pronounced rise we have seen in defaults occurring within a few months 
of  origination,  before  most  borrowers  would  have  experienced  significant  changes  in  their 
payment obligations or in their financial situations. 
Looking forward, we expect the substantial payment increases often experienced at the first 
interest-rate reset to result in higher delinquencies. From now until the end of next year, each 
quarter  roughly  one  out  of  ten  borrowers  with  an  adjustable-rate  subprime  mortgage  is 
scheduled  to  experience  the  first  rate  reset.4  In  addition,  tightening  credit  conditions  as 
reported in the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Surveys suggest that refinancing may 
become more difficult. In the past, many borrowers experiencing these resets were able to 
avoid the payment increases by refinancing their mortgages. The recent declines in house 
prices and the current tighter credit conditions, however, reduced the viability of this option 
for significant numbers of borrowers. 
The Federal Reserve's response to problems in the subprime market  
As I testified before this Committee in October, the Federal Reserve is actively working to 
respond to these challenges. If the benefits of homeownership are to be realized, we believe 
that homeownership must be sustainable and that access to responsible lending be available 
for consumers. To achieve this, the Board believes that there must be appropriate consumer 
protection  and  responsible  lending  to  traditionally  underserved  borrowers.  Accordingly,  we 
continue  to  coordinate  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies,  and  consult  with  consumer 
advocates, lenders, investors, and others. We take these issues very seriously, and, along 
with  the  other  federal  banking  regulators,  began  issuing  guidance  on  subprime  lending  in 
1999  for  the  institutions  we  regulate.  We  significantly  expanded  that  guidance  in  2001, 
issued guidance on non-traditional mortgage products (such as payment-option and interest-
only loans) in 2006, and issued guidance on adjustable-rate subprime mortgages earlier this 
year. I would like to take this opportunity to share a brief update on some of the work that the 
Federal Reserve is undertaking on these issues.  
                                                 
2   Kristopher  Gerardi,  Adam  Hale  Shapiro,  and  Paul  Willen,  "Subprime  Outcomes:  Risky  Mortgages, 
Homeownership  Experiences,  and  Foreclosures,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  Working  Paper  07-15, 
2007. 
3   2006 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. 
4   Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on data from First American LoanPerformance. 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
Coordinated enforcement of consumer protection laws 
First, the enforcement of consumer protection laws and regulations is critical and the Federal 
Reserve enforces these measures through oversight of the institutions it examines. As the 
mortgage  industry  has  diversified,  increasing  coordination  among  regulators  has  been 
helpful.  In  particular,  our  need  to  cooperate  with  state  bank  regulators  has  increased  in 
importance, and we have responded to that need. In that vein, we launched a cooperative 
pilot  project  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies  to  conduct  reviews  of  certain  non-
depository lenders involved in the subprime market.  
The  reviews  will  evaluate  underwriting  standards,  risk-management  strategies,  and 
compliance  with  certain  consumer  protection  laws  and  regulations.  This  initiative  brings 
together  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision,  the  Federal  Trade 
Commission,  and  state  agencies  represented  by  the  Conference  of  State  Banking 
Supervisors  (CSBS)  and  the  American  Association  of  Residential  Mortgage  Regulators 
(AARMR). The companies being reviewed include those that are supervised by the federal 
agencies, as well as independent entities that are licensed by the states.  
Loss mitigation efforts 
Second,  the  Board,  along  with  the  other  federal  financial  agencies,  has  worked  to  guide 
federally supervised institutions as they deal with mortgage defaults and delinquencies. The 
federal  financial  institution  agencies  issued  a  Statement  on  Working  with  Mortgage 
Borrowers in April 2007, and, in cooperation with the CSBS, a Statement on Loss Mitigation 
Strategies  for  Servicers  of  Residential  Mortgages  in  September  2007.  Together,  these 
statements  encourage  institutions  to  work  proactively  with  borrowers  who  may  be  facing 
delinquency or foreclosure, and encourage servicers of securitized residential mortgages to 
determine  the  full  extent  of  their  authority  to  restructure  failing  loans  and  to  pursue 
appropriate loss mitigation strategies. 
The  Board  continues  to  encourage  servicers  and  investors  to  make  every  effort  to  keep 
troubled borrowers in their homes. I, and other members of the Board, have had numerous 
meetings in recent months with a wide array of market participants and consumer advocates 
to understand the complexity of the issues and to encourage appropriate responses. Each of 
the  twelve  Federal  Reserve  Banks  has  been  working  with  financial  institutions  and 
community  groups  around  the  country  to  address  challenges  posed  by  loan  performance 
problems.  And  the  Federal  Reserve  Board's  staff  has  been  working  with  consumer  and 
community affairs groups throughout the Federal Reserve System to help identify localities 
that are most at risk of high foreclosures, with the intent to help local groups better focus their 
outreach efforts to borrowers. 
We have also been talking with lenders, servicers and investors, independently as well as 
through the Hope Now alliance, to support prudent efforts to reach out to as many borrowers 
as possible. Many servicers have established procedures to identify segments of borrowers 
who  are  current  but  could  face  trouble  at  reset,  to  contact  these  borrowers  ahead  of  the 
reset, and to systematically evaluate the ability of borrowers to make higher payments. On 
the  basis  of  this  analysis,  they  can  sometimes  present  prudent  refinancing  or  loan 
modification alternatives to the borrower. Other efforts, such as the FHASecure product and 
various state and local efforts, can play a role in avoiding foreclosure. As I will discuss further 
in a moment, we support these efforts because foreclosure is generally the worst possible 
option for consumers, investors,  and communities, and should be avoided whenever other 
viable options exist. Changes to existing terms, however, should not be made lightly, should 
be consistent with safe and sound lending practices, and should not be made when they are 
only  delaying  losses  to  investors  and  consumers.  In  short,  we  should  pursue  sustainable 
solutions.  
BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
Consumer protection regulations  
Finally, the Board continues to work toward more effective consumer protection rules. We will 
soon  begin  extensive  consumer  testing  to  ensure  that  new  disclosures  are  effective  and 
comprehensible.  Later  this  month,  we  will  propose  changes  to  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act 
(TILA)  rules  to  require  earlier  disclosures  by  lenders  and  to  address  concerns  about 
misleading mortgage loan advertisements. 
The Board recognizes, however, that improved disclosures are necessary but not sufficient 
to  address  the  problems.  In  addition  to  these  actions,  therefore,  the  Federal  Reserve  will 
exercise  its  rulemaking  authority  under  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act 
(HOEPA) to address unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices. At the same time we 
propose  the  TILA  rule  changes  on  advertising  and  timing  of  disclosures,  we  will  issue,  for 
public  comment,  significant  new  rules  that  would  apply  to  subprime  loans  offered  by  all 
mortgage  lenders.  In  formulating  our  proposal,  we  are  looking  closely  at  practices  in  the 
subprime mortgage market, such as prepayment penalties, failure to offer escrow accounts 
for  taxes  and  insurance,  stated-income  and  low-documentation  lending,  and  the  failure  to 
give adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay.  
I can assure you that our proposed rules will be based on detailed analyses of the issues and 
our statutory authority to address them, extraordinary outreach efforts to gather a wide range 
of  information  and  opinions,  and  attempts  to  balance  the  needs  of  adequately  protecting 
consumers and maintaining responsible lending markets. The rules will reflect input obtained 
through public meetings in 2006 and a hearing that dealt specifically with these issues that I 
chaired this past June. We also considered nearly 100 comment letters, following the June 
meeting,  and  consulted  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies  and  our  own  Consumer 
Advisory Council. Finally, we have continued to meet with, and listen to informed opinions 
from, consumer groups, the financial services industry, lawmakers, and others to ensure that 
our proposed rules are likely to achieve the goal of adequate consumer protection without 
shutting off access to responsible credit. 
Legislative responses 
Congress  has  expressed  understandable  and  appropriate  concern  about  subprime  lending 
and  the  challenges  in  the  mortgage  market  more  generally.  We  commend  leaders  in 
Congress  who  are  looking  into  these  problems  and  wrestling  with  the  challenges  of 
addressing abusive lending while encouraging responsible lending.  
The  Mortgage  Reform  and  Anti-Predatory  Lending  Act  of  2007,  which  was  passed  by  the 
House  of  Representatives  last  month,  would  extend  additional  oversight  and  consumer 
protections to the market. We were asked in today's testimony to comment on two issues, 
not  addressed  in  the  current  version  of  the  Act,  that  could  be  addressed  through 
amendments or other actions. 
Loan modifications 
One  issue  is  the  possible  legal  exposure  of  servicers  of  mortgages  who  enter  into  loan 
modifications or workout plans. Because loan servicers play a critical role in implementing 
possible loss mitigation strategies, this is a timely and important question.  
We  believe  that  investors  and  servicers  generally  want  to  work  with  borrowers  to  avoid 
foreclosure.  Prudent  loss  mitigation  techniques  that  avoid  foreclosure  not  only  help 
homeowners, they are usually cost-effective for investors. Borrowers who have been current 
in their payments but could default after reset, for instance, may be able to work with their 
lender  or  servicer  to  adjust  their  payments  or  otherwise  change  their  loans  to  make  them 
more  manageable. Working with borrowers before they experience payment problems has 
other  benefits;  for  instance,  late  payments  will  not  have  affected  such  borrowers'  credit 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2007
scores, preserving a wider range of options including refinancing. Such proactive outreach by 
servicers may mean the difference between loan payment and default, particularly for lower-
income families who may have little financial cushion.  
Given the substantial number of resets expected from now through the end of 2008, it is in 
the interest of the industry to go further than it has historically to join together and explore 
collaborative,  creative  efforts  to  develop  prudent  loan  modification  programs  and  other 
assistance to help large groups of borrowers systematically. Such programs can streamline 
and speed the process of anticipating and addressing delinquent loans, reduce transaction 
costs, and provide guidance to borrowers and to mortgage counselors. Many servicers are, 
in fact, working with counselors who can play a crucial role in helping homeowners, many of 
whom  do  not  even  communicate  with  their  servicers  out  of  fear,  embarrassment,  or 
misinformation  about  their  options.  Loan  modification  programs  should  be  a  bottom-up 
approach  designed  to  balance  the  needs  of  all  parties,  and  we  are  encouraged  by  the 
progress being made by the industry in advancing such programs.  
Because  systematic  approaches  to  dealing  with  troubled  loans  are  often  likely  to  lead  to 
better aggregate investor returns than foreclosures, we are encouraged by industry efforts to 
pursue these approaches. When servicers modify loans, however, they may face potential 
litigation  risk  from  investors  because  of  their  contractual  obligations  under  the  servicing 
agreements.  One  particular  source  of  litigation  risk,  we  understand,  may  be  that  different 
asset classes have conflicting interests. Therefore, we encourage ongoing industry efforts to 
agree to standards for addressing these issues. We are hopeful that the industry can resolve 
these  conflicts  on  a  consensual  basis  so  that  they  do  not  preclude  servicers  from  taking 
actions that are in the overall best interests of consumers and the industry.  
More generally, the Board supports efforts by the industry and others to develop reasonable 
and  standardized  approaches  to  dealing  with  these  challenges.  Such  approaches,  when 
applied consistently and predictably, can reduce uncertainty and ultimately help the markets 
function.  Prudent  workout  arrangements  that  are  consistent  with  safe  and  sound  lending 
practices are generally in the long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the 
borrower,  but  there  may  be  instances  when  such  arrangements  are  not  prudent  or 
appropriate. In trying to help homeowners, we must also be careful to recognize the existing 
legal  rights  of  investors,  avoid  actions  that  may  have  the  unintended  consequence  of 
disrupting the orderly functioning of the market, or unnecessarily reducing future access to 
credit.  Provisions  intended  to  immunize  servicers  from  liability  should  be  crafted  to  avoid 
creating  moral  hazard  of  parties  disregarding  their  contractual  obligations,  which  would 
ultimately have negative impacts for markets and consumers. Sustainable solutions, and not 
those that simply hide for the short term real repayment challenges, should be our goal.  
Patterns or practices of violations 
A  second  issue  is  the  possible  imposition  of  civil  money  penalties  when  the  enforcement 
agencies  find  that  there  is  a  pattern  or  practice  of  violations.  Penalties  collected  would  be 
used  to  establish  a  trust  fund  for  those  consumers  whose  interests  had  been  harmed  but 
who  lack  a  remedy  in  the  event,  for  instance,  that  the  responsible  party  has  gone  out  of 
business. 
The proper magnitude for any such penalties, or under what circumstances they should be 
imposed, is Congress' decision to make. As a general rule, the Board believes that penalties 
for  any  violation  of  law  should  be  sufficient  to  deter  the  prohibited  conduct,  and  also 
reasonably related to the injury caused by the violation. Penalties that are clearly articulated, 
and  that  reasonably  match  the  magnitude  of  the  violation,  are  the  most  appropriate  and 
effective forms of deterrence.  
We would recommend that the amount of such civil money penalties, if imposed, be given a 
ceiling as well as a floor because of the market uncertainty that can be introduced by open-
ended  liability.  We  would  also  suggest  that  some  discretion  in  the  actual  amount  of  the 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 5
penalty,  within  such  a  range,  be  given  to  the  enforcing  agencies.  This  sort  of  flexibility  in 
enforcement would help the agencies adjust the punishment to fit the infraction. 
The  proposed  increase  in  civil  money  penalties  draws  attention  to  the  critical  role  that 
enforcement  plays  in  ensuring  compliance  with  the  new  responsibilities  enacted  by 
Congress.  But  the  effectiveness  of  increased  penalties  can  be  diminished  by  a  lack  of 
enforcement resources. As Congress weighs the merits of the bill and possible amendments, 
we  would  encourage  you  to  also  look  at  the  resource  needs  of  the  agencies  that  are 
authorized to take enforcement actions to ensure that sufficient resources for this important 
role are available.  
Conclusion 
The Board recognizes the magnitude of the challenges facing mortgage borrowers today. We 
understand the uncertainty and harm being experienced by consumers across the country as 
the housing market challenges continue. We are engaged in an array of activities to respond 
to  these  concerns.  In  coming  weeks,  we  will  propose  new  rules  regarding  advertising,  the 
timing of disclosures, and practices that we find to be unfair or deceptive under our HOEPA 
authority,  all  of  which  we  believe  will  offer  increasing  protection  to  consumers.  We  look 
forward to continuing to work with Congress to achieve sustainable solutions to challenges in 
the mortgage market.  
6 
 BIS Review 146/2007
