Hermann Remsperger: Financial stability issues – a view from the 
Bundesbank1
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  China  Society  for  Finance  &  Banking,  Beijing,  7 November 
2007. 
 Introduction 
I 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
First of all, I would like to thank the “China Society for Finance and Banking” for giving me 
the  opportunity  to  hold  a  speech  on  “Financial  Stability  Issues”  in  Beijing  today.  I  have  to 
admit that I talked about a very similar subject in Brussels at the end of June.2 Four months 
separate these two speeches. And, what is more, in the intervening period there has been 
turmoil in the financial markets that has captured our attention. 
Of  course,  I  do  not  want  to  pretend  that  I  foresaw  this  turbulence.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot 
resist  the  temptation  to  quote  a  few  lines  from  my  Brussels  speech  here  in  Beijing  as  an 
introduction  to  my  talk  today:  “I  believe  there  is  a  certain  risk  in  the  fact  that  not  enough 
consideration is being given to the time when this period of market calm comes to an end. 
(…) I still see risks in the kind of things that are happening in the financial markets. These 
risks  are  not  only  of  a  cyclical  nature.  In  some  cases  they  are  closely  linked  to  structural 
changes occurring in the financial sector.” 
Despite all these warnings, at the time I said that the financial system was in robust shape 
overall. This assessment was based mainly on the resilience shown by financial institutions 
in the financial markets’ spring turbulence in 2006 and 2007. 
Now we are in the autumn of 2007. And we have every reason to look to the “hot” financial 
summer of this year. 
Before I enlarge on this subject, let me explain briefly what I mean by financial stability. At 
the Bundesbank, we define it as the ability of the financial system to perform its key functions 
efficiently,  namely  the  allocation  of  capital  and  risks  and  the  settlement  of  payments  and 
securities  transactions.  These  functions  must  also  be  fulfilled  smoothly  in  stress  situations 
and during periods of structural adjustment. 
As central bankers, we are interested in financial stability because a stable financial system 
is  a  precondition  for  the  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  decisions  into  the  real 
economy. Disturbances in the financial system, including speculative bubbles, can delay or 
impair the transmission process. 
Today, I will look at financial stability in the light of the recent turbulence. I would like to share 
my thoughts with you in three stages. First I am going to talk about some structural changes 
in financial markets. Second, I will look briefly at how the turbulences unfolded. Third, I will 
try to draw some initial lessons from this and discuss possible measures. 
                                            
1 
2   H. Remsperger, Current Financial Stability Issues from a European Viewpoint, in BIS Review 81, 2007. 
I would like to thank Claudia Ohly for her assistance in preparing this speech. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
Structural changes in financial markets 
II  
In recent years, we have seen far-reaching structural changes in financial markets. Let me 
mention  some  of  these  trends:  first,  new,  complex  instruments;  second,  new  business 
models; third, a growing role for relatively new players, and fourth, ever closer international 
financial integration. 
Some  of  these  trends  have  led  to  declining  transparency  and  hidden  liquidity  risks.  I  shall 
come back to these points later. 
Growing importance of new, complex financial instruments 
1 
First  of  all,  let  me  address  the  growing  importance  of  innovative  and  complex  financial 
instruments. Among those instruments, financial products used for credit risk transfer have 
played  a  prominent  role  and  have  significantly  changed  credit  markets  over  recent  years. 
The most popular instruments are collateralised debt obligations (CDOs), which bundle credit 
risk  into  different  tranches  with  different  ratings,  credit  default  swaps  (CDS),  by  which  you 
can insure yourself against the default of a borrower, and CDS index contracts covering the 
default risk of all names in the index.  
The  structuring  of  CDOs  can  produce  tranches  with  triple  A  ratings  that  are  based  on  a 
portfolio of loans with a partly inferior rating. These tranches are riskier than traditional bonds 
with  the  same  rating  and  generally  receive  a  much  higher  coupon.  The  complexity  of  this 
kind of securitisation makes risk assessment very difficult.  
On the one hand, credit risk transfer, in principle, leads to a more efficient allocation of risks. 
On  the  other,  credit  risks  do  not  disappear  in  the  process  and  are  often  shifted  into 
unregulated  market  segments.  As  transactions  take  place  over  the  counter,  there  is  no 
publicly available information on where the risks go. Transparency suffers. In addition, new 
risks emerge, such as counterparty risks. 
Growth in the credit risk transfer market has been enormous. For instance, the outstanding 
volume of credit default swaps more than doubled in both 2005 and 2006. Between 2001 and 
2006,  CDS  notional  amounts  outstanding  increased  from  USD  632  billion  to  over  USD  34 
trillion.  
New business models 
2 
The  second  structural  change  we  are  observing  is  the  increasing  weight  of  new  business 
models. In the past, banks extended loans and mostly kept them in their books. These days, 
the  large,  internationally  active  banks,  in  particular,  are  switching  more  and  more  to  the 
“originate-to-distribute” model – in other words, they pool credit risks and sell them on – often 
to investors outside the banking system.  
By passing on credit risk, banks create additional scope for new lending. Even though it is 
hard to verify, it is likely that the large demand for structured products has led to an increase 
in primary lending. 
Moreover,  I  would  like  to  point  to  the  fact  that  the  distinction  between  bank-  and  market 
based  financial  systems  has  become  blurred.  Even  in  traditionally  bank-based  economies, 
refinancing through the money and capital market has become more popular.  
Increasing importance of relatively new, largely unregulated players 
3 
The  third  trend  we  are  observing  is  the  growing  importance  of  a  number  of  relatively  new 
players. What is common to them is the fact that they are unregulated or regulated only to a 
minor extent. This reduces transparency in the financial system. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
Let  me  talk  first  about  hedge  funds,  which  have  come  to  play  a  major  role  in  financial 
markets.  Assets  under  their  management  have  more  than  tripled  over  the  past  six  years. 
They  increased  from  USD  539  billion  in  2001  to  USD  1,810  billion  at  the  end  of  the  third 
quarter of 2007. A typical feature of hedge funds is the use of high financial leverage. This 
means  that  the  actual  volumes  of  their  transactions  far  exceed  reported  assets  under 
management.  
Hedge  funds’  share  in  the  turnover  of  the  credit  market  is  so  large  that  they  make  a 
considerable contribution to market liquidity. In principle, this is positive. However, given their 
large weight and high transaction volumes, hedge funds can both cause and intensify market 
disruptions  and  thus  play  an  important  role  for  financial  stability.  Moreover,  they  are 
borrowers from and counterparties to systemically important financial institutions.  
The second type of player which has seen record inflows over the past few years are private 
equity  firms.  Private  equity  firms’  assets  under  management  amounted  to  USD 700  billion 
worldwide  in  2006;  the  compound  annual  growth  rate  between  2000  and  2006  was  14%. 
Inflows to west European private equity firms increased from EUR 20 billion in 1997 to over 
EUR 112 billion in 2006. 
Among other things, private equity firms have benefited from lower regulatory requirements 
than  listed  companies,  favourable  financing  conditions  and  tax  advantages  in  many 
countries.  To  a  considerable  extent,  the  business  model  has  relied  on  leveraged  buyouts 
(LBOs). 
Private  equity  creates  financing  opportunities  for  firms  that  might  have  had  difficulties  in 
obtaining a bank loan. This is particularly helpful for start-up enterprises. However, owing to 
their  substantial  weight  and  high  leverage,  private  equity  firms  can  also  affect  financial 
stability.  
Until the beginning of the turmoil last summer, we had witnessed increasing leverage and an 
easing  of  credit  standards  for  private  equity  firms.  Apparently,  they  had  sufficient  market 
power to ask lenders for very favourable conditions because investor demand was so strong. 
At  the  same  time,  private  equity  firms’  strategies  were  characterised  by  growing  short-
termism. Those developments pointed to an overheating in this market segment.  
After the outbreak of the turmoil, the flow of new LBOs came to a virtual standstill. The loss 
of liquidity in the credit markets made it difficult for banks to distribute the leveraged loans 
that they had originated. 
As a third group of new market players, I should mention Asset-Backed Commercial Paper 
Conduits  (ABCP  Conduits)  and  Structured  Investment  Vehicles  (SIVs.)  These  have  come 
play  a  pivotal  role  in  financial  markets  in  recent  years.  These  types  of  Special  Purpose 
Vehicle  (SPV)  are  generally  used  by  banks  to  keep  risks  off  their  balance  sheets.  In  that 
sense, they are not really independent players like hedge funds or private equity firms. 
Both  conduits  and  SIVs  usually  buy  tranches  of  structured  products  with  longer  maturities 
and refinance themselves by issuing short- or medium-term debt. While conduits exclusively 
issue Asset-Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP), SIVs also sell Medium-Term Notes (with a 
one to three-year maturity) and Capital Notes involving profit participation. 
Sponsoring banks provide liquidity lines for the event of market disruptions. ABCP Conduits 
usually  have  liquidity  facilities  of  about  100%  of  their  asset  portfolio,  while  those  of  SIVs 
amount  to  no  more  than  10%  to  15%.  Therefore,  SIVs  may  have  to  resort  to  the  sale  of 
assets in the event of market disturbances.  
If conduits or SIVs have to draw on liquidity lines, they transfer their liquidity problems to the 
sponsoring banks. At first sight, the risks for banks appears lower in connection with SIVs. 
However, if SIVs are forced to sell assets, banks may face additional risks as holders of the 
notes  issued  by  SIVs.  According  to  current  legislation  in  both  Germany  and  the  EU  as  a 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 3
whole, liquidity lines to SPVs are not counted when calculating lending ceilings for banks and 
do not require additional regulatory equity capital if their maturity is less than one year. 
The  fourth  group  of  financial  market  players  that  I  would  like  to  talk  about  today  are 
Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs). While there is no generally accepted definition for SWFs, I 
think  it  is  appropriate  to  say  they  are  public  investment  funds  or  agencies,  which  invest 
governments’  foreign  assets  in  addition  to  –  and  separately  from  –  the  traditional  foreign 
reserve management. 
SWFs have been around for a long time. However, in recent years, more and more countries 
have  set  up  such  funds  and  their  weight  has  reached  unprecedented  levels.  Most  of  the 
assets  are  held  by  funds  in  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  Singapore,  Norway,  Saudi  Arabia, 
China, Kuwait and Russia.  
Ever closer international financial integration 
4 
All the structural changes I have just mentioned have taken place against the background of 
ever  closer  international  integration  in  financial  markets.  The  speed  of  financial  integration 
even  exceeds  that  of  globalisation  in  the  real  economy.  Financial  openness,  measured  by 
the share of cross-border direct and portfolio investment in GDP, is growing fast. In industrial 
countries, financial openness increased from 15% in 1970 to 32% in 1990, then picking up 
speed and reaching 150% in 2006. 
Of course, overall, increasing financial integration is a very positive development, leading to 
higher  efficiency  and  welfare.  But  it  also  means  that  disturbances  spread  faster  from  one 
country to the other. The recent turbulence makes that very clear: the defaults of subprime 
borrowers  in  the  United  States  eventually  turned  into  a  widespread  international  crisis  of 
confidence  and  liquidity.  So,  let  us  take  a  closer  look  at  the  recent  turmoil  in  the  financial 
system. 
Recent turmoil and current situation 
III 
The US subprime mortgage market was characterised by loose credit standards, insufficient 
loan assessments and the involvement of unregulated mortgage brokers. As a result, default 
rates in this market segment increased significantly, starting in May 2007. This default surge 
triggered the turbulence that eventually led to a fundamental repricing and reassessment of 
risks across the globe. 
Among the first reactions to the subprime crisis we saw the breakdown of two large hedge 
funds and witnessed serious problems in conduits and SIVs which had invested in subprime 
credit risk and could not find buyers for the commercial paper they had issued to refinance 
themselves. The outstanding volume of ABCP declined from more than USD 1,100 billion in 
the summer of 2007 to below USD 900 billion in October. 
The problems then spread to the banking sector. The complex structure of some derivative 
instruments  made  it  extremely  difficult  to  assess  the  risk  exposure  of  individual  market 
participants. It became evident, however, that a smaller proportion than expected had been 
sold  to  non-banks.  As  there  was  not  enough  information  on  what  risks  were  on 
counterparties’ books, interbank lending pretty much dried up. 
It  was  indeed  surprising  how  the  crisis  then  spread  into  the  money  market,  making  rates 
soar.  Yield  spreads  between  secured  and  unsecured  interbank  lending  demonstrated  the 
uncertainty prevailing in the markets. While the spread between USLIBOR and USREPO had 
mostly staid below 20 basis points before the turmoil, it exceeded 130 at the end of August 
2007.  
The interplay of different types of risks – counterparty, funding liquidity, credit risk – led to 
strong  dynamics,  which  reinforced  each  other.  The  market  liquidity  of  certain  instruments 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2007
was  affected  as  well.  Large  parts  of  the  credit  market  dried  up.  Risk  premia  increased 
sharply and we saw substantial deleveraging. Equity markets also fell sharply, but were quick 
to recover. 
Provision of liquidity by the ECB and other central banks have helped to reduce tensions in 
the financial system. However, we still face uncertainty. There might be more delinquencies 
of  US  homeowners  over  the  coming  quarters,  and  we  do  not  know  when  the  adjustment 
process in the US real estate markets will come to an end. Moreover, the situation in money 
markets  has  not  completely  returned  to  normal.  The  funding  of  the  interbank  market 
continues  to  be  hampered  by  liquidity  concerns  and  a  lack  of  confidence  with  regard  to 
potential counterparties. 
With  the  increase  of  risk  premia  in  the  international  corporate  loan  markets,  a  period  of 
extremely  favourable  financing  conditions  has  come  to  an  end.  In  the  credit  risk  transfer 
markets, we shall probably see a longer adjustment process, during which complex financial 
instruments need to be repriced.  
It is striking that emerging markets seem to have been affected less than industrial countries 
and have emerged from the turbulence in remarkably strong shape. Their risk premia only 
went up for a rather short period. Emerging markets have not always been so resilient. In 
previous financial crises these countries were often hit particularly hard. I believe that it is still 
essential  to  enhance  market  forces  and  the  efficiency  of  local  currency  bond  markets  in 
emerging economies. These have proved to be one of the main vehicles for the shift from 
short-term external finance to long-term domestic debt and have helped to reduce currency 
and  maturity  mismatches.  Thus,  they  play  a  major  role  strengthening  the  resilience  of 
emerging markets financial sectors. 
After looking at emerging markets, you may be also interested in the effects of recent market 
developments on the German banking industry. I would like to make four points here. 
First,  German  banks’  direct  lending  to  US  subprime  borrowers  or  to  intermediaries  who 
passed loans on to the intermediaries is negligible. Investments in structured products that 
are  based  on  subprime  credits  amount  to  less  than  one  percent  of  German  banks’  total 
assets.  However,  liquidity  or  credit  lines  for  special  purpose  vehicles  that  invested  in 
structured credit resulted in outflows from large, internationally active banks. There appear to 
be  some  burdens  on  banks  due  to  the  taking-over  of  assets  from  their  special  purpose 
vehicles into their own books. 
Second, two smaller German banks got into serious difficulties as they had set up conduits 
that were disproportionately large given their total assets. But this did not involve systemic 
risks. The banks’ owners as well as other German banks stepped in. Our comprehensive, 
privately organised system of deposit insurance also helped to keep up confidence. 
Third, real estate prices have been more or less stagnating in Germany for many years, and 
there is definitely no risk of overheating or the development of bubbles. Moreover, standards 
for mortgage loans in Germany are much stricter than in the US subprime segment, and we 
have a long-standing tradition of fixed-interest loans for residential construction. In the past 
few years, interest rates have been fixed for at least five years for about two-thirds of new 
loans for residential construction. 
Fourth,  direct  financing  via  capital  markets  is  still  not  very  important  for  the  majority  of 
German  enterprises.  Thus,  the  impact  of  higher  spreads  for  corporate  bonds  on  German 
growth should be limited. 
Initial lessons and possible therapies 
IV 
Now let me turn to the question of what lessons we can draw from the turmoil. As I see it, it is 
still  too  early  to  make  definitive  judgements.  Nevertheless,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  we 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 5
should avoid rushing into overhasty regulatory responses. Above all, we need to analyse in 
more detail what happened and identify the reasons for the turmoil. 
As  the  turbulence  has  spread  across  national  borders,  international  cooperation  is  key.  It 
would hardly be possible for one country alone to take any promising measures to prevent 
the recurrence of such developments.  
At  present,  a  whole  range  of  international  bodies  are  inquiring  into  various  aspects  of  the 
turmoil.  In  my  view,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  is  a  “natural  choice”  for  discussing  the 
recent  events.  The  Bundesbank  also  contributes  to  the  work  of  the  Forum.  Recently,  the 
Forum set up a working group that is to examine the underlying causes of the recent financial 
market turmoil and make appropriate recommendations.  
Of  course,  other  bodies,  such  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  and  the 
international  committees  of  supervisors  (for  example,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, IOSCO) are currently working on this issue.  
In my view, at least two weaknesses in the current system should be discussed in all these 
fora:  liquidity  risks  and  a  lack  of  transparency.  I  will  now  first  talk  about  liquidity  and  then 
discuss transparency issues. 
Liquidity issues 
1 
This summer, it became more than obvious that liquidity is essential for the functioning of the 
financial system and thus key for financial stability. In my view, we should make a distinction 
between three different types of liquidity: market liquidity, which is generally defined as an 
asset's  ability  to  be  easily  bought  and  sold  without  causing  a  significant  movement  in  its 
price, funding liquidity – in other words, the access to markets for funding – and monetary 
liquidity provided by central banks.  
Let me start with some remarks on monetary liquidity. Many observers see a link between 
years  of  ample  monetary  liquidity  and  what  is  known  as  search  for  yield.  David  Dodge, 
Governor of the Bank of Canada, argues that the increase in securitisation implied an easing 
of  credit  conditions.  The  securitisation  probably  led  to  the creation  of  loans  that  would  not 
otherwise  have  been  made.  Monetary  policy  may  thus  have  been  less  restrictive  than 
thought. But this effect, and here I also agree with David Dodge, should not be overestimated 
since inflation rates remained contained. 
What I would like to stress, nevertheless, is that central banks need to take account of the 
link between monetary and market liquidity. In particular, we must be aware that a change in 
monetary liquidity can result in a more than proportional effect on market liquidity. 
Let me add that during the turbulence central banks had a very difficult task: ensuring the 
functioning of the money market without creating moral hazard.  
The ECB initially responded to the disruptions in the money markets by providing overnight 
liquidity and additional liquidity with a maturity of one week in its main refinancing operations. 
However,  tensions  persisted  with  regard  to  longer  maturities.  The  ECB  responded  with 
longer-term refinancing operations. While tensions in the money markets have been reduced 
by the ECBs operations, the situation is still not “back to normal”. 
Now let me turn to market liquidity. It is obvious that this type of liquidity could turn out to be 
elusive in times of market distress. However, the role of funding liquidity, and the interplay of 
different  types  of  liquidity  were  underestimated.  Funding  liquidity  has  become  increasingly 
dependent  on  market  liquidity.  This  is  due,  not  least,  to  the  increasing  importance  of  the 
originate-to-distribute  business  model.  At  the  same  time,  market  liquidity  depends  on 
financial institutions having funding liquidity at their disposal. 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2007
So how can the handling of liquidity risks be improved? Of course it is up to the banks to take 
a close look at their risk management techniques. In particular, the management of liquidity 
risks should receive due attention.  
To my mind, the implementation of Basel II will help to avoid some of the problems I have 
just described. In the first pillar of Basel II, capital requirements will also be introduced for 
credit lines to off-balance-sheet special purpose vehicles for periods of less than one year. 
The rules on large credits will also become stricter and more risk-adequate. The second pillar 
of  Basel  II,  which  relates  to  the  Supervisory  Review  Process,  contains  the  requirement  to 
include concentration risks in banks’ risk management.  
Having looked into liquidity issues, I would like to conclude that is a real challenge to create 
financial instruments which are tailored to the needs of individual investors and, at the same 
time, tradable in liquid markets. Maybe we can pick up this issue in our discussion. 
Transparency issues 
2 
The second weakness that has become apparent in the financial system since last summer 
is a lack of transparency. Transparency is necessary for the identification of risks and for the 
assessment  of  their  seriousness.  It  is  essential  for  making  market  discipline  to  work. 
Transparency  is  also  an  important  means  of  maintaining  confidence  among  market 
participants under stress. Thus, it is a precondition for safeguarding financial stability. 
In  my  view,  private  sector  initiatives  are  key  for  ensuring  transparency  and  increasing  the 
resilience of the financial system. We should first discuss the outcome of such initiatives in 
detail before rushing into new regulation.  
Banks  can  make  important  contributions  to  transparency  in  financial  markets.  Originating 
banks  should  provide  more  information  on  the  structure  and  underlyings  of  complex 
instruments.  
Talking about banks, I would also like to mention the launch of a private sector initiative by 
the  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF),  which  aims  at  refining  best  practices  for  market 
participants. It is to produce recommendations concerning issues such as the pricing of risks; 
conduits  and  the  contingent  liquidity  risks  to  which  firms  have  been  exposed  by  using  off-
balance sheet instruments; valuation questions, especially where markets are thin or absent; 
ratings; and, transparency, disclosure and communications to define appropriate standards. 
We can also expect some progress with regard to transparency when Basel II comes into 
force  in  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  next  year.  The  third  pillar  of  this  new  framework 
addresses the issue of improving market discipline through public disclosure.  
Furthermore,  we  need  transparency  and  reliability  with  regard  to  valuations  of  financial 
instruments. In the recent turmoil, the valuation of credit instruments – especially those that 
are  backed  by  subprime  loans  –  in  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  has  raised 
considerable attention and contributed to uncertainty. Pricing structured financial instruments 
mark-to-market  is  extremely  difficult  in  times  when  markets  have  dried  up.  Therefore  the 
mark-to-model  method  is  increasingly  being  used.  Extremely  complex  models  are  applied, 
but they are far from perfect. 
No easy solution is at hand, but in any event market participants must do their best to make 
valuations  as  realistic  as  possible.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  that  the  methods  use  are 
consistent  and  transparent.  How  this  goal  can  be  achieved  is,  above  all,  up  to  financial 
institutions and auditors. 
Rating agencies should also contribute to ensuring transparency. Over the past few years, 
we  have  seen  lots  of  triple  A  ratings  for  structured  credit  products.  These  ratings  may  be 
misunderstood. The same rating for a corporate bond and a CDO tranche does not mean 
that the risk is the same. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 7
In  addition,  the  frequency  of  rating  adjustments  for  structured  products  is  lower  than  for 
traditional bonds. However, if ratings are adjusted, the change for structured products tends 
to  be  much  larger.  Moreover,  ratings  focus  on  credit  risk,  while  for  structured  products,  in 
particular,  market  and  liquidity  risks  play  an  important  role,  too.  Probably  not  all  investors 
took that sufficiently into account. 
Rating  agencies  do  acknowledge  the  need  to  improve  their  rating  methods  for  structured 
products. It may be worth considering a separate rating scale for these instruments in order 
to make it clear that the related risks are of a different kind than in the case of classic bonds. 
Publishing more information on the type and quality of claims underlying structured products 
would also be helpful. 
At the same time, I would like to emphasise that ratings are no substitute for a broad-based 
risk  assessment  by  investors,  who  should  develop  their  own  risk  analysis,  as  Randall 
Kroszner from the US Fed recently pointed out.  
Thus,  investors  will  have  to  weigh  the  benefits  of  certain  instruments  against  the  cost  of 
acquiring the data and expertise necessary to assess them properly. Sellers may respond by 
putting instruments on offer that are less complex and more transparent. 
As regards the transparency of hedge funds, it is essential to strengthen market discipline 
and to enable counterparties to make a correct assessment the risks involved in dealing with 
hedge funds. In May 2007, the Financial Stability Forum published a list of recommendations 
on  hedge  funds  to  address  potential  systemic  risk,  which  is  clearly  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  The  recommendations  include  strengthening  the  management  of  counterparty 
exposures  and  the  development  of  enhanced  sound  practice  standards  for  hedge  fund 
managers. The G7 have endorsed these recommendations.  
A  group  of  UK-based  hedge  funds  under  the  leadership  of  Sir  Andrew  Large  have 
announced plans to introduce standards based on the industry’s best practices. I think this is 
a  very  promising  project.  In  the  US,  the  government  has  launched  two  working  groups  on 
hedge fund transparency. We expect to see their recommendations by the end of this year. 
Concerning Sovereign Wealth Funds greater transparency should be in the interests of the 
investing countries as well, because they would also benefit from a reduction of uncertainty 
in the financial markets. Moreover, a commitment to best practices would reassure the target 
countries and could help to prevent protectionist tendencies. The dialogue between investing 
and receiving countries should definitely be intensified. The formulation of and adherence to 
best  practices  in  that  area  seems  to  be  a  promising  route  to  follow,  possibly  with  the 
involvement  of  the  IMF  and  the  OECD.  In  any  event,  we  should  not  call  into  question  the 
principle of free capital movement and should avoid resorting to protectionism.  
Last but not least, I would also like to point to the lack of aggregate statistics on credit risk 
transfer. Transactions are mostly carried out over-the-counter. Comprehensive and reliable 
data, say, on the overall volumes of transactions, exist only for some market segments. In 
particular, data on the CDO market are far from sufficient. 
In other areas, for example, with regard to CDSs, different sources publish figures that are 
difficult to compare. They are often based on surveys carried out by the private sector (for 
instance,  by  business  associations  or  rating  agencies).  Thus,  it  is  hard  to  judge  whether 
specific activities could have an impact on the financial system as a whole. 
We  need  to  discuss,  at  the  international  level,  how  statistics  can  be  improved.  Such 
initiatives  can  only  be  successful  if  all  countries  with  significant  market  shares  participate. 
They should be coordinated by international organisations like the BIS. 
Conclusions 
V 
Let me briefly summarise the main points I wanted to make. 
8 
 BIS Review 129/2007
First, while the structural changes that have taken place over recent years have helped to 
increase  efficiency  and  certainly  have  had  positive  effects,  they  have  also  led  to 
transparency and liquidity problems.  
Second, a lack of transparency and the underestimation of liquidity risks were at the centre of 
the recent financial turbulences.  
Third, we are currently observing a number of promising private sector initiatives aimed at 
increasing transparency and reducing liquidity risks.  
Fourth,  while  regulators,  as  well  as  central  banks,  should  indeed  ask  themselves  whether 
there  is  room  for  improvement  in  their  domain,  there  should  be  no  rush  to  new  regulation 
across the board. In any event, we can expect the implementation of Basel II to bring about 
improvements. 
Last but not least, we should not forget the international dimension of the disruptions in the 
financial  system.  No  country  can  be  sure  that  it  will  not  catch  the  flu  that  started  in  other 
countries’  financial  markets.  Policies  focused  solely  on  national  markets  will  not  work. 
International cooperation has become more important than ever.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 9
