Jürgen Stark: The external dimension of monetary analysis 
Dinner speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  ECB  workshop  on  “The  external  dimension  of  monetary 
analysis”, Frankfurt am Main, 12 December 2007. 
 The  role  of  monetary  analysis  in  the  monetary  policy  process  remains  a  topic  of  utmost 
importance to all central banks, whatever the strategy they pursue.  
It is pertinent to adopt a new perspective on monetary analysis, focusing on the impact of the 
global environment on monetary developments and how they should be assessed.  
Given the recent financial turmoil that has affected global markets, in part via international 
capital  flows  and  global  financial  linkages,  it  is  important  to  link  monetary  analysis  to 
international developments.  
Let me come straight to the key substantive issues. In essence, I see three main topics for 
discussion: 
First:  How  can  we  assess  global  liquidity  and  what  are  its  implications  for  consumer, 
commodity and asset prices? 
Second:  What  evidence  is  there  of  possible  links  between  global  monetary  liquidity, 
international portfolio flows and domestic monetary growth? 
Third: In the context of the influences exerted by globalisation and, specifically, cross-border 
capital flows, what are the implications for monetary policy?  
In my remarks, I will address each of these issues in turn. 
First of all, when talking about liquidity, it is important to clarify that, in the field of central 
banking and monetary policy, there are at least four distinct definitions of liquidity – each with 
its own implications for policy-making.  
The first relates to “central bank liquidity”, which is provided to the money market in order to 
steer short-term interest rates.  
The second refers to the general “monetary policy stance”, as summarised by the level of 
policy interest rates.  
The third relates to “financial market” liquidity, which is defined as the ease with which large 
volumes of financial securities can be traded, without affecting the market price.  
The fourth refers to “ monetary liquidity”, which is defined in quantitative terms on the basis 
of monetary and financial aggregates.  
While all are important – indeed key – to monetary policy-making in the current environment 
of strong money and credit growth at the global level, I deem it necessary to say a few words 
on this last type of liquidity.  
I think you would agree that it is difficult to precisely measure global monetary liquidity. There 
seems to be no universally accepted definition of it among economists. Several  measures 
have been suggested and they all differ in many respects. They can be based on different 
monetary  and  credit  aggregates;  they  may  vary  according  to  geographical  coverage;  and 
finally, they can be constructed using different types of aggregation. 
Even  more  challenging  is  diagnosing  at  what  point  global  monetary  liquidity  becomes 
excessive. For excessive I mean liquidity that poses a medium or long-term threat to price 
stability  or  starts  to  boost  asset  prices  to  levels  not  justified  by  economic  fundamentals. 
Certainly,  a  normative  concept  is  needed  to  define  excess  liquidity.  I  hope  that  these  two 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 1
days will help us to make progress in reaching a common understanding on how to assess 
global liquidity insofar as the concept is established. 
Looking  at  the  current  situation,  at  least  it  can  be  asserted  that  global  liquidity  has  been 
increasing  at  a  sustained  and  vigorous  pace  over  the  past  few  years.  We  are  also 
experiencing high asset prices all across the commodity markets and in some areas both, 
the housing markets and the stock markets. Commodity prices – notably oil and food prices – 
are also now rising strongly at the global level. In my view, we should be concerned about – 
and, as central bankers, alert to – the possibility that there may be a spillover into consumer 
prices. 
In particular, the wide availability of financial capital at low interest rates across the largest 
international  financial  markets  has  partly  contributed  to  the  significant  rise  in  the  prices  of 
various assets in the recent years. 
Concerns about the impact of ample liquidity on asset prices – notably the underpricing of 
risks that has been signalled by the ECB – have been repeatedly voiced.  
In the context of rapid liquidity expansion, asset prices may overshoot, leading to potentially 
costly  boom  bust  cycles, 
the  misallocation  of  resources  and  pressures  on  price 
developments. 
In this respect, ECB research has also shown that monetary liquidity shocks have played a 
role in driving asset prices during the boom phase of asset price cycles. However, the issue 
of  empirical  causality  between  asset  prices  and  portfolio  allocation,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
money and credit developments, on the other, remains a subject of ongoing research. 
A full understanding of the dynamics and forces behind global monetary liquidity is important 
for providing insights into the various transmission channels through which liquidity can affect 
the global business cycle, asset prices and global inflation.  
In the current context, if global economic growth and global liquidity are likely explanations 
for the recent increase in commodity prices, the resulting inflationary pressures should not 
necessarily  be  dismissed  as  “non-core”.  The  long-run  impact  of  global  commodity  price 
pressures  on  inflation  will  depend  on  whether  they  reflect  a  temporary  shock  or  a  more 
persistent nominal trend, driven partly by ample global liquidity.  
Overall,  when  looking  at  the  major  OECD  economies,  consumer  price  inflation  has  been 
successfully  contained  for  quite  some  time  now.  However,  for  the  euro  area  at  least,  the 
information available at the current juncture – not least the monetary data at both the area-
wide and global levels – points to upside risks to price stability. 
Let me now address the second issue I raised earlier.  
Before  dealing  with  the  evidence  of  possible  links  between  global  liquidity,  international 
portfolio flows and euro area monetary growth, it is worthwhile recalling the theoretical work 
by James Tobin and Harry Markowitz on macroeconomics and asset pricing. 
The  bulk  of  Tobin’s  work  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  was  on  the  monetary  side  of 
macroeconomics.  One  of  his  main  objectives  was  to  establish  a  firm  foundation  for  the 
sensitivity of money demand, or money velocity, to interest rates. He argued that people may 
prefer liquidity, and prefer it more the lower the interest rate on non-cash assets, because 
individuals are risk adverse.  
Over the same period, Harry Markowitz worked on portfolio choice problems, balancing risks 
against  expected  returns.  Markowitz  showed  that  under  certain  given  conditions,  an 
investor’s  portfolio  choice  can  be  reduced  to  balancing  two  dimensions,  i.e.  the  expected 
return on the portfolio and its variance.  
When the Nobel Prize was announced in 1981, Tobin was asked about his work at the press 
conference.  He  tried  to  explain  for  a  lay  audience  the  idea  of  why  it  is  that  people  hold 
different proportions of different assets in their portfolios.  
2 
 BIS Review 149/2007
He  said,  “Well,  you  know,  diversification  –  don’t  put  all  your  eggs  in  one  basket”.  This 
explanation  led  to  headlines  around  the  world:  “Yale  Economist  Receives  Nobel  Prize  for 
‘Don’t  Put  All  Your  Eggs  in  One  Basket’”.  A  similar  argument  was  made  when  the  Nobel 
Prize was awarded to Markowitz in 1990.  
Indeed the key results of Tobin’s and Markowitz’s work are labelled the “benefits of portfolio 
diversification”. Managers and academic economists have long been aware of the necessity 
of taking risk, as well as returns, into account when making portfolio decisions.  
The  first  pioneering  contributions  on  money  and  asset  pricing  were  therefore  made  in  the 
1950s, with the analysis focusing on the case of a closed economy. In this setting, for given 
risks, a rise in the expected excess returns implies a lower demand for money. 
In  the  course  of  the  last  20  years,  the  globalisation  of  financial  markets  owing  to  the 
reduction of transaction costs and the enhancement of information flows has increased the 
share of global wealth invested outside investors’ home jurisdictions. The models of Tobin 
and  Markowitz  have  become,  therefore,  much  more  complicated  when  extending  the 
analysis to the global environment. 
Portfolio theory suggested that assets should be considered imperfect substitutes for each 
other, with the differences in their expected yields reflecting their marginal risks regardless of 
the economy being open or closed. However, the representative agent model is no longer 
applicable  in  the  case  of  an  open  economy,  as  the  presence  of  international  capital  flows 
requires either asymmetric information or heterogeneous belief among various agents.  
This  makes  the  theoretical  and  empirical  efforts  to  search  for  policy  solutions  a  very 
complicated business. In an open economy setting, for given risks, a rise in expected excess 
returns  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  lower  demand  for  money.  Domestic  assets  may  be 
purchased by foreign investors generating net portfolio inflows, which would raise domestic 
money growth. 
It  is  also  true,  however,  that  money  and  credit  growth  could  trigger  international  portfolio 
flows. 
Specifically,  two  mechanisms  can  be  identified  through  which  liquidity  affects  international 
portfolio  flows.  First,  strong  money  and  credit  growth  in  one  country  may  induce  capital 
outflows to foreign asset markets, thereby exerting upward pressure on prices for financial 
and real assets abroad. 
Second:  At  the  same  time,  ample  liquidity  conditions  in  the  domestic  economy  may  fuel 
strong  economic  growth  and  be  accompanied  by  higher  asset  prices,  thereby  inducing 
foreign capital inflows. 
The  current  magnitude  of  the  stock  of  global  liquidity  and  global  savings  is  such  that  the 
asset  prices  and  money  growth  of  large  economic  areas,  including  the  euro  area,  can  be 
affected  by  them.  In  the  same  vein,  large  net  capital  inflows,  as  well  as  their  sudden 
reversals,  may  also  have  important  real  consequences  for  large  economies  as  they  can 
systematically  influence  domestic  monetary  developments  with  potential  implications  for 
monetary policy. 
Evidence  from  the  euro  area  shows  that  international  portfolio  flows  have  played  an 
increasingly important role as a driving force for monetary dynamics.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  attributes  a  prominent  role  to  the 
analysis of monetary aggregates and their counterparts in the assessment of risks to price 
stability over the medium to longer term.  
The  growing  size  of  international  capital  flows  associated  with  globalisation  of  financial 
markets  has  made  the  analysis  of  monetary  aggregates,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting 
information for assessing price stability, increasingly more complex.  
BIS Review 149/2007 
 3
throughout 
jurisdictions.  Central  banks 
This brings me to discuss the third point: the implications of globalisation and of international 
capital flows for monetary policy. 
If  globalisation  and,  specifically,  cross-border  capital  flows  can  affect  the  dynamics  of 
monetary aggregates, how can we conduct monetary policy? 
An  improved  shared  understanding  of  the  influence  of  global  liquidity  and  cross-border 
capital flows on the monetary policy transmission mechanism is necessary to enhance the 
analysis  underlying  our  decisions.  Our  role  and  responsibilities  as  central  bankers  remain 
intact in the globalised economy, but the performance of our task may be becoming more 
challenging. Certainly, there is a need for timely and open exchange of information among 
central banks and for further collaborative research efforts. 
Still, let me stress that the globalisation of financial markets does not affect the central role 
and overriding responsibility of central banks, which is to preserve price stability within their 
respective 
the  world  have  been  assigned 
responsibility for keeping domestic inflation at low and stable rates.  
Cross-border  capital  flows  may  affect  the  velocity  of  money,  but  the  basic  principle  for 
anchoring monetary policy – that is the Friedman’s view that “…in the long run, inflation is 
always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon”  –  remains  valid.  This  has  also  been 
confirmed  by  studies  that  have  found  a  strong  relationship  between  monetary  growth  and 
inflation  at  low  frequencies.  In  other  words,  the  relationship  between  money  and  prices  is 
stronger between the trend-like developments than between the business cycle fluctuations.  
One  interpretation  of  the  international  portfolio  capital  flows  that  influence  monetary 
developments  is  that  they  introduce  greater  “noise”  in  shorter-term  monetary  dynamics, 
thereby increasing the importance of seeking the underlying rate of monetary expansion by 
looking at the lower-frequency, trend-like component of monetary growth. 
Notwithstanding the complications created by an increasingly complex international financial 
system, money has been, is and will remain an important indicator of inflation.  
The monetary policy strategy devised by the ECB, with its medium-to-longer-term orientation 
and the prominence it assigns to economic and monetary analysis, is well placed to address 
some of the implications of globalisation for inflation dynamics and price stability. The broad 
analytical framework on which the ECB’s two-pillar strategy rests is well suited to detecting 
risks to price stability and to the economy as a whole. 
There  is  a  need  to  intensify  the  analytical  efforts  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  several 
aspects  of  financial  innovations,  changes  in  the  international  financial  system  and  their 
implications for the assessment of medium to longer-term risks to price stability.  
Indeed, as our current agenda of enhancing the monetary analyses demonstrates, the ECB 
is in the vanguard of developing such tools. 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 732. 
Baks, K. and C. Kramer (1999), “Global liquidity and asset prices: measurement, implications 
and spillovers”, IMF Working Paper Series, No 168. 
Browne,  F.  and  D.  Cronin  (2007),  “Commodity  prices,  money  and  inflation”,  ECB  Working 
Paper Series, No 738. 
Ciccarelli, M. and B. Mojon (2005), “Global inflation”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 537. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2007
Detken,  C.  and  F.  Smets  (2004),  “Asset  price  booms  and  monetary  policy”,  ECB  Working 
Paper  No  364,  published  in  Siebert,  H.  (ed.),  “  Macroeconomic  Policies  in  the  World 
Economy”, Springer, Berlin, 2004.  
Markowitz, H. (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, 7: 77-91. 
Markowitz,  H.  (1959),  Portfolio  Selection:  Efficient  Diversification  of  Investments,  Cowles 
Foundation Monograph 16, New York, Wiley. 
Sousa, J. and A. Zaghini (2004), “Monetary policy shocks in the euro area and global liquidity 
spillovers”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 309 
Tobin, J. (1969), “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory”, Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, 1: pp. 15-29. 
BIS Review 149/2007 
 5
