Y V Reddy: The rise of Asia – implications for the global economy 
Memorial lecture by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion 
of the 40th anniversary celebrations of the Bank of Mauritius, Mauritius, 3 December 2007. 
 The  Honourable  Vice-President  of  Mauritius,  Honourable  Ministers,  Respected  Governor 
Rundheersing Bheenick, Mr. Googoolye, Dr. Khadaroo, Directors of the Board of the Bank of 
Mauritius and distinguished friends. 
It is a great honour and privilege to be invited to deliver a Memorial Lecture on the occasion 
of the 40th Anniversary Celebrations of the Bank of Mauritius. The invitation is yet another 
demonstration of not only the close ties between India and Mauritius but also between the 
two  central  banks,  which  have  a  mutually  beneficial  and  very  special  relationship.  I  am 
personally grateful to Governor Bheenick for giving me the opportunity to be here with you. 
The Honourable Prime Minister, Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, in his address on August 24, 
2007, to commemorate the 40th anniversary celebrations of the Bank of Mauritius, paid rich 
tributes to the Bank. He specifically referred to the effort and dedication that have gone into 
making the Bank “a successful and well respected institution”. I would amplify that the Bank 
has become a globally well respected institution and we, in the Reserve Bank, have got great 
trust and confidence in our counterpart in Mauritius. 
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel,  Switzerland,  (BIS)  in  its  Review  99/2007, 
carried  Governor  Bheenick’s  address  on  the  same  occasion  on  August  24,  2007  which  is 
titled “Escaping the fate of Dodo”. It is a brilliant exposition of not only the evolution and the 
successful adaptation of the Bank of Mauritius to the changing circumstances, but also on 
the  theory  and  practice  of  central  banking.  On  the  tasks  ahead,  Governor  Bheenick 
mentioned  that  “this  Central  Bank  needs  to  achieve  this  transition  from  being  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius to being the Bank for Mauritians; the Bank of the people. We must make the sound 
financial choices for every family, the easy choices”. We, in the Reserve Bank of India, have 
recently set ourselves similar mandate. Let me formally congratulate the Bank of Mauritius 
on its successful journey into the 41st year and wish it all the best in its pursuit of the goals of 
growth, stability and, above all, service to common persons. 
The theme for today’s lecture is “The Rise of Asia – Implications for the Global Economy”. I 
want  to  approach  the  subject  with  considerable  humility.  My  first  trip  to  Mauritius  was  in 
1997,  in  connection  with  the  Commonwealth  Finance  Ministers’  Conference.  From  here,  I 
was  scheduled  to  proceed  to  Hong  Kong  for  attending  the  IMF  /  World  Bank  Annual 
Conference.  However,  I  chose  to  cancel  my  trip  to  Hong  Kong  and,  instead,  returned  to 
Mumbai since the financial markets in India indicated some sort of unease. It was about that 
time that the full blown Asian Crisis erupted. For months and years thereafter, we deliberated 
on the unfortunate developments in the Asian economies and the consequent difficulties, as 
well as the need for reforms. On my second trip to Mauritius, after ten years, now we are not 
merely celebrating the success of the Asian economies but also contemplating on how they 
may contribute to the global growth and stability. It has been a remarkable turnaround for the 
Asian region, and no one could have predicted this outcome, ten, or even five, years ago.  
Second, could anyone have anticipated turbulence in financial markets that would emanate 
from  the  advanced  economies  like  the  United  States  and  more  particularly  from  a  global 
financial centre?  
Third,  how  many  could  envisage  a  situation  where  the  largest  financial  intermediaries, 
especially global banks, which are highly rated for their risk management capabilities, would 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
suddenly lose full confidence in the liquidity position of each other and thus become reluctant 
to  deal  with  each  other?  Consequently,  some  central  banks  have,  perhaps  justifiably, 
pumped in huge liquidity into the system on extra-ordinary liberal terms.  
Fourth, in a related event, in a leading global financial centre, the government had to take 
initiatives  to  support  a  bank  when  there  was  a  run  on  the  bank  –  an  approach  that  was 
seldom on the drawing boards of governments, in recent years. 
In brief, the need for humility arises because recent history has shown that we do not know 
enough to predict economic outlook for nations, or the global economy, with any reasonable 
degree  of  certainty.  Moreover,  the  current  global  economic  environment  is  particularly 
uncertain, making such predictive exercises very tentative.  
In this background, let me present a few perceptions about the Asian economies in the global 
context. At the outset, we should recognise that Asia is a large region with several countries 
and  economies  that  are  of  varying  size  and  nature,  which  are  at  different  stages  of 
integration with the global economy and also with each other. Hence, what is attempted here 
is a set of very broad generalisations. 
The growing importance of Asia in the global economy is well-documented and hence a brief 
recall  should  suffice.  Asia  can  boast  of  three  of  the  ten  largest  economies  in  the  world  – 
these  are  Japan,  China  and  India.  In  1980,  Asia  accounted  for  19  per  cent  of  the  global 
Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  in  Purchasing  Power  Parity  (PPP)  terms.  Today,  Asia 
accounts for over 36 per cent and by the year 2020, it is expected to reach over 45 per cent. 
Currently, Asia contributes close to 50 per cent of world growth in PPP terms. Asia’s share in 
the global trade is increasing rapidly and trade within Asia is also increasing in an impressive 
fashion. The Asian economies are more open to each other now, than ever before. 
However,  while  the  size  of  the  national  GDP,  in  comparison  with  those  of  others,  is  very 
important,  the  levels  of  per  capita  GDP  in  each  nation,  in  PPP  terms,  is  also  somewhat 
relevant. As per Maddison’s projections, the per capita GDP of China will be about one-fourth 
of that of the US in the year 2030, though the GDP of China is expected to surpass that of 
the  US  within  the  next  twenty  five  years.  This  broadly  reflects  the  position  of  most  of  the 
Asian  economies  vis-à-vis  the  advanced  economies.  In  brief,  therefore,  there  is  merit  in 
combining justifiable enthusiasm for a rising Asia with a dose of humility, which is warranted 
by the long journey ahead. 
The  impressive  growth  in  Asia  has  benefited  the  global  economy  in  several  ways,  though 
some issues have emerged. First, by producing highly competitive goods and services, Asia 
has  helped  enlarge  the  range  of  goods  available  and  enhance  their  quality.  As  a 
consequence, world over, billions of consumers, as a group, have benefited from the growth 
of Asia. This process helped central bankers, globally, in containing inflation and inflationary 
expectations.  In  view  of  the  vast  reserves  of  labour  force  that  will  be  available  in  Asia  for 
several decades to come, and the strides made in the field of technology, many expect the 
process to continue, perhaps not necessarily with the same intensity. 
Second, many commodity producing countries, especially in Africa and Latin America, have 
benefited through better terms of trade and increased export earnings, as well as increased 
economic activity, by catering to the rising demand from Asia. Thus, Asia supplemented the 
US  in  providing  impetus  for  global  growth.  As  Asia  is  expected  to  continue  the  growth 
momentum, the positive impact is expected to persist. 
Third,  rapid  growth  of  large  economies  in  Asia  may  continue  to  generate  significant 
opportunities  for  expanding  the  markets  for  other  economies,  especially  the  neighbouring 
economies, and these could certainly include tourism and financial products also. 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
Fourth, a few advanced economies tended to experience some discomfort in the rise of Asia 
since competitive forces put pressure on wages of some categories of workers, though, as 
consumers, the general populace benefited from the process. 
Fifth, there are additions to demand for energy due to rapidly growing Asia and, according to 
some, thus impacting oil prices. In terms of the existing levels of energy consumption, Asia is 
still a minor player in the overall energy market. Further, many attribute the rising oil prices to 
financialisation  of  commodities  and  speculation.  No  doubt,  over  the  medium  to  long  term, 
there is scope for improving efficiency in the use of energy in Asia. The energy economy of 
the world and the rise of Asia may continue to interact in a dynamic setting in future also. 
Sixth, the economic growth in Asia has resulted in an unprecedented number, in millions, of 
people  moving  out  of  poverty  levels  every  year  thus  generating  demand  for  food  items, 
including  cereals  and  milk.  The  structural  increase  in  demand  for  food  on  account  of  Asia 
may continue for several years. While demand for food is relatively inelastic, the supply side 
is  often  influenced  by  several  factors,  including  political  economy  considerations.  The 
problem is accentuated by the uncertainties in the global climatic conditions and increasing 
financialisation of trade in these commodities.  
Finally,  the  monetary  authorities  are  facing  very  complex  challenges,  since  traditionally  oil 
prices were treated as “shocks” and food prices are also treated as some sort of a “shock”. It 
is now realised by the monetary authorities, in advanced economies also, that food prices 
have significant impact on inflation-expectations, which are vital for the conduct of monetary 
policy. In developing economies, the problem is more acute since the weight for food prices 
in price indices is large. 
Way forward, all of us recognise the growing importance of Asia in an inter-dependant world. 
Hence, Asia needs to be conscious of the challenges to public policy and the international 
community would also gain by being supportive of policies that benefit Asia and the global 
economy over the medium term to longer term. Such collaborative and mutually reinforcing 
policies are critical for growth and stability in all regions. 
Let me recount a few important challenges in Asia. First, two-thirds of the world’s desperately 
poor live in Asia. According to the Asian Development Bank (ADB), 620 million people within 
the region are still living on less than one US dollar per day and if we raise the limit to two US 
dollars per day, the number would be more than a billion. Hence, a policy of inclusive growth 
becomes critical and, indeed, essential. 
Second,  the  share  of  Asia  in  billionaires  and  high  networth  individuals  (HNIs),  relative  to 
other  regions, 
flag  concerns  regarding 
maintenance  of  social  and  political  stability.  The  consequences  of  growing  regional 
inequalities  are  being  felt  in  several  Asian  economies.  There  is  evidence  of  several  policy 
initiatives in this regard also. 
is  growing  disproportionately,  which  could 
Third, the urban population in Asia may double by the year 2030 relative to the year 2000. By 
2030, Asia will have about 2.7 billion urban people, while all other regions in the world will 
have a combined urban population of about 2.3 billion. This will result in large demands on 
urban  infrastructure.  At  the  same  time,  due  to  globalisation  and  growth  experiences,  the 
urban  residents  will  be  more  demanding  in  regard  to  quality  of  urban  infrastructure  and 
services.  Hence,  public-private  participation,  cutting  across  national  boundaries,  may 
become significant. 
Fourth, the demographic trends in Asia over the next 50 years are expected to be reflective 
of the past 50 years for developed countries, with significant divergence among the various 
Asian economies. The expected increase in old age dependency during 2000 to 2025, and 
further  on  to  2050,  may  increase  fiscal  pressures.  However,  countries  such  as  India  and 
Indonesia  are  expected  to  reap  benefits  of  demographic  dividend  over  a  longer  period 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 3
ahead, than the other Asian economies, perhaps for another 25 years. Reaping benefits of 
demographic dividend is dependent upon enhancing quality of health conditions, imparting 
better skills and improving public infrastructure so as to take advantage of globalisation. In 
the  absence  of  appropriate  public-policy  initiatives,  what  could  be  a  demographic  dividend 
could turn out to be a demographic problem. 
Finally,  the  global  community  has  to  address  the  issue  of  adequacy  of  voice  and 
representation  to  a  rising  Asia  in  the  current  international  financial  architecture.  In  other 
words, governance structures and arrangements need to reflect the new realities of a rapidly 
growing Asia, in the interests of all stake holders. 
An  issue  of  contemporary  importance  is  the  possible  interaction  between  recent  events  in 
global financial markets and Asia. As of now, all relevant aspects of financial markets and 
institutions  are  yet  to  be  fully  transparent.  There  a  feeling  that  full  normalcy  is  yet  to  be 
restored in the global financial markets. The impact on the real economy in the USA is yet to 
be fully felt and a possible slow down in that economy is not ruled out. While neither financial 
contagion nor slow down in the US economy is ruled out, the global consensus, as of now, is 
that  global  growth  will  be  robust  as  anticipated,  but  with  heightened  uncertainties.  At  this 
stage,  therefore,  we  can  make  only  a  few  very  broad  observations  on  the  likely  impact  of 
global financial conditions on Asia.  
The economic reforms in the real sector have improved the overall productivity and resilience 
in Asia. The macro economic conditions in Asia, as a whole, are significantly stronger and 
conducive  to  overall  stability  relative  to  the  past.  The  financial  systems  in  most  countries, 
both markets and institutions, are far more efficient and resilient than before. The external 
sector  has  been  strengthened  and  considerable  reserves  provide  cushions  to  withstand 
financial  contagion.  In  fact,  it  is  felt  by  many,  that  Asia’s  reserves  can  help  smoothen  the 
process of unwinding of global imbalances that appears to be underway through, what has 
been described as “falling with a parachute" scenario. Overall, the economies in Asia seem 
to be reasonably equipped to withstand, to some extent, heightened volatilities in most of the 
financial markets. 
The possible impact of adverse developments, if they happen, on the real sector is, however, 
less clear. While some hold that any slow down in the US will impact Asia adversely, since 
Asia’s exports to the US are large, others hold that some “de-coupling” has occurred in view 
of the growing intra-Asia regional trade. It is also argued that intra-regional trade in Asia is 
linked to exports to the US. A more plausible scenario would be that slow down in the US, if it 
takes place, would, to some extent, dampen the growth in Asian economies, but to the extent 
there has been some elements of decoupling, which may be country specific also, the impact 
may be moderated. In other words, it will be unrealistic to hold that Asia can substitute for the 
US as the major engine of global growth at this stage. Hence, heightened vigilance among 
Asian central banks appears to be common.  
We, in India, are monitoring (a) the process of restoration of full normalcy in global financial 
markets; (b) the evolving financial contagion; and (c) the possible spill-over to the real sector 
after accounting for the possible extent of “decoupling”. The major reason for extraordinary 
vigilance  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  this  juncture,  is  what  I  would  describe  as 
simultaneous  volatilities  in  several  globally  significant  markets,  namely,  money,  credit  and 
currency  markets;  asset  prices;  and  commodity  prices,  especially  oil  and  food  items.  The 
current phenomenon of simultaneous volatilities should be viewed in the context of possible 
repositioning of the world’s dominant reserve currency, involving significant wealth, income 
and terms of trade effects. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  Indian  economy  in  greater  detail.  Before 
independence,  during  the  first  five  decades  of  the  20th  century  (1900-01  to  1946-47),  the 
annual average growth performance of the Indian economy was very low, averaging 0.9 per 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2007
cent  per  annum.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  planned  development  process,  in  the  early 
1950s, the GDP growth displayed a self-accelerating tendency reaching a level of around 6.0 
per cent in the 1990s. Two exceptions during this phase were the dipping of the growth rate 
in the 1970s to 2.9 per cent and during the crisis year of 1991-921 when the growth was as 
low as 1.4 per cent.  
In the new millennium, the GDP growth rate has accelerated further averaging 6.9 per cent 
during the seven-year period 2000-01 to 2006-07, while the growth rate in the last four years 
(2003-04  to  2006-07)  averaged  8.6  per  cent.  In  2005-06  and  2006-07,  it  has  grown  still 
higher  at  9.0  per  cent  and  9.4  per  cent,  respectively.  During  this  phase  too,  in  one  year 
during 2002-03, the growth rate dipped to 3.8 per cent due to drought conditions in several 
parts of the country leading to significant fall in agricultural production.  
The strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent 
increase in gross domestic investment rates from 24.3 per cent of GDP in 2000-01 to 33.8 
per cent in 2005-06 and domestic saving rate from 23.7 per cent in 2000-01 to 32.4 per cent 
during 2005-06. It is important to note that over 90 per cent of investment during this period 
was financed by domestic savings.  
In  tandem  with  acceleration  in  the  rate  of  investment  in  the  economy,  there  has  been 
evidence of a pickup in productivity and efficiency of capital use. Some of the recent studies 
relating to India have indicated an increase in total factor productivity (TFP) in recent years.  
While growth rate has picked up in the new millennium, the inflation rate has moderated to 
still  lower  levels  ensuring  price  stability.  Since  2000-01,  the  annual  inflation  rate,  as 
measured by Wholesale Price Index, has averaged below 5 per cent despite the recent oil 
price shock.  
Fiscal management in the country has significantly improved with the combined fiscal deficit 
of Centre and States declining from 9.5 per cent of GDP in 2000-01 to 6.4 per cent in 2006-
07.  However,  combined  public  debt  of  the  Centre  and  the  States,  as  proportion  of  GDP, 
remains high at over 70 per cent.  
India’s external sector has become resilient with the current account deficit being maintained 
at very modest levels after a few years of marginal surplus during 2001-02 to 2003-04. The 
value of both exports and imports, in US dollar terms, has tripled by 2006-07 relative to 2000-
01, and the current account deficit remained modest at 1.1 per cent of GDP, or below, for 
four out of the seven years, while there was a surplus in the remaining years. On account of 
strong capital flows, there have been accretions to foreign exchange reserves, which, at US 
$ 271.2 billion as on November 16, 2007 are currently higher than the external debt (US$ 
165.4 billion at end-June 2007).  
For  monetary  policy  purposes,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  its  Annual  Policy  Statement  of  April 
2007,  placed  the  real  GDP  growth  for  the  current  year,  2007-08,  at  around  8.5  per  cent, 
assuming no further escalation in international crude prices and barring domestic or external 
shocks.  
The  policy  preference  for  the  period  ahead  is strongly  in  favour  of  price  stability  and  well-
anchored inflation expectations with the endeavour being to contain inflation close to 5.0 per 
cent in 2007-08. In recognition of India’s evolving integration with the global economy and 
societal  preferences  in  this  regard,  the  resolve,  going  forward,  would  be  to  condition 
expectations in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent so that an inflation rate of around 3.0 per cent 
                                                 
1  
In India, the fiscal year is from April 1 to March 31. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 5
becomes a medium-term objective, consistent with India’s broader integration into the global 
economy.  
The  Indian  economy  is  confronted  with  some  major  challenges  in  the  medium  term.  First, 
though about 60 per cent of the Indian population is still dependent on agriculture, its share 
in the GDP has been declining steadily over the years and now accounts for less than 20 per 
cent of the GDP. Enhanced growth of the agricultural sector is, therefore, vital for ensuring 
food security, poverty alleviation, price stability, overall inclusive growth and sustainability of 
growth  of  the  economy.  Second,  absence  of  modern  infrastructure  and  shortage  of  skilled 
manpower are the most critical barriers to the growth. It is, hence, imperative to augment the 
existing infrastructure facilities, particularly roads, ports and power, to provide the enabling 
environment for industry to prosper. Third, in order to reap the benefits of the demographic 
dividend, substantial expansion and reforms in the education sector would be needed on an 
urgent basis. Fourth, reprioritisation of expenditures towards social sectors along with higher 
capital outlays is required to promote fiscal discipline without restricting operational efficiency 
of  the  Government.  Fiscal  empowerment  would  allow  higher  capital  outlays  and  boost 
infrastructure  and  social  sector  spending  with  beneficial  impact  on  domestic  productivity, 
growth and employment. It is, thus, necessary to emphasise the criticality of quality of fiscal 
adjustment. Finally, to meet the growing credit demand and sustain high economic growth, 
banks  need  to  widen  their  deposit  base.  Banks  need  to  bring  more  and  more  financially 
excluded  people  within  their  fold,  which  would  help  the  low-income  households  and 
strengthen financial deepening.  
I have already alluded to some of the quantitative positive aspects of the Indian economy, 
such as savings-investment balances, and price stability, just a while ago. Now, I will narrate 
some of the prominent non-quantifiable strengths which are expected to help in facing the 
challenges mentioned above. First, it is endowed with a vast pool of science and technology 
graduates and millions of people who are familiar with English language. Second, familiarity 
with multiple languages makes adaptation better to multi-cultural situations, making it easier 
for the Indian manpower to fit into international systems smoothly. Third, being the largest 
democracy of the world and the existence of a free press provide some insurance against 
excesses  and  make  Governments  more  accountable 
the 
empowerment  of  women  in  the  recent  years  has  helped  them  to  defend  their  rights  and 
helped  to  gain  greater  self-esteem  and  control  over  their  own  personal  lives  and  social 
relationships. Fifth, despite the coalition cabinets and periodic elections, the political climate 
is characterized by political system stability. Sixth, considerable “demographic dividend" can 
be  realised  by  putting  in  place  prerequisites  such  as  skill-up-gradation  and  sound 
governance.  Finally,  in  terms  of  business  environment,  a  fast  emerging  very  broad-based 
growing  entrepreneurial  class,  with  a  penchant 
for 
imbued  with 
professionalism, is seeking to become globally competitive. 
than  otherwise.  Fourth, 
innovation  and 
However,  to  ensure  continued  successful  performance  of  the  economy,  it  is  generally 
recognised that all stakeholders need to strengthen State capacity and enable it to perform 
its core functions more effectively and equitably. 
Referring to the long-term economic outlook for emerging market economies, in general, and 
for India, in particular, Mr. Jean-Claude Trichet, President, European Central Bank, said in 
the Tenth L K Jha Memorial Lecture on November 26, 2007 that “..it suffices to recall how 
significant  India’s  weight  in  the  world  economy  was  two  millennia  ago,  when  the  Middle 
Kingdoms were ruling in India and the Roman empire was ruling in Europe and North Africa. 
At that time, India was by far the world’s largest economic power, accounting alone for about 
a  third  of  world  output.  Moreover,  at  par  with  China,  it  subsequently  remained  the  largest 
economy  in  the  world  for  several  centuries,  until  the  eve  of  the  industrial  revolution.  Seen 
from  this  long-run  perspective,  the  rapidly  growing  importance  of  India  in  today’s  world 
economy seems to be a return to normality.” 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2007
Concluding remarks 
Governor Bheenick made a brilliant exposition of achievements, policies and challenges for 
Mauritius in a presentation at the BIS/African Governors’ Conference in Cape Town a few 
weeks  ago.  I  am,  therefore,  convinced  of  a  bright  future  for  Mauritians  and  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, in particular, under his leadership. There are some telling aspects of the Mauritian 
economy  and  public  policy  of  Mauritius  that  appear  to  be  worthy  of  note  by  the  other 
countries,  especially  economies  in  Asia  that  we  are  speaking  about,  including  of  course, 
India. I will allude to some of these aspects now, which we in Asia will be well advised to take 
note of and imbibe. 
The  November  2007  issue  of  the  journal  “African  Business”  carries  an  Index  on  African 
Governance 2007 and, as per the final score, Mauritius occupies the number one position in 
Africa. Mauritius is also ranked first in the latest global African Competitiveness Index of the 
World Bank and the International Finance Corporation. My personal observations show that 
many of us, in Asia, could study and learn from the public policies in Mauritius relating to high 
coverage and quality of primary education, efficient delivery of health services and protection 
of environment. Yes, we have a lot to learn from each other and there are many areas in 
which we can cooperate. The two central banks will, I am sure, strengthen the traditional ties. 
We will carry forward a continuous dialogue to strengthen cooperation between the Bank of 
Mauritius and the Reserve Bank of India. 
As a reciprocal gesture, let me extend an open and standing invitation to Governor Bheenick 
to visit India soon and, in addition, participate in the celebrations of 75th Anniversary of the 
Reserve Bank, which is due soon in a couple of years from now. 
Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 7
