Christian Noyer: The Eurosystem’s monetary policy – a view from the 
inside 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Swedbank’s Annual 
Global Business Outlook Conference, Stockholm, 8 October 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a real pleasure to be back at a Swedbank’s conference. In 1999, as Vice-
President of the European Central Bank, I already had the opportunity to comment the then 
very recent introduction of the Euro. Eight years later, at a time when the Eurosystem, i.e. the 
ECB and the currently 13 national central banks, has just showed its ability to manage the 
financial turmoil triggered in Europe by the US subprime crisis, it is the right time to come 
back  to  the  strategic  framework  of  the  Eurosystem,  focusing  on  its  main  features  and 
achievements. 
The  single  currency  for  a  long  time  met  with  the  scepticism  from  many  observers,  who 
regarded  it  as  unrealistic  first  to  launch  a  new  currency  and  second  to  envisage  a  single 
monetary policy for a group of countries that, despite rapid convergence, continued to display 
major  differences.  Interestingly  enough,  the  assumption  made  by  some  observers  and 
market  participants  that  the  entry  interest  rates  in  the  Euro  on  1  January  1999  would  be 
some kind of average of the interest rates of the composing currencies proved to be wrong. 
On the contrary, and since the very construction of the Euro was based on continuity with the 
most  credible  national  currencies,  it  was  foreseeable  that  interest  rate  convergence  inside 
the future Euro area would take place progressively on the basis of a merge of different yield 
curves of the various currencies with the benchmark yield curve corresponding to the most 
performing and credible ones, as it effectively happened. 
The  nay  votes  from  France  and  the  Netherlands  to  ratifying  the  EU  constitution  rattled 
Europeans concerns for the future. Some observers immediately conjectured that the single 
currency was directly responsible for the muted economic performance of the euro area and 
publicly  questioned  its  durability;  however,  the  track  record  of  the  Single  monetary  policy, 
after  8  years  of  implementation,  has  been  really  impressive:  the  inception  of  the  euro  has 
been so far associated with an increased macroeconomic and price stability within the euro 
zone,  despite  an  unusual  sequence  of  unfavourable  events,  adverse  supply  shocks  and 
periods of global financial turbulences. The extent to which the recent episode of financial 
distress  will  affect  the  global  outlook  remains  an  open  issue  but  the  Eurosystem  has 
demonstrated  its  ability  to  withstand  such  a  shock  as  well  as  the  effectiveness  of  its 
operational framework. 
The point I would like to set out today is that a high degree of credibility, transparency and 
predictability of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy is a key condition for its efficiency. I will 
provide you with an overview of the Eurosystem monetary policy strategy (part 1) and then 
will assess its main achievements (part 2). 
PART 1:   The main features of the Eurosystem monetary policy 
Let  us  see  what  the  main  features  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  conducted  by  the 
Eurosystem, are in terms of institutional and operational framework as well as on strategic 
issues themselves. 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 1
The institutional and operational framework is founded on modern concepts 
Let me recall first that over the past decade, a large body of literature has been devoted to 
questions  surrounding  central  bank  independence,  the  concepts  of  transparency  and 
monetary strategies, and the communication of monetary policy decisions. 
Drawing on this analytical expertise and the experience of the national central banks of the 
participating countries, the Eurosystem is first and foremost based on a modern institutional 
framework, founded on the principles of independence, transparency and accountability 
and, lastly, operational decentralisation. 
The independence of the Eurosystem fosters price stability 
1. 
The Eurosystem’s primary objective, as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, is to achieve and 
maintain  price  stability.  As  many  empirical  studies  have  shown,  a  country’s  ability  to  fight 
inflation appears very closely correlated to the degree of independence of its central bank. 
The independence of the European Central Bank and the 13 national central banks of the 
Member States of the euro area is therefore anchored in the Treaty. 
In  operational  terms,  this  means  that,  in  the  conduct  of  their  duties,  neither  the  European 
Central  Bank  nor  the  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  may  request  or  take 
instructions from the Community institutions, national governments or any other body. They 
are entirely institutionally, operationally and financially independent. 
Transparency and accountability are also essential for gaining credibility  
Naturally,  the  independence  of  these  institutions  requires  transparency  in  their  decision-
making processes and accountability vis-à-vis the general public and their representatives. 
As  regards  new  institutions  such  as  the  ECB,  transparency  is  even  more  important  for 
gaining credibility and building up economic agents’ confidence in the new currency. In order 
to  establish  this  credibility  and  gain  the  confidence  of  agents,  it  is  imperative  to  be 
understood,  which  in  turn  calls  for  transparency.  For  the  sake  of  transparency,  the 
Governing Council has specified and quantified its definition of price stability (inflation below 
but close to 2% over the medium-term). 
Second, the ECB has gone beyond the accountability requirements laid down by the Treaty 
by  instituting  regular  testimonies  by  the  President  of  the  ECB  before  the  European 
Parliament and regular informal meetings with the Eurogroup of Finance ministers. Another 
channel  for  transparency  is  constituted  by  the  regular  publication  of  reports  on  economic 
developments  and  Central  Bank  analysis,  of  the  Eurosystem’s  and  ECB’s  staff  projections 
exercises, most prominently in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
Finally  and  most  importantly,  following  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  President  and  Vice-
President  of  the  ECB  hold  a  press  conference  followed  by  an  open  discussion  with 
journalists, the transcript of which is published on the ECB’s website. It should be recalled 
that the ECB was the first central bank to adopt such a procedure, which provides a unique 
opportunity to fully explain and comment monetary decisions immediately. 
On the other hand, the Governing Council of the ECB has chosen not to publish the minutes 
of its meetings. The publication of these minutes would indeed present some drawbacks: 
- 
first, governing council members may “speak for the minutes” when these are very 
detailed, while, when they are not detailed, may not convey more information than a 
plain communiqué; 
second, the publication of the minutes might also create more difficulties for moving 
from initial positions to new ones in the light of the arguments developed; 
finally and most importantly, in the case of the euro area, the analysis of the votes 
could  be  read  and  interpreted  as  reflecting  national  interests  or  preoccupations, 
BIS Review 113/2007
  2 
 which  would  be  misleading  and  could  jeopardise  both  the  independence  of  the 
members  of  the  Governing  Council  and  the  credibility  of  our  decision-making 
processes. 
third 
feature  of 
is  an  essential 
The Eurosystem is based on operational decentralisation 
imperative,  operational  decentralisation 
The 
the 
Eurosystem.  According  to  this  principle,  monetary  policy  decisions  taken  in  a  centralised 
fashion by the Governing Council of the ECB are implemented in a decentralised way by the 
national central banks. 
Contrary to the US, the use of modern technology and communications has made it possible 
for  market  operations  not  to  be  concentrated  at  a  single  geographical  location,  but  to  be 
carried  out  simultaneously  at  all  of  the  National  Central  Banks.  The  same  type  of 
arrangement applies in other monetary areas (cash management, payment systems, etc.). 
The  efficiency  of  such  a  decentralised  scheme  has  been  demonstrated  in  August  and 
September when the inter-bank money market has gone through marked turbulences. The 
close  relationship  of  national  central  banks  with  their  banking  system  has  allowed  better 
understanding and addressing their refinancing needs. 
The Eurosystem benefits from an efficient operational framework 
The operational framework is based on two main guidelines: 
- 
a range of monetary policy instruments selected in accordance with the principles of 
an open market economy, a level  playing field, simplicity and transparency: these 
instruments enable the smooth adjustment of banking liquidity and effective steering 
of short-term interest rates. I should add that the Eurosystem accepts a wide range 
of collateral, including private securities, to carry out its open market operations. It 
also provides credit for long maturities (with a 3-month maturity); 
procedures guaranteeing a high level of security for all interbank transactions and 
large-value payments within the euro area and with other countries in the European 
Union, with in particular the TARGET system, which played a predominant role in 
the integration process of the euro money market. 
The strategic framework also contributes to the efficiency of the single 
monetary policy 
From  the  outset,  there was  a  consensus  among  the  designers  of  the Eurosystem  that  the 
Single  monetary  policy  would  require  a  clear  strategic  framework.  This  framework  can  be 
characterised by two main principles: a quantitative definition of price stability and a medium-
term orientation of monetary policy. 
The quantitative definition of price stability has been clarified after five years of experience 
The definition adopted by the ECB’s Governing Council in October 1998 was confirmed and 
clarified  in  May  2003  following  an  in-depth  review  of  its  strategic  framework  by  the 
Eurosystem. In the wake of this assessment exercise, the Governing Council specified that 
price stability was defined as an annual increase in the HICP close to, but below, 2% over 
the medium term. Several remarks should complement this definition: 
- 
by specifying that inflation should be close to 2%, the Governing Council intended 
first of all to confirm the symmetrical nature of its strategy by ruling out situations of 
deflation.  This  clarification  also  makes  it  possible  to  take  account  of  any  possible 
measurement bias in the price index, as well as inflation differentials within the euro 
area; 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 3
 2.  
  the  quantitative  definition  of  monetary  stability  brings  the  Eurosystem’s  strategic 
framework close to that of central banks that rely on inflation targeting, especially if a 
broad definition of the latter is accepted, such as that expressed by the term “flexible 
inflation targeting”. The big difference is in the use made of forecasts derived from 
econometric  models,  which  play  a  predominant  role  in  “pure”  inflation  targeting 
strategies, whereas they are only one component in the decision-making process of 
the Governing Council of the Eurosystem; 
especially in the early days, we were confronted with substantial criticism regarding 
our definition of price stability, considered by many observers as too ambitious. Two 
points are worth mentioning at this stage: 
- 
First, due to the scepticism I already mentioned and for credibility reasons, 
it would have been damaging for the euro not to build on the credibility of 
the most efficient and successful participating national central banks, that 
had previously chosen 2% as the ceiling for their definition of price stability; 
second, this criticism has abated recently and it is interesting to note that 
the definition of price stability has converged towards a level close to, if not 
below,  2%:  in  December  2003,  Gordon  Brown,  then  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  announced  a  new  inflation  target  for  the  Bank  of  England, 
based on the HICP, and set at a level of 2% for the 12-month increase; in 
the US, Ben Bernanke, while he was a member of the FOMC, advocated 
for a quantitative definition of the FED’s price objective comprised between 
1 and 2% over the medium-term. 
 The Eurosystem’s monetary policy is “medium-term” oriented 
What  exactly  are  the  implications  of  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy strategy? 
The first is that the single monetary policy does not have a fixed horizon, defined once and 
for all ex ante, but aims, as far as possible, to take account of the “long and variable lags of 
monetary policy” dear to Milton Friedman. Taking account of this uncertainty is particularly 
important in the case of the euro area, whose “deep structural parameters” are somewhat 
uncertain  to  the  extent  that  the  inception  of  the  euro  may  have  been  associated  with  a 
“regime shift”. More prosaically, this medium-term orientation of the single monetary policy 
recognises  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  central  bank  to  control  price  developments  with 
accuracy over the short-term. 
The second implication is that the relevant indicators for monetary policy must reflect, almost 
exhaustively, the main sources of both short and long-term inflation. In the light of this, the 
monetary policy strategy seeks, as far as possible, to rely on a “full information approach”. 
This is what the concepts economic analysis and monetary analysis – also known as the 
two-pillar  approach  –  used  notably  at  the  press  conferences  given  by  the  ECB  President 
following monetary policy decisions, reflect: 
- 
the economic analysis examines cyclical, economic and financial indicators related 
to the main determinants of short-term inflation; 
the  monetary  analysis,  is  based  on  a  monetary  explanation  of  the  low  frequency 
movement of inflation. 
The  medium-term  orientation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  makes  necessary  the 
crosschecking of these two complementary approaches. From this point of view, the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  more  comprehensive  than  pure  inflation  or 
monetary targeting strategies. 
  External observers sometimes criticise the complexity of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
strategy  and  argue  in  particular  that  the  monetary  pillar  or  analysis  does  not  provide  any 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2007
useful information for our monetary policy decision. It is considered by some as superfluous, 
confusing if not as an obstacle to transparency. 
To give money an important role in its monetary policy analysis and strategy is however quite 
a  natural  thing  for  a  central  bank  geared  towards  price  stability  to  do,  as  inflation  is 
“ultimately  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon”,  to  quote  again  Milton 
Friedman.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that,  in  our  set-up,  with  a  clear  medium-term  focus,  the 
Eurosystem  does  not  need  or  have  to  react  mechanically  to  short-term  deviations  of 
monetary  growth  from  the  reference  value.  Instead,  monetary  developments,  i.e.  both  the 
developments of the components of M3 and of its counterparts, are analysed very carefully in 
order to examine and extract their information content for future inflation. 
Part 2:   The achievements of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
What  preliminary  assessment  can  we  make  of  the  first  eight  years  of  the  single  monetary 
policy? I would like to underline the following points, considering successively price stability, 
macroeconomic stability and convergence, monetary stance and predictability. 
The achievement of the overriding policy objective: price stability 
1.  
Confronted  with  a  series  of  adverse  exogenous  supply  shocks  (affecting  in  particular  oil 
prices,  food  products  and  services  prices),  the  Eurosystem  has  been  able  to  contain 
inflationary  pressures  despite  considerable  volatility:  since 
the  Eurosystem  became 
responsible for monetary policy in the euro area, HICP inflation has averaged 2.0 % (1.7% 
excluding  unprocessed  food  and  energy),  which  is  near  our  definition  of  price  stability  at 
which  we  aim  over  the  medium  term.  This  figure  mainly  reflects  the  sharp  increase  in  oil 
prices  over  the  last  two  years.  However,  HICP  inflation  has  remained  below  2%  since 
September 2006. In addition, let me remind you that HICP inflation was around 4% in the 
1980s and about 9% in the 1970s [see Figure Annex p3]. 
Until  recently,  the  single  monetary  policy  also  succeeded  in  stabilising  and  anchoring 
medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  at  around  1.8%  to  1.9%,  despite  all  the  above 
mentioned  shocks.  That  is  to  say,  once  again,  at  a  level  close  to,  but  below,  2%  in 
accordance with our definition of price stability – whether one takes the inflation expectations 
derived from surveys (for example, Consensus Forecast, or the ECB survey of professional 
forecasters – [see Figure Annex p4] ) or those drawn from market data, notably index-linked 
government bonds. Recently, the awareness of a higher cost of oil has pushed expectations 
slightly above 2%. This is asking for strong vigilance so as to ensure that medium to longer-
term  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  level  consistent  with  price 
stability. 
Macroeconomic stability and convergence 
2. 
Price stability has not come at the expense of higher unemployment. Moreover, there are no 
visible signs of costs in terms of higher real macroeconomic volatility. Quite on the contrary, 
the  volatility  of  real  variables  has  declined  relative  to  the  averages  observed  during  the 
1980s and 1990s. 
Does one size fit all? It is often argued that a single monetary policy combined with inflation 
differentials  leads  to  different  real  interest  rates  across  countries,  which  in  turn  may 
destabilisize  the  currency  union  by  creating  divergence  in  output  growth  that  exacerbate 
inflation differentials. This is by no way what we have observed: 
First,  inflation  dispersion  among  the  euro  area  countries  (measured  as  the  unweighted 
standard deviation of annual HICP inflation rates) amounted to 0.7 percentage point in 2006 
compared to around 6 percentage points in the 1990s. Since the inception of the euro, the 
average inflation dispersion across the euro area countries has been around 1 percentage 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 5
point.  This  figure  is  very  close  to  the  dispersion  observed  across  the  14  US  metropolitan 
statistical areas. 
Concerning  growth  differentials,  euro  area  averages  naturally  mask  a  variety  of  growth 
performances of individual countries within the single currency area, especially in a context 
where  structural  convergence  has  not  been  completed  yet.  Growth  dispersion  is  a  natural 
phenomenon  in  any  large  economic  area.  Looking  at  the  main  trend,  the  degree  of 
dispersion in real GDP growth rates across 12 euro area countries declined somewhat since 
1999, reaching 1.5 percentage points in 2005, while for the largest countries it has remained 
close to 1 p.p. Let me recall that growth dispersion had been fluctuating around 2% since the 
1970s.  By  comparison,  the  dispersion  of  real  growth  rates  across  the  eight  US  statistical 
regions fluctuated around an average of 1.5 % between 1990 and 2002. 
This  is  not  surprising  since  some  stabilisation  channels  are  at  work  in  a  currency  area:  in 
particular, a credible monetary policy should bring about a convergence of expected inflation 
towards the definition of price stability, leading progressively to the convergence of ex ante 
real  rates  across  the  area;  moreover,  lower  inflation  relative  to  other  trading  partners 
increases  price  competitiveness,  which  in  turn  counteracts  the  initial  effect  of  higher  real 
interest rates. 
Appropriateness of the monetary policy stance 
3.  
Has the monetary policy stance been appropriate? To try answering that delicate question, 
the literature of central bank watchers or observers has mainly focused on Taylor-type rules 
as a usual benchmark. 
Despite  numerous  caveats,  such  an  approach  can  be  very  informative  as  it  addresses 
several relevant issues such as: is the monetary policy decision process rule-based or rather 
discretionary? To what extent is the central bank too focused on price stability at the expense 
of, say, growth and employment? Is the central bank forward-looking or rather “behind the 
curve”? 
These  are  actually  some  of  the  recurrent  criticisms  I  have  heard  about  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy:  too  obscure,  too  narrow-focused,  too  late.  One  can  build  up  (see  Figure 
page 7 of the Annex) a forward-looking Taylor-type rule for the ECB’s minimum bid rate. As 
an overall assessment, the Taylor-type rule closely matches Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
decisions. 
Under  the  proviso  that  this  rule  provides  a  good  benchmark,  it  is  quite  unclear  why  the 
Eurosystem has attracted so much criticism: in particular, the output stabilisation “objective”, 
as  encapsulated  in  a  standard  Taylor  rule,  has  not  been  overlooked  by  the  overriding 
objective  of  price  stability.  In  that  regard,  one  should  be  aware  that,  in  the  euro  area  as 
elsewhere, price stability aims at providing the highest sustainable growth and employment 
in the longer run; finally, the decisions have been taken in a timely fashion, the Eurosystem 
conducting its monetary policy in a forward-looking and pre-emptive way. 
However,  the  same  figure  shows  that  policy  decisions  deviate  from  the  Taylor  rule 
benchmark. Actually, being rule-based doesn’t imply being rule-bound and monetary policy 
decisions are not taken on the basis of mechanical rules. 
I already mentioned the Eurosystem adopted a full-information approach, which besides the 
usual array of economic and financial indicators also gives a key role to monetary analysis 
not  factored  in  usual  Taylor  rules.  Identifying  in  real  time  the  nature  of  monetary 
developments  and  their  implication  for  future  price  developments  represents  however 
increasing challenges. 
Meeting  these  challenges  has  not  been  straightforward  in  recent  years  as  the  euro  area 
economy was hit by several shocks: financial instability in the aftermath of the stock market 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2007
  collapse in 2000, exceptionally high economic and geopolitical uncertainty between 2001 and 
2003, just to name a few. 
- 
First  of  all,  we  have  to  identify  and  account  for  temporary  “special  factors”  or 
“distortions”  that  may  affect  monetary  developments  and  blur  their  information 
content.  To  some  extent  it  is  the  aim  of  the  methodology  developed  at  the  ECB 
which allows for periodic adjustments to measured monetary aggregates in order to 
account  for  portfolio  shifts  which  impact  the  demand  for  money  without  any 
incidence on future inflation. This approach has met with great success in the period 
2000-2004, allowing the Eurosystem to enter an easing cycle despite a rapid growth 
of M3. 
Second,  and  more  permanently,  it  is  necessary  to  disentangle,  in  monetary  and 
credit evolutions, those which reflect structural and permanent changes from those 
which simply result from moves in the level of interest rates and the position in the 
economic cycle. 
Finally, we must be able to assess whether these developments result from money 
supply  shocks,  in  which  case  they  clearly  entail  some  risks  to  price  stability,  or 
whether they are caused by money demand shocks that may raise the desired level 
of money balances without necessarily impacting aggregate demand. Such demand 
shocks can be triggered by structural changes in the behaviour of economic agents 
or  result  from  portfolio  shifts  or  financial  innovations  in  the  context  of  financial 
globalisation. There are indeed some signs that a money demand shock occurred at 
the beginning of the 2000s in the euro area, as illustrated by an apparent structural 
shift  in  the  trend  velocity  of  money,  which  summarises  the  relationship  between 
money,  output  and  the  price  level.  (see  Figure  Annex  page  8).  A  tentative 
explanation  is  that  our  economies  are  becoming  more  and  more  "financial"  in  the 
sense  that  the  ratio  of  financial  wealth  to  GDP  is  constantly  increasing.  Since 
economic  agents  –  especially  financial  intermediaries  and  corporates  –  need  to 
keep part of their total financial assets in liquid holdings, there may be a structural 
increase in the demand for money (everything equal). The euro and the integration 
of European capital markets may have accelerated this evolution. 
As an illustration of the uncertainties facing euro area monetary policy makers, one possible 
consequence  of  current  events  in  credit  markets  may  be  to  trigger  a  re-intermediation 
process,  i.e.  an  expansion  of  banks'  balance  sheets  which  may  further  complicate  our 
reading and interpretation of monetary and credit dynamics in the months to come. 
As you can see there is a need to continuously reassess and diversify the tools used in our 
monetary analysis. 
Predictability and frequency of policy actions 
4.  
Contrary  to  some  preconceptions,  most  monetary  policy  decisions  have  been  perfectly 
anticipated  by  the  markets.  This  assessment  derives  from  studies  conducted  by  the 
Eurosystem but also from the reports published by “ECB Watchers”, with whom, incidentally, 
the ECB has regular contact, notably in the context of annual conferences. 
Research  carried  out  by  these  “ECB  Watchers”  show  for  example  that  on  average,  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  decisions  were  very  well  anticipated  by  financial  markets, 
whatever  their  orientation,  at  least  two  weeks  in  advance,  and  fully  factored  in  at  least  a 
week before. 
A comparison with the  Fed, moreover, does not reveal significant differences between the 
two  institutions  with  regard  to  the  ability  of  markets  to  anticipate  the  monetary  policy 
decisions of the two institutions. That points to the transparency of the single monetary 
policy. In particular, the fact that the ECB has chosen channels other than the publication of 
BIS Review 113/2007 
 7
minutes of the meetings of the Governing Council has not prevented it from reaching a high 
level of predictability.  
As  regards  the  frequency,  since  the  inception  of  the  euro  in  1999,  the  Eurosystem  has 
changed its policy rates 25 times (8 cuts, 17 hikes), which is on average close to the usual 
average frequency of interest rate changes1. 
However, compared to the Federal Reserve, in particular since 2001, the frequency of the 
changes  is  by  far  lower.  Does  this  necessarily  imply  that  the  Eurosystem  does  not  move 
enough or too low? I think there is a broad agreement on the fact that interest rate decisions 
are state-dependent rather than time-dependent and as a consequence, both the frequency 
and  the  amplitude  of  the  policy  changes  are  mainly  driven  by  the  underlying  state  of  the 
economy. 
As  far  as  the  Eurosystem  is  concerned,  the  more  gradualist  approach  is  nothing  but  the 
reflection that the economy of the euro area has been less affected by cyclical fluctuations 
than the US economy. Moreover, recent research carried out by the Eurosystem on inflation 
persistence tends to show that the degree of inflation persistence in the euro area is quite 
moderate while the degree of price stickiness is considerable and higher than in the United 
States. This finding may provide another justification for a gradualist monetary response to 
cost-push shocks as: first, the impact of an inflation shock will be small as agents anticipate a 
low persistence of this shock and therefore will maintain their expectations of future inflation 
at low levels; in turn, the negative response of the output gap will be limited implying a less 
persistent response of the real rate. 
5.  
As a result, the Eurosystem monetary policy has won European citizens’ 
confidence in and acceptance of the new currency 
Finally, the euro has been readily accepted by economic agents and is now part of European 
consumers’ daily lives. Surveys confirm that the general public has confidence in the euro, as 
a solid currency, and in the Eurosystem as their Central Bank. 
However, there remain two causes for concern: 
- 
one is the natural difficulty in moving to an entirely new set of price references – and 
it may take a number of years before this switch is fully made by the public at large. 
and  the  second,  probably  related  to  the  first  one,  is  the  feeling  in  the  public  that 
there have been excessive price increases linked to the cash changeover. Indeed, 
the public’s attention has focused on a small number of goods and services in which 
abnormal increases occurred at the time of this event, leading to a misperception of 
the real rate of inflation. This gap between perceived inflation and real inflation has 
however been narrowing progressively and should hopefully disappear in the near 
future. 
 Concluding remarks 
To conclude, let me emphasise that eight years after its adoption, the euro has lived up to all 
of our expectations. After the unprecedented challenge of a continent-wide cash changeover, 
the euro almost instantly replaced the legacy currencies without any disruptions. 
It has fostered both price and macroeconomic stability through its credibility and has shielded 
many  euro  area  countries  from  significant  exchange  rate  volatility  and  financial  market 
                                                 
1   On average, central banks of industrialised countries changed their policy rates every 5 months both in the 
1980s and the 1990s (Source Clerc et Yates (1999): “Interest rate stepping: some puzzles and facts”, mimeo 
Bank of England), which is close to the frequency of the ECB interest rate changes (4.7 months). 
8 
 BIS Review 113/2007
turmoil. It is all the more important to acknowledge these achievements since it was said in 
some quarters that the euro would never see the light of day or that it would create severe 
economic disruptions. Those scenarios have not materialised. 
In the post-war European adventure, the euro represents a major milestone. That said, and 
whatever its own merits, a currency is not an end in itself, even though the new EU members 
are keen on adopting it as soon as possible. Entry into Monetary Union must be founded on 
a  sustainable  convergence  process.  Enlargement  of  the  euro  area  also  gives  renewed 
impetus to addressing the challenges ahead as it makes it more pressing for policy-makers 
to tackle long-ignored weaknesses. This is a crucial contribution to building a stronger EU, in 
which I strongly believe. 
All in all, let me express my confidence in the future of the euro and of the single monetary 
policy of a large Euro zone. 
 
 
 
 9
BIS Review 113/2007 
  10 
   BIS Review 113/2007
   BIS Review 113/2007 
 11
   12 
 BIS Review 113/2007
   BIS Review 113/2007 
 13
