Y V Reddy: Central banking and academia 
Talk  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
conferment of the Degree of Doctor of Civil Law by the University of Mauritius, Port Louis, 
3 December 2007. 
 Honourable  Chancellor,  Sir  Ramesh  Jewoolall,  Respected  Pro-Chancellor  Professor 
Jugessur,  Respected  Vice-Chancellor,  Professor  Fagoonee,  Governor  Bheenick, 
distinguished academics, and friends, 
It is a great honour and privilege to accept, gratefully, the conferment of the Degree of Doctor 
of Civil Law, honoris causa from the University of Mauritius. I deeply appreciate and thank 
the Governor of the Bank of Mauritius and Honorary Professor Rundheersingh Bheenick for 
presenting  me  for  the  conferment.  This  event  is  of  special  significance  because  the 
University  commands  immense  prestige  and  has  collaborations  with  several  globally 
renowned  academic  institutions  across  the  continents.  The  well  known  Indian  Institute  of 
Technology, Kanpur, India, is an example. The University is held in high esteem in India as 
exemplified  by  the  visit  to  the  University  by  Dr.  A.P.J.  Abdul  Kalam,  as  President  of  the 
Republic of India, for an interactive session. The session was held on 13th March 2006 in 
this Auditorium in the University. 
The  conferment  of  this  degree,  in  my  humble  submission,  signifies  the  recognition  of 
historical, cultural and economic ties between Mauritius and India. It also signals the shared 
desire  to  improve  and  reinforce  our  relations  in  the  sectors  that  are  critical  in  the  rapidly 
developing  world,  such  as  knowledge  based  economy  and  services  sector,  especially 
financial  sector  and  tourism.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Professor  Fagoonee  has  his  current 
interests in information technology, management and environment. Contextually, this event 
invites a focus on interaction between central banks and academia. 
It  is  well  known  that  practice  of  central  banking  has  been  drawing  very  heavily  from  the 
academic  contributions  on  the  subject.  Apart  from  theoretical  foundations,  academia 
provides guidance in the conduct of policy, both in terms of research inputs in collaborative 
work and in terms of participation in decision making process. While academics are often on 
the boards or committees of central banks, it is not uncommon for the Governors to be drawn 
from the academia – the current well known examples, to mention a few, are Professors Ben 
Bernanke in USA; Mervin King in UK, Axel Weber in Germany, Stanley Fischer in Israel and, 
of course, Professor Bheenick in Mauritius. No doubt, the central banks support research in 
academic and other research institutions. Often, the central banks provide significant inputs 
to national statistical endeavours, particularly in regard to financial sector. 
We, in the RBI, attach great value to the interactions with the academia in several ways. The 
foundation for financial sector reform in the early 1990s, in India, was laid down by Governor 
Rangarajan,  an  academic,  originally  drawn  from  a  Professorship  of  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Management, Ahmedabad.  
The Board of the Reserve Bank generally has four academics of eminence, two each from 
economics and sciences. 
On  an  ongoing  basis,  the  Reserve  Bank  benefits  from  active  inputs  from  academics.  Our 
standing Technical Advisory Committees on Monetary Policy; on Financial Markets; and on 
periodical  Surveys;  benefit  immensely  through  representation  of  academics  on  these 
Committees. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
The  Reserve  Bank  also  contributes  to  the  requirements  of  the  academic  world  through  its 
key analytical publications such as Annual Report, Report on Trend and Progress of Banking 
in  India,  Report  on  Currency  and  Finance,  State  Finances:  A  Study  of  Budgets, 
Macroeconomic  and  Monetary  Developments,  the  Weekly  Statistical  Supplement,  the 
Monthly Bulletin and Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, for the use of researchers. 
The Reserve Bank provides web-based access to the researchers through the Database on 
Indian Economy (DBIE). Time series data relating to the areas of financial sector, real sector, 
external sector, financial markets, public finance and corporate finance are made available 
through the DBIE. The users can navigate from metadata to the related data/reports. They 
can also navigate from the data/reports to the relevant metadata 
Like  other  major  central  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  developed  its  own  research 
capabilities  in  the  fields  of  economics  and  statistics,  which  contribute  to  a  better 
understanding of the functioning of the economy. 
In order to facilitate research on development issues from multi-disciplinary points of view, an 
advanced research institute – the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR) – 
was established by the Reserve Bank of India in 1986. The IGIDR receives annual financial 
support from the Reserve Bank. The Institute is now recognized as a Deemed University. 
The Development Research Group (DRG), constituted by the Reserve Bank in 1991, serves 
as a forum for collaborative research efforts between professional economists and officers of 
the Bank. The DRG has published 25 studies since its inception on a wide range of subjects 
relating to real and social sectors also. The studies are funded by the Reserve Bank. 
The  Reserve  Bank  had  established  the  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management  (NIBM)  in 
1969, as an autonomous apex institution, with the mandate of playing a proactive role of a 
"think-tank" of the banking system. The NIBM is recognized by the University of Pune as an 
approved Centre for Post-Graduate Research, and also by the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India. Joint India-
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Training Programme (ITP) has been established recently 
at  the  NIBM  campus  in  Pune.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  sponsored  and  funded  this 
collaboration. This is the seventh such facility of the IMF Institute in the world. 
A  former  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  at  present  the  Prime  Minister,  Professor 
Manmohan Singh, inaugurated the upgradation of the 50 year old Bankers’ Training College 
into a Centre for Advanced Financial Learning, when he visited the Reserve Bank recently. 
The Centre is in the process of taking a final shape with the help of a high powered advisory 
group. 
The Reserve Bank also promotes research by providing financial assistance under a scheme 
– the Reserve Bank’s Endowment Scheme – to various institutions for undertaking research 
and  training  in  areas  of  interest  to  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  financial  support  is  generally 
provided through corpus funds. At present, there are 21 corpus funds and the beneficiaries 
include several universities. 
The Reserve Bank funds several seminars/lectures by experts, including leading academics, 
most notable of them being a series of three Memorial Lectures and support to national level 
academic workshops/ conferences. 
As  a  continuation  of  this  process,  and  as  a  part  of  its  capacity  building  and  knowledge 
management  initiatives,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding with the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), as one of 
the sponsors, for creating a LSE India Observatory and IG Patel Chair. Currently, an eminent 
economist, Lord Nick Stern, holds the Chair. The LSE India Observatory co-ordinates India 
related research, policy development and teaching at the LSE and is expected to emerge as 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
a  hub  for  academic  collaboration  with  academic  institutions  in  India,  government  agencies 
and corporate bodies. 
We, in the Reserve Bank, believe that this event reinforces our joint commitment to greater 
collaboration  between  our  two  countries,  economies,  financial  sectors,  central  banks,  and 
academia.  
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  expressing  my  gratitude  to  the  University,  in  particular,  Vice 
Chancellor  Professor  Fagoonie  for  his  kind  invitation  to  me,  and  Honorary  Professor 
Bheenick for making the conferment ceremony a very memorable one.  
Thank you all, ladies and gentlemen.  
BIS Review 144/2007 
 3
