Randall S Kroszner: Recent events in financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  Annual  Breakfast  Dialogue, 
Washington DC, 22 October 2007. 
 Good morning. In my remarks this morning, I will share my views on events in U.S. financial 
markets  over  the  past  several  months.  Specifically,  I  will  describe  what  I  believe  were 
contributing factors in the breakdown of the price discovery mechanism in certain markets, 
and I will assess the future prospects for these markets. While I will draw some preliminary 
conclusions about recent market events, my views and those of other policymakers will likely 
continue  to  evolve  as  we  develop  a  more  informed  perspective  and  benefit  from  further 
analysis.1  
Price discovery 
When  markets  are  functioning  properly,  one  of  the  key  roles  that  they  perform  is  what 
economists refer to as "price discovery."2 Essentially, price discovery is the process by which 
buyers and sellers’ preferences, as well as any other available market information, results in 
the "discovery" of a price that will balance supply and demand and provide signals to market 
participants about how most efficiently to allocate resources. This market-determined price 
will, of course, be subject to change as new information becomes available, as preferences 
evolve, as expectations are revised, and as costs of production change. 
In  well-functioning  markets,  the  price  discovery  process  represents  the  efforts  of  market 
participants to use all available information to decide whether to buy or to sell or to abstain 
from  buying  and  selling.  In  efficient  and  competitive  markets,  participants  will  tend  to 
undertake a certain amount of due diligence before making their decisions. This means that 
prices do not just appear by themselves; a substantial amount of work is required by buyers 
and  sellers  for  markets  to  produce  prices  that  clear  markets  and  provide  useful  signals  to 
consumers  and  producers.  Indeed,  this  is  one  of  the  brilliant  aspects  of  the  market 
mechanism in that a number of participants, each pursuing their own interests and trying to 
maximize their own welfare and profits, determine a market-clearing price. A core principle of 
economics is that markets are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate 
information  is  available  to  both  buyers  and  sellers.  But  for  markets  to  work  best,  market 
participants  must  utilize  available  information,  including  analysis  of  costs  and  benefits  of 
obtaining  such  information.  In  the  case  of  new  and  innovative  products,  there  might  be  a 
particularly  strong  demand  for  information.  Then  this  information  must  be  processed 
appropriately before decisions are made about whether to buy or sell.  
In some instances, the price discovery process can break down and buyers and sellers are 
unable to discover any price at all – perhaps because of a lack of information or because of 
general  uncertainty  among  market  participants.  I  would  suggest  that  this  is  fundamentally 
what has occurred in some financial markets over the past several months. This has certainly 
not  been  the  case  in  all  markets.  For  example,  while  equity  markets  in  the  United  States 
have experienced greater price volatility in recent months, and credit spreads have widened 
                                                 
1   These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal 
Reserve System as a whole. 
2   See, for example, the work of Friedrich A. Hayek, including "Competition as a Discovery Procedure" in New 
Studies  in  Philosophy,  Politics,  Economics  and  the  History  of  Ideas.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press, 
1978. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
in markets for highly-rated, traditional debt instruments, I believe this has been a function of 
reassessing risk rather than a broader failure of the price discovery process itself. Moreover, 
investment-grade  corporations  faced  little  trouble  in  issuing  traditional  debt  instruments 
during the market turbulence in August and did so in significant volumes.  
In  some  financial  markets,  however,  the  price  discovery  process  appears  to  have  actually 
broken  down.  In  particular,  I  am  referring  to  markets  for  structured  credit  products  (for 
example,  collateralized  loan  obligations  and  collateralized  debt  obligations)  that  are  often 
complex  and  opaque,  as  well  as  instruments  that  are  linked  to  these  structured  products, 
such as asset-backed commercial paper. Why did the price discovery process fail in these 
markets but not in others? I would suggest that there are two principal related causes. 
First,  some  investors  may  not  have  done  sufficient  due  diligence  with  regard  to  complex 
structured  products.  Prior  to  the  recent  market  disruptions,  many  buyers  and  sellers  of 
complex  structured  products  appear  not  to  have  demanded  sufficient  information  from 
sellers, and simply accepted investment-grade ratings of these securities as a substitute for 
their  own  risk  analysis.  When  the  problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  began  to 
emerge  and  delinquencies  on  subprime  mortgages  in  pools  backing  these  securities 
exceeded  rating  agency  estimates,  subsequently  resulting  in  a  number  of  downgrades, 
investors  lost  confidence  in  the  quality  of  these  ratings,  and  hence  the  quality  of  the 
information they had about these instruments, and pulled back from markets for structured 
products across the board. 
A second, related factor contributing to the breakdown in price discovery is the recognition by 
investors of complexity and lack of transparency, both in the instruments themselves and in 
the  markets  more  broadly.  The  complex  structures  of  the  innovative  instruments,  and  the 
lack of transparency with regard to the underlying assets backing these instruments, made 
them more difficult and costly to value than many investors originally thought. At the same 
time, many investors realized that it was difficult to identify where the risks were lodged. This 
uncertainty,  of  course,  is  one  of  the  trade-offs  of  a  more  market-intermediated  finance 
system  in  which  risks  are  more  widely  dispersed  rather  than  concentrated  in  the  banking 
system.  As  problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  became  more  apparent,  investors 
became unwilling to purchase products that could have any exposure not only to subprime 
mortgages, but to housing-related assets and other structured products more generally.  
Put  simply,  investors  suddenly  realized  that  they  were  much  less  informed  than  they 
originally thought. In these circumstances, it is not necessarily surprising that investors pulled 
back from purchasing certain instruments at any price. 
Prospects for market recovery 
In light of these factors, what is the prognosis for recovery in markets for complex structured 
credit instruments? I would suggest that, while we have seen more normal price discovery 
activity slowly returning to some markets, the recovery may be a relatively gradual process, 
and these markets may not look the same when they re-emerge. Both investors and sellers 
will need to take steps for the price discovery process to be re-established in these markets.  
In  observing  the  challenges  to  price  discovery  and  the  repricing  of  risk  in  many  markets 
recently, I have been reminded of a Russian proverb that was made famous in the context of 
international relations but applies equally to investment decisions: "Trust, but verify." Let me 
explain. 
As I mentioned earlier, one of the reasons that the price discovery mechanism has broken 
down in some U.S. markets in recent months is that a number of investors failed to exercise 
due diligence and relied on rating agency assessments. That is, there was a lot of trust but 
not much verification. I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part 
of  investors  is  especially  high  for  newer  and  more-complex  products  compared  with  more 
traditional, familiar, and less-complex products.  
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
Reducing  the  chance  of  unanticipated  losses  may  require  significant  effort  on  the  part  of 
investors  looking  to  purchase  complex  structured  products  and  the  creators  or  sellers  of 
those products. To be able to better understand the risk profile of such instruments, some 
market participants will have to invest in three ways to revive the price discovery mechanism. 
First, they will likely need to collect more detailed data. In particular, investors will need to 
gather  data  more  systematically  to  help  them  understand  the  nature  and  risks  of  the 
underlying assets and the structures of the instruments. Second, investors will likely require 
enhanced  systems  to  warehouse  and  model  data  related  to  these  instruments  to  better 
understand  their  risk  profile,  especially  under  stress  conditions.  Third,  investors  will  likely 
need to ensure that they have the appropriate human capital expertise – that is, people – to 
interpret, understand, and act appropriately on the results of their modeling and analysis. The 
investment in data, modeling, and assessment will take time so there may be an extended 
period before normal price discovery will return in markets for some existing products.  
In  turn,  given  the  likely  increase  in  the  costs  of  producing  and  evaluating  certain  complex 
instruments,  these  actions  and  efforts  may  affect  investors’  risk-reward  calculus  by 
increasing  required  returns  –  or  the  "hurdle  rates"  –  on  these  investments.  Creators  and 
sellers  may  respond  by  reducing  complexity,  improving  quality  of  underlying  assets  or 
increasing  transparency  and  disclosure.  In  light  of  recent  events,  market  innovation  may 
result in new instruments that satisfy the needs of both buyers and sellers – instruments that, 
of  course,  should  not  just  be  accepted  on  their  face  but  should  be  subject  to  proper  due 
diligence.  In  the  end,  investors  will  decide  for  themselves  whether  acquiring  the  data  and 
expertise necessary to participate in certain markets is worth the cost. As a result, it is likely 
that these markets and instruments will look different than they did prior to the recent market 
turmoil. 
Let me close by highlighting the role of the Federal Reserve over the past several months as 
a backstop source of liquidity in interbank funding markets. As price discovery broke down in 
a  variety  of  markets,  financial  institutions,  as  intermediaries  and  liquidity  providers 
themselves in the affected markets, became protective of their liquid reserves and balance 
sheet capacity. As a result, overnight and term interbank funding markets have come under 
pressure. The Federal Reserve accordingly took a number of steps to try to alleviate these 
pressures. 
The Fed’s initial action in early August was to increase liquidity in short-term money markets 
through  larger  open-market  operations  –  the  standard  means  by  which  it  seeks  to  ensure 
that the federal funds rate is maintained at or close to the target rate set by the Federal Open 
Market  Committee.  This  extra  provision  of  liquidity  helped bring  the  funds  rate  down  to  its 
target early  in the day; it also eased banks’ concerns about the availability of funding and 
thus  assisted  the  functioning  of  the  interbank  market.  The  vigorous  provision  of  funds 
through  open  market  operations  succeeded  in  damping  pressures  in  overnight  funding 
markets. Yet, markets for term interbank funding remained strained. 
On August 17, the Federal Reserve Board took further action by cutting the discount rate – 
the rate at which it lends directly to banks – by 50 basis points, or half a percentage point. 
The Fed also adjusted its usual practices to facilitate the provision of financing for as long as 
thirty  days,  renewable  at  the  request  of  the  borrower.  These  actions  also  appear  to  have 
improved  market  functioning,  though  strains,  particularly  in  term  funding  markets,  persist 
even now. Moreover, judging from forward curves in interbank and overnight indexed swaps 
markets, market participants expect pressures in term funding markets to persist for several 
quarters. 
I should emphasize that the purpose of these actions was not to insulate financial institutions 
from the consequences of their business decisions, but rather to facilitate the orderly function 
of  markets  more  broadly  in  the  face  of  risks  to  the  overall  economy.  I  believe  that  this 
provision  of  liquidity  has  contributed,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  recent improvements  we  have 
seen in the functioning of financial markets. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
Importantly, the Federal Open Market Committee’s most recent action, the 50 basis point cut 
in  the  target  federal  funds  rate  in  September,  was  an  attempt  to  help  offset  the  potential 
effects  of  financial  market  turmoil  on  real  economic  activity.  The  breakdown  in  the  price 
discovery process can, after all, have real economic consequences that the Federal Reserve 
should,  in  my  opinion,  consider  when  fulfilling  its  statutorily  mandated  goals  of  maximum 
employment and price stability. 
Conclusion 
In  the  months  ahead,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  in  the 
financial markets and act as needed to support the effective functioning of these markets and 
to foster sustainable economic growth and price stability. In addition, we will be reviewing the 
events of the past several months to understand the likely causes and effects.  
Thank  you  very  much,  and  I  look  forward  to  a  lively  dialogue  following  my  esteemed 
colleagues’ remarks. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
