Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European economic and financial 
integration 
Speech  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  opening 
session at the conference “EMU Governance and Euro Changeover: Malta on the path to the 
euro”, Valletta, 1 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  and  pleasure  for  me  to  be  invited  to  offer  some  remarks  at  this 
conference organised by the National Euro Changeover Committee and the Central Bank of 
Malta, just three months before Malta adopts the euro on 1 January 2008. This will signify a 
great  milestone  in  Malta’s  history,  especially  since  Malta  only  joined  the  European  Union 
(EU) almost four years ago, on 1 May 2004. 
You can be proud of Malta’s successful convergence process. In fact, we are very pleased 
about  the  fruitful  cooperation  between  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  Central 
Bank of Malta in the preparations for the changeover, be it at the technical level or through 
the participation of Governor Bonello as observer in the Governing Council since last July. 
Preparations for EU membership and the adoption of the euro have spurred a broad-based 
reform  process,  which  has  led  to  the  restructuring  of  the  public  enterprise  sector  and  the 
liberalisation  of  the  trade  regime.  These  reforms  have  helped  Malta  to  gradually  reduce 
inflation and significantly shrink the fiscal deficit. Moreover, the exchange rate of the Maltese 
lira has been maintained at the central rate since the currency joined ERM II in May 2005, 
and long-term interest rates have declined.  
The adoption of the euro should not mark the end of this structural reform process. In order 
to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  euro  adoption  and  to  ensure  sustainable  convergence,  this 
process  should  continue.  This  will  involve  noticeably  reducing  Malta’s  high  debt  ratio, 
maintaining  moderate  wage  developments  that  take  fully  into  account  labour  productivity 
growth, and fostering labour participation. 
As you know, economic and monetary integration between countries with somewhat different 
characteristics and levels of development requires careful preparation. However, you have 
already  reached  this  stage  and  your  planning  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  almost 
complete.  
Looking ahead the adoption of the euro will enhance your integration with all EU partners. 
Let me now offer two brief remarks in this respect: first about some of the effects that the 
euro has already had on euro area countries, and second about the functioning of the euro 
area and its greater resilience vis-à-vis external events.  
1.  
My first remark is that the euro is providing a positive impetus in the euro area 
economy.  
The economic and financial environment of the euro area is changing in many ways and the 
euro  is  having  a  beneficial  impact.  Euro  area  economies  are  gradually  becoming  more 
interdependent, as evidenced by the following facts: 
a. 
There is clear evidence of a significant increase in both intra- and extra-euro area 
trade in goods since the launch of the euro. Exports and imports of goods within the 
euro area rose from about 26% of GDP in 1998 to around 32% in 2006, and intra-
euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% to almost 7% of 
GDP  over  the  same  period.  The  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  as  well  as 
greater  price  and  cost  transparency,  have  promoted  cross-border  trade.  The 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 1
b. 
c. 
completion of a single market for services will also further facilitate trade in services. 
In  addition,  the  rate  of  increase  in  extra-euro  area  exports  and  imports  exceeded 
that in intra-euro area trade, rising from about 24% of GDP in 1998 to almost 33% in 
2006. Over the same period, extra-euro area exports and imports of services grew 
from  about  8%  of  GDP  to  almost  10%.  External  factors,  such  as  more  sustained 
growth in world GDP than in euro area GDP, rising global trade integration and a 
sizeable  increase  in  trade  with  the  new  EU  Member  States,  are  also  playing  an 
important role.  
Another area I would like to mention is foreign direct investment (FDI), which also 
includes merger and acquisition (M&A) activity. FDI accumulates over time and thus 
makes  an  important  contribution  to  reshaping  Europe.  Intra-euro  area  FDI  has 
grown considerably and is catching up with extra-euro area FDI. Between 1994 and 
2004, the stock of intra-euro area FDI grew from almost 14% of euro area GDP to 
around  24%.  On  the  other  hand,  the  stock  of  extra-euro  area  outward  FDI  have 
grown somewhat less rapidly over the same period, rising from 22% to 30% of euro 
area GDP. In particular, EMU has been associated with a sharp increase in cross-
border M&As of the manufacturing sector among euro area countries. Conversely, 
the service industry has thus far benefited less from European financial integration. 
This also illustrates that more has to be done to remove the existing barriers to trade 
in services. 
The euro is acting as a catalyst towards a single market in financial services. 
To  illustrate  this,  I  will  give  you  just  a  few  examples  based  on  a  set  of  ECB 
indicators on the level of integration in euro area financial and banking markets.  
• 
Since the introduction of the euro, the cross-country standard deviation 
of interest rates in the interbank money market has plummeted. Back 
in  January  1998,  one  year  before  the  launch  of  the  single  currency,  this 
deviation stood at more than 130 basis points for overnight rates, at over 
100 basis points for one-month maturities, and at around 50 basis points for 
12-month  rates.  Since  January  1999,  however,  these  differences  have 
rarely exceeded one or two basis points.  
Furthermore, there is significant evidence that euro area corporations are 
taking advantage of the possibility to appeal to a broader universe of 
investors  in  order  to  raise  funds.  As  a  result,  the  euro  corporate  bond 
market  has  grown  significantly  since  1999,  and  has  the  potential  to  grow 
even further, judged by a comparison with the US. In 1999, the outstanding 
volume  of  bonds  issued  by  non-financial  corporations  was  just  3.9%  of 
GDP  in  the  euro  area  and  24.3%  in  the  US;  in  2006  it  has  increased  to 
12.5% but the US market is still one and a half times larger than in the euro 
area (21.1%). 
Between  1997  and  2005  euro  area  residents  doubled  their  holdings  of 
equity  issued  in  another  euro  area  country  –  as  a  share  of  their  total 
portfolio  of shares  issued  in  their  own  country  and  elsewhere  in  the  euro 
area  –  to  reach  29%.  Instead,  the  share  of  euro  area  equity  assets  held 
outside  the  euro  area  remains  much  lower  and  increased  only  slightly. 
Hence, since the launch of the euro there has been a portfolio reallocation 
from holdings of domestic equities to holdings of equities issued elsewhere 
within the euro area.  
The share of long-term debt securities issued in the euro area and held 
by  residents  of  other  euro  area  countries  has  risen  markedly.  Euro  area 
cross border holdings of long-term debt securities have risen from slightly 
above 10% in 1997 to nearly 60% in 2005.  
   2 
 BIS Review 109/2007
  their 
interests  outside 
By contrast, integration in retail banking has been slow so far, although 
it has picked up in the last two years. With some notable exceptions, much 
of the consolidation in the banking sector has been the result of domestic 
mergers;  only  in  the  last  couple  of  years  have  cross-border  banking 
mergers started to take place. In this respect, a number of euro area banks 
have  considerably  expanded 
the  euro  area. 
However, cross-border activity within the euro area is still relatively limited, 
even  though  it  is  gaining  in  importance:  a  trend  gradually  increasing  the 
level of competition and efficiency in the financial system. 
Further work is needed in order to achieve the goal of a single market for 
financial services. To this end, the ECB and the Eurosystem are actively 
involved  in  several  initiatives  that  help  foster  financial  integration, 
including:  the  launch  of  TARGET2,  the  new  payment  platform  for  the 
financial  system,  which  is  planned  for  the  end  of  2007;  the  European 
Commission’s Green Paper on Mortgage Credit in the EU. The mortgage 
credit  market  is  an  important  segment  of  the  banking  and  retail  markets, 
with  an  outstanding  volume  of  more  than  €4  trillion  in  the  EU,  which 
corresponds to around 40% of EU GDP. Euro area mortgage markets are 
not  yet  fully  integrated,  and  I  believe  there  is  great  potential  for  further 
integration  in  this  respect;  and  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA) 
project,  the  aim  of  which  is  to  integrate  the  market  for  retail  payment 
services.  
To  sum  up,  these  examples  clearly  show  that  the  euro  is  having  a  remarkable  impact, 
particularly  on  the  financial  market  segments  that  are  more  directly  affected  by  the  single 
currency and monetary policy, such as fixed-income markets. Hence, interdependence within 
the euro area is becoming stronger. 
My second remark is about the actual functioning of EMU.  
2. 
Before the launch of the euro, some experts feared that a single monetary policy would not 
suit a group of countries that were still diverse. But, after nearly a decade, the euro area has 
proved to be a success. The degree of synchronisation of business cycles across euro area 
countries  has  grown  since  the  1990s  and  remains  high.  There  is  evidence  of  a  stronger 
common euro area cycle that accounts for a large part of the business cycle fluctuations.  
a. 
Furthermore,  however  favourable  the  previously  mentioned  statistics  are,  they 
cannot fully capture the fact that the euro area has become more resilient to external 
developments than its individual member countries ever were before the launch of 
the euro. National economic policies have become better coordinated and the intra-
European impact of external exchange rate turbulences has been of course totally 
removed.  
Let me give you some specific examples of this increasing resilience: since 1999, 
the  euro  area  has  successfully  weathered  several  common  shocks,  including  the 
bursting of the dotcom bubble, the ripple effects of the terrorist attacks in the United 
States  on  11  September  2001,  the  surge  in  global  commodity  prices  and  energy 
prices  in  particular,  and  the  persistence  of  sizeable  global  imbalances.  These 
shocks were very significant and evidence shows that they spread in similar ways 
across euro area countries. They have not played an important role in the dispersion 
of output growth and they have not contributed to economic divergence.  
Furthermore,  we  are  currently  witnessing  a  significant  market  correction  with  a 
reappraisal  of  risk,  and  episodes  of  high  volatility  and  turbulences  on  various 
markets having threatened in particular the normal functioning of the money market. 
Through our liquidity operations in the recent period, the ECB and the Eurosystem 
b. 
c. 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 3
took the appropriate decisions to help ensuring the orderly functioning of the money 
market. I am proud of the capacity we showed to judge correctly the situation of the 
market and to act decisively and rapidly when needed.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this now brings me to the final part of my remarks.  
3.  
As  we  have  seen,  the  economic  and  financial  environment  is  changing  and  euro  area 
countries are gradually becoming more integrated and mutually interdependent. The effects 
of EMU have been beneficial, in line with the expectations of the 317 million people in the 
euro  area  and,  more  generally,  the  494  million  citizens  of  the  EU.  The  euro  area  is 
experiencing  low  inflation  and  low  macroeconomic  volatility,  both  in  historical  terms  and 
compared with other single currency areas, such as the United States. Let me remind you 
that over the eight and a half years since the creation of the euro, employment in the euro 
area has risen by almost 15 million people, compared with a rise of around 3 million in the 
eight and a half years preceding the adoption of the euro.  
European integration complements global integration. We are also reaping the benefits of a 
highly credible monetary policy strategy that is anchoring long-term inflation expectations at 
low levels. Several concerns that preceded the launch of the euro have successfully been 
dispelled. The euro area is now more resilient than its individual countries were before the 
launch of the euro.  
The fact that the euro area is now a very large economic area is accompanied progressively 
by a change in mentality. We need to think in terms of economic developments in the euro 
area  as  a  whole,  not  just  in  our  home  countries.  This  has  also  implied  a  different  type  of 
economic  management  to  the  one  used  prior  to  1999,  including  the  peers’  surveillance  of 
fiscal policies as called by the Stability and Growth Pact. We are also well aware that more 
must be done in several areas, such as raising the flexibility and adaptability of the individual 
euro  area  economies  and  paying  close  attention  to  cost  competitiveness  in  the  various 
economies. The achievements of EMU and our monetary policy support the reforms that are 
urgently needed in many countries.  
We look forward to welcoming you wholeheartedly into the euro area. Thank you very much 
for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2007
