Yiu-kwan Choi: Basel II implementation in Asia 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Yiu-kwan  Choi,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  (Banking)  of  the  Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority, at the BCBS/FSI/EMEAP: Basel II Implementation in Asia, Hong 
Kong, 17 October 2007. 
 Dear colleagues, 
Good morning. On behalf of the HKMA, I would like to extend a very warm welcome to you 
all here today to take part in this outreach event organized jointly by the Basel Committee, 
the FSI and EMEAP, focusing on the IRB validation aspect of the Basel II framework. The 
event  coincides  with  one  of  the  regular  meetings  of  the  Validation  Subgroup  of  the  Basel 
Committee’s Accord Implementation Group, which was held here over the last two days.  
The Validation Subgroup, or the AIGV as it is commonly called, is one of three subgroups 
under  the  AIG  that  share  information  and  discuss  specific  issues  related  to  Basel  II 
implementation.  The  AIGV  specifically  explores  issues  related  to  the  validation  of  systems 
used to generate the ratings and parameters that serve as inputs into the internal ratings-
based approach to credit risk.  
The AIGV has done some excellent work, using the regular AIGV meetings as an information 
dissemination  platform  for  members  of  this  Subgroup  to  explore  various  IRB  validation-
related  issues.  The  AIGV  has  also  published  several  high  quality  supervisory  guidance 
papers  covering  topics  on  validation  of  low-default  portfolios,  use  of  vendor  products,  use 
test and control expectations for validation under the Basel II IRB framework. These topics, 
as  I  understand,  will  be  discussed  this  afternoon  under  the  two  scheduled  working  group 
sessions. To broaden the geographical reach of the large pool of useful reference documents 
on IRB-related issues produced for its meetings or contributed by the member jurisdictions, 
the AIGV has developed an electronic library on eBIS to store these documents for access 
by the supervisory community.  
The hosting of this event is well timed, as some jurisdictions have already entered into the 
implementation phase of the Basel II IRB framework and other jurisdictions, including many 
from  Asia,  are  in  the  pipeline  for  the  introduction  of  the  framework  for  adoption  by  their 
banks.  The  event  is  therefore  a  good  opportunity  for  representatives  of  jurisdictions  which 
have  yet  to  adopt  Basel  II  to  hear  from  jurisdictions  already  implementing  the  framework 
about  the  emerging  issues,  and  to  facilitate  future  communications  on  this  topic  among 
participants. As Chairman of the EMEAP Working Group on Banking Supervision, the HKMA 
certainly welcomes the opportunity to host this outreach event, and would like to thank the 
AIGV members who have stayed behind after the regular meeting to provide support.  
A  major  innovation  of  Basel  II  is  that  it  allows  banks  to  calculate  their  regulatory  capital 
requirements  using  the  output  of  their  internal  rating  systems,  subject  to  supervisory 
approval.  Under  the  IRB  Approach,  banks  employ  internal  rating  systems  to  produce 
estimates  of  one  or  more  risk  components,  which  are  then  used  as  the  key  inputs  to  the 
calculation of regulatory capital requirements for credit risk.  
While  there  is  a  case  for  Asian  regulators  to  perhaps  concentrate  their  Basel  II 
implementation efforts initially on the Standardised Approach, they would eventually like to 
see  their  banks,  those  large  ones  in  particular,  adopt  the  IRB  Approach  over  time  as 
adopting  the  IRB  Approach  can  substantially  enhance  the  quality  of  risk  management  of 
banks.  Moreover,  Asian  regulators  including  the  HKMA  find  ourselves  in  the  position  of 
playing host to many large and internationally active banking groups that propose to adopt 
the IRB Approach globally, including their operations in our jurisdictions. In consequence, we 
need  to  develop  plans  for  the  adoption  of  the  IRB  Approach  in  our  domestic  banking 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
environment.  In  doing  so,  we  need  to  balance  the  readiness  of  the  industry  and  other 
supervisory priorities versus the desirability of implementation of the IRB Approach. 
On readiness of the industry, we believe that there are three key challenges facing banks in 
Hong Kong and probably other jurisdictions in Asia. First, the adoption of the IRB Approach 
by  banks  does  not  merely  involve  the  use  of  sophisticated  quantitative  tools,  but  also 
corresponding advances in banks’ risk management practices, culture, internal control and 
corporate governance. This is essentially the underlying and overarching principle of the IRB 
and other advanced approaches provided under the Basel II framework. 
The  Basel  II  framework  makes  it  clear  that  a  bank  should  be  allowed  to  provide  its  own 
estimates of the risk components for the calculation of its regulatory capital requirement only 
on the basis of a sound internal control and oversight framework. From our experience, this 
represents the primary challenge for some banks as they may focus only on the quantitative 
aspects of adopting the IRB Approach, without taking necessary account of the qualitative 
aspects. Without a sound internal control and oversight framework, these quantitative tools 
might be employed improperly and generate incorrect information for credit and management 
decisions. As such, the drawbacks brought by the use of sophisticated tools could outweigh 
the benefits. Thus, validation standards for the internal rating systems adopted by banks will 
need  to  place  as  much  emphasis  on  the  qualitative  as  on  the  quantitative  aspects  of 
validation. 
Data issues are another critical challenge facing banks and involve both quality and quantity 
aspects.  On  the  quality  side,  it  appears  that  the  awareness  of  data  integrity  generally 
remains low on the management agenda. Some banks may still have the misconception that 
data  management  only  requires  an  IT  system  to  keep  the  numbers,  and  does  not  require 
senior management attention. In fact senior management need to take the lead in improving 
data quality. Apart from making available the necessary IT infrastructure and resources, this 
includes  establishing  an  appropriate  data  management  program  as  well  as  policies, 
standards and control mechanisms, and from time to time, emphasising the importance of 
data quality to the relevant personnel.  
On  the  quantity  side,  since  the  notions  of  internal  rating  systems  and  the  quantification  of 
credit  risks  remain  relatively  new  to  the  industry,  some  banks  may  have  kept  the  relevant 
default  and  loss  data  only  for  recent  years.  Insufficient  data  consequently  becomes  an 
obstacle  to  the  implementation  of  the  IRB  Approach  by  banks,  in  particular  that  the  data 
collected so far may not be long enough to cover a complete business cycle. As such, the 
stability  of  an  IRB  system  under  different  economic  conditions  cannot  be  meaningfully 
evaluated. The problem is especially consequential in Asia, as economic fluctuations in the 
region have tended to be faster and greater in magnitude than those in more mature banking 
markets. 
The third challenge banks in Asia may face in adopting the IRB Approach is the paucity of 
internal  resources  necessary  for  rating  system  development  and  validation.  Many  banks 
have relied, or intend to rely, on external parties such as consulting firms and model vendors. 
Employing  third-party  services  can  be  beneficial  in  respect  of  areas  like  professional 
expertise, knowledge transfer, the utilisation of a more comprehensive data set and assuring 
independence  in  the  validation  process.  However,  over-reliance  on  external  parties  does 
carry certain risks. One example is that banks may not have the internal expertise to assess 
the quality of the rating systems delivered by model vendors. 
And it is not just the banks that face resource issues, it is the supervisors as well. In common 
with  supervisors  in  the  more  developed  markets,  we  face  the  challenge  of  limited  internal 
resources and expertise with which to implement the IRB Approach. Moreover, banks and 
supervisors are often competing between themselves for the relevant expertise. In addition, 
the  support  to  supervisors  in  Asia  from  external  parties,  such  as  academia,  vendors, 
consulting firms and rating agencies, is more limited than in the developed markets. Finally, 
both banks and supervisors face a very steep learning curve in familiarising themselves with 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
the basic concepts and techniques on which the IRB Approach relies, and need to become 
more conversant with these types of risk management technique. 
A  particularly  important  issue  to  consider  that  is  highly  relevant  to  today’s  event  is  the 
standards that bank supervisors will apply in deciding whether or not to approve a bank to 
use the IRB Approach. To ensure that the capital charges computed by the IRB systems are 
sufficient  for  banks  to  withstand  the  credit  risks  they  have  incurred  and  to  absorb  the 
potential losses resulting from borrower defaults, the estimates of the risk components must 
be accurate in capturing the relevant aspects of risk. As a consequence, validation of banks’ 
estimates of the risk components, and the underlying internal rating systems, is crucial to the 
implementation of the IRB Approach. This is one of the greatest implementation challenges 
confronting bank supervisors in Asia, where the development and understanding of the IRB 
Approach by banks is generally still at an early stage.  
No matter what supervisory approach you take in respect of IRB validation, it is only one of 
the major questions to which we need to find an answer. Banks and their supervisors in Asia 
are  going  to  face  a  variety  of  challenges  ahead  in  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  IRB 
framework. Through today’s outreach event, I hope that there will be stimulating discussions 
on  these  issues  and  that  participants  will  be  able  to  take  away  ideas  that  can  help  them 
make the implementation of the IRB framework in their jurisdictions a success. I also hope 
that the AIGV, the AIG and the Basel Committee can take account of the views of the Asian 
region, and of the particular issues we face.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 3
