Ewart S Williams: Understanding the Heritage and Stabilisation Fund  
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, 
to  The  South  Trinidad  Chamber  of  Commerce  Annual  General  Meeting, 
Port-of-Spain, 20 September 2007. 
 Let me thank the South Chamber for inviting me to speak at your Annual General Meeting. 
As the Chairman indicated, my theme is the Heritage and Stabilization Fund and what I 
would like to do is not only discuss the underpinnings and the specifics of the Fund …. in 
addition  I  see  this  as  the  launch  of  a  communication  initiative  geared  to  convince  the 
stakeholders, like you and the public at large, that this is their Fund over which they should 
show the same interest and vigilance that they exercise over their pensions or their personal 
savings. 
The  public  must  have  an  interest  in  how  much  money  is  placed  in  the  Fund:  how  it  is 
invested  and  what  returns  are  being  generated.  The  HSF  is  a  reserve  for  the  people  of 
Trinidad and Tobago, their children and hopefully their children’s children. 
In  the  economic  literature,  funds  like  our  Heritage  and  Stabilization  Fund  are  called 
Sovereign  Wealth  Funds  and  their  distinguishing  characteristic  is  that  these  are  national 
savings  that  are  invested  actively  with  the  purpose  of  earning  high returns  –  returns  that 
would  provide  an  important  source  of  revenue  to  the  Government  later.  These  sovereign 
funds are different in nature and in purpose from the country’s official reserves. 
Every  country  holds  official  reserves  that  are  managed  by  the  Central  Bank.  However, 
invariably rate of return is not the primary objective for holding reserves. Central Banks hold 
reserves  for  prudential  purposes,  for  example,  for  meeting  government  external  debt 
payments; to finance payments for imports and to be available for intervention in the foreign 
exchange  market,  as  needed.  Countries  like  ours,  that  are  heavily  dependent  on  primary 
products,  also  hold  reserves  for  precautionary  purposes  –  so  that  we  could  avoid  any 
disruption to international trade if there is a sudden fall in oil and gas prices. 
Given these objectives, liquidity is perhaps the most important consideration in the foreign 
reserve  management  policy  of  Central  Banks.  Consequently,  central  bank  reserves  are 
invested in short to medium term low risk financial assets. 
Sovereign  wealth  funds  have  assumed  heightened  popularity  in  the  last  few  years,  as 
many emerging countries have seen a phenomenal increase in their international reserve 
holdings. Most of these funds belong to commodity exporting countries that have benefited 
from the increase in the international prices of oil and gas (as in the case of Norway and the 
oil  producing  Arab  countries)  but  you  also  have  Chile  (where  the  commodity  export  is 
copper) and Botswana (where the commodity export is diamonds). 
There  are  a  few  countries  that  are  not  commodity  exporters  that  also  have  sovereign 
wealth  funds.  These  countries  have  accumulated  significant  foreign  exchange  reserves 
from trade surpluses. The most notable of these are Singapore, China, Hong Kong, South 
Korea and Malaysia. 
As you know, Trinidad and Tobago is a commodity exporter, with heavy dependence on oil 
and gas. The energy sector accounts for about 40 percent of GDP; about 90 per cent of 
total exports and close to one-half of total government revenue. 
All of you would, no doubt, recall the first oil shock in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s when 
there was a significant increase in Government revenues consequent of the rise in oil prices. 
Some  of  this  windfall  went  to  finance  the  start-up  of  the  petrochemical  platform,  from 
which  we  are  now  benefiting.  However,  the  increase  in  government  spending  also 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 1
contributed to a rise in the non-energy deficit, from less that 10 percent of non-energy GDP 
to over 40 percent by early 1980s. 
When oil prices collapsed, the end of the oil boom brought about the need for a sharp fiscal 
adjustment and total expenditure had to be reduced from an average of 56 percent of 
non-energy GDP in 1980 – 1985 to 36 percent in the nineties. Output per capita declined 
by about 33 percent between 1981 and 1992, and unemployment rose from 10 percent to 22 
percent from 1987 – 1989. 
Having learnt our lesson, when oil prices started to rise in the late 1990’s, the Government 
established an Interim Revenue Stabilization Fund. Annual contributions were made to the 
Fund since 2000, but it became a formal legal entity, only in March 2007, with Parliament’s 
approval of the Heritage and Stabilization Fund. 
For the record, we now have official reserves of about US$6 billion and by the end of this 
month assets in the Heritage and Stabilization Fund are expected to be close to US$2 
billion. 
The Heritage and Stabilization Fund – is a joint account, firstly, to help deal with boom-bust 
cycles, and secondly to generate savings for future generations. 
The rationale for setting aside funds for stabilization is as follows: (notwithstanding the 
prolonged increase in oil prices since the turn of the current decade), oil and gas prices are 
inherently  volatile  and  even  the  most  optimistic  projections  suggest  that  at  some  time  oil 
prices will revert to a more normal long term equilibrium level. Given our economy’s heavy 
dependence on oil and gas, a sharp fall in prices will affect government revenue and could 
require  a  drastic  cutback  in  government  spending.  By  putting  aside  some  resources  for 
stabilization, the Government would have the ability to cushion the impact on its spending 
and consequently on the level of economic activity. 
The  rationale  for  setting  up  a  savings  fund  is  a  bit  more  complex  and  incorporates 
both  economic  and  ethical  considerations.  It  says  that  natural  resources  are  an 
exhaustible sovereign asset, the benefits of which should be spread over generations. And 
therefore what a savings fund does is to transform the assets under the ground (in our case 
oil and gas) into a diversified portfolio of financial assets, which are managed so as to yield 
a high rate of return, which will flow back into the budget as revenue – not now—but 
when the oil resources have dwindled or have run out. 
Thus, future generations will be benefiting from the oil resources (not in cash transfers), but 
by not having to face expenditure cutbacks because the oil and gas resources would have 
been depleted. Future generations will thus be enjoying the benefits of oil and gas resources 
even when the oil and gas resources are gone. 
The flow of investment income from a commodity fund can go on for a very long time after 
the  oil  resources  are  gone,  if  you  have  built  up  sufficient  assets  and  if  the  country’s 
fiscal position is sustainable over the long term. 
A recent study done by the IMF suggests that, given the expected trend in oil prices over the 
next two decades, the HSF could possibly build up assets of up to US$40 billion by 2020, if 
we could move to a non-energy fiscal deficit of 10 per cent of GDP (we are currently at 
15  per  cent  of  GDP).  And  this  is  a  fairly  conservative  scenario  since  it  assumes  a  rate  of 
return on investment of 4 percent in real terms – which is considered average for sovereign 
funds. 
The HSF Act approved by Parliament in March of this year, is very much consistent with best 
practice legislation for Sovereign Wealth Funds. The legislation provides for clear deposit 
and withdrawal rules; a governance structure that incorporates checks and balances 
and a number of provisions to ensure adequate transparency and accountability. 
In terms of the basic deposit and withdrawal rules, the Act provides: 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2007
  That on the deposit side, a minimum of 60 per cent of the excess between actual 
and budgeted revenues must be credited to the Fund (where actual revenues are 
based on long term projected prices). 
The withdrawal rule allows the Government to tap into the Fund to cover 60 per 
cent  of  revenue  shortfalls,  provided  that  the  shortfall  is  at  least  10  per  cent  of 
budget  revenues.  This  is  a  maximum  entitlement  and  the  Government  could 
elect  to  cover  the  entire  shortfall  through  reductions  in  expenditure.  As 
indicated earlier, there is a cap on the amount of the Fund that could be used for 
stabilization. 
  There are some other significant provisions in the law or in the principles underlying the 
Fund. Thus, for example: 
• 
HSF  deposits  are  to  be  invested  in  foreign  assets  with  a  medium  to  long  term 
focus. 
The Fund cannot be used to directly finance capital expenditure or as collateral for 
government borrowing. 
In principle, the Fund should be invested in assets not directly related to oil and gas 
(so as to avoid contagion). 
The Act comes up for review every five years. 
• 
An appropriate governance structure is critical for the smooth and optimal functioning of the 
Fund. Best practices require that the structure provides a clear division of responsibilities 
and  an  effective  system  of  checks  and  balances  with  investment  decisions  based  on 
professionalism in a clear line structure. 
The  HSF  meets  these  criteria  by  defining  clear  roles  for  the  major  players  –  Minister  of 
Finance, the Board of the HSF, the Central Bank, and the Parliament, which represents 
the people, as the ultimate authority. 
The Minister of Finance is responsible for approving the deposits and withdrawal from the 
Fund. 
The  HSF  Board  decides  on  the  investment  objectives  of  the  Fund  and  approves  the 
Strategic  Asset  Allocation  –  which  in  effect  is  the  definition  of  the  overall  risk-return 
profile  of  the  portfolio.  In  the  final  analysis  the  Board  is  answerable  for  the  overall 
performance of the Fund but it delegates this function to the Central Bank, which is given 
responsibility for the day to day management of the Fund. To fulfill its function the Bank 
will make extensive use of external fund managers which it will help to select and oversee. 
The Bank is also available to give technical advice to the Board as required. 
The Parliament, as representative of the people has the ultimate oversight role of the Fund, 
exercised through review of the annual reports and the audited financial statements. 
The  credibility  of  the  HSF  depends  importantly  on  the  degree  of  transparency  and 
information disclosure that is practiced. The legislation provides for: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The  Norwegian  Petroleum  Fund  is  recognized  as  the  benchmark  for  transparency  and 
disclosure of information. The Norwegian Ministry of Finance reports to Parliament on all 
important  matters  relating  to  the  Fund  such  as  the  size  of  petroleum  revenues;  the 
outlook for fiscal sustainability, any planned changes in investment strategy and the Fund’s 
Quarterly Reporting by the Central Bank to the Board; 
Quarterly and Annual Reporting by the Board to the Minister of Finance; 
Annual Reporting by the Minister of Finance to the Parliament; 
Annual auditing by the Auditor General. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 3
performance, risks and costs. The HSF Board and the Ministry of Finance will need to 
work out the scope of our information and disclosure policy. 
I  would  like  to  dwell  a  bit  more  on  the  concept  of  the  strategic  asset  allocation  and  its 
importance in meeting the objectives of the Fund. 
Let’s  recall  that  unlike  the  official  reserves  administered  by  the  Central  Bank,  a  main 
objective  of  the  HSF  is  to  maximize  the  risk/return  equation  or  put  another  way,  to 
maximize long-term returns at an acceptable level of risk. In the case of our official reserves, 
where  the  main  objectives  are  safety  and  liquidity,  the  Strategic  Asset  Allocation 
emphasizes  money  market  instruments  (including  deposits),  short  to  medium  term 
government securities of G-7 countries and other investment grade securities. 
I am not in a position to say what the Strategic Asset Allocation for the HSF will look like. 
That’s  a  decision  for  the  Board.  What  I  can  say  is  that  typically,  sovereign  wealth  funds 
choose  from  a  wider  range  of  diversified  asset  classes  which  could  include  equities, 
commodities, emerging market stocks and bonds, real estate, and private equity. In practice, 
most funds focus on longer term fixed income securities and equities. In fact, the proportion 
of assets invested in equities is usually considered the main parameter in determining the 
risk assumed by the Fund. 
Norway, which is unquestionably, one of the most successful of sovereign funds, for a long 
time had a strategic asset allocation of 60 per cent fixed income securities and 40 per 
cent equities, before increasing the share of equities to 60 per cent. There is an abundance 
of  evidence  to  suggest  that  over  the  long  term  an  appropriately  diversified  portfolio, 
comprising bonds and equities, could yield significantly higher real returns than one of purely 
fixed income assets. 
Since  the  HSF  Act  was  approved,  much  has  been  done  to  prepare  for  its  active 
implementation. 
Pending the appointment of the HSF Board and its instructions with respect to the investment 
of  the  portfolio,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  authorized  the  maintenance  of  the  Fund  “in 
accordance  with  the  Investment  Guidelines  and  Procedures  used  in  respect  of  the 
Interim  Stabilization  Fund”.  This  meant  maintaining  the  Fund  in  US  dollar  short  term 
deposits, in institutions with high credit ratings. 
You would have seen on yesterday’s newspapers that the HSF Board is now in place. 
The  Bank  is  currently  making  arrangements  for  the  longer-term  management  of  the  Fund. 
We are working with the World Bank to develop the alternative scenarios, as a basis for 
recommending a Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA) to the Board. 
After the SAA is approved, the next step will be to select External Managers. Preparation 
for  this  latter  stage  has  already  begun  with  identification  of  a  broad  group  of  potential 
External  Managers.  The  process  of  engaging  external  managers  can  be  relatively  long, 
largely because of the contract negotiation phase. We are hoping that this could be done in 
six to nine months. 
Due  to  the  length  of  time  that  could  elapse  between  the  approval  of  the  SAA  and  the 
selection and engagement of the external asset managers, the Bank will develop an interim 
investment policy for recommendation to the Board of the HSF. 
Work is well advanced in the preparation of the Instrument of Delegation which is a legal 
contract  that  details  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  Bank  as  it  pertains  to  the 
management of the HSF. 
A public education programme is also being developed to inform and prepare the public 
for the Fund. 
Let  me  end  with  a  few  words  about  the  critical  importance  of  a  public  education  and 
communication programme, for the success and credibility of the HSF. As I said earlier, it is 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2007
important that the public understands what is involved in the HSF in order to get buy-in. For 
example  some  people  need  to  be  convinced  of  the  need  to  put  aside  savings  for  future 
generations rather than to pursue expenditures to meet current needs. 
It  is  important  that  we  counter  mis-information  and  misperceptions  by,  for  example, 
explaining the rationale behind the transfers to the Fund and withdrawals from the Fund, 
when  they  become  necessary.  It  is  important  that  we  explain  the  procedures  behind  the 
selection of external managers so as to underscore transparency and avoid the perception of 
special deals. 
We need to manage expectations in line with market realities, since there are going to be 
questions  about  whether  we  are  taking  too  little  of  too  much  risk,  or  the  Fund  is  earning 
enough. A successful long term investment strategy is not incompatible with one or two years 
of low returns. In such circumstances, open communication could serve to maintain support 
for the Fund and its objectives. 
Let me repeat that this is neither the Government’s Fund nor the Central Bank’s Fund; it is 
the country’s Fund – for you and for your children and perhaps for your children’s children. 
In addition to ensuring that the purpose and the operations of the Fund are well understood, 
it is important that the public feels social ownership for the Fund as this will foster 
vigilance and ensure accountability, transparency and compliance. In the final analysis, 
this is a precondition for the Fund’s success. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 5
