Ignazio Visco: €-coin and the growth outlook for the euro area 
Presentation by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, of the new 
Banca d’Italia-CEPR “Eurocoin” indicator at the CEPR meeting on “After a volatile summer, 
where do we stand? €-coin and the growth outlook for the euro area”, London, 20 September 
2007. 
 Nature and history of the project 
1.  
In the eight years since the launch of the Economic and Monetary Union great efforts have 
been devoted to support the implementation of the common monetary policy. European and 
national statistical institutions, academia and, naturally, the ECB and national central banks 
have all worked to provide more timely and reliable data, new instruments of analysis and a 
deeper knowledge of the euro-area economy. Today, we can base our policy decisions and 
forecasts  on  a  firmer  understanding  of  the  functioning  of  the  euro-area  economy  as  a 
whole.  Thanks  to  the  steady  progress  in  improving  the  timeliness  of  publications  and  the 
reliability of the statistics, our ability to monitor economic developments has also improved.  
The Bank of Italy – building on a long tradition of research in macroeconomic forecasting and 
short-term analysis – contributed actively to the development of innovative tools able to meet 
these new challenges. Soon after the launch of the EMU, Lucrezia Reichlin, now Director of 
Research  at  the  ECB  (and  then  CEPR  program  codirector  for  International  Economics), 
coordinated a pioneering research project at the Bank of Italy which led to the construction of 
a new indicator of macroeconomic conditions in the euro area as a whole. This new indicator 
was called Eurocoin, as it is a “coincident” indicator, i.e. an indicator of current economic 
conditions.  This  was  the  first  real-time  synthetic  indicator  of  the  euro-area  economy  not 
based solely on survey data. Built on innovative statistical methods applied to a large data 
set  comprising  a  variety  of  statistics  related  to  real,  monetary  and  financial  phenomena,  it 
constituted  a  step  forward  with  respect  to  traditional  indices  and  provided  a  timely  and 
broadly  based  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook.  Unlike  other  indicators,  Eurocoin  is 
“linked” to GDP growth: each month it gives a quantitative assessment of the conjunctural 
situation in terms of quarterly GDP growth in the euro area. 
Since  2002  CEPR  has  hosted  the  monthly  releases  of  the  indicator  on  its  website.  The 
indicator  has  been  closely  monitored  ever  since,  and  though  its  overall  performance  was 
satisfactory on the whole, a few problems did emerge. On the basis of this experience and 
further  analytical  work,  after  five  years,  Eurocoin  underwent  a  substantial  overhaul  in  the 
Bank of Italy’s Research Department. After a period of continuous scrutiny and testing, we 
are now ready to publish a new version. This new indicator, €-coin, is what I am presenting 
today. We believe that it is a useful tool for the research community and for policy makers, as 
well as for market participants and watchers (see Figure 1). 
In  my  talk,  I  will  first  briefly  summarize  the  basic  ideas  behind  it.  I  will  then  describe  the 
value added of this indicator, show how €-coin can be used for real-time monitoring of the 
euro-area  economy,  and  compare  its  performance  with  that  of  other  commonly  used 
indices, focussing on the advantages of using a large dataset. Finally, I will briefly discuss 
what  we  can  learn  about  recent  economic  developments  by  looking  at  the  behaviour  of 
€-coin over the last few months.  
As  a  last  remark  I  would  like  to  stress  the  reason  why  I  believe  it  is  important  for  us  to 
share our indicator with market participants and watchers, and the research community at 
large.  Obviously  a  central  bank  is  a  public  institution  and  making  public  the  results  of 
research that uses considerable resources adds to the available information and provides a 
“public  good”.  Furthermore,  as  Luigi  Einaudi,  former  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and 
President  of  the  Italian  Republic,  once  said,  we  need  “to  know  in  order  to  be  able  to 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 1
deliberate”.  We  believe  that  sharing  this  knowledge  helps  in  forming  a  common 
understanding  of  how  our  market  economy  is  performing,  and  in  making  informed 
decisions, at both the policy and the market level.  
Figure 1: The new €-coin indicator 
 €-coin: its value added in monitoring the economy 
2.  
In Figure 1 we can see €-coin and the quarterly GDP growth figures as we now know them 
(notice that they are not available at the time €-coin is produced). 
With respect to the previous version the main improvements of €-coin are: 
i) 
a  more  timely  signal  (at  the  end  of  each  month  we  now  have  an  estimate  of  the 
underlying GDP growth for that month); 
lower volatility (a smoother indicator and therefore easier to interpret); 
a  continuous  monitoring  technique  for  the  data  used  in  the  construction  of  the 
indicator. 
ii) 
iii) 
These improvements are grounded first of all in a reassessment of the dataset, which now 
comprises more timely series, a larger amount of international data and is subject to close 
monitoring every month, to ensure the indicator is always based on the best available data. 
Secondly, a new method of extracting the common relevant information from the data has 
been  used.  This  will  become  clearer  when  I  briefly  describe  the  ideas  underlying  this 
aggregate  indicator,  which  attempts  to  synthesize  the  information  contained  in  about  200 
elementary series.  
For a detailed description of the methods used, the tests conducted and the results obtained, 
I refer to the recent paper by Filippo Altissimo, Riccardo Cristadoro, Mario Forni, Marco Lippi 
and  Giovanni  Veronese,  “New  Eurocoin:  Tracking  economic  growth  in  real  time”  (CEPR, 
Discussion  Paper  No.  5633,  April  2006,  revised  June  2007,  and  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di 
Discussione  No.  631,  June  2007).  Together  with  Lucrezia  Reichlin,  I  wish  to  thank  these 
economists for having devoted so much of their time and knowledge to this project. 
We can conclude this introduction by noting that €-coin appears to track the underlying trend 
cycle movements of GDP growth in the euro area remarkably well. But more on this later.  
2 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Monitoring the economy: GDP 
2.1 
Let us now turn to what inspired and motivated the construction of €-coin. Ideally, we would 
like  to  assess  the  state  of  the  economy  and  its  outlook  using  GDP  growth,  the  most 
comprehensive measure of economic activity. However: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
GDP is published only quarterly and with a rather long delay; 
it is subject to revisions; 
most  importantly,  it  is  affected  by  measurement  errors  and  substantial  short-run 
volatility.  
These  factors  reduce  the  potential  of  GDP  releases  for  gauging  the  current  situation.  In 
fact,  I  would  argue  that  for  short-run  policy  analysis  and  decision  we  are  often  especially 
interested  in  “signal  extraction”,  that  is  in  removing  the  “noise”  from  an  estimate  of  the 
underlying  conditions  of  the  economy.  We  know  that  the  first  quarterly  GDP  releases  are 
always  provisional  and  that  at  times  important  revisions  are  in  order.  And,  at  times,  a 
preliminary but timely and sufficiently robust estimate of what is known as the “trend-cycle” 
component of the aggregate measure may be especially useful.  
2.2    Monitoring the economy: higher frequency data 
Of  course,  we  do  not  rely  solely  on  GDP.  Our economic  outlook  is  constantly  updated  by 
monitoring  the  inflow  of  other  economic  and  financial  data.  Euro-area  and  national  surveys, 
industrial production and demand indicators are all important pieces of this constantly changing 
information set. Compared with GDP, these data are more timely and are available at a higher 
frequency. It is not obvious, though, how to combine potentially contradictory signals coming 
from  so  many  disparate  sources  and  how  to  translate  these  signals  into  a  quantitative 
assessment of the state of the economy such as that provided by GDP growth (see Figure 2). 
At the end of the day, “economy watchers” and forecasters rely on their judgment to perform 
this “weighting task”. 
Figure 2: High frequency indicators 
BIS Review 123/2007 
  3
what is the relationship between monitoring the economy and forecasting? 
what do we mean here by judgment? 
At this point two questions naturally arise 
i) 
ii) 
In  my  opinion,  forecasting  macroeconomic  variables  for  policy  purposes  requires  a 
framework that helps to make causal dynamic relationships explicit. We can perhaps call this 
a “structural” model. What we are doing here is a different kind of forecasting, which can 
perhaps be more properly called “nowcasting”. In fact: 
i) 
Structural models are typically built on quarterly variables (though respected annual 
and monthly “structural” models certainly exist) with a projection horizon of several 
quarters,  often  years.  It  is  an  acknowledged  problem  that  at  the  start  of  the 
forecasting  period  we  have  a  wealth  of  information  that  is  not  (yet)  captured  by 
quarterly  variables,  owing  both  to  the  publication  delays  of  the  national  accounts 
statistics and to the very nature of the information (surveys of consumer confidence, 
producer intentions, market sentiment, stock market prices, export and import data, 
and  so  forth).  A  satisfactory  assessment  of  the  current  state  of  the  economy  is 
therefore not only an important element with which to judge the forecasts but also a 
necessary  ingredient  of  a  forecasting  exercise,  providing  the  best  guess  for  the 
“starting condition”.  
Tools  like  €-coin  are  designed  to  perform  this  task  by  extracting,  through  formal 
quantitative methods, the information contained in a large dataset. Pooling higher 
frequency  information  to  obtain  an  estimate  of  GDP  growth  in  the  current  quarter 
well ahead of official releases can thus be seen as complementary to forecasting. 
By their nature, indicators based on a large set of monthly or weekly data exploit the 
information contained in the cross section. In general, however, they are ill-suited to 
forecasting the variable of interest beyond a very short horizon (i.e. nowcasting, or 
at most, I would say, one quarter ahead). 
ii) 
I believe, with others, that the construction, utilization, evaluation and revision of models for 
economic forecasting and policy making is a complex “organic social process”, a process in 
which subjective judgment often plays an important role. In fact: 
i) 
Judgment is often a catchword for a rather complicated mixture of experience, use 
of  formal  models,  statistical  tests  and  intuition.  Part  of  this  process  can  be  made 
more transparent and more rigorous by applying appropriate statistical techniques.  
Another  part  of  the  process,  though,  is  inherently  subjective  and  remains 
fundamental in deciding which models are really relevant and how results should be 
interpreted. Judgment is also used in the case of €-coin, for instance in selecting 
and  revising  the  set  of  elementary  indicators  or  in  deciding  the  degree  of 
smoothing that the final indicator should have relative to the quarterly GDP figures.  
It  is  important,  however,  in  the  case  we  are  considering  to  communicate  the 
reasoning  behind  the  various  choices  made,  both  at  the  methodological  level  (for 
instance with the help of technical papers), and at the practical level (making use of 
appropriate information channels). This is what is being done and will continue to be 
done in the case of €-coin. 
ii) 
iii) 
Monitoring the economy: €-coin in a nutshell 
2.3  
The  basic  ideas  behind  €-coin  are  straightforward.  What  one  would  like  to  have  is  a 
comprehensive measure of economic activity, like GDP growth, but a measure that is not 
affected by temporary noise, that is promptly available and that is updated at a higher 
frequency (say each month) so that it incorporates relevant news without much delay. This 
is exactly what €-coin delivers. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2007
The starting point is the collection of a wide range of data, such as surveys, bond rates, 
stock  market  prices  or  industrial  production  indices.  The  information  that  is  relevant  to 
estimate GDP growth is then squeezed out of this large set of monthly and daily statistics 
and summarized in a few variables, or “common factors”. Through them we can obtain a 
monthly estimate of the euro-area GDP rate of growth. 
The  method  is  based  on  the  tendency  of  macroeconomic  data  to  move  together  when 
observed  over  a  sufficiently  long  time  span.  This  phenomenon  implies  that,  apart  from 
idiosyncratic vagaries, macroeconomic variables are guided by “common” driving forces or a 
“common” set of few fundamental shocks. These driving forces or shocks can be captured 
–  under  very  mild  assumptions  –  by  a  (small)  set  of  common  factors  computed  in  the 
following way:  
i) 
ii) 
pool all the series; 
find  the  (linear)  combination  that  captures  the  greatest  part  of  the  trend-cycle 
movements of these series; 
regroup the series having “taken out” the first linear combination and search again 
for the best (second) linear combination defined as above, and so on; 
choose the number of common factors that, put together in a proper way, provide a 
sufficient  measure  of  the  underlying  process  characterizing  the  evolution  of 
aggregate demand (for further details, see the paper by Altissimo et al.). 
iii) 
iv) 
This process can be thought of as a sequence of “cleverly” taken weighted averages of the 
data, where each average in the sequence is the one that best explains the co-movement of 
the data at business cycle periodicities given the averages already taken.  
But  how  should  we  read  €-coin?  €-coin  appears  to  be  a  very  good  predictor  of  current 
quarterly economic growth. Its aim, however, is to capture the underlying growth momentum 
in the euro area so that departures of €-coin from actual GDP figures should therefore be 
seen  as  transitory  and  could  be  interpreted  as  an  over-  or  under-estimation  of  actual 
(underlying) growth rates by official GDP data.  
2.4    Monitoring the economy: €-coin in real time 
The task of €-coin is to monitor in real time the euro-area economy. Let’s then see how it 
has performed in the recent past. In doing so, its track record will also be compared with 
that of other well known and widely used indicators. 
Figures 3a-3d are frames taken from a real time animation. In Figure 3a we are positioning 
ourselves  at  the  end  of  2003.  In  the  upper  panel  you  see  the  €-coin  indicator  and  the 
quarterly growth rate of GDP. In the lower panel you see the Ifo business climate, the PMI 
manufacturing  climate,  the  euro-area  industrial  production  index  and,  again,  the  GDP 
quarterly growth rate. 
The  animation  mimics  the  following:  we  repeatedly  ask  ourselves  what  is  our  “current” 
assessment of the true growth momentum in the euro area and month after month we watch 
what would have been the answer given by €-coin and by the other indicators (one should 
bear in mind that €-coin also uses the information contained in these competitors, so we are 
certainly not claiming they are unimportant). 
Since there is no clear way of translating survey data or the IP index movements into q-o-q 
GDP  growth,  they  were  appropriately  rescaled.  I  would like  to  direct  your  attention  to  two 
episodes: 
i) 
ii) 
what happened in 2004 (see Figure 3b); 
the most recent upturn that started in 2005 (see Figure 3c-3d). 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 5
Figure 3a: Situation at the end of 2003 
Figure 3b: Situation at the end of 2004 
  6 
 BIS Review 123/2007
Figure 3c: Situation in summer 2005 
Figure 3d: Situation in February 2007 
 BIS Review 123/2007 
   7
The  case  of  2004  is  particularly  interesting  because  throughout  2004  many  economy 
watchers, basing their judgment on traditional indicators, repeatedly announced a pick-up in 
economic activity in the euro area. As it turned out, the signals derived from such indicators 
were misleading and the recovery in GDP growth did not materialise. Note in particular how 
the  PMI,  that  will  turn  out  to  perform  well  in  the  2005-06  period,  wrongly  signalled  an 
acceleration in activity for the first few months of 2004. As you see, relying on €-coin would 
have suggested a more bearish conclusion.  
In particular, while at any point in time one can always find an indicator that closely follows 
GDP developments, it is not the case that this happens consistently through time for any 
single  (elementary)  indicator.  On the  other  hand  €-coin has  always  performed  remarkably 
well in terms of tracking growth. 
In  the  Spring  of  2005  the  signs  of  a  pick-up  started  to  become  evident  and  this  time  the 
acceleration  in  economic  activity  was  also  signalled  by  €-coin.  As  you  can  see,  though, 
moving  forward  in  2005-06  other  indicators  show  more  episodes  of  what  we  would  call  a 
“false signal” and a tendency either to overshoot or to undershoot GDP. 
On the use of a large dataset 
3. 
One might wonder what is the advantage of basing our judgment and hence our indicator on 
a broad range of statistics. We can answer this question in various ways: as we have seen, 
even focussing just on survey indicators leaves one with the doubt as to which one is the 
most reliable when faced with possibly contradictory signals. But in order to prove the case 
today, I will illustrate two advantages of using many series combined together. 
First,  €-coin  is  an  improvement  on  equally  refined  methods  of  constructing  a  monthly 
indicator  that  relies  on  a  limited  number  of  series.  One  can  try  different  combinations  of 
“cherry  picked”  series  and  propose  a  favourite  index,  the  result  will  not  change:  indicators 
based  on  a  small  set  of  elementary  series,  even  if  they  are  well  known  and  widely  used, 
invariably  produce  much  poorer  results  in  terms  of  smoothness  and  reliability  than  those 
obtained by carefully constructing the “common factors” as is done with €-coin (see Figure 4). 
Figure 4: “Cherry picking” 
 8 
  BIS Review 123/2007
The  second  advantage  of  using  many  series  in  a  formal  way  to  construct  €-coin  is  the 
possibility of assessing in continuous time the impact of the news contained in any of these 
series on the indicator. 
This  can  best  be  seen  by  referring  to  a  real  episode,  such  as,  for  example,  the  recent 
turmoil  in  monetary  and  financial  markets  and  the  surge  in  uncertainty  it  has  produced. 
Since  most  forecasts  are  typically  derived  from  quarterly  macro-econometric  models,  they 
are still necessarily based on information gathered to a very large extent ahead of the recent 
financial crisis. Recent news are typically incorporated in a judgmental way and can usually 
be  reflected  in  the  forecast  only  as  “downside  risks”,  and  even  then  only  rarely  with 
probabilities clearly spelled-out, for instance with the help of a fan-chart. 
With  the information  at hand,  almost  all forecasters  have  suggested  in  the  last  few  weeks 
that the short-term economic outlook for the euro area remains broadly in line with the picture 
we  had  before  the  Summer,  i.e.  the  cyclical  expansion  will  continue  in  the  second  half  of 
2007 at a pace only slightly lower than what was expected in the Spring. However, an issue 
worth  investigating  could  be  whether  the  initial  conditions  underlying  these  projections 
have changed or not, perhaps reflecting effects from the recent financial developments. 
What  information  does  €-coin  contain  in  this  respect?  First  of  all  it  confirms  the  overall 
positive outlook pointing to an underlying growth rate still between 2.5 and 3 per cent for 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The  modest  increase  in  June  and  July,  that  interrupted  a 
weakening trend that started in the first half of the year, was followed in August by a return to 
a lower growth rate. However, the underlying growth is still higher than what was observed 
until the first quarter of 2006.   
To  assess  the  impact  of  the  August  news  on  the  state  of  the  euro-area  economy,  we 
compared the estimate of €-coin obtained at the end of August with an alternative estimate 
obtained assuming that we had no August data concerning survey expectations and financial 
markets,  thus  replacing  the  actual  data  with  their  forecasts,  as  it  is  the  case  for  those 
components of €-coin that are not yet available when the estimate is finalized (at the end of 
the month; see Figure 5).  
Figure 5: The August “surprise” 
 BIS Review 123/2007 
  9
The result shows that with respect to the trends implicit in financial and survey data up to 
July,  the  actual  turnout  in  August  implied  only  a  minor  downward  revision.  It  is  still  too 
early  to  draw  definite  conclusions  but  the  fall  is  very  modest  indeed.  While  it  cannot  be 
excluded that the impact of the August financial turmoil will have only limited repercussions 
on the underlying macroeconomic conditions of the euro area, it should be noted, on the one 
hand, that its effects may take time to be fully passed through the economy and, on the other 
hand, that the turmoil and liquidity strains in the money markets are not over yet. So, a better 
picture will only be gained with the September and later releases of €-coin.  
As for September, a very preliminary estimate that does not yet incorporate the information 
contained in survey data (available only in the second half of the month) points to a further 
moderation of the underlying rate of growth of GDP (see Figure 6). Note however that the 
indicator  still  points  to  an  economic  expansion  close  to  potential  and  above  the  levels 
reached at the beginning of 2005. 
Figure 6: The September “(VERY) preliminary” update 
 The way ahead 
4. 
To conclude, the €-coin indicator will be published at the end of each month on the CEPR 
(eurocoin.cepr.org) and Bank of Italy (eurocoin.bancaditalia.it) websites. The web pages will 
contain  a  graph  and  a  table  with  the  most  recent  releases  of  the  indicator  and  a  short 
comment  on  the  interpretation  of  the  signal  (note  that  past  releases  are  treated  as  “final 
estimates” and will not be updated). When there are interesting events, the indicator will be 
further analysed by breaking it into its main determinants (surveys, financial variables and 
so forth) thus adding some insight in terms of the driving forces of underlying growth. The 
website will also host a page of invited comments, critiques and suggestions. Links will be 
provided to related literature and background papers. 
10 
 BIS Review 123/2007
