Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Shared services and outsourcing in the 
Malaysian financial sector 
Address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at  the  Shared  Services  and  Outsourcing  in  the  Financial  Sector  –  A  Joint  Forum  by  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  and 
the  Multimedia  Development  Corporation,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
13 November 2007. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the inaugural forum on shared services and 
outsourcing  (SSO)  in  the  financial  sector.  This  forum  is  jointly  organised  by  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia and the Multimedia Development Corporation in a cooperative initiative to enhance 
the  significance  of  SSO  in  the  Malaysian  financial  sector.  The  organisation  of  this  event, 
which focuses specially on the financial services industry and its players, is a timely bringing 
together of minds to discuss the issues and concerns faced by financial institutions in SSO.  
The growing significance of the global SSO market suggests to the financial industry players 
that the outsourcing of operations which would otherwise be performed in-house is certainly 
an  idea  worth  exploring.  According  to  a  recent  study  by  Frost  &  Sullivan,  the  global  SSO 
market was estimated to be worth US$930 billion in 2006 and is forecasted to reach a market 
size of US$1,430 billion by end-2009. Further, the banking, financial services and insurance 
sectors had the largest SSO spending in 2006 at an estimate of US$273 billion or almost a 
third of total SSO spending. This is not surprising news, given that major global players in the 
industry such as HSBC, Standard Chartered and Citibank have established SSO centres on 
our  shores.  Regional  players  such  as  Maybank,  CIMB  and  OCBC  have  also  outsourced 
certain operations here to increase their productivity levels. We are happy to have them here 
today to share their experiences and perspectives.  
It would not be presumptuous of me to say that the financial institutions in Malaysia are in an 
enviable  position  where  SSO  is  concerned  in  view  of  Malaysia's  standing  as  a  leading 
destination for the establishment of SSO hubs.  A.T. Kearney ranked Malaysia as the third 
most  attractive  outsourcing  centre  in  their  Global  Services  Location  Index  in  three 
consecutive  reports,  including  this  year's  index.  The  report  states  that  Malaysia  was  a 
"natural  choice"  for  outsourcing  in  view  of  its  low  costs,  modern  infrastructure,  business 
environment and high levels of global integration. Frost & Sullivan ranked Malaysia as the 
fifth most attractive SSO location in 2007 whereby the finance sector was identified as one of 
Malaysia's  niche  areas,  ranking  fourth  in  this  sector.  Key  strengths  that  they  pointed  out 
include infrastructure  quality,  favourable  Government  policies,  political  stability  and cultural 
adaptability  of  skilled  workforce.  Indeed,  the  Multimedia  Development  Corporation  has 
implemented  various  initiatives  in  developing  the  Multimedia  Super  Corridor  or  MSC 
Malaysia as a conducive and attractive environment for outsourcing activities. Leveraging on 
these  competitive  advantages  of  Malaysia  would  seem  to  be  a  natural  progression  for 
financial  players  who  are  looking  to  stay  ahead  of  the  game.  Today's  forum  will  be  an 
opportunity for the sharing of views and experiences, with both local and global perspectives, 
on Malaysia's value propositions and competitive advantages as an ideal SSO destination.  
In  developing  Malaysia's  competitive  advantages,  efforts  to  position  Malaysia  as  an 
international  Islamic  financial  centre  under  the  MIFC  initiative  have  propelled  Malaysia's 
standing  in  the  global  Islamic  finance  sector.  With  a  strong  and  comprehensive  Islamic 
financial  system  supported  by  a  robust  regulatory  regime  and  well  established  legal 
framework already in place, the envisioned landscape is that MIFC will be a centre for the 
offering of Islamic financial products and services in international currencies with a large pool 
of highly skilled Islamic finance expertise. Leveraging on the growing significance of Islamic 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 1
finance  in  Malaysia  as  well  as  globally  and  Malaysia's  international  standing  as  an  SSO 
destination, the development of Malaysia's SSO potential in Islamic finance would harness 
these two strengths in a meaningful manner. Today's forum will explore the possibility of the 
pooling of resources by various Islamic financial institutions in Malaysia to develop a shared 
platform for the outsourcing needs of these stakeholders. The benefits from such an initiative 
would be apparent in terms of achieving economies of scale and the avoidance of duplication 
of resources. Of course, establishing the necessary infrastructure for such an initiative would 
entail considerable commitment to address all the practical issues and avoiding the pitfalls. It 
is hoped that the discussions during the forum will assist in gathering a consensus on the 
viability of such an initiative where efforts and resources involved may be substantial. Indeed, 
it should be noted that there is certainly potential in the development of this shared platform, 
where combined resources and expertise would foster greater efficiency and provide fresh 
impetus  for  a  more  meaningful  and  far-reaching  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  the 
international  stage.  The  prospects  of  such  pioneering  works  with  the  possibility  of 
international appeal, if successful, would certainly be exciting.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
SSO,  at  first  sight,  seems  very  much  the  domain  of  large  global  players  –  where 
opportunities for significant cost arbitrage involved in, say, the relocation of call centres from 
the UK to  Malaysia seem to be very compelling and obvious options. Understandably, the 
issue  of  SSO  is  tread  very  cautiously  by  the  smaller  and  boutique  players  in  the  industry. 
Where  bottom  lines  are  concerned,  an  institution's  Board  may  find  little  appeal  in  the 
proposition  of  outsourcing  where  the  cost-savings  involved  may  seem  minimal.  However, 
there  are  many  rewards  to  be  reaped  by  an  institution's  successful  execution  and 
maintenance of SSO arrangements and a reduction in operating costs may only form part of 
the  picture.  The  outsourcing  of  back  office  operations,  say,  allows  institutions  to  accord 
greater  focus  on  their  core  competencies  and  core  businesses  such  as  the  execution  of 
growth strategies or capturing market share. Back office operations, important as they are, 
can prove distracting in managing a financial institution, where the focus should firmly be on 
the heart of the institution's business. Outsourcing arrangements can lighten the load of such 
a  burden  and  these  operations  can  often  be  performed  more  effectively  and  efficiently  by 
skilled outsourcing providers than if performed in-house.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  essence  of  a  successful  outsourcing  arrangement  rests  on  the  institution's  overall 
strategy. In executing a successful outsourcing strategy, the various risks involved have to 
be recognised and mitigated. Controls and effective oversight on the external parties have to 
be  put  in  place  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  over-reliance  or  loss  of  an  institution's  control. 
Clarity  on  roles  and  responsibilities  is  paramount.  Outsourcing  strategies  which  maximise 
rewards  and  minimise  risks  can  prove  invaluable  to  an  institution  in  enhancing  its 
competitiveness. Therefore, a key to this is to conceptualise the outsourcing approach and 
early  identification  of  the  gains  and  pains  that  may  arise.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  ,  in  our 
efforts towards facilitating the development of stronger and more focussed institutions in the 
financial sector, will endeavour to reconsider any regulatory barriers deemed to be impeding 
the outsourcing arrangements of banking institutions and insurance companies in the future. 
Our only wish is that the outsourcing arrangements should not in any way affect stability in 
the financial system.  
On that note, I wish you a productive and successful forum.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2007
