Frederic S Mishkin: Availability of credit to small businesses 
Testimony by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Small Business, US House of Representatives, 
Washington DC, 7 November 2007. 
 Chairwoman  Velázquez,  Ranking  Member  Chabot,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses. Small businesses, generally 
defined  as  firms  having  fewer  than  500  employees,  are  critical  to  the  health  of  the  U.S. 
economy. For example, small businesses employ more than half of private-sector workers, 
generated  well  over  half  of  net  new  jobs  annually  over  the  past  decade,  and  create  more 
than half of nonfarm business gross domestic product. Moreover, larger firms often begin as 
smaller  firms  that  prosper  and  grow.  If  small  businesses  are  to  continue  to  provide  major 
benefits to the economy, their access to credit is clearly a high priority.  
The first and largest part of my statement will cover the highlights of the Board's most recent 
periodic report to the Congress on the availability of credit to small businesses, which was 
submitted  on  October  26.1  The  second  portion  of  my  testimony  will  address  the  unusual 
stress  imposed  on  credit  markets  in  recent  months  and  how  that  stress  may  affect  small 
businesses. By necessity, the latter remarks are preliminary and subject to an unusually high 
degree of uncertainty. 
Highlights of the 2007 report to the Congress 
As you know, the Board is required by law to report to the Congress every five years on the 
status of small business access to credit. The current report covers the period from mid-2002 
(generally  the  time  of  the  latest  data  in  the  previous  report)  through  June  of  this  year. 
Looking  first  at  an  aggregate  level,  and  using  a  variety  of  data  sources,  our  2007  report 
indicates that, since 2002, financing flows to both small and large firms generally increased 
along with economic activity. Credit conditions during the period were favorable for small and 
large  firms,  and  we  have  no  evidence  that  creditworthy  borrowers  faced  any  substantial 
constraint  on  their  access  to  credit.  The  demand  for  credit  by  small  businesses  generally 
tracked  the  pattern  for  nonfinancial  businesses  overall.  Indicators  of  financing  needs  for 
small  businesses  suggest  that  demand  picked  up  in  2004  from  low  levels  in  2003  but 
moderated in 2006 and early 2007.  
Looking  more  deeply,  our  report  discusses  the  sources  and  types  of  credit  used  by  small 
businesses, the effects of developments such as bank consolidation, increased use of credit 
scoring  and  securitization,  and  the  role  of  community  development  activities  on  the 
availability of credit to small businesses. Moreover, underlying the congressional mandate to 
produce this report is a concern that small firms have more difficulty gaining access to credit 
than  do  large  businesses.  The  source  of  this  concern  may  be  that  lending  to  small 
businesses is generally considered riskier and more costly than lending to larger firms. For 
example, small businesses tend to be much more affected by swings in the economy and 
have a much higher failure rate than larger organizations. 
                                            
1   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007),  Report  to  the  Congress  on  the  Availability  of 
Credit  to  Small  Businesses  (748  KB  PDF),  submitted  to  the  Congress  pursuant  to  section  2227  of  the 
Economic  Growth  and  Regulatory  Paperwork  Reduction  Act  of  1996  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors, 
October). 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
In addition, lenders historically have had difficulty determining the creditworthiness of some 
applicants for small business loans. The high level of diversity across small firms, together 
with their widely varying uses of borrowed funds, has impeded the development of general 
standards for assessing applications for small business loans and has made evaluating such 
loans relatively expensive. Lending to small businesses is further complicated by the fact that 
reliable  information  on  the  creditworthiness  of  a  small  business  is  often  difficult  to  obtain 
because  little,  if  any,  public  information  exists  about  the  performance  of  most  small 
businesses.  Small  businesses  rarely  issue  publicly  traded  equity  or  debt  securities,  and 
many small businesses also lack the detailed balance sheets and other financial information 
used by lenders in making credit decisions. 
Financial  institutions,  especially  commercial  banks,  are  thought  to  have  an  advantage  in 
dealing  with  information  problems.  Through  interactions  with  a  firm  that  uses  its  services, 
including the firm's owners and key employees, a financial institution can obtain information 
about the firm's activities, ownership, financial characteristics, and prospects that is important 
in  deciding  whether  to  extend  credit  and  on  what  terms.  Employing  what  is  often  called 
"relationship finance," banks and other financial intermediaries can use information gathered 
over time through long-term relationships with small businesses and other members of the 
local community to monitor the health of the small businesses to which they lend and to build 
appropriate terms into loan agreements. 
Results from the Board's 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) support the view 
that commercial banks have an advantage in lending to small businesses. The survey data 
show that, although small businesses obtain credit from a wide range of sources, including 
savings  institutions,  credit  unions,  finance  companies,  nonfinancial  firms,  and  individuals 
such as family members or friends, commercial banks are today, as in the past, the leading 
provider. For example, commercial banks supplied traditional credit – credit lines, loans, and 
leases – to slightly more than two-thirds of small businesses that obtained such credit from 
any source. Banks were also the most common source of mortgages and equipment loans, 
and they were second only to finance companies as the source of automobile loans.  
Data from our 2003 survey also indicate that among small businesses, relatively large firms 
(whether  measured  by  sales,  assets,  or  number  of  employees),  and  relatively  older  firms, 
were  more  likely  than  smaller  or  younger  firms  to  use  a  wide  range  of  types  of  credit, 
including credit lines, capital leases, motor vehicle loans, mortgages, and equipment loans. 
The reasons for these differences are unclear; it may be that larger or older firms have more-
complex funding needs, or perhaps lenders are simply more willing to extend credit to larger 
or older firms. 
In  addition  to  traditional  sources  of  credit,  small  businesses  often  use  alternative  sources, 
including  credit  cards,  trade  credit,  and  owner  loans.  Of  the  alternative  sources,  only 
business credit cards registered an appreciable increase in usage between 1998, the year of 
the  Board's  previous  SSBF,  and  2003.  Although  most  small  businesses  used  credit  cards 
and trade credit, the rapid payment of outstanding balances by a large percentage of these 
firms suggests that much of the use of these products was for convenience rather than for 
longer-term financing.  
The  amount  of  credit  that  the  SSBF  and  other  data  sources  indicate  was  used  by  small 
businesses may have been less than the amount those firms desired, especially smaller and 
younger  firms.  According  to  our  survey,  about  20  percent  of  small  businesses  applied  for 
new  credit  between  2000  and  2003,  and  more  than  80  percent  of  those  firms  had  an 
application approved. Relatively larger small businesses (again, whether measured in terms 
of sales, assets, or employees) were more likely than smaller firms to apply for new credit 
and were more likely to have their applications approved. In addition, although the proportion 
of small businesses applying for credit did not vary much by age of the firm, younger firms 
were  more  likely  than  older  ones  to  be  denied  credit.  The  finding  that  both  smaller  and 
younger  firms  have  their  loan  applications  denied  more  frequently  is  consistent  with  the 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
conventional view that these firms are riskier, have shorter credit histories or less collateral to 
pledge as security, and are generally harder for lenders to evaluate because they are less 
transparent. 
Because banks are the leading source of traditional credit to small business, much attention 
has  been  paid  to  developments  in  banking  that  may  influence  credit  availability.  The 
substantial  consolidation  of  the  banking  industry  over  the  past  twenty  years  is  one  such 
development.  Mergers  and  acquisitions  have  dramatically  reduced  the  number  of  banks, 
thereby  increasing  the  concentration  of  industry  assets  and  the  importance  of  large 
institutions.  Although  larger  banks  supply  the  majority  of  bank  loans  to  small  businesses, 
small business loans tend to comprise a smaller proportion of assets at larger banks than at 
smaller  banks.  Hence,  the  changing  structure  of  the  industry  has  raised  concerns  about 
possible reductions in the availability of credit to small businesses. 
Studies that directly analyze the relationship between bank consolidation and the availability 
of credit to small businesses tend to suggest that, although mergers and acquisitions may 
sever existing bank-firm relationships and may introduce some short-term uncertainty, bank 
consolidation overall has not reduced credit availability to small businesses. After a merger, 
any reduction in small business lending by the newly consolidated bank is generally offset by 
an increase at other banks. In addition, the evidence suggests that the thousands of small 
banks still in operation continue to account for a meaningful share of small business lending. 
For  example,  in  2006,  about  three-fourths  of  banks  had  assets  of  $250  million  or  less. 
Although  such  banks  accounted  for  only  5  percent  of  all  banking  assets,  they  held  a 
disproportionately large share of all small loans issued by banks to businesses: 16 percent 
for loans of $1 million or less and 21 percent for loans of $100,000 or less.  
As  was  true  of  our  2002  report,  the  2007  report  emphasizes  the  importance  to  small 
businesses of geographic proximity to their source of credit. For example, our data indicate 
that in 2003 the median distance between a small business and its lender of any type was 11 
miles (4 miles for depository institution lenders); and the lender was located within 30 miles 
of  the  firm's  headquarters  in  66  percent  of  all  small  business  lending  relationships  (in  83 
percent of relationships with depository lenders).  
The  importance  of  local  providers  of  credit  to  small  businesses  underscores  the  need  to 
preserve competitive banking markets at the local level. Despite the significant consolidation 
in the banking and thrift institution industry, the data indicate that competitive conditions in 
the  nation's  local  banking  markets  have  remained  quite  stable.  For  example,  since  2002, 
measures  of  average  market  concentration  in  both  urban  and  rural  banking  markets  have 
either declined slightly or remained the same. In short, the slight reduction in concentration 
seen in local markets in recent years suggests that the availability of small business credit 
from commercial banks and thrifts has not declined.  
Credit scoring has been used for more than thirty years in underwriting consumer loans, but 
it has become common in assessing small business credit applications only since the mid-
1990s.  On  the  one  hand,  the  use  of  credit  scoring  for  small  business  lending  has  raised 
concerns that it may disadvantage firms that find it difficult to qualify for loans on the basis of 
only a formal credit score. On the other hand, credit scoring may increase the availability of 
credit  for  small  businesses  by  improving  the  consistency,  objectivity,  and  speed  of  credit 
evaluations while lowering the cost of gathering relevant information. In addition, it may have 
the  potential  to  increase  a  lender's  ability  to  accurately  predict  loan  performance  and  may 
increase access to capital markets. Evidence to date regarding the effect of credit scoring on 
credit  availability  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  the  use  of  scoring  models  increases  the 
availability of credit to some small businesses. 
Additionally,  because  the  use  of  credit  scoring  models  in  small  business  lending  has  only 
recently become more commonplace, at this time, it is not clear how small business credit-
scoring models perform relative to traditional reviews of such loans, especially during a major 
economic slowdown. However, users of the models generally report that, after their adoption, 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 3
(1) the riskiness of the small business portfolio either remains about the same or declines, 
and (2) the quality of the typical credit decision increases.  
Loans to small businesses operating in low- and moderate-income areas may be influenced 
by the obligations of insured depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act 
(CRA). The CRA does not require that banks lend to small businesses, but it reaffirms that 
federally insured banks and thrifts have continuing and affirmative obligations to help meet 
the  credit  needs  of  all  the  communities  they  serve,  including  low-  and  moderate-income 
neighborhoods.  Although  much  of  the  small  business  lending  of  depository  institutions  in 
such  neighborhoods  cannot  be  directly  attributed  to  the  CRA,  bankers  and  community 
representatives  indicate  that  some  of  it  is  the  result  of  individual  institutions  responding  to 
their  CRA  obligation.  Beyond  conducting  lending  programs  that  are  part  of  their  normal 
operations, banks often develop or work with specially created entities focused on providing 
credit  in  underserved  communities.  Some  of  these  entities  operate  wholly  within  a  bank's 
legal structure, some are partnerships with other service providers, and still others are stand-
alone  organizations  in  which  banks  invest.  These  programs  encourage  credit  and  equity 
capital to flow where it otherwise might not.  
In addition, a number of trends in the community development field either are just beginning 
to influence the delivery of capital to small businesses or have the potential to do so in the 
near future. Some of these trends, such as the proliferation of financial literacy and outreach 
programs, are primarily initiatives of financial services firms themselves. Others result from 
government actions to stimulate lending. Still others involve new hybrid partnerships among 
banks and nonbank entities such as local microloan funds, a subject addressed yesterday by 
Chairman  Bernanke  in  a  speech  in  San  Antonio.  These  trends,  should  they  continue,  are 
likely to result in improved access to credit and capital for small businesses. 
A  final  topic  addressed  in  our  report  is  the  securitization  of  small  business  loans,  a 
development that could substantially influence the availability of credit to small businesses. 
Securitization  offers  potential  benefits  for  lenders,  borrowers,  and  investors.  However,  the 
obstacles to securitizing loans to small businesses are large, especially for loans not backed 
by a guarantee from the Small Business Administration (SBA). As a result, securitization has 
so far remained modest and is unlikely to increase substantially over the foreseeable future. 
Small business finances and recent financial market developments 
Financial  market  conditions  began  to  deteriorate  quite  rapidly  in  the  middle  of  August. 
Although  conditions  have  steadily,  albeit  gradually,  improved  over  recent  weeks,  problems 
could spill over to the  market for small business loans. In recognition of this possibility for 
small  businesses  and  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  the  Federal  Reserve's  policy  actions 
during this period have been aimed both at restoring financial market liquidity and at helping 
offset the effects of tighter credit conditions on the broader economy. 
I will briefly address the possible effects of the recent turmoil on small business access to 
credit. I emphasize that the possible effects are complex, that we do not yet have much hard 
evidence, and that it is far too early to draw any definitive conclusions. Thus, my comments 
should  be  viewed  as  preliminary  and  subject  to  an  unusually  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  I 
assure you, however, that the Federal Reserve is monitoring market conditions closely in an 
effort  to  better  understand  the  combined  effects  of  the  housing  market  slowdown  and 
financial market stresses. 
There are good reasons to believe, and some evidence to suggest, that the recent financial 
market disruptions have not seriously harmed access to credit by small businesses, and if 
the disruptions continue to be resolved in an orderly manner, will be unlikely to do so in the 
future. For example, the current turmoil has centered on securities backed by nonconforming 
residential  real  estate  loans  and  loans  or  other  debts  of  relatively  large  firms;  so-called 
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Because, 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2007
as  I  discussed  earlier,  the  securitization  of  small  business  loans  is  still  quite  modest,  we 
would not expect turmoil in the markets for securitized assets to have a large direct effect on 
small business lending.  
In addition, it is the relatively large banks that are deeply involved in the loan securitization 
markets and that have sometimes chosen to conduct a significant portion of their business 
through  so-called  conduits,  many  of  which  have  contracted  rapidly  in  recent  months.  In 
contrast,  it  is  the  smaller  banks  that  specialize  in  "relationship  finance"  to  small 
businesses.nbsp; These banks are relatively unaffected by disruptions to the securitization 
markets. Thus, once again, we would expect that the direct effect of current events on small 
businesses would be limited. Indeed, the data we have on business lending at small banks 
show that such loans have continued to expand at a fairly robust pace through mid-October. 
Such data and our conversations with bankers suggest that, at least to date, the supply of 
credit to small businesses remains healthy.  
Although these arguments and evidence are encouraging, recent events have nonetheless 
almost surely had some negative effects on small business access to credit, and we cannot 
rule  out  further  effects.  We  know  that  risk  premiums  embedded  in  interest  rates  have 
increased across a wide range of debt instruments, that credit standards have tightened for 
most types of lending, and that investors are continuing to reassess both the risks of and the 
prices  they  are  willing  to  pay  for  assets  they  are  considering  adding  to  their  portfolios. 
Because loan terms, both risk premiums and credit standards, had previously been unusually 
low, in many ways these are welcome and healthy developments that, over the longer term, 
will produce a more efficient and stable financial system. But for many borrowers, including 
some small businesses, these developments also mean that credit now is, and will probably 
continue to be, less available and more expensive than it was a few months ago.  
Recent surveys have found evidence that the market for small business credit has tightened. 
For example, the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on  Bank Lending 
Practices, conducted most recently in October, indicates that banks generally tightened loan 
terms for all types of business borrowers over the previous three months. The most recent 
monthly  survey  of  small  business  conditions  sponsored  by  the  National  Federation  of 
Independent Business (NFIB), conducted in early September, finds that the net percentage 
of small business respondents that had found credit harder to obtain over the previous three 
months and the net percentage that expected credit conditions to tighten over the next three 
months  both  reached  levels  not  seen  since  the  early  1990s.2  Likewise,  the  Duke 
University/CFO Business Outlook survey for September reported that about one-fourth of the 
chief financial officers (CFOs) of small businesses that responded found credit to be more 
costly, or less available, or both following August's financial market turmoil.3  
While these survey data certainly suggest that some tightening has occurred, it is important 
to observe that they also suggest that, at least for now, the effects have generally been quite 
limited. For example, a deeper look at our October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey data 
reveals that the tightening of terms on loans to small businesses was typically less severe 
than  the  tightening  on  loans  to  larger  firms.  Moreover,  our  survey  indicates  that  small 
business loan demand held up rather well between our July and September surveys. In the 
NFIB survey, only a very small fraction of business owners cited the cost and availability of 
credit as their principal business concern. Indeed, in the commentary on its survey results, 
the  NFIB  has  continually  emphasized  that  borrowing  to  finance  normal  production  is  still 
running  smoothly.  In  addition,  both  the  NFIB's  index  of  small  business  optimism  and  the 
fraction of firms in the survey that consider the next three months "a good time to expand" 
have remained at levels similar to those seen in the first half of this year.  
                                            
2   About two-thirds of survey responses were collected before the September 18 policy easing by the FOMC. 
3   The survey was concluded on September 7. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 5
Perhaps one of the most important concerns about the prospects for small business access 
to  credit  is  that  many  small  businesses  use  real  estate  assets  to  secure  their  loans.  For 
example,  data  from  our  2003  SSBF  indicate  that  45  percent  of  the  total  dollar  amount  of 
small  business  loans  outstanding  in  2003  was  collateralized  by  some  type  of  real  estate 
asset. About 37 percent was collateralized by business real estate assets, and 15 percent 
was secured with "personal" real estate.4 Looking forward, a reduction in the value of their 
real  estate  assets  clearly  has  the  potential  to  substantially  affect  the  ability  of  those  small 
businesses to borrow.  
Similarly, declines in the value of real estate assets held by banks and other lenders may 
affect their ability to supply loans, as real estate losses use up capital that could otherwise be 
used for making new loans. In addition, if banks place on their balance sheets some assets 
that they had expected instead to place in conduits or otherwise sell to investors, the move 
could  crowd  out  loans  to  small  businesses  and  other  borrowers.  In  fact,  business  loans 
surged in September and October primarily at large banks and banks affiliated with securities 
firms, institutions that, due to financial market conditions, likely had to retain on their books 
larger-than-expected portions of syndicated loan deals.  
Fortunately, the vast majority of U.S. banks are well capitalized and thus should be able to 
maintain their lending capacity. In addition, lender constraints on small business loans may 
be  mitigated  somewhat  by  loan  guarantees  provided  by  the  SBA.  In  the  past,  following 
declines  in  bank  capital,  the  volume  of  loans  associated  with  SBA  guarantee  programs 
contracted considerably less than the volume of other loans. However, as our report points 
out, SBA guaranteed loans are only a small portion of total small business loans. Thus, the 
possibility remains that reductions in real estate values and a permanent reassessment by 
investors of the risk of various financial market instruments could significantly affect access 
to credit; the Board will be monitoring the economy for signs of such an effect over the next 
few months. 
The interdependencies between small business and household finance are among the most 
interesting  and  least  understood  aspects  of  small  business  access  to  credit.  In  addition  to 
personal real estate assets, other household assets such as automobiles may be used as 
collateral  for  small  business  loans,  and  personal  credit  cards  and  savings  accounts  are 
sometimes used to help finance a small business. For example, our report documents that, in 
2003,  almost  47  percent  of  small  businesses  used  personal  credit  cards  in  the  conduct  of 
their business. Most of this use appears to have been for convenience rather than longer-
term  borrowing.  Nonetheless,  such  data  suggest  that  a  significant  decline  in  the  financial 
condition of households, should it occur, would be likely to affect economic activity through 
its influence on small business finances over and above the more traditional effects of such a 
decline on the aggregate consumption of the household sector. Thus, the interaction of the 
household  and  small  business  sectors  is  another  area  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be 
monitoring over the coming months. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the health of the U.S. economy depends importantly on the vitality of the small 
business sector, and continued access to credit on competitive terms is central to that vitality. 
Our 2007 report to you indicates that, since our 2002 report, small business access to credit 
has  been  robust.  Credit  conditions  have  no  doubt  tightened  since  mid-August,  but  small 
businesses seem generally to have been able to retain access to credit. However, the effects 
of recent events are complex, the data are spotty and mixed, and it is far too early to draw 
                                            
4   The two components sum to more than 45 percent because some loans are collateralized by both business 
and personal real estate. 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2007
any firm conclusions. Moreover, the current level of uncertainty about the future is unusually 
high.  Thus,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  the  effects  of  current 
financial  market  conditions  on  small  business  finances  as  part  of  its  efforts  to  ensure  that 
distress in financial markets does not spill over into the broader economy. More generally, I 
assure  you  that  the  continued  good  health  of  the  small  business  sector  is  an  important 
consideration for the Federal Reserve as we strive to fulfill the dual mandate given us by the 
Congress to promote both price stability and sustainable economic growth. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 7
