Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the international financial 
architecture 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
2007  Salzburg  Seminar  “Challenges  to  the  International  Monetary  System:  Rebalancing 
currencies, institutions, and rules”, Salzburg, 29 September 2007. 
 Introduction:  
I.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  Schloss  Leopoldsbrunn  in 
Salzburg.  Both  the  Schloss  and  the  city  are  places  with  a  lot  of  history  and  famous 
inhabitants!  I  am  sure  that  this  wonderful  location  will  inspire  your  work  over  the  coming 
days. The Salzburg Seminars have long been a forum for discussion of global issues and the 
focus of this particular seminar promises very interesting exchanges of views on very topical 
issues.  As  you  know,  Salzburg  traditionally  has  been  a  facilitator  of  cultural  exchanges 
across European countries and beyond since the 18th century. I am afraid that by its very 
nature, my talk tonight might be less “entertaining” than most other events taking place here 
in this wonderful city.  
I  would  like  to  offer  some  reflections  on  the  various  changes  in  the  set  up  of  the  global 
economic and financial system. Over the last two decades the international community has 
been confronted with tremendous challenges arising from important structural changes in the 
global  system  linked  to  technological  advances  and  trade  and  financial  integration.  During 
this period the international community has learnt critical lessons and has launched profound 
adjustments  to  what  has  been  termed  the  international  financial  architecture  that  is  the 
network  of  institutions  and  fora  with  varying  degrees  of  coordination  at  the  global  or 
sometimes regional level.  
As in other parts of life, the most radical changes to structures and to behaviour are often 
launched during or after times of crisis. This has also been the case at the global level. The 
Asian crisis, which started exactly 10 years ago, is one case in point. The crisis that began in 
summer  of  1997  with  the  fall  of  the  Thai  baht  –  and  by  the  end  of  1997  had  engulfed 
Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines with spill over effects felt in Singapore and 
Hong Kong – did not remain confined to emerging markets but affected the global system. 
Remember that by August 1998, we had the Russian default, followed by the LTCM crisis in 
September the same year.  
I do not want to enter into a discussion of the Asian crisis tonight. It is clear, this crisis was 
not the first one – we had to deal with the debt crisis in the 1980s and witnessed in 1994/5 
how  Tesobonos  in  Mexico  developed  from  a  local  phenomenon  into  an  issue  for  the 
international community. And it was certainly not the last one; the global system had to digest 
crises  in  Turkey  and  Argentina  as  well  as  shocks  in  the  private  sector  such  the  stock 
exchange fall and the bursting of the technology bubble in 2000. But it was the Asian crisis 
that revealed a number of vulnerabilities in national and international financial systems and 
that led to an enormous reform agenda at the international level.  
All these crisis episodes that we were confronted with brought to the fore new insights and 
lessons. They illustrated forcefully the challenges linked to a more globalised world and the 
increasing  importance  of  private  capital  flows.  I  would  like  to  highlight  two  more  general 
lessons which have remained still important today:  
First, one about the interlinkages between countries and the implications for the institutional 
set up. The world has changed dramatically over the past decades. The steady opening up 
of  goods  and  capital  markets  has  led  to  the  growing  integration  of  countries  around  the 
globe.  Integration  is  of  course  a  welcome  development  in  itself  because  more  and  more 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 1
countries participate in the global exchange of goods and services and can benefit from the 
transfer of know how and technologies. As  proven by the  experience of many economies, 
including in the EU, trade openness is the best catching up strategy for developing countries. 
But the contagion effects we have seen from time to time demonstrate the main challenges 
associated with  interdependence. Globalisation  has  put  all  countries around  the globe  into 
one  boat.  Something  that  happens in  one  economy  is  often  not  just  a  local  event  but  can 
have  implications  for  the  global  system.  From  this  fact  it  follows  that  all  economies  which 
have a systemic importance should be involved in discussing and participating in the collegial 
response of the international community as regards issues of global relevance.  
Second, another important lesson from my point of view is the fact that efforts to improve the 
resilience of the global international system are not a static matter for which one can claim a 
lasting  victory  at  one  point  in  time.  The  globalisation  and  catching  up  process  is  far  from 
being completed; likewise, very rapid technological and financial innovations will continue to 
be a feature of the  modern world for dozens of years to come. Thus,  trying to ensure the 
public good of global stability is a constant task that requires continuous scrutiny and effort. 
Each crisis, or episode of significant market correction, is different from the one before. They 
differ in origin, nature and magnitude. Each time new insights are gained about potential root 
causes of crises – often painful ones that go beyond simply lax macroeconomic policies and 
point to a lack of transparency or appropriate oversight.  
These  two  lessons  –  that  is,  the  need  to  involve  all  important  players  and  to  undertake 
continuous effort to prevent crises and ensure global stability – are in  my view the driving 
force  of  all  reform  efforts  at  the  international  level  since  the  1990s,  be  they  focused  on 
frameworks  for  dialogue  and  cooperation  or  on  actual  policy  matters.  I  will  come  back  to 
these two aspects in a short while, but I would first like to highlight some facts which illustrate 
the changing global landscape we are living in, and give cause to reflect on the course and 
stewardship of the global economy. 
Changing landscape  
II.  
There has been a dramatic increase in trade integration over the past two or three decades 
that has simultaneously increased opportunities and vulnerabilities. World trade has grown 
four-fold in real terms since 1980; its share of world GDP has risen from 36 percent to 55 
percent over this period. Part of this impressive development is explained by the integration 
of  the  former  communist  countries  into  the  global  trading  system  in  the  1990s.  Also 
developing Asia progressively dismantled barriers to trade. Over the past two decades, many 
emerging  and  developing  countries  have  been  catching  up  with  advanced  economies  that 
shifted earlier to more open trading regimes.  
Likewise,  financial  globalisation  has  proceeded  at  a  dizzying  pace  over  the  past  two 
decades. Take the sum of countries’ gross external assets and liabilities relative to GDP as a 
proxy for financial integration. Since the creation of the euro in 1999 until 2005, total cross-
border financial assets increased from 87 % of GDP to 124 % in the euro area, and from 80 
% to 90 % in the US ; international liabilities increased in the euro area from 92 % of GDP to 
137% and from 91 % to 110 % of GDP in the US . Advanced economies still continue to be 
the most financially integrated. Yet other regions of the world have also increased their cross 
border  asset  and  liabilities  positions,  albeit  at  a  much  more  moderate  pace.  These 
differences can be explained with different capital control regimes as well as a range of other 
factors, 
financial 
development.  
But globalisation does not only imply the exchange of final goods, services and capital, but 
also outsourcing and off shoring of parts of the production chain. It is probably especially this 
aspect of globalisation that often leads to negative perceptions in the general public since it 
entails  distributional  effects  among  and  within  countries  despite  the  fact  that  technological 
innovations probably played a more important role in that respect.  
institutional  quality  and  domestic 
including  different  degrees  of 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2007
One of the most important changes in the global landscape concerns the role of emerging 
market economies.1 They have become increasingly significant players on the global scene 
and are catching up with advanced countries through continued strong growth. Over the past 
five years, these economies grew at about 7% per annum on average; emerging Asia has 
been  growing  faster,  at  close  to  8%  per  annum.  This  rapid  growth  has  made  emerging 
markets the main engine of world growth. Last year China, India and Russia alone accounted 
for  about  one  half  of  global  growth  (in  PPP  terms).  Likewise,  the  share  of  emerging 
economies  in  world  exports  of  goods  and  services  doubled  between  the  early  1990s  and 
2006, to reach roughly 30%. As mentioned before, their share in financial integration is still 
lagging behind advanced economies, but is constantly improving.  
What  does  the  present  tell  us  about  the  future?  Will  emerging  markets  overtake  those 
countries that are currently the major economies in the world? China has already risen from 
the 9th largest economy in 1980 to become the second largest (in PPP terms). There are 
several studies that try to analyse this question and that deliver interesting results regarding 
the growth prospects of emerging markets over the next decades. According to one study, 
the so-called BRICs, i.e. Brazil, Russia, India and China, could account for over half the size 
of today’s six largest economies in 2025 (at market exchange rates), and by 2039 they could 
be  larger  than  these  countries.2  Similarly,  another  study  concludes  that  seven  emerging 
markets will by 2050 be around 25% larger than the current G7 countries when measured at 
markets exchange rates, or around 75% larger in PPP terms. This contrasts dramatically with 
the situation in 2005 when they were only around 20% the size of the G7 at market exchange 
rates  and  around  75%  of  its  size  in  PPP  terms.  According  to  this  study,  China  will  rank 
number two on the list of largest economies in 2050 (measured at market exchange rates), 
India number three and Brazil number five. Of the current G7 economies, only the US, the 
euro  area  and  Japan  would  remain  among  the  largest  economies,  the  others  would  be 
replaced by emerging market economies.3  
Certainly, any projection is subject to a large degree of uncertainty. This holds even more for 
projections that try to cover very distant horizons; they are inevitably somewhat speculative. 
But such studies might nevertheless provide some indications as to how the global economy 
could  look  like  in  30  or  40  years.  Even  if  you  do  not  take  their  results  at  face  value,  the 
projections  point  to  a  profound  rebalancing  in  the  distribution  of  global  output  if  these 
countries make full use of their potential for growth. In any way, they leave no doubt that the 
prospects  of  emerging  markets  will  be  critical  to  how  the world  economy  evolves  over  the 
next  decades.  The  current  discussions  on  the  appropriate  representation  of  emerging 
markets at the International Monetary Fund show that policy makers  do take seriously the 
current setting and these future prospects.  
Returning to today’s world, let us consider the implications of the emergence of these fast 
growing countries for the euro area. Growth in emerging markets increases the demand for 
those euro area goods and services where the euro area has competitive advantages. And 
since  the  euro  area  is  much  more  open  than  other  major  economies  both  with  respect  to 
                                                 
1   There is no single definition of the group of emerging markets. In line with the article entitled “Financial flows 
to emerging market economies: changing patterns and recent developments” published in the ECB’s Monthly 
Bulletin of Janaury 2005, the term emerging markets here is meant to comprise Russia and Turkey in Europe; 
Argentina,  Brazil,  Chile,  Colombia,  Mexico  and  Venezuela  in  Latin  America;  and  China,  Hong  Kong  SAR, 
India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand in Asia. 
2   See “Dreaming with BRICs: The path to 2050”, Global Economics paper No. 99, Goldman Sachs, 1 October 
2003. 
3   See John Hawksworth, “The world in 2050 – How big will the major emerging market economies get and how 
can  the  OECD  compete?”,  Price  Waterhouse  Coopers,  March  2006.  In  a  speech  on  “The  new  global 
economic  geography”dated  25  August  2006,  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  referred  to  a 
study by Angus Maddison, Evidence to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs, House of Lords, February 
2005. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 3
trade and financial openness the euro area has the potential to take advantage of the new 
opportunities. Our exports and imports of goods and services account for around one fifth of 
GDP, more than in the US or Japan. And indeed, our trade relations with emerging markets 
have strengthened considerably over the time. The share of emerging markets in euro area 
trade has grown from about one third in 1999 to more than 40% today. Moreover, the euro 
area has become a destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) from emerging markets. 
For example, the stock of FDI from the BRIC countries in the euro area tripled in the period 
1999-2005 to reach the still modest amount of €12 billion. Conversely, the amount of euro 
area  FDI  in  emerging  market  economies  also  rose  quickly:  between  1999  and  2005,  the 
stock of outward FDI to the BRICs rose by 111% to €133bn.  
All  in  all,  we  can  only  benefit  from  increasing  our  trade  and  financial  relations  with  these 
countries. While it often entails adjustments to former configurations, one should not forget 
that competition from emerging markets strengthens the incentives for structural reforms in 
our  economies.  These  reforms  have  to  be  undertaken  in  any  case  not  only  to  improve 
efficiency  but  also  to  improve  flexibility  and  resilience  in  a  world  where  different  kind  of 
shocks can hit an economy.  
International rules of the game  
III.  
After  this  quick  snapshot  of  the  changing  global  landscape  I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  the 
implications for the governance of the global system. It is obvious that the systemic changes 
we are observing in the world’s economic and financial system require systematic changes in 
the  policy  framework.  The  rules  of  the  game  need  to  adapt  in  order  to  keep  pace  with 
developments.  This  recognition  is not  new.  It  was  felt  already  in  the  1970s  with the  break 
down of the Bretton Woods system. And it was felt very strongly in the aftermath of the Asian 
crisis ten years ago. At that juncture, the work on improving the international architecture – 
which  had  started  with  the  G7  Ministers  and  Governors  and  the  summit  of  industrialised 
nations taking place after the Mexican crises in 1995 – was considerably stepped up. This 
links me to the two lessons that I outlined at the beginning of this talk, namely the need to 
adapt the institutional set up and to involve all important players in a fruitful policy dialogue 
and the need for continuous efforts to preserve global stability. One can consider the reform 
efforts that have taken place over the years from these two angles. The question is thus what 
changes to the international rules of the game have been introduced over time in terms of 
format  and  substance.  These  two  aspects  are  often  interwoven,  i.e.  institutional  changes 
often go hand in hand with and are aimed at improving the resilience the global system. Yet I 
will try to deal with them one after the other.  
Let’s first consider the changes in terms of format: With the growing importance of emerging 
markets for the global economy – which was felt quite profoundly during and after the Asian 
crisis – it became obvious that new ways had to be found to integrate them better into the 
international policy dialogue. In response, finance ministers and central bank governors from 
22  systemically  important  countries  met  in  April  1998  to  examine  issues  related  to  the 
functioning  of  the  international  financial  system.4  This  “Group  of  22”  became  in  1999  the 
“Group of 20”. Since 1999, the G20 has developed into an important international forum for 
dialogue and consensus-building among systemically important countries, both industrialised 
and emerging. Discussions in the G20 have facilitated consensus on important elements of 
the  international  reform  agenda.  It  has  held  numerous  workshops  to  deepen  the 
understanding of issues of global relevance and has engaged in a process of peer reviews to 
                                                 
4   This grouping consisted of: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, 
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Singpaore, South Africa, Thailand, 
the UK and the US. The heads of the BIS, IMF, OECD and the World Bank, as well as the Chair of the Interim 
Committee (was has been transformed later in the International Monetary and Financial Committee), attended 
as observers. 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2007
promote countries’ implementation of market-based economic systems. In the early years of 
its  existence,  emphasis  was  placed  on  financial  stability  and  crisis  prevention,  including 
issues such as prudent debt management, domestic financial deepening, and exchange rate 
regimes.  Over  time  however,  the  range  of  topics  on  the  agenda  has  widened,  and  now 
includes issues such as development, energy, climate change. The G20 has also played a 
decisive  role  in  leading  by  example  to  promote  the  wider  compliance  with  standards  and 
codes  in  various  areas  and  was  instrumental  in  the  process  leading  to  the  “Principles  for 
Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets”. At present, the G20 
is also actively involved in the efforts to reform the IMF and the World Bank, especially in the 
current  discussions  on  reforming  the  IMF’s  quota  and  voice  system.  In  my  view,  it  is  the 
composition  and  size  of  the  membership  that  strike  a  good  balance  between  giving  this 
informal  forum  a  rather  high  degree  of  legitimacy  while  at  the  same  time  also  allowing  for 
frank dialogue between the members.  
Frank dialogue is also one of the important aspects of the continued relevance of the G7. 
The  G7/G8  process  is  often  criticised  for  no  longer  reflecting  the  political  and  economic 
realities  of  the  21st  century.  But  the  meetings  of  G7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank 
governors that I have attended over the past 18 years have proven an invaluable forum for 
policy cooperation on macroeconomic policies and when appropriate signals given to foreign 
exchange markets. G7 countries have also recognised the need to involve emerging markets 
in their discussions, and it is now standard practice for finance ministers and governors from 
emerging economies – and at times also from developing countries – to be invited to join the 
discussions of their G7 colleagues.  
A very recent example of a new form of informal cooperation is the Heiligendamm process 
that started at the G8 summit this summer. Here again the G8 acknowledged that there can 
be  no  solution  to  global  challenges  without  active  participation  of  emerging  market 
economies.  At  that  meeting,  along  with  heads  of  state  and  government  of  Brazil,  China, 
India, Mexico and South Africa, all countries committed to embark on a high-level dialogue 
on  a  number  of  global  challenges,  specifically  in  the  fields  of  cross-border  investment, 
research and innovation, energy efficiency, and development.5 Such a process is welcome 
because it provides the chance to listen to different views on global challenges, to build a 
shared understanding and to develop joint proposals to address these challenges.  
Also at the International Monetary Fund there are currently major reform efforts underway in 
the context of the medium-term strategy to adjust the institution to a changed environment 
and  new  constellations  of  players.  One  of  these  reforms  –  the  quota  and  voice  reform  I 
already mentioned – concerns the representation of members in the institution and is thus 
considered as crucial for the future governance and the credibility of the Fund. Moreover, the 
introduction  of  multilateral  consultations  last  year  constituted  a  new  approach  to  bring 
together  countries  with  a  shared  responsibility  for  global  issues.  The  first  of  these 
consultations was dedicated to global imbalances and involved the euro area, the US, Japan, 
China and Saudi Arabia. We at the ECB welcomed these discussions as a way to foster the 
implementation  of  the  agreed  strategy  to  address  global  imbalances.  More  related  to 
substance  than  to  procedures,  let  me  also  mention  the  recent  reform  of  the  Fund’s 
framework for surveillance, which should help to strengthen this important part of the IMF’s 
mandate given the current climate of reduced IMF lending.  
Before  moving  on  from  important  changes  in  the  institutional  set-up  of  the  international 
system, I would like to highlight the Financial Stability Forum (FSF). Its creation back in 1999 
was  also  motivated  by  the  Asian  crisis.  The  FSF  is  today  the  only  forum  which  enables 
cross-sectoral cooperation among national and international entities in charge of supervision. 
                                                 
5   The Joint Statement of 8 June 2007 envisages that the discussion will be continud in a structured manner for 
a period of two years untile the G7 summit in 2009 where they will review progress made. The OECD was 
asked to provide a platform for dialogue between the G8 and the five other countries. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 5
Since  it  includes  the  major  financial  centres  and  holds  regular  regional  meetings  involving 
countries  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  as  well  as  in  Latin  America,  it  has  a  particularly  large 
reach out to a number of systemically important countries.  
Let me turn now to the changes in terms of substance which have been introduced since the 
crisis  events  in  the  1990s.  Here  I  have  to  be  selective  because  initiatives  have  been 
undertaken  in  many  areas  to  improve  countries’  macroeconomic  and  financial  sector 
institutions and policies and thus their resilience to crisis. The increased focus on financial 
sector issues, such as in the framework of the FSF or the changes in progress in the IMF to 
place much greater emphasis in surveillance on this matter, is certainly very welcome.  
But I would like to highlight three more general concepts which I consider to be of utmost 
importance. Firstly, greater transparency, both in the public and private sector, has been one 
of  the  major  achievements  since  the  1990s.  Transparency  is  a  precondition  for  well-
functioning  markets  since  it  facilitates  better  risk  management  and  leads  to  strengthened 
market discipline, which in turn has a positive impact on the conduct of macroeconomic and 
structural  policies.  Enhanced  transparency  also  enables  investors  to  better  differentiate 
between economies and thus helps to counter herding behaviour and contagion effects. The 
IMF’s  special  standard  for  dissemination  of  economic  and  financial  data  has  become  a 
widely  recognised  benchmark  to  which  a  large  and  increasing  number  of  countries  have 
subscribed.  Transparency  in  the  private  sector  is  also  crucial  for  well-functioning  global 
financial  markets.  All  in  all,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  considerable  progress  has  been 
achieved  over  the  years.  But  there  are  still  areas  where  there  is  room  for  improvements, 
including  in  the  reporting  to  the  IMF  on  the  currency  composition  of  countries’  foreign 
exchange reserves.  
My second point relates to standards and codes, which have been internationally agreed for 
a wide variety of areas such as macroeconomic and data transparency, banking supervision, 
corporate  governance,  accounting,  payment  and  settlement  systems,  to  name  just  a  few. 
The  IMF  and  the  FSF  have  designated  twelve  of  these  standards  as  being  of  particular 
importance for sound and stable economic and financial systems. Such standards distil and 
set  out  what  is  widely  accepted  as good  practices  or  guidelines  in  a  given  area.  Here  the 
international community had made large strides over the years in the development of new 
standards and their implementation as well as in systematically and often publicly examining 
countries’ compliance. In my view, standard setting and implementation can help to promote 
domestic  and  international  stability.  The  attractiveness  of  this  approach  is  the  fact  that  is 
does not rely solely on rules set and enforced by authorities but also on voluntary standards 
adopted by economic agents of the private sector.  
My  third  and  last  point  is  linked  to  the  previous  one  and  concerns  the  fruitful  dialogue 
between  the  public  and  the  private  sector.  Sometimes  it  might  be  wise  to  have  principles 
voluntarily  agreed  by  the  private  sector  rather  than  aiming  at  a  heavy-handed  public 
approach. One prominent example are the “Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt 
Restructuring in Emerging Markets” I referred to earlier. These Principles have been set up 
at  a  time  when  the  international  community  was  discussing  seriously  the  proposal  for  an 
international  sovereign  debt  restructuring  mechanism  that  was  meant  to  improve  the 
resolution  of  financial  crises.  The  Principles  are  also  aiming  at  this  objective  but  follow  a 
different  route.  Debtor  countries  and  private  investors  agreed  on  best  practices  and 
guidelines for information-sharing, dialogue and close cooperation both in normal times and 
in periods of financial distress. Since I suggested myself such a voluntary code of conduct at 
the  IMF  Annual  Meetings  in  2002,  I  am  very  pleased  to  see  that  the  Principles  are 
increasingly  becoming  an  important  framework  for  cooperative  actions  by  debtors  and 
creditors. These Principles might also set an example for a similar approach adopted in other 
areas,  such  as  the  hedge  fund  industry  –  the  highly  leveraged  institutions  and  other  non 
regulated entities – which should develop as actively as possible voluntary benchmarks for 
good practices, as also recommended by the Financial Stability Forum for hedge funds. 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2007
Concluding remarks  
IV. 
Ladies and gentlemen, over the past two decades we have been witnessing the incredible 
transformations of the global economy, such as impressive technological advances, deeper 
and wider trade and financial integration, and the emergence of powerful economic giants. 
These are all great successes of today’s interlinked world. Success, however, does not come 
without major challenges and we have been confronted with risks to the global economic and 
financial  stability  more  than  once  over  the  past  25  years.  With  each  crisis  or  turbulent 
episode we had to cope with, we have learnt numerous lessons. Amongst the most important 
ones that are very much common to all of these episodes I will mention four: 
First, be as lucid as possible from the outset. It is always a recipe for additional difficulty to 
over-assess the gravity of a particular situation and therefore to over-react. But it is equally 
dangerous to misjudge a particular situation by underestimating its gravity and the risks that 
are at stake. Therefore the quality of the first appreciation, the lucidity of the judgement which 
is worked out at the beginning is always of the essence. And for this judgement to be as just 
and  pertinent  as  possible  my  experience  is  that  you  need  three  ingredients:  an  excellent 
analytical preparation, a confrontation of various views within a college of wise persons, and 
a great deal of experience within that college. Particularly in those hectic circumstances that 
are always complex and multi-dimensional, with a great deal of non-linearities, the textbook 
solution might not be of great use. Experience is of the essence.  
Second,  often  the  lucidity  and  pertinence  of  the  judgement  –  and  depending  on  this 
judgement – is the rapidity of action. In the development of a very complex situation a slight 
change at the start turns out in very significant discrepancies after a certain period of time 
and  these  significant  discrepancies  can  make  all  the  difference  between  a  situation  which 
would  be  under  control  and  a  situation  clearly  out  of  control.  So  time  is  absolutely  of  the 
essence in regaining control of a hectic situation: acting expeditiously is a must.  
Third, whatever the nature of the turbulences, which would hit the global financial system, the 
multiplicity of entities and parties involved, whether private of public makes it necessary to 
agree as much as possible ex-ante on the appropriate ways for handling the situation. From 
that  standpoint  stress-tests  are  extremely  useful.  Also  useful  would  be  the  working  out  of 
voluntary “Principles” stating ex-ante what would be expected from each parties concerned in 
a difficult situation. This working out of voluntary principles has already been done, as I have 
already mentioned, in the domain of the private financing of emerging economies.  
Fourth, and finally, let me mention one constant lesson that we have drawn from all previous 
turbulent episodes: to minimise contagion in all compartments of global finance, whether in 
the  domain  of  sovereign  risks,  or  in  the  financial  markets  of  industrialised  countries, 
transparency appears to be the key principle. In hectic times, when fear dominates, absence 
of  transparency  foster  herd  behaviour  and  amplifies  considerably  the  initial  shock  that 
triggered  the  turbulences.  It  was  one  of  the  main  lessons  we  draw  rightly  from  the  Asian 
crisis.  Transparency  vis-à-vis  investors  and  savers,  transparency  vis-à-vis  surveillance 
authorities,  appears  to  be  the  best  vaccine  against  contagion  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
epidemic.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 7
