Krzysztof Rybiński: Innovations in the financial markets – globalization 
of the infrastructure 
Panel  presentation  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Poland, at the conference “Innovations in the financial markets 2007”, Warsaw, 16 October 
2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Since  I  have  little  time  to  deliver  this  presentation,  I  will  skip  the  introduction  and  the 
anecdote and get straight to the point. The global financial markets have recently reported 
episodes of strong volatility; liquidity was suddenly lost, some markets failed to perform their 
functions  in  an  adequate  manner,  others  ceased  to  operate  altogether.  The  liquidity  and 
solvency  of  some  financial  institutions  were  put  at  risk,  whereas  some  investors  suffered 
loss. Disturbances originated from underestimation of risk by a number of agents on financial 
markets,  ranging  from  subprime  lenders  to  institutions  which  purchased  structured  credit 
facilities offered by banks and their vehicles. A thorough review must be performed with a 
view to examining the role of rating agencies and supervisory authorities, which appear to 
have  underestimated  the  risk  generated  by  the  rapidly  expanding  market  of  asset-backed 
instruments and the market of credit derivatives. It is not yet certain whether the worst stage 
of disruptions is over. In the light of the above, strong asset appreciation, especially visible 
on the emerging markets, should be assessed with caution.  
Thanks to the low exposure of Polish financial institutions to the main infected markets and 
good  economic  conditions  in  Poland,  the  Polish  financial  system  remained  practically 
unaffected by the turbulences which unwound on the global financial markets. Nevertheless, 
some  negative  effects  of  those  turbulences  may  yet  materialize.  In  addition,  two  areas  in 
Poland require a special watch of supervisory institutions: the property market and the equity 
market in view of the risk of an asset bubble developing on those markets. 
The development of asset bubbles on asset markets constitutes a potentially very dangerous 
phenomenon.  As  shown  by  experience  of  many  countries,  shrinking  credit  supply  (credit 
crunch) materialized at commercial banks in the wake of a bubble burst was a strong shock 
for the whole economy.1 In some cases it may lead to a long-term economic recession, like 
the one which Japan experienced in the 90s. Bearing in mind the severe macro- and micro- 
economic  consequences  of  bubble  burst,  we  should  determine  the  appropriate  reaction  of 
public authorities, including the institutions responsible for the economic policies of a country 
and the supervisory authorities. However, the key questions are whether there should be a 
reaction, who should react and when. 
A number of arguments may be quoted for and against undertaking action by central banks 
during a boom phase of a bubble2. I enumerated them in my book on globalization3. On this 
opportunity,  I  wish  to  quote  the  three  premises  which,  according  to  Donald  Kohn4,  the 
Federal Reserve Vice Chairman, are necessary to justify the activities undertaken by central 
banks to pursue this aim: 
                                                 
1   Borio C., Lowe P. Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus, BIS Working Paper, 
No. 114, July 2002. 
2   See references at the end of the speech. 
3   Rybiński K., Globalizacja w trzech odsłonach, Difin, Warszawa 2007. 
4   Kohn  D.,  Remarks  by  Donald  Kohn  at  Monetary  Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice,  An  ECB 
Colloquium held in honor of Ottmar Issing, 16 March 2005. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
   a  central  bank  must  be  able  to  identify  bubbles  on  an  asset  market  in  a  timely 
fashion  with  reasonable  confidence  as  to  the  adequacy  of  the  findings  of  its 
analysis,  
there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check 
a further expansion of speculative activity on a given asset market,  
the  expected  improvement  in  future  economic  performance  must  be  sizeable  and 
bigger  than  expenses  disbursed  by  the  economy  as  a  result  of  conducting  those 
activities. 
The last condition points to the restricted use of interest rates for the purpose of bursting a 
bubble, since the level of interest rates has a bearing not only on decisions taken by entities 
directly engaged in the process of forming a bubble but in fact on all the entities operating in 
the economy. To evoke a vivid picture, the use of interest rates to this end may be compared 
to the use of an atomic weapon in the battlefield – for an atomic bomb makes no distinction 
between friend and foe.  
Donald  Kohn’s  conditions  are  not  easy  to  meet.  Therefore,  the  opinion  now  prevails  that 
supervisory authorities must enhance their macroprudentail activities5. Consequently, one of 
the  conclusions  is  to  take  recourse  to  supervisory  instruments  with  a  view  to  bearing  on 
decisions of those market participants which are primarily responsible for bubble formation 
and  report  to  supervisory  authorities.  By  way  of  illustration,  although  the  supervisory 
authorities do not interact with financial institutions which extended a large part of subprime 
loans  or  with  arbitrage  funds  which  purchased  instruments  backed  on  those  loans,  they 
continue  to  oversee  the  process  of  credit  risk  management  and  liquidity  at  banks.  Banks 
played an important role in the process of spreading the crisis. as investors and providers of 
liquidity to companies – intermediaries in the sale of assets and companies investing in those 
assets, as well as by organizing the securitization of those assets.  
The role of good supervisory policies cannot be underestimated6. First, the negative impact 
of a bubble burst will be less severe both for the economy as well as for financial institutions 
as  such,  provided  that  a  banking  system  is  well  supervised,  the  level  of  exposure  on  this 
market is low, the system has quality assets and the capital stock is adequate to absorb the 
effects  of  the  shock.  Second,  if  the  bubble  expansion  reflects  the  expectations  of 
extraordinary gains, the supervisory policy may substantially diminish the economic benefits 
from and the scale of speculation, e.g. by way of reducing the LTV ratio, restricting the loan 
term or introducing the requirement to provide own contribution for housing loans. Third, the 
supervisory  activities  –  as  an  instrument  preventing  asset  bubble  formation  –  have  the 
advantage of affecting directly one selected group of entities which may play an important 
role  in  bubble  formation.  Compared  to  interest  rates,  those  measures  have  an  effect  of  a 
conventional intelligent bomb, which is both selective and precise.  
Supervisory  activities  pursued  in  order  to  prevent  the  creation  of  an  asset  bubble  may  be 
especially effective if bubbles occur, among others, as a result of the legislation the sector is 
regulated  by.  In  Poland,  this  principle  is  illustrated  by  regulations  which  restrict  the 
investment  policy  of  open  pension  funds  and  the  impact  of  those  regulations  on  the  stock 
                                                 
5   Crockett  A.,  Marrying  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential  dimensions  of  financial  stability,  BIS  speeches, 
September 2000. 
  Borio C., Towards a macro-prudential framework for financial supervision and regulation?, CESifo Economic 
Studies, Vol. 49, No. 2/2003, Summer 2003. 
Tsatsaronis  K.,  Systemic  financial  risk  and  macroprudential  supervision,  article  presented  at  Bocconi 
University  Centennial  Conference  on  risk  and  stability  of  financial  system:  what  roles  for  regulators, 
management and market discipline, 2003. 
 6   Rybiński K., Globalizacja w trzech odsłonach, Difin, Warszawa 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
market.  The  currently  effective  legislation  may  contribute  both  to  aggravating  the  supply-
demand  imbalance  which  supports  the  divergence  of  stock  prices  from  the  fundamentally 
reasonable levels and also towards the growth in the scale and impetus of price adjustments, 
should a bubble burst. 
Open pension funds are one of the main sources of demand on the stock market. From their 
very beginning, they have recorded average monthly inflows of PLN 870 million, the value of 
equities in their portfolio have exceeded PLN 51.5 billion, whereas their share in free float 
has amounted to ca. 22%. The assets held by open pension funds are likely to continue their 
rising path. As estimated, their credit debit balance will stabilize to report a balanced position 
only  in  20317.  In  addition,  the  past  quarters  saw  high  demand  of  investment  funds  for 
equities.  
Meanwhile, despite a large number of debuts, the value of equities introduced to the Warsaw 
Stock  Exchange  is  relatively  low.  By  way  of  illustration,  in  2004,  the  value  of  public  offers 
amounted to PLN 13.2 billion (including PLN 7.9 billion of PKO BP's issue); in 2006 it was 
PLN  4.2  billion,  whereas  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2007  it  was  PLN  6.4  billion.  The 
prevalence of SME sector in the structure of WSE debuts is the factor behind these statistics. 
Consequently, the supply-demand imbalance on the stock market was one of the reasons for 
the  strong  price  rise,  which  may  not  always  be  explained  by  fundamental  factors.  For 
example, the P/E ratio for medium-sized companies included in the mWIG40 index rose from 
9.0 to 34.7 between January 2005 and June 2007, and this growth was even higher in the 
category of smaller companies.  
Excess  concentration  of  investments  on  a  small  number  of  markets  poses  a  particular 
challenge, should an asset bubble develop and burst. This development would be the more 
dangerous that open pension funds cannot hedge their portfolios against the fall in prices. It 
is  worthwhile  to  mention  that  pursuant  to  the  Regulation  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  13 
September 20058, it was anticipated that as from 1 January 2006, open pension funds could 
take recourse to derivatives to provide hedging to their investment portfolios. Regretfully, in 
December 2005, this Regulation was repealed9, and henceforth, as of today, should prices 
go  into  a  significant  decline,  open  pension  funds  have  no  other  instruments  to  hedge  the 
value  of  their  portfolios  but  to  sell  some  of  their  equities  .  Given  a  high  value  of  share 
portfolio, such a sale would significantly aggravate the decline. 
I  believe  that  joint  actions  must  be  undertaken  in  order  to  minimize  the  threats  of  asset 
bubbles  resulting  from  effective  regulations  in  the  sector  of  open  pension  funds,  to  better 
diversify investment portfolios as well as to enhance the sector’s prospective levels of return. 
In order to achieve those goals, we have to commit ourselves to: 
• 
increase  the  limit  on  foreign  investment  and  gradually  modify  some  terms  and 
conditions of using them from the current level of 5% to 30% of assets, 
allow open pension funds to take recourse to derivatives with a view to hedging their 
investment portfolios, 
in a longer perspective, gradually raise the open pension funds’ limit on investment 
in equities from 40% to 60%. 
  Pension funds should invest a large part of their portfolios in equities because the return on 
equities should exceed that of debt instruments over a long horizon. CalPERS, the world’s 
                                                 
7   Rozwój systemu finansowego w Polsce w latach 2002-2003, Narodowy Bank Polski, December 2004, p. 120. 
8   Regulation of 13 September 2005 concerning the deposits of a pension fund, Polish Journal of Laws –  Dz. U., 
No. 186/2005, item 1549). 
9   Regulation of 20 December 2005 repealing the regulation concerning the deposits of a pension fund, (Dz. U. 
No. 260/2005, item 2180). 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
largest pension fund, invests 45% of assets in equities on the US market and 20% in equities 
quoted on foreign markets. In Chile, the structure of pension fund portfolio as of the end of 
2006 was as follows:  
domestic  Treasury  bonds  -13%,  domestic  equities  -17%,  other  domestic  debt  securities 
-22%, foreign equities and certificates of participation in investment funds -32%. In Argentina 
and Peru, the foreign assets accounted for ca. 10% and 14%, respectively, of pension funds 
assets. 
The findings of Fisher Black’s studies indicate that the foreign positions should be hedged 
against exchange rates risk. His famous work shows that the optimal hedge ratio amounts to 
77%  for  investment  in  equities10.  Open  pension  funds  could  manage  their  investment 
portfolios more effectively if they were allowed to invest in derivatives (equities, interest rate 
instruments and currencies), because – not infrequently – transactions costs on derivatives 
are much lower than the costs involved in cash market. By way of illustration, the costs in the 
US  cash  market  are  over  five  times  higher  than  the  costs  in  the  market  of  stock  index 
futures11. Additionally, this step could also contribute to the development of the derivatives 
market in the WSE.  
It is worth remembering too that as early as in 1974, a well-known study by Bruno Solnik12 
provided  an  example  of  American  investors  to  show  that  the  risk  of  investment  portfolio 
composed  of  ca.  20  international  equities  (international  dispersion)  is  twice  lower  as 
compared to the portfolio of domestic equities only.  
Amendments introduced the legal provisions with the aim to extend investment possibilities 
of  open  pension  funds,  to  provide  better  diversification  and  to  decrease  investment  risk 
would fall within the trend currently observed in many countries. All over the world, pension 
funds may invest abroad, taking even recourse to hedging funds to this end13. In most OECD 
Member States, pension funds may hedge the value of investment portfolio on derivatives14.  
Those  changes  depend  on  thorough  restructuring  of  supervision  over  the  open  pension 
funds sector, i.e. the development of a supervision system based on the assessment of risk 
of open pension funds’ portfolio (risk-based supervision). The supervisory institutions should 
not concentrate on analyzing formal restrictions imposed onto open pension funds by law, 
but they should examine the risk of the entire portfolio instead. This development has been 
widely observed also in other supervisory areas (banks, insurance companies). 
By way of recapitulation, let me outline the infrastructure of the European clearing system in 
about 10 years’ time, as prepared by the NBP.  
At first, let me define the main elements of this infrastructure, which include:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
trade platform where transactions on the capital market are performed, 
central counterparties (CCP) performing the clearing functions on the capital market,  
securities  settlement  systems  (central  depositories)  performing  the  depository  and 
settlement functions  
                                                 
10   Black F. (1989), “Universal Hedging: Optimizing Currency Risk and Reward in International Equity Portfolios”, 
Financial Analyst Journal, July-August 1989. 
11   Carhart M. (2003), “Global Tactical Asset Allocation” in Litterman R. (ed) “Modern Investment Management”, 
Goldman Sachs Asset Management, John Wiley and Sons, New Jersey, 2003. 
12   Solnik B. (1974), “Why Not Diversify Internationally Rather Than Domestically?” Financial Analysts Journal. 
30, 4 (July/August 1974). Reprinted in Financial Analysts Journal. 51, 1 (January/February 1995). 
13   Stewart  F.,  Pension  Fund  Investment  in  Hedge  Funds,  OECD  Working  Papers  on  Insurance  and  Private 
Pensions, No. 13. OECD September 2007. 
14   Survey on investment regulations of pension funds, OECD, July 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
payment systems, which process the cash settlement of a transaction,  
4. 
Beyond  doubt,  this  model  is  simplified  a  bit  and  serves  only  as  a  starting  point  for  further 
analysis.  I  would  like  to  confine  it  to  two  elements:  securities  settlement  systems  and 
payment systems.  
Securities  settlement  systems  and  payment  systems  currently  comprise  a  couple  of  large 
systems of international, pan-European or even global character (e.g. CLS) operated either 
by  private  institutions  (Euroclear,  Clearstream,  EURO1  and  STEP2)  or  by  central  banks 
(TARGET) as well as by many domestic and local systems, including central depositories of 
securities and depositories maintained by central banks, clearing houses and other systems, 
e.g. card systems.  
On account of the adopted diverse legal and market solutions, the present system of capital 
market infrastructure cannot be deemed optimal. For many years already, significant action 
has been adopted on the EU level with a view to establishing an efficient and safe European 
market,  where  those  transactions  will  be  executed  with  similar  effectiveness  both  on 
domestic and cross-border levels.  
Those activities, undertaken both by the public authorities and by the market, are aimed at 
achieving:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
It is extremely difficult to predict future developments in each of those domains. Apparently, 
the harmonization and integratory action which I have just mentioned and which has been 
undertaken  recently,  will  lead  to  a  situation  that  can  be  predicted  to  some  extent.  What 
changes will the future bring in comparison to what we have now?  
As  regards  the  securities  settlement  system,  a  new  large  player  is  about  to  appear  in  a 
couple of years. TARGET2-Securities operated by the European Central Bank will integrate 
the settlement function which is now executed by domestic systems of securities settlement. 
It  may  also  be  assumed  that  owing  to  consolidation  processes,  the  number  of  central 
depositories  in  the  EU  will  diminish.  I  would  venture  the  claim  that  in  the  context  of  the 
development  of  TARGET2-Securities  and  CCBM2,  the  number  of  deposits  maintained  at 
central banks is going to decline15.  
As regards the payments systems, in a month, the TARGET2 system will be established to 
take over RTGS systems in individual EU Member States. Furthermore, an additional system 
will be launched soon to offer communication between the domestic clearing houses under 
the auspices of their organization, the EACHA16. Thus, the most effective and best adjusted 
to SEPA standards local clearing houses may become less numerous but they should not 
legal harmonization, 
systemic standardization and harmonization, 
subjective consolidation, 
systemic integration, and 
technical integration.  
                                                 
15   CCBM2  (Collateral  Central  Bank  Management)  is  designed  to  be  a  mechanism  which  allows  the  use  of 
securities  deposited  at  foreign  central  depositories  of  securities  to  collateralize  monetary  policy  operations 
pursued by the Eurosystem and to collateralize mid-day credit in the RTGS system. 
16   EACHA  (European  Automated  Clearing  House  Association),  the  association  established  on  28  September 
to:  
2006,  grouping 
- be a forum for the sharing of information and experience amongst its members and undertake work on the 
issues  of  general  interest  to  the  payment  industry,  in  particular  to  develop  common  standards  for  SEPA 
interbank clearing and settlement. 
representatives  of  20  automated  clearing  houses.  EACHA  aims 
the 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 5
close  down,  contrary  to  the  least  effective  ones  or  those  which  will  not  switch  into  SEPA 
standards in due time.  
I  would  then  put  forward  a  hypothesis  that  harmonization  and  integration  will  lead  to  the 
enhanced  integration  of  the  systems  within  the  area  of  payment  and  settlement  services, 
new  systems  of  pan-European  character  will  develop  or  will  be  launched  but  domestic 
systems  will  not  come  out  of  use  altogether.  They  will  either  adjust  themselves  to  the  all-
European standards or are likely to continue operating also transactions of local or specific 
character, which will not be eligible for processing via the all-European standards.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, despite turmoil on the global financial markets, the financial market in 
Poland  is  developing  very  fast.  However,  there  are  probably  serious  challenges  in  the 
pipeline, related to developments on some markets and to the changing architecture of the 
financial system in Europe. We have to face those challenges so that future generations of 
Poles can benefit from the ever better functioning of the financial market in Poland over the 
decades to come. 
References 
Bernanke  B.,  Asset  price  “bubbles”  and  Monetary  Policy  speech  before  the  New  York 
Charter of National Association for Business Economics, 15 October 2002. 
Bernanke B., Reflections on the Yield Curve and Monetary Policy, Remarks by Chairman B. 
Bernanke Before the Economic Club of New York, 20 March 2006.  
Bernanke B., Gertler M., Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility, [in] New Challenges for 
Monetary  Policy,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming 26-29 August 1999. 
Bernanke  B.,  Gertler  M.  Should  central  banks  respond  to  movements  in  asset  prices?, 
American Economic Review, May 2001. 
Blinder  A.,  Reis  R.,  Understanding  the  Greenspan  standard,  [in]  The  Greenspan  Era: 
Lessons  for  the  Future,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas 
City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming 25-27 August 2005. 
Bordo  M.,  Stock  Market  Crashes,  Productivity,  Boom,  Busts  and  Recessions:  Some 
Historical Evidence, Rutgers University, unpublished manuscript. 
Bordo M. Jeanne O., Boom-Bust in Asset Prices, Economic Instability and Monetary Policy, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 8966, June 2002. 
Borio C., Lowe P., Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus, BIS 
Working Paper, No. 114, July 2002. 
Cecchetti  S.,  What  the  FOMC  Says  and  Does  When  the  Stock  Market  Booms,  article 
presented at the conference held at Reserve Bank of Australia, Asset Prices and Monetary 
Policy, Sidney, 18-19 August 2003. 
Cecchetti  S.,  Genberg  H.,  Lipsky  J.,  Wadhwani  S.,  Asset  Price  and  Central  Bank  Policy, 
Geneva Report on Global Economy. 
Cecchetti  S.,  Measuring  the  Macroeconomic  Risks  Posed  by  Asset  Price  Booms,  NBER 
Working Paper, No. 12542, September 2006. 
Chadha J., Sarno L. Valente G., Monetary Policy Rules, Asset Prices and Exchange Rates, 
IMF Staff Papers, vol. 51, No. 3 International Monetary Fund 2004. 
Filardo A., Monetary Policy, Asset Price Bubbles: calibrating the monetary policy trade-offs, 
BIS Working Paper, No. 155, June 2004. 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2007
Gruen D., Plumb M. Stone A., How Should Monetary Policy React to Asset Price Bubbles?, 
International Journal of Central Banking, December 2005. 
Helbing T., Bayoumi T. Are they in all the same boat: The 2000-1 growth slowdown under 
the G-7 Business Linkage, IMF Working Paper 2003. 
Kohn D., Remarks by Donald Kohn at Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice, 
An ECB Colloquium held in honor of Ottmar Issing, 16 March 2005. 
Miller  M.,  Weller  P.  Zhang  L.,  Moral  Hazard  and  the  US  Stock  Market:  Analyzing  the 
Greenspan Put, Economic Journal 112, 2002. 
IMF,  Asset  Prices  and  Business  Cycle,  World  Economic  Outlook,  Washington  D.C.,  May 
2000. 
IMF, Growth and Institutions, World Economic Outlook, Washington D.C., April 2003. 
Mishkin F, White E., US Stock Market Crashes and their aftermath: implications for monetary 
policy, NBER Working Paper, No. 8922, 2002. 
Posen  A.,  It  Takes  More  Than  Bubble  to  Become  Japan,  [in]  Asset  Price  and  Monetary 
Policy (ed.) A. Richards, Reserve Bank of Australia 2003. 
Posen A., Why Central Banks Should Not Burst Bubbles, Institute of International Economics 
Working Paper WP 06-1, January 2006. 
Roubini  N.,  Why  Central  Banks  Should  Burst  Bubbles?,  NYU  Stearn  School  of  Business 
mimeo, January 2006. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 7
