  Daniel Mminele: Outlook for monetary policy in South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
JP Morgan Investor Seminar, Washington DC, 16 April 2016. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you to JP Morgan for the opportunity to again participate in this seminar, which takes 
place on the margins of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank Spring Meetings. I 
have been requested to give you an update on the monetary policy outlook for South Africa. 
Those of you who joined us last year may recall that I talked about heightened uncertainty 
complicating the conduct of monetary policy. If anything, the environment has become more 
complex for policymaking in both emerging and advanced economies, South Africa being no 
exception. 
Let me start by reiterating the primary mandate of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), 
which is to achieve and maintain price stability in the interest of balanced and sustainable 
economic growth. It should be noted that price stability is pursued within a flexible inflation 
targeting  monetary  policy  framework,  with  the  target  band  for  headline  consumer  price 
inflation being 3 to 6 percent. In practice this implies that the SARB will tolerate temporary 
breaches  of  the  inflation  target  in  the  interest  of  smoothing  out  short-term  fluctuations  in 
economic  growth.  However,  a  persistent  breach  of  the  inflation  target  range  will  require  a 
policy  response  to  achieve  sufficiently  low  inflation  that  promotes  competitiveness  and 
provides  an  enabling  environment  for  sustainable  growth  and  employment  creation,  in 
addition to protecting the purchasing power of the currency. 
Last month, the monetary policy committee (MPC) stated that the upside risks to the inflation 
forecast,  coupled  with  the  protracted  period  of  the  expected  breach  of  the  inflation  target 
range, was the primary motivation for increasing the repo rate by a further 25 basis points to 
7 percent, bringing the cumulative increase to 200 basis points since the beginning of the 
tightening cycle in January 2014. Let me now turn to some of the factors that have and are 
likely to influence the monetary policy outlook. 
Global economic developments 
The  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  that  has  just  been  released  by  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  confirmed  recent  observations  that  the  global  recovery  remains 
weak. I can afford to be brief on some of the details given that the WEO has enjoyed wide 
coverage over the last couple of days. 
Global  growth  is  forecast  to  reach  3.2  percent  in  2016  and  3.5  in  2017,  representing,  yet 
again,  a  downward  revision  to  the  growth  outlook.  The  growth  outlook  for  most  advanced 
countries (AEs) is notably weaker and the same can also be said for the emerging market 
economies (EMEs), with the exception of emerging Asia. 
For some time, the global recovery has been underpinned by the performance in emerging 
markets with the expectation that the global growth momentum will gain traction as the pace 
of  recovery  in  advanced  countries  picked  up.  Unfortunately,  these  expectations  have  not 
been fully realised. Emerging market economies, which currently make up around 58 percent 
of global gross domestic product (GDP), still continue to account for a significant portion of 
world growth. However, the economic performance across emerging markets as a whole is 
uneven  and  generally  weaker.  With  the  exception  of  India,  most  major  emerging  market 
economies have had disappointing growth outcomes as depicted by the recent recessions in 
Brazil and Russia and the slowdown in China. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Of concern, is that the global recovery is not only weaker, but that the deterioration in the 
global environment over the last year has been accompanied by greater downside risks. The 
drop  in  commodity  prices,  uncertainty  in  financial  markets,  volatile  capital  flows,  subdued 
external  demand  and  geopolitical  influences,  coupled  with  the  refugee  crisis,  have  been 
some  of  the  major  headwinds  adversely  impacting  global  economic  developments. 
Unfortunately, these factors will continue to have a bearing on the economic outlook for both 
emerging  market  economies  and  the  global  economy  as  a  whole.  Given  the  globalised 
nature of EMEs – South Africa included – this implies that international influences, although 
of  an  exogenous  nature,  will  form  an  integral  part  of  the  policy  landscape  in  emerging 
economies. 
Global  inflation  pressures  remain  subdued  with  both  current  and  projected  inflation  rates 
below  target  in  most  advanced  economies.  These  developments,  combined  with  below 
potential  growth  have  prompted  expansionary  monetary  policies  in  a  number  of  advanced 
economies, which are very likely to persist over the forecast horizon. In contrast, inflationary 
pressures  have  been  rising  in  a  number  of  emerging  economies,  mainly  on  account  of 
currency  depreciation  rather  than  as  a  result  of  rising  international  price  pressures.  South 
African  inflation  outcomes  have  also  been  subjected  to  more  prominent  exchange  rate 
pressures  recently,  an  issue  I  will  come  back  to  later  on.  So  in  general,  global  inflation 
remains at modest and subdued levels and, with oil prices projected to remain at low levels, 
international cost pressures are unlikely to pose a major risk to inflation outcomes across the 
globe. 
South Africa’s economic outcomes and outlook 
Recent indicators show that real economic growth in South Africa slowed marginally to an 
annualised  rate  of  0,6  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015  from  0,7  percent  in  the  third 
quarter resulting in a growth rate of 1,3 percent for 2015 as a whole. In fact, there has been a 
steady deceleration in South African real GDP growth over the last five years from 3 percent 
in 2011 to 1,5 percent in 2014 and 1,3 percent in 2015. The growth rate in 2015 was the 
lowest in the past 17 years barring the contraction in 2009. 
In  general,  both  domestic  and  external  factors  have  been  responsible  for  the  lacklustre 
performance of the South African economy. Inter alia, these have included, muted domestic 
and  external  demand  conditions,  domestic  supply-side  constraints  (most  notably  electricity 
supply  constraints),  a  decline  in  international  commodity  prices,  and  the  effects  of  the 
drought on agricultural output and prices. Of particular concern is the poor performance of 
the  agricultural  sector  given  its  impact  on  both growth  (output)  and  inflation  (prices).  As a 
result  of  the  worst  drought  in  decades,  this  sector  contracted  in  all  four  quarters  of  2015 
resulting in an annual contraction of 8,4 percent for 2015 as a whole. 
The  decline  in  international  commodity  prices  has  had  a  strong  bearing  on  South  Africa’s 
export and growth outcomes. For 2015 as a whole, the US dollar price of the basket of South 
African  non-gold  export commodities  declined  by  approximately  21,5  percent following  the 
decrease of 9,4 percent in 2014. 
Despite  a  marginal  quarter-on-quarter  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade,  South  Africa’s 
trade deficit widened in the final quarter of 2015. When combined with the larger shortfall on 
the services, income and current transfer account, the deficit on the current account of the 
balance of payments increased to 5,1 percent of GDP in the fourth quarter of 2015 from –
4,3 percent and –3,1 percent in the previous two quarters respectively. 
The SARB has officially identified November 2013 as the upper turning point in the business 
cycle, implying that the South African economy is now officially in a downward phase of the 
business cycle. In addition, subdued business and consumer confidence levels do not augur 
well  for  growth  outcomes  going  forward.  The  SARB’s  most  recent  forecast  shows  GDP 
growth of 0,8 percent for 2016, significantly down from 1,5 percent projected in November 
2015 and 2,9 percent in November 2014. The recently released WEO is more pessimistic, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
forecasting  0,6  percent  growth  for  the  South  African  economy  in  2016  and  1,2  percent  in 
2017.  The  SARB  forecasts  for  2017  have  also  been  revised  down  to  1,4  percent  and 
1,8 percent in 2018. 
The most recent estimates by the SARB indicate that potential output growth of the South 
African economy has declined from 1,9 percent to 1,5 percent for 2016, and from 2,1 percent 
to 1,6 percent for 2017. With lower growth outcomes, the output gap is expected to remain 
negative over the forecast horizon. The policy challenge is to ensure that the economy is not 
trapped in a cycle of persistent low growth. South African policymakers are fully aware that 
we have to avoid the risk of becoming trapped in what Christine Lagarde, the MD of the IMF, 
has termed the “new mediocre”. 
The  budget,  which  was  tabled  in  February,  reinforces  the  need  to  provide  support  to 
economic  growth,  albeit  against  a  background  of  deteriorating  prospects  for  tax  revenue 
collection.  The  budget  sets  out  to  accomplish  this  through  a  path  of  more  rapid  fiscal 
consolidation.  In  the  main,  the  budget  focuses  on  containing  administrative  expenditure 
(most  notably  salaries)  while  maintaining  investment  and  other  core  expenditure  items  at 
levels that will be supportive of economic growth. 
The package of tax measures that have been introduced in the 2016 Budget has also spread 
the additional tax burden over several revenue sources so as to limit the adverse short-term 
impact on growth. As a ratio of GDP, the deficit of national government is projected to narrow 
from 4,2 percent in the 2015/16 fiscal year to 2,9 percent by fiscal 2018/19. It is noteworthy 
that the budget sets out a more rapid adjustment path than what was envisaged in the 2015 
Medium Term Budget Policy Statement in October last year. These projected outcomes are 
commendable in the current circumstances, and if implemented effectively, will contribute to 
dampening inflationary pressures and impact favourably on investor confidence and  South 
Africa’s credit rating metrics. 
South Africa’s inflation outcome and outlook 
The trajectory for the year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index 
(CPI) has increased significantly over the last three months. Consumer inflation measured 
7 percent in February, up from 6,2 percent in January and 5,2 percent in December 2015. On 
a month-to-month basis, headline CPI increased by 1,4 percentage points between January 
2016 and February 2016. Headline CPI inflation for February exceeded both the Reuters and 
Bloomberg  consensus forecast of  6,8  percent for  February  2016,  mainly  as  a  result  of  an 
acceleration in food price inflation. 
Following  sharp  increases  in  agricultural  food  prices  in  earlier  months  as  a  result  of  the 
severe drought conditions, food price inflation increased markedly by 1,8 percentage points 
to 8,8 percent in February 2016 – the highest level since August 2014. Food price inflation at 
the producer level registered 9,0 percent in February, significantly up from the 7,8 percent 
recorded in January. Agricultural food prices on the other hand has also followed a similar 
trend, increasing by 27,2 percent in February as compared to 25,9 percent in January 2016. 
These  increases  are  expected  to  impact  consumer  prices  with  a  lag.  In  addition,  current 
indications are not encouraging for the expected agricultural output for the coming season. 
According to the most recent estimates (February 2016), the agricultural land or area under 
cultivation will be approximately 26 percent smaller than last year. Further, maize which has 
an important direct and indirect impact on overall food inflation will have to be imported in the 
coming year in order to meet the annual domestic and commercial consumption of roughly 
9,6 million tons. The SARB forecasts as at the March MPC meeting – which did not consider 
the February inflation numbers – showed that annual CPI food price inflation was expected to 
peak at 11,6 percent in the final quarter of 2016 as compared to the forecast of 11,3 percent 
at the beginning of 2016. Food price pressures, which have intensified in recent months pose 
a significant upside risk to inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Inflation  is  now  expected  to  average  6,6  percent  and  6,4  percent  in  2016  and  2017, 
compared to the 6,8 percent and 7,0 percent forecasted at the beginning of the year. It is 
expected to peak at 7,3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2016 and only return to within the 
target range during the fourth quarter of 2017. This represents a protracted breach implying 
that underlying pressures remain elevated. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  a  discussion  of  some  of  the  underlying  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy.  The  SARB’s forecast  shows  that  core  inflation  will  breach  the  upper  end  of the 
target  range  in  the  second  quarter  of  2016  for  four  consecutive  quarters,  with  a  peak  at 
6,5 percent  in  the  latter  half  of  2016.  Core  inflation  is  expected  to  average  6,2 percent  in 
2016, and 5,7 percent and 5,2 percent in the next two years, respectively. 
Average inflation expectations have remained undesirably close to the upper target level of 
6 percent despite inflation outcomes at times being close to the midpoint of the target range 
during 2015. Inflation expectations as measured by the Bureau of Economic Research (BER) 
at the University of Stellenbosch at the end of 2015 revealed that average headline inflation 
expectations over the forecast horizon (i.e. one and two years) had shifted above 6 percent. 
More  recently,  the  BER  survey  presents  a  more  mixed  picture.  In  the  survey  conducted 
during  the  first  quarter  of  2016,  the  expectations  of  analysts  increased  significantly,  while 
those  of  business  representatives  and  trade  unions  have  moderated  for  both  years. 
However,  average  expectations  are  unchanged  at  6,2  percent  for  2016  and  2017  while 
inflation  is  expected  to  average  6,0  percent  in  2018.  The  short-term  expectations  of 
economic analysts, as reflected in the Reuters Econometer survey in March, show that the 
median expectation for 2016 and 2017 was 6,4 percent and 6,3 percent respectively, with 
inflation returning to within the target range to average 5,6 percent in 2018. 
In  addition,  market-based  measures  of  expectations  over  the  longer  run  (5  to  10  years) 
indicate that break-even inflation rates remain at elevated levels. More recently, while these 
rates have declined to around 7 percent from 8 percent in December, they are significantly 
above  the  average  level  for  2015  and  the  upper  inflation  target  level.  While  there  is  little 
evidence  of  a  deterioration  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations,  they  are  anchored  at 
elevated levels. So in essence, inflation expectations over the forecast horizon, as well as 
over the longer term, are uncomfortably close to the upper target level and this has been one 
of the factors considered by the MPC at its most recent meeting in March 2016. 
Of  particular  significance  for  monetary  policy  has  been  the  movement  in  the  value  of  the 
rand. There has been a steady depreciation in the currency over the last five years. The rand 
depreciated by approximately 30 percent against the dollar in 2015, reaching historical lows 
in  December  2015  mainly  as  a  result  of  an  adverse  market  reaction  to  domestic  political 
developments associated with changes in the finance ministry. While the rand exchange rate 
has  recovered  from  the  lows  experienced  in  December  2015,  it  remains  volatile  and 
vulnerable  to  domestic  and  external  developments.  While  exchange  rate  pass-through  to 
inflation  has  been  low  in  recent  years,  the  sustained  and  substantial  depreciation  in  the 
currency  was  identified  by  the  MPC  as  a  significant  threat  to  inflation  outcomes  over  the 
forecast horizon. However, the recovery in the exchange rate in recent weeks is welcome, 
and  if  sustained,  will  favourably  influence  the  risk  profile  associated  with  the  inflation 
trajectory over the forecast horizon. 
Conclusion 
Currently,  the  policy  dilemma  is  one  of  trying  to  address  the  deterioration  in  the  inflation 
outlook against the background of a weakening growth outlook. Inflation is currently outside 
the  inflation  target range  and  the  latest forecasts  suggest  it  will  return  to  within  the  target 
band only in late 2017. Inflationary pressures are underpinned by supply-side shocks, mainly 
related to exchange rate and food price movements. Some of the inflation risks previously 
identified  materialised  earlier  and  more 
these 
circumstances, monetary policy cannot afford to be complacent and should strive to manage 
than  anticipated.  Under 
forcefully 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
inflation expectations to ensure that these shocks do not result in second-round impacts and 
a generalised increase in prices. 
The overall monetary policy stance continues to be supportive of the weak economy with the 
necessary policy tightening having proceeded at a moderate pace, showing sensitivity for the 
weak  growth  environment  while  seeking  to  counter  mounting  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy.  It  is,  however,  worth  reiterating  that  over  the  long  run  South  Africa’s  growth 
prospects are best served by keeping inflation within the target range, and not by looking to 
exploit a temporary trade-off between growth and inflation. In these times of uncertainty and 
volatility,  the  SARB  will  remain  focused  on  its  mandate  and  continue  to  be  a  beacon  of 
stability by implementing its policy framework in a forward-looking, consistent, transparent, 
and as far as possible, predictable manner. 
Thank you. 
References 
South African Reserve Bank. 2016. Quarterly Bulletin, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
March 2016. 
South African Reserve Bank. 2016. Monetary Policy Review, South African Reserve Bank, 
Pretoria, April 2016. 
International Monetary Fund, 2016. World Economic Outlook, IMF, Washington. April 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
