  Stephen S Poloz: A new balance point – global trade, productivity and 
economic growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Investment 
Industry Association of Canada and Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, 
New York City, 26 April 2016. 
 I would like to thank Bob Fay and Louis Morel for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
The year 2016 got off to a rough start, with plenty of financial market volatility. Of course, 
there is no shortage of fundamental issues to worry about: another downgrade to the outlook 
for  global  growth,  uncertainty  about  the  economic  transition  in  China,  the  pace  of 
normalization in the United States, worries about Europe, worries about Japan, just to cite a 
few. 
Financial markets have a love-hate relationship with volatility, and central bankers usually try 
to see through it all. But one worry I hear a lot these days hits pretty close to home – the idea 
that monetary policy just isn’t working anymore. That’s one myth I’d like to dispel right off the 
top. 
The fact is that policy actions – both monetary and fiscal – taken in the wake of the global 
financial crisis prevented what would have been a second Great Depression. But many of the 
negative forces that were acting then are still acting now. That’s why ultra-low interest rates 
are not causing rapid growth and inflation. 
If you think monetary policy is not working, ask yourself what would happen if interest rates 
suddenly returned to 3 or 4 per cent. Most  would agree that such a move  would trigger a 
recession. This is just another way of saying that severe headwinds are still acting on our 
economies, years after the crisis, and low interest rates are keeping them at bay. 
It’s  a  bit  like  riding  a  bicycle  up  a  steep  hill.  Your  progress  may  be  slow,  but  that  doesn’t 
mean your legs aren’t working hard or that your bicycle is broken. Monetary medicine hasn’t 
cured everything, but it is working, and it has surely saved us from the worst. 
Still,  as  central  bankers,  we  need  to  take  market  anxiety,  and  the  volatility  it  creates, 
seriously, regardless of the source. Although volatility can go both ways, “market volatility” is 
usually code for “market declines,” which can erode consumer and business confidence and 
cause a weakening in economic fundamentals. 
So,  what  I  would  like  to  do  today  is  address  another  current  source  of anxiety  in  financial 
markets  –  the  striking  weakness  of  international  trade.  After  all,  international  trade  is  the 
lifeblood of the global economy. Firms, consumers and investors alike all rely on it to keep 
the economy growing, create and sustain jobs and deliver investment returns. 
The exchange of goods and services has been happening as long as people have been able 
to  produce  more  than  they  needed  to  survive,  leaving  them  free  to  follow  other  pursuits. 
Expanding exchange into the international arena is the next logical step, and that is exactly 
how global history has unfolded. 
Trade  is  a  grand  facilitator  that  permits  people  and  firms  to  specialize  and  innovate.  The 
resulting improvement in living standards continues until trade reaches a balance point in the 
economy where all advantages have been exploited. That balance holds until circumstances 
change and people react to new opportunities. 
Given the central importance of trade, it’s not surprising that investors are worried about what 
the  data  show.  For  roughly  20  years  before  the  financial  crisis,  global  trade  had  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  expanding by more than 7 per cent a year – about twice as fast as the world economy. Trade 
collapsed in the wake of the crisis, but rebounded sharply in 2010. Since then, though, trade 
growth has again slowed dramatically, trailing even the tepid pace of global GDP growth. 
What  is  behind  this  slump  in  trade?  Has  the  link  between  trade  and  economic  growth 
changed?  Is  the  trade  slowdown  a  warning  of  another  global  recession?  And,  if  trade  is 
central  to  the  productivity  and  efficiency  of  companies,  what  does  the  slowdown  in  trade 
mean for productivity growth? 
I hope to shed some light on these issues today, and help everyone better understand the 
forces that are at work. 
investment.  Throughout 
Explaining slow trade growth 
Let’s  dig  into  the  data  a  little.  The  post-crisis  slump  in  international  trade  was  initially 
concentrated  among  advanced  economies,  particularly  in  Europe.  More  recently,  the  trade 
slowdown has been centred in the emerging markets of Asia, including China. This has led 
many  investors  to  link  weak  trade  to  the  slowdown  in  China,  and  therefore  in  the  global 
economy. 
Recent work at the Bank of Canada and elsewhere shows that about half of the slowdown in 
trade growth among advanced economies in the post-crisis period can be explained by weak 
economic  activity,  especially  sluggish  business 
this  period, 
companies  have  been  dealing  with  high  levels  of  uncertainty  about  the  prospects  for  the 
global  economy,  in  some  cases  because  of  aggressive  deleveraging.  This  has  held  back 
investment  and,  in  turn,  contributed  to  soft  trade.  Investment  spending  involves  capital 
equipment, with inputs from many countries, and therefore is very trade-intensive. So when 
economic growth slows because of weak investment, trade slows disproportionately. 
While  advanced  economies  were  dealing  with  the  worst  of  the  crisis,  China’s  economy 
continued to expand. This supported demand for commodities, thereby keeping a portion of 
international  trade  flows  moving.  Higher  prices  for  commodities  also  prompted  commodity 
producers to make big investments and ramp up supply. 
Ultimately,  though,  growth  in  China  began  to  moderate  to  a  more  sustainable  pace.  More 
importantly,  the  Chinese  economy  has  begun  to  shift  away  from  investment-driven  growth 
toward consumption, especially of services. Quite simply, this has meant less international 
trade. Even so, China’s imports of many commodities continue to grow at double-digit rates. 
So,  we  have  reason  to  expect  global  trade  to  grow  more  slowly  than  in  the  past:  first, 
because global investment spending is in a lull, and second, because China’s economy is 
restructuring  toward  more  domestic  consumption  and  less  trade.  We  can  certainly  expect 
global  trade  to  pick  up  when  the  world  economy  gets  back  onto  a  self-sustaining  growth 
track,  with  stronger  business  investment.  Still,  as  I  just  noted,  cyclical  factors  can  explain 
only about half of the trade slowdown, so we have more explaining to do. 
Indeed, I think we need to step back and consider the possibility that the rapid pace of trade 
growth that prevailed for the two decades before the crisis was the exception, and not the 
rule. Why would I say that? What we saw during the 1990s and 2000s was the result of the 
natural incentive to use trade to increase specialization, in reaction to reduced trade barriers 
and major advances in communication and transportation technology. 
During those years, countries formed regional trading blocs through arrangements such as 
the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  and  the  European  Union.  Previously  closed 
economies, such as China, became more engaged by joining the World Trade Organization 
(WTO). 
This combination of elements gave the natural incentive to trade a great deal more room to 
grow. It paved the way for companies to build global supply chains – the “integrative trade 
model.”  A  factory  that  made  a  product  no  longer  needed  to  be  next  door  to  the  product’s 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  designers. Firms could now exploit their comparative advantage by specializing, not just in 
one  particular  good  or  service,  but  in  one  part  of  a  good  or  service.  The  result  was  an 
explosion of specialization as markets became global and companies became more efficient. 
As  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics  put  it  in  its  recent  persuasive  report 
Reality Check for the Global Economy, “trade boomed during the 1990s and early 2000s in 
part because intermediate goods began globetrotting.” 
However, any trend that goes on for 15 or 20 years becomes ingrained in our expectations. 
We should have realized all along that this process of integration simply could not continue at 
the same pace forever. At some point, trade would reach a new balance point in the global 
economy  where  firms  had  built  optimal  supply  chains  that  crossed  international  borders, 
slowing the integration process, at least for the present. 
Yes, there are other structural reasons you can point to for the deceleration in global trade. A 
troubling  number  of  protectionist  measures  have  been  put  in  place  since  the  crisis,  for 
example. But I believe that the most important structural factor behind the slowdown in trade 
growth is that the big opportunities for increased international integration have been largely 
exploited. China can join the WTO only once. That’s not to say that further integration waves 
won’t  happen  –  I  certainly  hope  they  will.  But  if  global  trade  has  reached  a  new  balance 
point, we should not fret that global export growth hasn’t recovered to pre-crisis levels. 
The link between trade and productivity 
Even so, we need to think about what this assessment of the state of global trade means for 
productivity.  Productivity  matters  to  all  of  us  because  its  growth,  along  with  the  growth  of 
labour,  determines  the  potential  growth  rate  of  an  economy.  We  already  know  that 
demographic forces are leading to slower labour input growth in most advanced economies. 
Productivity growth is also slowing. This combination points to lower global economic growth 
in the future. 
And there’s more. The most important input into the equilibrium real rate of interest – what 
economists  refer  to  as  “the  neutral  rate”  –  is  the  underlying  growth  in  economic  potential. 
Investors are only beginning to come to grips with the implications of this downward drift in 
the neutral rate of interest and what it means for long-term investment returns. 
Obviously,  it  matters  a  great  deal  whether  productivity  growth  is  likely  to  remain  low  or 
recover as the world economy gains traction, and that depends on how you explain slowing 
productivity growth. 
Some have said that productivity growth is slow today because most of the truly important 
inventions happened years ago, and today’s technological progress is more incremental. But 
I  think  a  more  natural  place  to  look  is  at  international  trade,  because  companies  that  use 
trade  to  increase  specialization  also  increase  their  productivity.  And  if  that  process  has 
reached  a  natural  limit,  at  least  for  now,  then  perhaps  that  also  limits  future  productivity 
gains. 
A  quick  comparison  of  experiences  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  illustrates  my  point. 
Let’s look at US and Canadian manufacturing over the past 60 years. In 1955, roughly one-
third of the workforce in both countries was employed in manufacturing. As has been  well 
documented, these shares have been declining, as they have in all advanced economies, as 
companies  built  global  supply  chains  and  shifted  activities  to  places  that  can  produce  the 
same goods at a lower cost. Last year, the share of the workforce involved in manufacturing 
was below 10 per cent in both countries, with the US figure a bit lower than the Canadian. 
Of course, today’s factories are much more productive than those in 1955. US manufacturing 
is almost seven times more productive than it was 60 years ago, while Canadian factories 
are roughly five times more productive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Those are both big numbers, but what can explain the difference? The relative size of our 
economies may be one factor, since there are clearly more opportunities for economies of 
scale and scope in the larger US economy. But also consider this: over the same 60-year 
period, the importance of international trade to the US economy more than tripled, while the 
importance of trade for Canada only doubled. Here, I am measuring the importance of trade 
by looking at total trade – exports plus imports – as a share of GDP. 
One explanation for this difference is that Canada has always been dependent on trade. We 
were founded on a resource-export model, and since trade started out being very important, 
there is less room for its importance to grow. But, in my opinion, the basic insight here is that 
US  companies  pursued  globalization  and  offshoring  more  than  Canadian  companies  did, 
boosting the importance of trade to the US economy more than was done in Canada. When 
a  company  procures  one  slice  of  its  value  chain  offshore,  it  does  so  to  reduce  costs. The 
result  is  that  the  average  productivity  of  the  domestic  operation  goes  up.  This  isn’t  a 
productivity miracle; it’s simply arithmetic. 
US  firms  are  more  likely  to  be  larger  than  Canadian  firms. That  means  they  tend  to  have 
more  outsourcing  opportunities.  Smaller  Canadian  firms  are  more  likely  to  be  part  of  the 
global  supply  chain  of  a  multinational  firm  and  have  fewer  opportunities  to  build  an 
integrative-trade supply chain. And, of course, if you are in a resource-extraction business, 
there may be few opportunities to outsource. 
Ultimately, the integrative trade model is a powerful force for advancing living standards. We 
can see evidence of it in action everywhere. Most of us have examples in the mobile phones 
we are carrying in our pockets right now. It’s true, of course, that the globalization of supply 
chains has required economic adjustments. These adjustments can be painful for individuals, 
and it is incumbent on policy-makers to help buffer the transition by ensuring adequate safety 
nets for workers and facilitating retraining and relocation. But the benefits of integrative trade 
shouldn’t  be  ignored.  It  has  meant  increasing  incomes  for  economies.  It  has  made  many 
products  much  more  widely  accessible  to  more  people.  And  it  has  meant  continued  job 
growth at home. 
Implications and alternatives 
My  argument  is  that  a  significant  part  of  the  strong  productivity  performance  in  the  two 
decades before the crisis was due to globalization, and that the globalization process may 
have  brought  trade  in  the  global  economy  to  a new  balancing  point.  Understanding this  is 
one thing; the question is what can be done about it. 
I see at least three reasons to hope for future progress. The first is that a lot of productivity 
growth  comes  not  from  existing  firms,  who  tend  to  be  incremental  about  it,  but  from  new 
firms. A new firm with a new product or service tends to see giant leaps in productivity as it 
goes  from  being  a  start-up  to  the  “hockey  stick”  growth  phase.  A  firm  only  makes  that 
transition once, but an economy can reap the benefit over and over if there is a strong trend 
in new firm creation. 
An  expanding  economy  generally  sees  a  pretty  steady  growth  in  the  population  of 
companies. Under the surface, there is a steady rate of firm exit too. This is Schumpeter’s 
process of creative destruction. 
So let me just point out that the growth of the population of companies slowed dramatically in 
a  number  of  countries  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  I’ve  been  watching  the 
Canadian  and  US  data  closely,  because  I’d  interpret  the  emergence  of  firm  creation  as  a 
strong  sign  that  growth  had  become  self-sustaining.  In  the  Canadian  data,  firm  population 
growth has picked up but remains slow, at around 1 per cent annually, well below pre-crisis 
rates.  But  in  the  United  States,  there  has  been  a  steady  acceleration  of  firm  population 
growth since 2011. The most recent figures are approaching 3 per cent annual growth, which 
is back to pre-crisis levels. If I am right, the US economy is due for another period of better 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  productivity growth, and I have every reason to think that Canada will follow once we work 
through  our  adjustment  to  lower  resource  prices.  A  reversal  of  the  cyclical  slowdown  in 
investment I mentioned earlier would also serve to support future productivity growth. 
A second reason for optimism about productivity is that even if most major economies have 
exploited  most  available  opportunities  for  integration,  gains  may  still  be  had  from 
improvements  to  existing  supply  chains.  Economies  evolve  over  time,  and  comparative 
advantages are not set in stone. 
Consider China, which for years was the main destination for outsourced production. Today, 
its  working-age  population  is  shrinking.  Unit  labour  costs  have  been  rising  quickly  as  the 
economy  moves  up  the  value  chain.  Now,  we’re  seeing  signs  that  labour-intensive 
production  is  shifting  out  of  China  and  into  nearby  economies,  such  as  Cambodia  and 
Vietnam. 
All of this suggests that companies and investors may be able to find ways to improve the 
efficiency of supply chains in many geographic areas. This will show up as a new wave of 
integration and global trade growth. For policy-makers, of course, this means we should be 
working  to  help  initiatives  such  as  the  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  and  the  Comprehensive 
Economic  and  Trade  Agreement  between  Canada  and  the  European  Union  become  a 
reality. 
Third,  nobody  can  predict  the  future  disruptive  technologies  that  would  allow  the  global 
economy to take its next giant step forward. History gives us no reason to be pessimistic with 
respect to future technological progress. 
Before  I  wrap  up,  let  me  make  one  more  point.  International  trade,  as  measured  by  our 
standard  global  trade  statistics,  is  not  the  only  way  for  companies  to  exploit  integration 
opportunities.  Some  companies  find  it  more  sensible  to  operate  foreign  affiliates  in  other 
countries while managing them from home. For some firms, this model effectively acts as a 
substitute for international trade. 
And this business model has been growing, even while traditional exports and imports have 
been  slowing.  We  know  that  sales  by  Canadian-owned  foreign  affiliates  now  exceed  total 
exports  from  Canada,  approaching  30  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  other  words,  these  foreign 
affiliates are almost like another Canadian economy out there, supporting jobs in Canada in 
areas such as research and development, engineering, design and marketing, not to mention 
lawyers, accountants, and executives who manage the operation from home. In the United 
States, foreign affiliates are even more important, with sales equalling more than 40 per cent 
of GDP. This is a very real sign that companies are growing, becoming more productive and 
creating jobs at home, whatever the official trade data show. 
Conclusion 
It’s time to conclude. In a world full of anxiety, my goal today was to give investors one less 
thing to worry about. Most of the cyclical part of the slowdown in trade should be reversed as 
the  global  economy  recovers,  even  if  that  is  a  slow  process.  Furthermore,  there  are 
opportunities  for  progress  on  the  structural  side  in  terms  of  both  trade  and  productivity  if 
conditions  permit  another  wave  of  global  integration.  Moreover,  the  creation  of  brand-new 
firms could be the most promising source of new trade and productivity growth. 
I hope I’ve convinced  you that the global economy can continue to recover, even  if global 
trade growth remains lower than its pre-crisis levels. The weakness in trade we’ve seen is 
not a warning of an impending recession. Rather, I see it as a sign that trade has reached a 
new  balance  point  in  the  global  economy  –  and  one  that  we  have  the  ability  to  nudge 
forward. 
As  for  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  work  on  building  a  positive 
economic  environment  for  investors,  firms  and  consumers.  We  know  that  sound,  clearly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  communicated monetary policy can facilitate trade, productivity and growth. And that’s good 
for everybody. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
