  François Villeroy de Galhau: Financial stability in the age of digital 
industry 
Introducing speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at 
the Paris Europlace International Financial Forum, New York City, 18 April 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to introduce this third round table by presenting the latest issue of the Banque de 
France  Financial  Stability  Review  entitled  “Financial  Stability  in  the  Digital  Era”.  This  new 
edition  of  the  FSR  addresses  a  very  topical  issue  in  the  financial  world,  the  impact  of 
digitalisation and how to regulate such changes where necessary. I am keen to hear today’s 
exchange of views. 
In  this  FSR,  we  have  gathered  contributions  from  prominent  academics,  practitioners  and 
policy-makers in order to shed light on the impact of innovation on financial stability. 
I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  all  the  contributors  who  have  provided  their 
views  and  analyses  on  such  a  technical  and  forward-looking  topic.  I  cannot  list  all  the 
contributors just now but I would like to give a special mention to Ms Karen Gifford who is 
with us today. The contributions presented in the FSR are very diverse in nature. The aim of 
the FSR is to help readers form an opinion; it is not designed to convey the explicit message 
of  the  Banque  de  France. The  core  aims  of  our  Review  are to  exchange  ideas,  explore  a 
given theme from various angles, and juxtapose different analyses and opinions. I hope this 
new edition will be appreciated as much as, or even more than the previous ones. 
Before we start the discussion, let me briefly share with you some personal thoughts 
on this subject. 
The digitalisation of financial services is clearly a fascinating subject. It is also an issue that is 
particularly  relevant  at  the  moment,  as  the  emergence  of  digital  technologies  is  coinciding 
with a period of burgeoning recovery. 
The  fact  that  regulators,  and  notably  the  Banque  de  France,  are  turning  their  attention  to 
these  issues  should  come  as  no  surprise.  It  is  our  responsibility,  as  central  bankers  and 
regulators, to strike the right balance between the obvious benefits that digital innovation can 
bring to the financial sector, and the need for an adequate framework to mitigate risks and 
guarantee financial stability. The search for this subtle balance can best be represented as a 
trinity comprising innovation, stability and regulation. 
We are thus facing a form of “trilemma”, and our role is to build a “possible trinity”. 
1. 
With  regard  to  the  first  element:  innovation.  The  Banque  de  France  is  a 
proponent of digital innovation in financial services. 
There is no denying that technology has opened up a wealth of opportunities for innovation, 
and that we still haven’t unlocked its full potential. However, in finance, the majority of these 
innovations  also  have  the  potential  to  be  highly  disruptive,  be  it  in  payments,  in  financing 
(think of crowdfunding) or in financial markets (think of HFT, which has more questionable 
objectives). 
We  are  witnessing  the  emergence  of  a  fully-fledged  and  constantly  evolving  digital 
ecosystem. Faced with the competitive threat from innovative newcomers, traditional players 
can  respond  using  different  strategies:  establishing  partnerships,  acquiring  fintechs  or 
competing for new markets and activities. 
2. 
The second element is stability. Although banking and financial innovations can 
stimulate growth in the financial system and foster economic expansion, we know 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  only  too  well  that  they  can  also  be  a  source  of  instability,  as  evidenced  by  the 
subprime  crisis.  Digital  innovations  actually  expose  the  financial  system  to  new 
forms of risk. 
First of all, the digitalisation of financial services presents a new issue for central banks as 
they  perform  their  task  of  ensuring  safe  financial  transactions  (payment,  delivery  and 
settlement). In particular, the significant growth of decentralised trading systems, driven for 
example  by  blockchain  technology,  could  change  the  conditions  in  which  central  banks 
perform their duties. 
The transition to cyberspace has also left finance exposed to the increased threat of cyber-
crime. 
Lastly, the rise of digital innovation could also provide an opportunity for criminals to develop 
new methods of laundering money and financing terrorism. In this context, the new players in 
this  digital  era must  also  be fully  subject  to  all anti-money  laundering  and  counter-terrorist 
financing regulations. 
3. 
The  third  element  needed  in  order  to  reconcile  innovation  and  stability  and 
construct our “possible trinity” for digital finance is regulation. 
The regulation of financial services created in the wake of the digital wave must be tailored to 
its specific risks. To this end, we must adhere to two principles of action. 
The first principle is an absolute guarantee of payment and transaction security. In the 
framework  of  its  mandate  to  oversee  the  security  of  payment  instruments,  the  Banque  de 
France strives to promote innovative, effective and safe payment solutions. In this respect, it 
ensures that the emergence of new players and new solutions does not reduce security. 
Central banks are also trying to take a proactive approach towards the digital transition, to 
avoid  being  left  behind  by  the  highly  technical  nature  of  certain  innovations.  For  instance, 
discussions are underway at the Banque de France over how to monitor the development of 
initiatives concerning blockchain technology, both in terms of the possibilities it offers and the 
issues it raises notably in terms of security. 
The second principle is a proportionate adaptation of regulations and supervision to 
address the development of fintechs. The regulation applied to these new players should 
avoid  stifling  innovations  that  may  be  beneficial  to  consumers  and,  more  generally,  to  the 
economy and society; but at the same time it should also guarantee consumer protection and 
address issues of financial stability. Specific regulations, allowing for a gradual adjustment of 
regulatory intensity, might be better suited to preventing the risks generated by fintech firms. 
I  prefer  to  talk  of  “gradualism”  rather  than  the  “sandbox”  approach,  which  is  another 
frequently mentioned solution: when precisely should fintechs be placed inside or outside of 
a regulatory sandbox? Segregation may be less manageable than a process of proportionate 
adaptation. That said, both approaches may be combined. 
Moreover,  fintech  companies,  which  mainly  operate  on  the  Internet,  are  not  bound  by 
borders. This raises questions as to the efficacy of regulations which are still largely domestic 
or  based  on  residency  criteria.  The  cross-border  nature  of  technological  innovation  in  the 
area of banking and financial services is a strong incentive for the regulatory authorities to 
coordinate their policies at the international level. 
Constructing the possible trinity between innovation, stability and regulation for digital finance 
requires the regulator to improve vulnerability analysis, enhance the security of transactions, 
adapt regulations and relax supervision, while all the time remaining vigilant. More precisely, 
the need to adapt supervision to the specific features of fintech companies will require setting 
up dedicated teams to assist them in obtaining the necessary authorisations and to organise 
their supervision: this will be the case in France thanks to the creation of a Joint Unit by the 
ACPR (the French regulator for banks and payment institutions) and the AMF (the French 
market regulator). However, this is only the first stage. In the long run, it will be necessary to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ensure that the same rules apply to the same activities, irrespective of the players performing 
them. In order to ensure a level playing field, financial players must be regulated according to 
what  they  do  and  not  what  they  are.  Addressing  the  growing  influence  of  borderless 
technology on the financial system will also require an international coordination effort. Such 
are the challenges that the public authorities will have to meet. 
 To discuss these important issues, we are extremely fortunate to have an excellent 
panel today, including: 
• 
Mrs  Sarah  Dalhgren,  Partner  at  McKinsey,  formerly  Head  of  the  Financial 
Institution  Supervision  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (FRBNY).  Dear 
Sarah, your expertise in supervision, which you demonstrated through most of the 
financial  crisis,  will  be  extremely  useful to  assess  the  current  situation  of financial 
institutions in the context of financial innovation. 
We  also  have  Mrs  Sandie  O’Connor,  Manager  Director  and  Chief  Regulatory 
Affairs Officer at JPMorgan Chase & Co. Dear Sandie, you are deeply involved in 
your  firm’s  regulatory  strategy  and  your  views  on  how  financial  innovation  should 
affect regulation from the industry’s point of view will be extremely valuable. 
I would also like to introduce Mr Alain Papiasse, Deputy Chief Operating Officer 
(COO)  at  BNP  Paribas,  representing  the  group  in  North  America.  Alain  is  a  top 
market  practitioner  with  extensive  experience  in  both  asset  management  and 
investment  banking.  So,  dear  Alain,  I  hope  you  will  provide  us  with  “insider”  and 
complementary views on what the fintech industry can usefully bring to banks. 
And  finally  let  me  introduce  Mrs  Karen  Gifford,  Special  Advisor  for  Global 
Regulatory Affairs for Ripple, and formerly an attorney in the private sector and at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Dear Karen, you have been a distinguished 
contributor  to  the  Financial  Stability  Review  and  you  will  tell  us  about  blockchain 
technology and its potential benefits. 
   Thank you all for being with us today. 
Now I give the floor to our panelists. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
