   Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The national commemoration of the 
Bank of Uganda’s 50th anniversary 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the national commemoration of the Bank of Uganda’s 50th anniversary, Kampala, 3 August 
2016. 
 Your Excellency the President  
Honourable Ministers  
Honourable Members of Parliament  
Former Governors of the Bank of Uganda  
Governors and Deputy Governors of our fellow Central Banks in the region  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to thank all of you for taking the time to be with us this morning, on the occasion of 
the Bank of Uganda’s 50th anniversary.  
I would especially like to express my gratitude to his Excellency the President for gracing this 
occasion with his presence and showing his support for the Bank of Uganda.  
The history of the Bank of Uganda over the last fifty years reflects, in many respects, the history 
of independent Uganda. Like our country, the Bank has experienced both good times and bad.  
During the 1970s and 1980s the Bank suffered, along with the rest of Ugandan society, from 
political and economic turbulence and the breakdown of governance.  
Our first Governor, Dr. Joseph Mary Mubiru, was abducted and murdered in 1971, a fate he 
shared with tens of thousands of his fellow citizens. We honour his memory every year with 
the Joseph Mubiru Memorial Lecture.  
During the years of turbulence, many staff of the Bank of Uganda strove bravely and tirelessly, 
against  numerous  obstacles,  to  keep  the  Bank  functioning  properly  for  the  welfare  of  all 
Ugandans.  
The second half of the Bank’s 50 years of existence has undoubtedly been more propitious 
than the first. Over the course of the last three decades, the Bank of Uganda has played its 
part, first in putting the economy back on its feet and then supporting a sustained recovery of 
real growth in the economy.  
Economic recovery would not have been possible, of course, without the restoration of peace 
and security in the country and the rebuilding of the institutions of government.  
I would like to highlight two areas where the Bank of Uganda has made a crucial contribution 
to the recovery of the Ugandan economy.  
The first is the control of inflation, which began in the early 1990s. Inflation was brought under 
control  by  a  combination  of  fiscal  and  monetary  reforms.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  curbed 
domestic borrowing to finance the fiscal deficit and the Bank of Uganda controlled the growth 
of the money supply.  
The results were dramatic. Annual headline inflation had averaged 93 percent from 1981 to 
1992. From 1993 to the present day it has averaged 6.9 percent.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   As  the  economy  has  developed  and  the  financial  system  has  deepened,  the  Bank  has 
strengthened its monetary policy framework with the introduction of Inflation Targeting. This 
framework allows for a more sophisticated approach to the proactive control of inflation using 
a publicly announced policy interest rate, which we call the Central Bank Rate.  
The second area where the Bank of Uganda’s contribution to the recovery of the economy has 
been of critical importance is that of bank regulation. By the end of the 1980s, the banking 
system  had  shrunk,  as  a  result  of  financial  repression  and  macroeconomic  instability,  and 
some of the major banks were suffering chronic financial distress.  
During  the  1990s,  distressed  banks  were  restructured  and  restored  to  solvency  or  closed 
down.  A  new  banking  act  was  enacted  in  1993  and  the  Bank  of  Uganda  prioritized  the 
prudential  regulation  of  banks,  with  the  safety  of  customers’  deposits  being  the  foremost 
objective.  
Over the last 20 years we have gradually strengthened the prudential regulatory framework, 
especially with regard to intervention in distressed banks and the introduction of risk based 
bank supervision.  
The result has been a dramatic restoration of public confidence in the banking system. At the 
end  of  the  1980s  bank  deposits  amounted  to  only  4  percent  of  GDP,  whereas  today  they 
amount to  16  percent  of  GDP. The growth  of  bank  deposits  has,  in turn,  made  possible  a 
dramatic growth in bank lending to the private sector.  
In real terms, after adjusting for inflation, commercial bank lending to the private sector has 
expanded eighteen fold since 1992.  
The foundation for the sustained improvements in macroeconomic management as well as 
bank regulation and supervision was the changes that were made to the institutional structure 
of governance in the 1990s.  
Of particular importance was the 1996 Constitution, which set out the mandate of the Bank of 
Uganda and guaranteed its independence to implement its mandate in accordance with the 
law.  
This brought the governance of the Bank of Uganda into line with the evolving best practice 
for central banks around the world.  
I want to conclude by expressing my appreciation and thanks for all those members of staff, 
past and present, of all ranks, and all of the board members, who have served the Bank of 
Uganda and devoted their careers to public service during the first 50 years of the Bank’s 
existence.  
Without  your  efforts,  the  Bank  would  not  have  achieved  any  of  its  successes.  This  50th 
anniversary  celebration  is  principally  a  commemoration  of the contribution,  which  staff and 
board members have made to the Bank and to the country, over the last five decades.  
The history of the Bank of Uganda is the history of the people who have served in the bank. 
Congratulations to you all; you have served the Bank and our nation well.  
Thank you for listening to me. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
