  Manuel Sánchez: Is Mexico different from other emerging economies? 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the University 
of York, York, United Kingdom, 19 April 2016. 
  
It  is  an  honor  to  be  with  you  today  in  this  historic  English  city  to  speak  at  the  prestigious 
University  of  York.  This  academic  center  has  received  much  recognition  in  its  first  half-
century for its achievements in both research and education, with a distinguished faculty and 
cosmopolitan student community. 
I would like to talk about how Mexico has fared in the present international environment of 
heightened risk aversion, and some of the challenges that lie ahead. In particular, I would like 
to  examine  whether  or  not  Mexico’s  structural  and  policy  framework  has  set  the  country 
sufficiently apart from other emerging economies. 
Differentiation  is  a  highly  desirable  outcome  as  it  would  contribute  to  better  economic 
conditions. I will argue that Mexico should make further progress in this regard in order to 
consolidate price stability and enhance potential output growth. 
As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect the position of the 
Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
favorable 
in  2010,  emerging  economies  enjoyed  a 
The rise and fall of emerging economies 
Starting 
financial  environment 
characterized  by  substantial  capital  inflows  in  the  search  for  yield  amid  extraordinarily  lax 
monetary  policies  in  advanced  countries.  At  the  same  time,  commodity  prices  rose  and 
remained  high,  supporting  growth  in  commodity  exporters.  Also,  asset  prices  in  emerging 
markets tended to increase, including some bouts of currency appreciation vis-à-vis the U. S. 
dollar. 
While the taper tantrum in 2013 sparked a transitory rise in risk aversion, the market mood 
really  changed  around  mid-2014  as  previous  trends  reversed,  including  a  contraction  of 
portfolio investment inflows in the second half of the following year, something which had not 
been seen since the global financial crisis. In a few words, emerging economies went from 
beauty to beast in the eyes of international fund managers.1 
Among factors spurring this turn of events was the apparent perception that the process of 
U.S. monetary policy normalization was about to begin, given the end of longstanding asset-
purchase programs in October 2014, and worries about the health of the Chinese economy 
and policy measures there. 
The result has been an almost continuous decline for commodity and financial asset prices in 
emerging economies over the last two years, only partly attenuated in recent weeks. Energy 
prices have been the most affected, but those of metals and agricultural products have also 
taken  a  knock.  Growth  prospects  and  public  finances  have  been  hurt  in  countries  heavily 
dependent on commodity exports.2 
                                                
1   See  Koepke,  R.  and  S.  Farnham  (2016).  “March  2016  EM  Portfolio  Flows  Tracker  and  Flows  Alert,”  IIF 
Portfolio Flows Tracker, March. 
2   For an analysis of the impact on and policy responses of commodity-based economies to lower prices, see 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2015).  World  Economic  Outlook:  Adjusting  to  Lower  Commodity  Prices, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Simultaneously, external borrowing costs for emerging economies have increased and their 
currencies  have  weakened  significantly  versus  the  U.S.  dollar.  Some  nations  have  found 
themselves in a difficult spot given that fiscal and financial imbalances were built up during 
the preceding bonanza. 
Problems run from high debt in domestic and foreign currencies and deterioration of financial 
institutions’  balance  sheets  to  overly  appreciated  real  estate  in  some  cases.  As  a  result, 
several  economies  have  been tightening  monetary  policy  in  the face  of rising  inflation  and 
inflation expectations, a development that contrasts with that of advanced nations. 
The real impact on Mexico 
There  are  two  noticeable  avenues  through  which  this  adverse  external  environment  has 
affected  Mexico’s  actual  and  potential  economic  activity.  One  is  through  lower  commodity 
prices,  where  the  impact  can  be  expected  to  be  milder  than  that  for  primarily  commodity 
exporters. 
Beginning in the 1980s, Mexico undertook a deep economic transformation by expanding its 
integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  tearing  down  foreign  trade  and  investment  barriers. 
Among other treaties signed by Mexico, the North American Free Trade Agreement of 1993 
notably  consolidated  the  country’s  links  with  the  United  States.  Throughout  these  years, 
manufacturing  and  services  gained  substantial  share,  in  trade  and  economic  activity, 
respectively, while agriculture and mining lost relative weight in both. 
The  most  important  commodity  produced  and  exported  by  Mexico  continues  to  be  oil. 
Currently, oil and gas extraction accounts for roughly five percent of GDP, and crude, only 
around six percent of total exports. A large part of the reduced size of the sector comes from 
the  shrinking  production  trend  observed  since  2004  due  to  the  depletion  of  high-yield  oil 
fields.3 
Whereas  Mexico  now  depends  much  less  on  commodities  for  production  and  trade  than 
several other emerging economies, particularly in Latin America, the possible real effect of 
low  oil  prices  is  not  trivial,  especially  if  they  are  sustained  for  a  long  time.  Further  oil 
extraction in certain areas may no longer be profitable, and the return on new investments as 
well  as  the  possibilities  for  financing  may  be  more  limited.  Negative  spillovers  to  other 
production sectors, such as mining-related services, may be considerable.4 
 Another real external effect has come from the slowdown of U.S. industrial production, partly 
due to the downsizing of the oil sector in that country after the price drops. Mexico’s GDP is 
highly  correlated  with  industrial  production  in  the  United  States,  reflecting  the  vertical 
integration of processes between the two nations, such as in the automotive and electronic 
sectors. 
The negative impact has been transmitted through a deceleration of Mexico’s manufacturing 
exports  to  its  northern  neighbor.  Even  so,  the  hit  has  tended  to  be  smaller  than  that 
experienced  by  many  other  emerging  economies  with  exports  oriented  to  countries  other 
                                                                                                                                                   
Washington, October; and Institute of International Finance (2015). “Living With Less: Oil Exporters’ Different 
Adjustment Paths,” December. 
3   To  appreciate  the  contrast,  it  is  worth  noting  that  in  1982  oil  represented  68  percent  of  total  exports.  To 
confront the declining trend in oil production, the Mexican government has opened the energy sector to private 
investment, which could have positive impacts over the medium term. 
4  The general view of analysts as well as the futures markets point towards a slow recovery for oil prices in the 
medium-term.  For  example,  the  U.S.  Energy  Information  Administration  (EIA)  forecasts  West  Texas 
Intermediate (WTI) crude oil prices to average 35 dollars per barrel in 2016 and 41 in 2017; see U.S. Energy 
Information Administration (2016). Short-Term Energy Outlook, April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  than  the  United  States,  as  this  economy  has  shown  one  of  the  clearest  upturns  among 
advanced nations after the crisis, albeit disappointing in a historical context. 
Since  2014,  Mexico’s  GDP  has  been  growing  at  roughly  2.5  percent,  slightly  below  the 
average of the previous two decades. The main engine of the ongoing rebound has been the 
services sector and, on the demand side, private consumption. However, history tells us that 
unless  the  external  sector  eventually  supports  the  upturn,  the  economy’s  vitality  will  not 
continue. 
The  outlook  for  the  Mexican  economy  is  one  of  a  gradual  recovery  along  with  that  of  the 
United  States.  However,  downward  risks  prevail,  including  most  importantly,  less-than-
expected U.S. industrial improvement, and secondly, a larger-than-anticipated contraction in 
oil  production.  Of  course,  long-term  growth  potential  depends  heavily  on  adequate 
implementation of the structural reform agenda, which seeks more efficiency in many sectors 
such as energy and telecommunications.5 
The financial impact on Mexico 
The  adverse  international  environment  has  also  had  financial  repercussions  on  Mexico 
through  two  main  channels.  The  first  is  a  slowing  in  portfolio  investment  inflows,  which 
nevertheless  have  tended  to  remain  positive  in  contrast  to  those  of  many  other  emerging 
economies, where they have been significantly negative. 
As a result, nonresident holdings of peso-denominated government securities, a favorite for 
fixed-income  investors  for  several  years,  continued  to  increase,  and  since  2015  have 
remained roughly constant in nominal terms. Hence, the share of these holdings in the total 
outstanding has recently declined only moderately. However, this proportion is still one of the 
highest among emerging-market local-currency-denominated government securities. 
High and stable exposure to foreign holdings is a sign of strength. The confidence shown by 
investors  in  Mexico  possibly  reflects  the  depth  of  the  bond  and  peso  markets  and  the 
credibility  of  the  economic  policy  framework.  The  resilience  of  foreign  portfolio  investment 
has  contributed  to  the  relative  stability  shown  by  medium-  and  long-term  market  interest 
rates for government bonds. Maintaining the preference of nonresident investors is obviously 
of paramount importance and can never be taken for granted. 
The second route for external impact has been in the public finances, originating, again, in 
lower  oil  prices.  As  with  other  large  oil  producers,  Pemex,  the  state-owned  oil  extracting 
enterprise,  has  seen  its  financial  conditions  deteriorate  significantly.  This,  along  with  more 
than  a  decade-long  decline  in  oil  production,  has  resulted  in  a  considerable  increase  in 
credit-risk perception. The rise for Pemex credit default swap (CDS) spreads has been more 
acute than for many other major oil-producing firms. 
More  importantly,  lower  oil  prices  have  dented  the  prospects  for  healthy  Mexican  public 
finances. The fragility is due, first, to the fact that because Pemex is state-owned, markets 
assume  the  government  will  back  its  debt  under  the  pressure  of  contingencies.  Second, 
public-sector budgeted revenues depend heavily on oil income, which accounts for slightly 
less than one-third of the total, among the highest ratios in the emerging-market universe.6 
                                                
5   Analysts’ forecasts for U.S. industrial production and Mexico’s GDP are, respectively, 0.3 and 2.4 percent for 
2016, and 2.3 and 2.8 percent for 2017; see Blue Chip Indicators 2016, April. For a discussion of Mexico’s 
structural  reforms,  see  Sánchez,  M.  (2015).  “Mexico’s  Reforms  Progress  and  Economic  Outlook,”  speech 
given at the 2015 IIF Latin America Economic Forum, March. 
6  See IMF (2015). “Fiscal Monitor: Now Is the Time, Fiscal Policies for Sustainable Growth,” p. 2, April. For the 
classification of emerging markets, see Koepke, R. (2012). “IIF Capital Flows User Guide,” IIF Research Note. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  These  weaknesses  are  amplified  by  the  fact  that  during  the  last  few  years,  the  ratio  of 
accumulated  total  public-sector  financial  requirements  to  GDP  has  consistently  increased. 
For the public finances to be sustainable, this proportion must stop growing and eventually 
stabilize at lower levels, a goal which has been explicitly stated in federal budget plans.7 
The resulting vulnerability has been reflected in two ways. One, during the first few weeks of 
this  year,  Mexican  government  CDS  spreads  increased  more  rapidly,  and  have  tended  to 
remain higher than those for governments with equivalent credit ratings. 
Another  is  the  increasing  correlation  between  the  peso-U.S.  dollar  exchange  rate  and  oil 
prices.  Since  mid-2014,  the  peso  tracked  the  average  emerging-market  currency  in  its 
substantial weakening trend, with nothing to distinguish its performance. 
Furthermore, in January and until mid-February this year, the peso depreciated at a faster 
rate  than  other  emerging-market  currencies. This  period  also  overlapped  with  the  worst  of 
the deterioration in CDS spreads. Since then, along with other emerging-market currencies, 
the peso has recovered somewhat, in tandem with higher oil prices. 
In short, Mexico has been affected financially by external circumstances. Furthermore, new 
financial  pressures  may  emerge  as  the  sources  of  international  volatility  have  not 
disappeared  and  could  even  resurface.  For  this  reason,  Mexico  needs  to  strengthen  its 
macroeconomic fundamentals. 
Certainly, in the face of the possible persistence of reduced oil prices, a tight fiscal stance is 
highly  advisable.  Appropriately,  last  February,  the  federal  government  announced  budget 
expenditure cuts, especially for Pemex.8 
Monetary policy and inflation 
Since  1994,  the  Bank  of  Mexico’s  primary  objective  as  mandated  by  the  country’s 
constitution  is  price  stability.  Like  that  of  other  emerging  economies,  Mexico’s  monetary 
policy  has  formally  been  implemented  within  an  inflation-targeting  framework  since  2001. 
The  permanent  annual  inflation  target  is  3  percent.  Attaining  this  target  has  been  a  long 
quest. 
Recent  inflation  developments  differ  from  those  in  other  emerging  economies  in  two 
interrelated  ways.  First,  since  2015,  inflation  has  not  only  been  lower  than  that  in  several 
other  emerging  economies,  especially  in  Latin  America,  but  it  has  also  been  consistently 
below  target  for  the  longest  period  on  record  in  Mexico.  Consequently,  inflation  struck  all-
time lows last year. 
A second difference, perhaps more noteworthy, is the fact that pass-through from currency 
depreciation  to  price  changes  has  been  virtually  inexistent.  While,  as  expected,  currency 
depreciation  has  directly  affected the  prices  of  particular  tradable  goods,  no  second-round 
effects  have  occurred  either  on  the  generalized  price  formation  process  or  medium-  and 
long-term inflation expectations. 
The  absence  of  pass-through  is  quite  an  achievement  given  Mexico’s  long  history  of  high 
correlation  between  currency  devaluation  and  inflation  until  the  1990s  under  successive 
regimes of predetermined exchange rates. To be sure, under inflation targeting and a flexible 
exchange rate, pass-through has diminished substantially in the past 15 years, a result that 
                                                
7  See  SHCP  (2015).  Criterios  Generales  de  Política  Económica  para  la  Iniciativa  de  Ley  de  Ingresos  y  el 
Proyecto  de  Presupuesto  de  Egresos  de  la  Federación  Correspondientes  al  Ejercicio  Fiscal  2016,  p.  139, 
September. 
8   See SHCP (2016). “Preemptive Fiscal Adjustment Strengthens the Commitment to Macroeconomic Stability,” 
Press Release, February. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  may  be  traced  to  lower  and  more  stable  inflation.  Furthermore,  statistical  evidence  shows 
that pass-through has been lower than in other Latin American countries during this century.9 
An interesting question is why pass-through has been muted in the present context. Although 
the answer still awaits rigorous statistical examination, I would like to put forth three possible 
reasons for this phenomenon, which could be complementary, though with varying degrees 
of significance. 
First is slack in the economy. While one cannot rule it out as a factor, slack is also present in 
other Latin American countries, not just Mexico, and they have seen more significant pass-
through. 
Second,  last  year  saw  positive  supply  shocks,  including  the  elimination  of  national  long-
distance  telephone  charges,  a  reduction  in  government-mandated  gasoline  and  electricity 
price increases, and unusually soft agricultural prices. It is possible that these shocks have 
given entrepreneurs maneuvering room for delaying price increases stemming from greater 
import  costs.  However,  some  of  these  bonuses  have  begun  to  wane  this  year,  and  yet 
inflation remains benign. 
Third, inflation expectations for the medium- and long-term horizons, contained in analysts’ 
surveys, have continued to be stable, although slightly above the target. This is perhaps the 
most important factor behind the absence of pass-through, possibly reflecting credibility on 
the commitment to price stability.10 
To  face  the  risks  posed  by  the  external  scenario,  Mexico’s  monetary  policy  was  adjusted 
twice recently, with a 25-basis-point hike in December and a 50 basis-point hike in February. 
Considerations behind these measures were consistent with arguments in favor of vigilance 
emphasized in previous monetary policy communications. 
In  particular,  an  important  argument  supporting  the  first  hike  was  to  maintain  the  relative 
stance vis-à-vis the United States in light of the first fed funds rate increase since 2006. The 
second hike came in conjunction with the government’s announcement of expenditure cuts, 
and sought to prevent contamination of inflation expectations from currency depreciation, as 
well as to contribute to stronger macroeconomic fundamentals. 
Trust gained over years of consistent endeavor, however, can be lost in an instant. Mexico 
has an unprecedented opportunity to consolidate convergence to the inflation target, given 
unusually subdued price pressures. 
Upward  risks  to  inflation  imply  that  monetary  policy  must  remain  particularly  on  guard. 
Dangers  include  further  peso  depreciation  that  does  lead  to  second-round  effects,  despite 
their past absence; more rapidly rising agricultural prices that may contaminate other prices; 
and aggregate demand pressures which may eventually arise with the economy’s recovery, 
something particularly relevant in light of uncertainty on the degree of slack in the economy.11 
                                                
9  The  observation  of  lower  pass-through  resulting  from  price  stabilization  was  pointed  out  as  a  general 
phenomenon by John Taylor. See, Taylor, J.B. (2000). “Low Inflation, Pass-through, and the Pricing Power of 
Firms,”  European  Economic  Review,  44(7).  For  pass-through  estimates,  see  Banco  de  México  (2015). 
Quarterly Report, July-September 2015, Box 1, November. 
10  See Banco de México (2016). Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector 
Privado: Marzo de 2016, April. 
11  For  international  evidence  of  non-linearities  in  pass-through  during  episodes  of  significant  currency 
depreciation,  see  Caselli,  F.G.  and  A.  Roitman  (2016).  “Non-Linear  Exchange  Rate  Pass-Through  in 
Emerging Markets,” IMF Working Paper WP/16/1, January. For a recent discussion of slack in the economy, 
see  Palacio,  S.  and  G.  Lozano  (2016).  “Mexico:  Potential  GDP,  Output  Gap,  and  Inflation,”  Economic 
Research Global Data Watch, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Finally,  although  actions  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  must  continue  to  be  taken  into 
account, the need for further adjustments may arise independently of U.S. policy moves, for 
example if inflation expectations become misaligned as a result of international volatility. 
Concluding remarks 
Mexico has set itself apart from other emerging economies in some respects. However, to an 
extent, markets continue to treat the country as if it were an average case, and sometimes, 
below the mean in its asset class. This implies that Mexico must make further progress on 
possible  sources  of  differentiation.  These 
improvement  of  macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  with  sustainable  public  finances  and  timely  monetary-policy  adjustments  to 
consolidate price stability. 
A well-capitalized and highly liquid banking system must continue to be the case. Structural 
reforms  should  also  be  implemented  appropriately.  Finally,  Mexico’s  potential  growth  will 
increase if improvements to the rule of law and public security are attained. 
 
include 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
