  Benoît Cœuré: Towards a macroprudential framework for central 
counterparties 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  a  policy  panel  discussion  on  the  progress  with  new  macroprudential 
instruments at the ESRB Conference on Macroprudential Margins and Haircuts, Frankfurt am 
Main, 6 June 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) for organising this event and 
inviting me to chair this panel. I will make a few brief remarks before handing over to our 
distinguished group of speakers. 
I  do  not  intend  to  talk  about  the  development  of  new  macroprudential  instruments  –  I  will 
leave this to our panellists. Instead, I will try to set the stage by saying a few words about 
central  counterparties  (CCPs),  as  they  are  very  much  in  the  spotlight  when  it  comes  to 
debates about the future of macroprudential policy. 
The  strong  regulatory  push  towards  central  clearing  in  recent  years  has  clearly  helped 
improve  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Among  the  many  well-known 
advantages  of  central  clearing  are  the  reduction  in  counterparty  credit  risk,  and  the 
simplification of the network of exposures through multilateral netting and risk sharing, which 
also  comes  with  a  more  efficient  use  of  collateral.  Default risk,  no  longer  being  dispersed 
thinly across the global financial system1, is better pooled and monitored. 
At  the  same  time,  the  drive  towards  central  clearing  has  made  CCPs  key  nodes  for 
propagating risk in the system2. Given the central role CCPs play in the financial system and 
the potential effects their risk management can have on the economic cycle, it has become 
increasingly  important  to  consider  CCPs  not  only  from  a  microprudential  but  also  from  a 
macroprudential  perspective.  Therefore,  the  discussion  about  macroprudential  policy, 
previously almost exclusively referred to in the context of banks, is now being expanded to 
include CCPs. Indeed, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and 
the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) already considered some 
of  these  aspects  when  they  published  in  2012  the  Principles  for  financial  market 
infrastructures  (PFMI)3,  for  instance  by  requiring  CCPs  to  adopt  stable-through-the-cycle 
margin practices and collateral haircuts. 
Before turning to the more recent work of the CPMI and IOSCO in this area, allow me to 
recall  two  important  general  considerations  that  should  be  taken  into  account  when 
developing macroprudential frameworks for CCPs. 
First,  we  should  not  try  to  apply  blindly  to  CCPs  the  macroprudential  tools  we  have 
developed  for  the  banking  sector.  Unlike  banks,  whose  social  function  is  to  transform risk 
and  maturity,  CCPs  are  not  in  the  business  of  taking  risk  directly  but  of  pooling  risk. 
                                                
1   See  Adrian,  T.,  and  Shin,  H.S.,  “Liquidity  and  financial  contagion”,  Financial  Stability  Review,  Banque  de 
France, February 2008. 
2   See Cœuré, B., “The known unknowns of central clearing,” speech at the meeting on the global economy and 
financial system hosted by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business Initiative on Global Markets, 
Coral Gables, 29 March 2014. 
3   See  Committee  on  Payments  and  Settlement  Systems  and  Technical  Committee  of  the  International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions,  “Principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures”,  April  2012, 
http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d101a.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Therefore, we do not want to regulate them primarily as risk takers. Instead, our aim is to 
control the  way  they  propagate risk,  including  in  particular  the  way  they  allocate  losses  in 
case  of  a  participant’s  default.  Second,  while  the  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
approaches have different perspectives, they may in practice rely on some of the same tools 
to reach their objectives. A macroprudential approach to CCPs should also involve elements 
of sound microprudential risk management, as both can be tightly interlinked. 
Bearing this in mind, allow me to lay out five elements of the macroprudential approach to 
CCPs which are being developed and implemented at CPMI-IOSCO level. 
First, we are currently working towards establishing a set of criteria to identify CCPs that are 
systemically relevant in more than one jurisdiction. This is an important issue given that the 
PFMI require CCPs with cross-border relevance or with a more complex risk profile to apply 
more stringent risk mitigation standards – in particular a “cover 2” requirement for calibrating 
their  stress  testing  and  for  sizing  their  financial  resources.  Providing  authorities  with  a 
consistent  framework  for  assessing  systemic  relevance  is  the  starting  point  of  any 
macroprudential approach. 
Second,  we  want  to  ensure  that  the  financial  buffers  built  up  by  CCPs  in  good  times  are 
highly  robust,  thereby  reducing  the  need  to  take  sudden  and  abrupt  measures  in  more 
stressed  situations.  In  this  context,  we  are  focusing  on  making  CCPs  fully  resilient  by 
ensuring they are rigorously applying the PFMI, and have adopted appropriate arrangements 
for  recovery  planning  in  line  with  the  guidance  issued  by  CPMI-IOSCO  in  2014.  In  this 
regard, CPMI-IOSCO will publish this summer two reports that assess the way international 
requirements  are  being  implemented,  drawing  on  surveys  carried  out  with  a  significant 
number of CCPs worldwide. Additional guidance will be proposed in some areas, such as on 
stress  testing.  In  other  areas,  such  as  recovery  planning,  we  will  ensure  the  existing 
guidance is properly and fully implemented.4 
This work is fully consistent with the forthcoming guidance by the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB) on CCP resolution. 
The  third  area  where  the  forthcoming  reports  will  propose  further  guidance  is  in  the 
identification and mitigation of potential procyclical behaviour. Building on the requirements 
for margining and haircut-setting practices in the PFMI, we will now go further by requiring 
CCPs  to  take  a  holistic  approach  to  addressing  the  issue  within  their  risk  management 
frameworks.  The  guidance  will  also  point  out  that  a  CCP  is  expected  to  measure 
procyclicality  by  using  quantitative  metrics,  and  to  include  considerations  related  to 
procyclicality in its model validation process. One open question is whether we should raise 
the bar even further by establishing minimum, binding margin floors, as is now the case for 
non-centrally cleared securities financing transactions.5 I trust our panellists will share their 
insights on this issue. 
As a fourth step, I believe it would be helpful to enhance our capacity to identify and address 
financial  vulnerabilities  in  CCPs  at  an  early  stage  by  complementing  CCP  in-house  stress 
testing with a framework for supervisory CCP stress testing that can be conducted across 
jurisdictions. Supervisory stress testing can be a key building block of the macroprudential 
framework for  CCPs  if  it  accounts for  the  propagation  of risk  across  CCPs  as  well  as  the 
spillover  to,  and  spillback  from,  their  clearing  members.  The  recent  European  Union-wide 
stress test led by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) is a promising first 
                                                
4   See also Cœuré, B., interview with Risk Magazine, 19 May 2016. 
5   See  Financial  Stability  Board,  “Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking  -Regulatory 
framework for haircuts on non-centrally cleared securities financing transactions”, 14 October 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
step in this direction6. While this is an ambitious project and will take some time, I hope we 
can propose a way forward at the G20 summit in September. 
Finally,  we  will  need  to  make  substantial  progress  in  understanding  and  assessing 
interdependencies  between  CCPs  and  their  participants,  across  the  multiple  relationships 
they have with each other. Mapping the complex network of these interlinked exposures is 
crucial  from  a  macroprudential  standpoint.  This  work  is  currently  being  carried  out  by  the 
FSB,  and  its  success  will  depend  on  the  full  and  timely  availability  of  data  from  all 
jurisdictions  involved  in  the  exercise.  The  information-  sharing  framework  and  the 
methodology  being  developed  for  this  analysis  is  a  precondition  for  future  work,  such  as 
supervisory stress testing. 
Pooling  risk  in  CCPs  brings  benefits  for  market  participants  and  generates  positive 
externalities  for  the  broader  economy  –  provided  that  the  propagation  of  risk  is  well 
understood  and  well  regulated.  As  Mark  Twain  once  said:  “Put  all  your  eggs  in  the  one 
basket and – watch that basket!”7. The macroprudential framework for CCPs is about making 
sure that we’re watching that basket. 
I will now hand over to our panellists. 
                                                 
6   See ESMA report, “EU-wide CCP Stress test 2015”, 29 April 2016. 
7   “Behold, the fool saith, ‘Put not all thine eggs in the one basket’ – which is but a manner of saying, ‘Scatter 
your money and your attention’; but the wise man saith, ‘Put all your eggs in the one basket and – watch that 
basket!’”, in Twain, M., The Tragedy of Pudd’nhead Wilson, chapter 15, 1894. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
