   Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa – “Fit for the Future” 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Agricultural Business Chamber Congress 2016, Cape Town, 1 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am honoured to be here with you today, on this 70th anniversary of the Agriculture Business 
Chamber. Congratulations on this milestone, Agbiz! 
The  theme  of  this  Congress  is  “Fit  for  the  Future”,  and  to  my  mind,  this  is  an  excellent 
encapsulation of South Africa’s monetary policy framework. Inflation targeting, the cornerstone 
of this framework, is fundamentally medium- to long-term orientated. 
As you all know, economic activity in South Africa is currently weak. Drought has contributed 
much to this weakness, but it has considerably deeper roots. 
Structural reforms are urgently needed to improve capital and labour use, which  will boost 
productivity in the medium term. We have also seen rising inflationary pressures for some time, 
which prompted the current monetary tightening cycle. Headline inflation is above the upper 
end of the target range of 3 to 6 per cent, and this breach is expected to persist until late next 
year, driven especially by food price increases.1 
The South African Reserve Bank is certain that an environment of consistently low and stable 
inflation is the best contribution it can make to balanced and sustainable growth in South Africa. 
However, inflation shocks such as the current food price spike can compromise the credibility 
of the Bank and thereby permanently accelerate inflation. 
I will focus my remarks today on explaining how the Bank views these shocks and when it 
deems a monetary policy response necessary. 
Economic conditions and the drought 
South Africa’s short-term prospects do not look encouraging. While growth has declined since 
2011, underlying inflation1 has increased. At the same time, the economy continues to suffer 
spillovers from low global growth as well as idiosyncratic shocks, of which drought is the most 
recent. 
Rainfall in 2015 was 20 per cent below its long-run average.2 Parliament recently adopted a 
motion that drought should be declared a national disaster.3 
After  a  particularly  large  maize  harvest  in  the  2014/15  season,  of  14,3  million  tonnes, 
commercial maize production dropped last season and is estimated even lower for 2016/17, 
at just 7,2 million tonnes. We are thus likely to need up to 4 million tonnes of imported maize 
this year. 
                                                
1   As measured by headline inflation excluding food, non-alcoholic beverages, petrol and energy prices. 
2   Annual rainfall measured 380mm in 2015, in contrast to the 1990–2015 average of 477mm. 
3   As of end 2015, five provinces had been declared disaster areas (those are latest available figures). However 
on 26 May 2016, Parliament adopted a motion to declare the drought a national disaster. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector contracted in every quarter of last year, losing 
8,4 per  cent  of  its  total  value  over  the  course  of  2015.4  Associated  sectors  such  as 
manufacturing  (via  agro-processing)  as  well  as  banks  and  insurance  companies  that  are 
heavily invested in the agricultural sector have felt the impact of this contraction – as everyone 
here will know. 
In addition to the issue of access to food, we continue to see enormous human suffering from 
water shortages affecting people’s quality of life. These shortages also endanger businesses; 
this, in turn, threatens the livelihood of the communities dependent on those businesses for 
employment. 
More  specifically,  we  in  the  Bank  have  been  revising  our  estimates  of  potential  growth 
downwards. In other words, the estimated rate at which the economy can sustainably grow 
before inflation rises has declined. As a result, South Africa today faces a high-inflation, low-
growth situation similar to many other commodity-exporting emerging markets. The response 
to this problem is to push potential growth back up while ensuring that inflation does not rise. 
Currency depreciation, while uncomfortable, is an important part of the adjustment to broader 
economic weaknesses, in particular coming from falling commodity prices. But it also tends to 
lift inflation as firms increase producer prices in response to higher imported input costs and 
as consumers demand higher wages to re-establish living standards relative to the cost of 
imported goods. 
With a  drought and a weaker currency, food prices are playing an unusually strong role in 
complicating the inflation outlook. I will turn to this relationship in more detail shortly. For now, 
from a policy vantage point, preventing an inflation response is critical to keeping our overall 
cost of borrowing low for investment and to maintaining the competitive advantage we have 
gained with depreciation. 
In the past two years, National Treasury has embarked on a fiscal consolidation programme 
and the South African Reserve Bank has entered a monetary policy tightening cycle. These 
actions help to reduce inflation and will foster economic stability, consistent with our respective 
policy frameworks. In the long run, this is good for everyone. In the short run, however, we are 
providing less economic stimulus while the economy remains far from the hoped-for recovery. 
Structural  reforms  to  improve  opportunities  for  small  businesses  and  job  seekers  would 
increase  investment  and  productivity,  and  should  therefore  complement  the  current 
macroeconomic policy stance of the Bank. 
Food price inflation and the exchange rate 
In 2015, due to favourable oil price shocks, inflation averaged 4,6 per cent. In contrast, inflation 
outcomes have exceeded 6 per cent this year because of food and petrol prices. The Bank 
expects headline inflation to average 6,7 per cent in 2016 and 6,2 per cent next year. Food 
prices  are  increasing  due  to the  drought,  whereas  petrol  prices  are  increasing  because  oil 
prices have risen off the extremely low levels prevailing at the start of 2015 and a weaker 
exchange rate. The drought, like oil price movements, is a supply-side shock to inflation. 
Domestic  price  increases  in  maize,  South  Africa’s  staple  food,  have  been  extreme.  Since 
1 January 2015, yellow maize prices have increased by almost 70 per cent while white maize 
prices have increased by more than 130 per cent over the same period.5 In total, food prices 
make up 14 per cent of the consumer price index, and this measure increased by 11,3 per cent 
                                                
4   Calculated as change in real gross value added at basic prices. 
5   As traded up to 20 May 2016 on the South African Futures Exchange (SAFEX). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   in April 2016, up from 4,3 per cent ten months earlier. Food inflation is forecast to peak at 
12 per cent in the final quarter of this year. 
Dry conditions since 2015 have caused a long period of herd culling, which increased the short-
term supply of meat and temporarily suppressed meat price inflation – thus, although grains 
inflation has accelerated since June 2015, meat price inflation accelerated this year. 
Meat  price  dynamics  were  an  important  reason  why  food  inflation  rose  at  a  slower-than-
expected pace last year. However, this trend has reversed in 2016, as food inflation rose faster 
than we had anticipated in the first four months of the year. Furthermore, the rising cost of 
meat  inputs  and  the  lower  supply  of  animals  to  the  market  are  likely  to  push  meat  prices 
significantly higher over the course of 2016. 
Food prices are not solely determined by domestic supply and demand; they are increasingly 
influenced  by  international  food  prices  and  therefore  by  the  exchange  rate.6  This  is  not 
necessarily  negative.  Although  South  Africa  is  a  net  food  exporter,  we  do  not  have  a 
comparative advantage in all food production. Thus we rely on international prices, which are 
predominantly US dollar-denominated, in markets where we are price takers. During a drought, 
international food prices and the currency play a greater role, as food imports are larger than 
in  “normal”  years  and more food  commodities  trade  at  import  parity  prices.  Exchange  rate 
depreciation is thus often discussed as a disadvantage as it drives up food costs. 
Yet  there  are  advantages  to  depreciation  that  are  easy  to  overlook.  For  South  African 
commodity  producers,  rand  depreciation  has  mitigated  the  impact  of  international  price 
changes: food price indices from the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, measured in US 
dollars, show international food prices deflating for the past three years. When calculated in 
rand terms, these prices have continued to rise. Thus, domestic producers (or at least those 
who have harvested during the drought) have been protected from global agricultural price 
deflation. 
In  general,  currency  movements  assist  the  domestic  economy  in  adjusting  to  changing 
international conditions by signalling an appropriate allocation of resources for production. I 
have been talking about food prices in particular, but broader commodity prices have been 
declining since 2011. This has resulted in rand depreciation, making our manufacturing and 
services exports more competitive at a time when mining exports have become less profitable. 
For the agri-sectors, this implies scope for agro-processing expansion, as we have a relative 
advantage while the currency is depreciating. Of course, this can only happen once harvests 
recover from the drought. The extent to which we can lock in these benefits will depend on 
ensuring that future price increases are contained so as not to erode competitiveness. 
The rationale for inflation targeting in South Africa 
Before discussing the way in which the South African Reserve Bank thinks about food prices 
and its framework, let me briefly reiterate the inflation-targeting rationale. 
Inflation targeting is global best practice in monetary policy because it is transparent while also 
recognising  that  there  is  no  long-run,  or  even  medium-run,  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
growth.  Instead,  in  the  long  run,  price  stability  is  a  precondition  for  significant  sustainable 
growth. This is also true of financial stability, which has been added to the mandate of the Bank 
in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. 
Inflation  targeting  is  a  framework  that  helps  to  create  the  conditions  for  a  stable  and 
investment-friendly  business  environment.  Volatile  or  higher  inflation  outcomes  increase 
business  costs  in  several  ways.  They  can  push  employees  into  demanding  above-inflation 
                                                
6   The exchange rate also influences food production costs, as inputs such as fertiliser are usually 
imported. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   wage  increases,  which  pressure  business  margins.  More  variable  inflation  also  increases 
uncertainty  about  the  costs  of  business  operation,  which  can  delay  investment  decisions. 
Finally, investors require higher returns for increased uncertainty, which means elevated long-
term real interest rates. 
In addition, higher inflation can negatively impact on competitiveness. If inflation in South Africa 
is above that of our trading partners or export rivals, then the production costs of our exports 
will be relatively greater, and as a result we will be less competitive in global markets. This can 
be corrected by rand depreciation but the rand is especially volatile and, furthermore, domestic 
inflation can easily erode these gains. Inflation targeting helps to address these problems by 
guiding  policymakers  to  respond  to  temporary  supply  shocks  when  they  may  permanently 
accelerate inflation, as well as by ensuring that demand-side inflation is controlled. 
These  advantages  are  generic;  they  apply  to  everyone.  Yet  inflation  targeting  is  also 
particularly suited to the structure of the South African economy. The recent increase in the 
unemployment rate is a reminder of the large number of people locked out of the real economy. 
Fundamentally, inflation targeting is a policy framework that protects the vulnerable groups in 
society, such as the unemployed, the poor and the elderly – basically those with a fixed or no 
income. Higher headline inflation affects these groups most severely as they are not able to 
negotiate income increases commensurate with inflation, nor are they able to access financial 
markets to acquire assets to protect themselves against inflation. 
The South African economy is characterised by strong pricing rigidities and resilient barriers 
to entry in many industries. Because of the high concentration of the economy as well as the 
shortage of skilled employees, “insiders” – meaning price and wage setters – are in a position 
to mark prices and wages in line with their expectations. When these price and wage setters 
expect higher inflation in the future, their actions make the expectations self-fulfilling: inflation 
duly rises and the risk of a wage-price spiral increases. 
Inflation targeting, once credible, has the capacity to break this cycle as it provides an external 
anchor  for  the  “insiders.”  They  focus  instead  on  the  Bank’s  inflation  forecast  and  its 
communication and on how and when it will achieve the inflation target. This then protects 
those groups that do not have the same market power as price and wage setters, such as the 
unemployed, non-unionised employees and small firms. Greater certainty and lower inflation 
rates remove a significant constraint that these groups face in accessing the real economy. Of 
course, this is only the case as long as the Bank can convince price and wage setters of its 
commitment to the inflation target range –as long as the Bank keeps their inflation expectations 
anchored. 
Food prices and second-round effects 
Food prices hold a particular interest for the Bank. In part, this is because we are aware of the 
regressive  nature  of  food  price  increases.  More  crucially,  from  an  inflation-targeting 
perspective, if those who do have negotiating power use it in response to food price shocks, 
this can lead to second-round effects. By second-round effects I mean a reaction in inflation 
expectations or wages to higher headline inflation, which would cause a further increase in 
headline inflation after the initial effect of the shock would have dissipated. This occurred after 
the previous peak in food prices; in 2008, food price inflation averaged 15,8 per cent. In four 
of the five subsequent years, wage inflation exceeded both food and headline inflation. 
The current tightening cycle began in January 2014. Since then the Bank has hiked the repo 
rate by a cumulative 200 basis points to 7 per cent currently. This year, the Bank has hiked the 
repo rate by 75 basis points. From a historical perspective, the 7 real interest rate remains low, 
following a prolonged period of monetary accommodation. Furthermore, this is one of the most 
gradual hiking cycles on record. 
Let me emphasise that interest rate increases are not aimed at decreasing food inflation; the 
Bank  understands  that  the  food  inflation  we  are  seeing  is  a  market-based  response  to  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   temporary shock. Typically, a flexible inflation-targeting regime will look through supply shocks 
that  shift  headline  inflation  away  from  the  target  range,  provided  that  the  shift  is  clearly 
temporary  and  will  not  create  second-round  effects.  The  Bank  applied  this  approach  for  a 
number  of  shocks  occurring  between  2009  and  2013.  Headline  inflation  spent  18 months 
above the upper end of the target range over that period. Yet the Bank could afford to look 
through those shocks; underlying inflationary pressure, as measured by core inflation, was 
contained, and this, alongside anchored inflation expectations, meant that there was space for 
temporary breaches. 
However, the Bank is of the view that, since January 2014, it has not been appropriate for it to 
look  through  supply  shocks  that  drive  inflation  above  6  per  cent.  At  that  time,  the  Bank 
forecasted an extended breach of the target if it did not act. The risks around its forecast implied 
that second-round effects would manifest if it did not act to prevent them. In the run-up to the 
hiking  cycle,  the  Bank  noted  with  concern  persistently  above-inflation  wage  settlements 
despite weak growth and the clustering of inflation expectations around the upper end of the 
target range. These were signals that inflation could permanently accelerate if further shocks 
occurred. 
The problem is not that inflation may exceed 6 per cent; the problem is that people may come 
to believe that the South African Reserve Bank does not target 3 to 6 per cent but instead 
targets 6 per cent plus a “supply shock premium”. Such a perception would compromise the 
credibility that the Bank has earned since inflation targeting was introduced in 2000. As I’ve 
mentioned, price and wage setters have enormous discretion if they believe that the true target 
is above the set range. The Bank wants to avoid such a situation. 
“Fit for the Future” and the agribusiness and agro-processing sectors 
The environment that I have described today may feel discouraging to you. I would not want 
that to be my overarching message. I think that the actions South Africa takes now, to reinforce 
our framework, will protect economic competitiveness in the global arena and encourage future 
growth. 
The  National  Development  Plan  has  highlighted  the  potential  of  the  agriculture  and  agro-
processing sectors, particularly for increasing employment but also growth. Although South 
Africa is a leading exporter of certain food commodities – including maize, sugar and fruit – 
there is great scope for expansion of the agro-processing sector. Even a cursory glance at the 
manufacturing production statistics makes them look encouraging, as the weight of the food 
and  beverages  category  has  increased  from  11  per  cent  in  2000  to  24  per  cent  currently. 
However, the contribution from manufacturing production to GDP has been shrinking over this 
period, so agro-processing volumes have merely grown in line with real GDP. I am sure that 
this observation will be a key focus of your conference over the next two days, so I will not say 
more on the subject. 
There are multiple advantages to expansion. Agriculture is relatively labour-intensive, and it is 
a crucial source of employment for rural communities. Increasing agricultural output would also 
strengthen  food  security,  not  just  in  South  Africa  but  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.  Furthermore, 
expanding  manufacturing  production  is  key  to  creating  stable  jobs  suitable  for  our 
underemployed workforce. The International Monetary Fund has recommended expansion of 
agro-processing  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  as  the  region  has  a  comparative  advantage  in 
agriculture and countries such as Ethiopia have enhanced their integration into global value 
chains through agro-processing.7 Research has shown that this value chain integration is key 
to  productivity  growth  for  small  open  economies  in  particular,  as  they  learn  from  countries 
                                                
7   See the International Monetary Fund, “Regional economic outlook – sub-Saharan Africa: navigating 
headwinds”, April 2015, p. 59. Available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2015/afr/eng/pdf/sreo0415.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   further along in the value chain. Overall, then, expansion would assist in South Africa’s great 
need for export growth and give it a productivity boost and additional employment. 
Conclusion 
This  Chamber  is  well  suited  to  tackling  challenges  related  to  expansion.  As  a  forum  of 
stakeholders from different stages of the agricultural process, Agbiz is in a unique position to 
facilitate  communication  and  action.  It  is  encouraging  that  your  strategy  and  objectives 
highlight competitive performance, transformation, inclusivity and technology – all necessary 
for  a  thriving  and  sustainable  agriculture  sector,  and  for  managing  the  challenges  of 
globalisation and climate change. 
Although periods of underperformance are often the most difficult times to make changes, they 
also provide valuable time to evaluate and strengthen frameworks with a view to sustainable 
growth.  The  many  recent  shocks  to  growth  and  inflation  have  created  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty. In this context, you can at least be certain that the South African Reserve Bank is 
committed to containing inflation. This preserves your competitive advantage for exporting and 
contains long-run investment costs, creating the foundation for your expansion. You can count 
on  the  Bank  to  do  its  part.  In  turn,  I  look  forward  to  watching  you  build  a  productive  and 
integrated sector that is able to contribute ever more meaningfully to domestic growth and 
employment. 
Thank you 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
