   Lesetja Kganyago: Collaboration for building cyber resilience 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Cybersecurity Conference, Johannesburg, 23 August 2016. 
 Governor, Deputy Governors, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen  
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to this cybersecurity conference with the theme 
of “Collaboration for building cyber resilience”. This is the first cybersecurity conference of this 
kind  to  be  organised  and  hosted  by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (or  SARB),  which 
underlines the importance of cybersecurity and cyber resilience to the South African central 
bank.  
As we stand at the dawn of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, developments in information and 
communication technology (ICT), spurred on by the digital revolution, have brought and will 
continue  to  bring  about  significant  and  wide-ranging  changes  to  society  and  the  broader 
economy.  These  changes  are  marked  by  both  speed  and  ubiquity,  and  therefore  have  an 
impact on almost everyone and most firms and business processes, especially in the financial 
services sector. While most of these advances have been beneficial, the cyber-world also has 
its dark side. This is where individuals, groups, and organisations use and exploit the advances 
made in ICT for ulterior motives. In this context, very few individuals and firms are exempt from 
or are left untouched by the potentially negative consequences of such activities.  
Our Constitution, other legislation as well as the Financial Sector Regulation Bill (FSR Bill), 
currently  before  Parliament,  place  tremendous  responsibilities  on  the  SARB.  The  SARB’s 
primary  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  will  soon  be  augmented  by  an  explicit  financial 
stability mandate, and our responsibility for the regulation and supervision of banks as well as 
for the oversight of the national payment system will be expanded to include the safety and 
soundness  of  insurers,  financial  conglomerates,  and  other  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, as outlined in the FSR Bill.  
Like many other central banks, the SARB plays a key role in the regulation and supervision of 
the domestic financial system. In our scanning of the financial system for potential systemic 
risks, cyber-threats have been on our radar for a while now.  
As new financial products and services emerge from FinTech innovation and affect the market, 
the SARB will have to consider their implications for the way in which it conducts its oversight 
functions as well as monetary and macroprudential policy. The SARB has a balanced approach 
to these technological innovations. It acknowledges the greater efficiencies that ICT advances 
have  brought  to  the  financial  services  sector.  We  have  also,  within  our  risk  management 
framework  –  and  like  many  organisations  represented  here  –  adopted  and  embraced 
technologies that have helped us to execute our mandate more effectively and efficiently. As 
a  central  bank,  we  are  open  to  innovations  despite  the  different  opinions  of  regulators  on 
matters such as crypto-currencies. We are willing to consider the merits and risks of block 
chain technology and other distributed ledgers.  
Not  all  innovations  in  this  area  are,  however,  benign.  The  abuse  of  algorithmic  or  high-
frequency  trading  can  pose  problems  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial  markets.  We 
understand  that  many  financial  and  other  firms  –  in  their  drive  for  greater  efficiency  and 
productivity, and for serving their clients more effectively – may have an even bigger stake in 
leveraging off these innovations and technologies.  
Real opportunities in the digital revolution currently underway await not only further application 
by  the  private  sector,  but  also  greater  utilisation  by  financial  regulatory  authorities.  As 
innovations  bring  down  costs,  significant  transformation  of  the  financial  intermediation 
landscape cannot be discounted or dismissed. Leading innovators know how to turn disruption 
into  opportunity.  Possibilities  for  the  use  of  improved  technology  in  ensuring  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   compliance  abound  for  both  regulators  and  the  industry.  Regulators  have  only  started  to 
scratch the surface of the potential uses of, for example, Big Data in regulatory technology – 
also referred to as “RegTech”. Big Data techniques can assist us to understand the state of 
the economy and “identify trends in systemic risks” more accurately and quickly.1 Hopefully, 
this will lead to further enhancements for policymaking and greater precision in supervisory 
interventions.  
The threat landscape and the role of regulatory authorities  
With  an  expanding  digital  footprint  comes  a  growing  threat  landscape,  providing  greater 
opportunities and increasing entry points or vectors for cyberattacks. Since the unleashing of 
the  first  computer  worm  in  1988  by  a  23-year-old  Cornell  University  student,  malware  has 
grown exponentially in both volume and sophistication over the last three decades.2 There are 
well over 100 000 known computer viruses and the frequency of cyberattacks has increased. 
Old defences are quickly rendered redundant. As participants in the financial sector, you are 
aware of the details of the cyberattacks on privately owned banks, insurers, and other financial 
institutions without one having to list examples of these.  
Even central banks are not immune to such attacks. Reported attacks on SWIFT,3 the financial 
messaging network that underpins most international money transfers, have the potential to 
paralyse global trade and finance, albeit for only a short while.  
Spare a thought for ordinary citizens, your customers, who, with their limited resources and 
information asymmetries, are the most vulnerable and often the biggest losers in attacks where 
illicit financial gain  is  the key motive.  Innovations,  such  as the  advances  in  biometrics  and 
digital identities, hold great promise for individual security. We wait for industry to translate 
these gains into suitable security measures applicable to corporations.  
Innovation, however, cuts both ways. Advances in, for example, cryptography prompt further 
improvement in decryption technology. We therefore cannot be complacent about our cyber-
defences.  
Given this threat landscape, it is no surprise that cybersecurity has in the recent past moved 
swiftly up the list of priority issues in a number of countries as regulatory authorities seek to 
address cybersecurity threats and enhance cyber resilience. As a central bank and a regulator 
in the financial sector, the SARB would be remiss in its duty if it ignored the growing risks 
emerging  from  the  financial  services  sector’s  increasing  reliance  on  cyberspace  and  the 
Internet. Because of its access to capital, the financial sector is a key target. Cyber-related 
attacks  are  therefore  more  likely  to  be  directed  at  financial  systems,  institutions,  and  their 
customers. Hackers’ attacks are also becoming more sophisticated as their understanding of 
the value chains in financial services improves.  
At  an  international  level,  global  standard-setting  bodies  –  such  as  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions as well as the Committee on Payments and Market 
Infrastructures – recently issued a document titled Guidance on cyber resilience for financial 
market infrastructures that should be used to address the cyber resilience of FMIs. While these 
guidelines  are  aimed  directly  at  FMIs,  it  is  important  that  FMIs  actively  reach  out  to  their 
participants  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  to  promote  the  understanding  and  support  of 
resilience objectives and their implementation.  
                                                
1   Carney, M. Enabling the FinTech transformation: revolution, restoration or reformation? 
2   Bradshaw, S. December 2015. Combatting cyber-threats: CSIRTs and fostering international cooperation on 
cybersecurity. Paper Series No. 23. Chatham House: the Royal Institute of International Affairs. 
3   Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The guidance document covers themes such as:  
• 
• 
• 
situational awareness to understand and pre-empt cyber-events;  
collaboration to drive resilience in support of broader financial stability objectives;  
cyber-governance  to  implement  and  review  the  approach  to  managing  protection 
against  cyber-risks to  ensure  effective  security controls that  protect  confidentiality; 
and  
the  integrity  and  availability  of  assets  and  services  as  well  as  the  testing  of  the 
elements of the cyber-resilience framework to ensure their overall effectiveness.  
 These guidelines will have implications for the way in which we exercise oversight over both 
national and regional payment FMIs, the way in which we regulate and supervise the financial 
institutions under the SARB mandate, as well as the way in which we monitor financial stability. 
At a domestic level, the bankers among you would have noted that this year cybersecurity is 
one of the flavour-of-the-year topics that the Bank Supervision Department of the SARB will 
cover in its annual engagements with the boards of directors of banks.  
Motives for cyberattacks are, however, not limited to theft and often extend into a more sinister 
realm. Regulatory authorities must consider the possibility of systemic risks in the financial 
ecosystem, such as hackers bringing down a critical financial infrastructure for a prolonged 
period of time and the consequences of such an event. To this end, the SARB has established 
the  Financial  Sector  Contingency  Forum  (FSCF),  in  which  all  the  major  financial  sector 
stakeholders are represented. One of the responsibilities of the FSCF is to put contingency 
plans in place for such eventualities.  
But that is not enough. We must do more, which brings me to the purpose of this conference.  
The purpose of this conference  
Against the background of an expanded mandate, as described in the FSR Bill, the SARB has 
taken the initiative to organise this cybersecurity conference. Given the potentially systemic 
impact of new innovations, the SARB does not take cyber-threats lightly and it is serious about 
deepening cyber resilience in the financial services sector. The selection of the theme for this 
conference – “Collaboration for building cyber resilience” – has been deliberate. We want to 
galvanise collective thinking and action around cyber resilience and facilitate the emergence 
of appropriate measures to counter common threats. We also cannot address this problem in 
isolation. In a highly interconnected world, our cyber-defences are literally as strong as the 
weakest link. All role players – from critical infrastructure operators and financial firms through 
to  technologists  and  law  enforcement  agencies  to  regulators  and  vendors  –  need  to  work 
together to counter the dangers that we face.  
We  need  to  extend  the  focus  beyond  the  mere  reporting  of  cybersecurity  incidents  and 
recovery  times.  The  whole  industry  needs  to  become  more  proactive  in  its  approach  and 
embed a healthier cyber-culture in each firm. This proposed culture will have to be risk-based 
and inclusive. More prominence will have to be given to greater deterrence, early detection, 
regular  penetration  testing,  and  quicker  response  times.  How  we  strengthen  our  computer 
security incident response teams (or CSIRTs) and coordination centres becomes important. 
To be effective, we need to coordinate our efforts and work together.  
The SARB believes that cybersecurity is a terrain with enough non-competitive and mutual 
interests, where public and private stakeholders can collaborate to build the resilience that is 
required against a common threat. A number of countries have cybersecurity frameworks in 
place to deal with cyber-threats. While there is a significant amount of variation and overlap 
across national frameworks, an important shortcoming is often the lack of coordination and 
cohesion at national and regional levels. We should avoid this. Indeed, there are hurdles that 
we will have to overcome, including privacy concerns, trust deficits, and the lack of expertise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   But these are not insurmountable obstacles. I hope you will engage fruitfully on these matters 
of coordination and cohesion in your deliberations and arrive at workable solutions.  
Cyberattacks know no national borders. We have thus called on knowledgeable experts, both 
local and international, to address us on a number of relevant topics, ranging from the nature 
of  the  threat  landscape  and  regulatory  approaches  to  cybersecurity  through  future  cyber-
defensive tools to emerging cyber-resilience trends. To make matters a little more practical, I 
believe  that  you  may  examine  one  or  two  case  studies  and  consider  how  to  build  cyber 
resilience into FinTech innovation. I am sure that you are also looking forward to learning how 
cyber-threats  are  addressed  by  the  other  central  banks  represented  here  and  the  latest 
developments in this regard.  
Conclusion  
I encourage you to explore and share your ideas on cybersecurity candidly, and I wish you well 
as you work on the important details of collaborating on, and laying the foundations of, effective 
and efficient resilience against the cyber-threats of today and of the future.  
May you remain forever vigilant.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
