   Benoît Cœuré: Rebalancing in the euro area – are we nearly there yet? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
to the Danish Economic Society, Kolding, 15 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Mr President, dear Per, 
The  euro  area  crisis  was  a  crisis  fuelled  by  imbalances.  Imbalances  laid  the  ground  for 
economic and financial turmoil, in part due to the euro area’s design flaws. And the difficult 
process  of repairing  imbalances  within  that  design  sustained the  turmoil further  and  let  its 
consequences become entrenched, tearing our social fabric. If we want lasting stability and 
growth in the euro area, we cannot let the same things happen again. 
The  long-term  solution  is  to  complete  our  monetary  union  and  make  it  less  vulnerable  to 
shocks. The foundations of this road have been laid by the Five Presidents’ Report, and it 
implies setting up new risk-sharing mechanisms among the participating economies. But that 
will not happen in a situation where large imbalances between member countries already exist 
and are considered as a state of nature. Just like John Rawls pointed out with his concept of 
the “veil of ignorance”, it is impossible to achieve an optimal solution for a group if the winners 
and losers are clear a priori. Citizens are rightly suspicious that risk sharing may turn into risk 
shedding. We can only strengthen the euro area, to the benefit of all, if all member countries 
imagine themselves in comparable positions behind a veil of ignorance. 
This is why resetting all our economies onto a path of sustainable rebalancing is essential. 
Sustainable rebalancing is key to reducing risks. It is key to creating the preconditions for all 
euro area countries to stabilise, grow and converge. And it is key to laying the groundwork for 
Economic and Monetary Union to be completed. 
The euro area has been going through such a rebalancing process for several years now. So 
what I would like to do in my remarks is review where we stand today. How far has rebalancing 
come?  Is  that  rebalancing  sustainable?  And,  if  not,  what  do  we  need  to  do  to  make  it 
sustainable? 
These questions do not only matter for the euro area. They matter for the rest of the world as 
well, since rebalancing has important implications for global growth. If every economy were to 
react to their domestic challenges by exporting their slack, it would only trigger a race to the 
bottom. Therefore, only through achieving a truly sustainable rebalancing can the euro area 
start generating rather than absorbing global demand. 
Dimensions of sustainable rebalancing 
So what is sustainable rebalancing? There are four aspects we need to consider. 
The first is that external and internal rebalancing are twin concepts. For rebalancing to become 
truly sustainable, progress on both fronts is required. This follows from Macroeconomics 101: 
the current account position is the mirror image of the balance of savings and investment. 
External rebalancing achieved through, for example, raising savings and depressing domestic 
investment, might not be compatible with robust growth or high levels of employment. 
The second aspect is the interaction between flows and stocks. Rebalancing has traditionally 
been seen as resolving flow imbalances, e.g. the current account. But it is also about sustaining 
sufficient flows over time to stabilise stock imbalances. That is because, even with a balanced 
current account, excessive net external liabilities create instability and may be unsustainable. 
And as is the case today in many euro area economies, an internal debt overhang slows down 
the economic recovery and hence impedes internal rebalancing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
The third aspect is the role of surplus and deficit countries. Rebalancing could, in theory, be 
achieved by all euro area countries adjusting vis-à-vis the rest of the world. But, in reality, as 
50% of euro area trade is intra-area, it must involve rebalancing within the euro area as well. 
And to be sustainable, that rebalancing cannot take place solely through demand depression 
in  deficit  countries  in  a  way  that  prevents  their  internal  balance.  It  requires  symmetrical 
adjustment in surplus countries too. “Symmetrical”, of course, does not mean that all countries 
should have a perfectly balanced current account, but rather that both excessive deficits and 
excessive surpluses should be adjusted. 
The  fourth  aspect  is  the  cyclical  and  structural  drivers  of  rebalancing.  If  current  account 
improvements are being driven mainly by lower imports in a weak economy, they are likely to 
unwind when the economy recovers and imports rise again. But if they are being driven by 
structural changes  – such as competitiveness gains and reallocation of resources towards 
productive sectors – they are more likely to be sustainable in the steady state, both externally 
and internally. 
All four aspects are integral to the rebalancing process. Sustainable rebalancing requires that 
adjustment  is  stable,  symmetrical  and  structural.  Only  under  those  conditions  can  all 
economies achieve full employment in a way that is robust to global developments. 
So what do we see in the euro area today? 
Progress with rebalancing 
The imbalances that built up in the euro area before the crisis were sizeable. Current account 
deficits in the five (former) programme countries – Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Cyprus 
– had doubled from, on average, around 5% of GDP in 2000 to about 10% of GDP in 2008. 
Moreover, those imbalances were financed largely by volatile, debt-based cross-border flows. 
That left several countries vulnerable to a rapid reversal in financing, with little ex-post sharing 
of risks between private borrowers and lenders – a so-called “sudden stop”. 
Since then, we have seen considerable flow improvements, especially in the countries that 
entered  the  crisis  with  large  current  account  deficits.  Deficits  in  the  (former)  programme 
countries have adjusted dramatically. On average they are in balance today. Only Greece and 
Cyprus are still recording small deficits, while the other countries have moderate surpluses. In 
the three Baltic countries the improvement was even more dramatic, averaging 17 percentage 
points since 2007. 
The composition of adjustment has also been encouraging. Aside from Ireland and, to some 
extent, the Baltics, import compression played a strong role in closing current account deficits 
in the first phase of the crisis. But since 2012, improvements in deficit countries have been 
driven predominantly by robust growth in exports. The previous dramatic fall in internal demand 
in stressed countries had in fact not only depressed imports. It had pushed firms to look for 
new international markets as well.1 
Demand  for  exports  in  deficit  countries  has  also  been  supported  by  intra-euro  area 
rebalancing. In particular, though Germany continues to run a record overall current account 
surplus, its trade surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has diminished. It fell from close to 4% of GDP 
in late 2007 to around 1% of GDP today.2 Imports from the euro area have also increased 
notably. In this sense there has been some symmetry in the adjustment process. 
                                                
1   See Bobeica, E., Esteves, P.S., Rua, A. and Staehr, K. (2015), “Exports and domestic demand pressure: a 
dynamic panel data model for the euro area countries”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1777. 
2   Bundesbank trade balance data corrected for the so-called “Rotterdam effect”, that is, the fact that German 
intra-area  imports  are  “inflated”  by  imports  from  (mainly)  the  Netherlands  which  are  actually  imports  from 
countries outside the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Several factors suggest that these developments are not purely cyclical. 
On the demand side, estimates by the ECB, as well as the IMF and the European Commission, 
suggest that – with the exception of Greece – the majority of current account adjustment in 
deficit countries has been “non-cyclical”.3 “Non-cyclical”, however, does not mean “structural”. 
What it means is simply that, though falling demand did depress imports during the crisis, 
potential growth has fallen as well. Thus, when the output gap closes, current account positions 
should not substantially worsen. “Non-cyclical”, however, does not mean “structural”. What it 
means is simply that, though falling demand did depress imports during the crisis, potential 
growth has fallen as well. Thus, when the output gap closes, current account positions should 
not substantially worsen. 
On the supply side, there is also evidence of structural shifts in deficit countries that should 
help  sustain  their  export  performance.  Cost  competitiveness  –  measured  in  terms  of  real 
effective exchange rates deflated by unit labour costs (ULCs) – has improved strongly since 
the start of the crisis. In most cases real effective exchange rates now stand close to 1999 
levels or even below. That suggests much of the pre-crisis “excesses” have been reversed. 
To  give  some  examples,  in Ireland  the  improvement  in  cost  competitiveness from  peak to 
trough  is  close  to  50  percentage  points.  In  Greece  and  Latvia  the  figure  is  around 
30 percentage points. Spain and Cyprus have seen improvements of 20–25 percentage points, 
while for Portugal the figure is around 15 percentage points. In each case, the largest part of 
the improvement has come from relative cost adjustments rather than changes in the nominal 
exchange rate. 
What is less well known is that we have also seen cost adjustments in surplus countries. In 
Germany, ULC growth relative to the euro area has accelerated strongly in recent years, on 
the back of more robust wage growth and slowing productivity. That has translated into a small 
correction  in  its  cost  position  relative  to  its  euro  area  partners.  However,  thanks  to  the 
depreciation of the euro exchange rate, Germany’s competitive position relative to the rest of 
the world has also improved during the crisis. 
Stable rebalancing 
Still, all this does not mean that the rebalancing process has reached its steady state, for two 
reasons. 
First, the fact that rebalancing has been achieved, to some extent, by falling potential growth 
is hardly satisfactory. We cannot have a situation where rebalancing only holds if potential 
growth  remains  low  and  unemployment  high.  Remember  that,  despite  the  notable 
improvements since 2013, in several stressed countries employment is still more than 10% 
below 2008 levels. Any external rebalancing that does not generate jobs is not one that will 
last. 
Achieving both external rebalancing and high employment requires a better reallocation of 
available  resources,  which  means  shifting  resources  to  the  tradable  sector  and,  more 
generally, to the most productive firms operating within each sector of the economy. This would 
                                                
3   See ECB (2014), “To what extent has the current account adjustment in the stressed euro area countries been 
cyclical  or  structural?”,  box  in  the  Monthly  Bulletin,  January  (https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other-
/mb201401_focus05.en.pdf).  See  also  IMF  (2015),  External  Sector  Report  2015  (https://www.imf.-
org/external/np/pp/eng/2015/062615.pdf), and European Commission (2015), “Rebalancing in the euro area: 
an  update”,  box  1.3 
(http://ec.europa.eu/-
economy_finance/eu/forecasts/2015_spring/box3_en.pdf). 
the  European  Economic  Forecast,  Spring 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
boost total factor productivity and, therefore, potential output on a long-lasting basis, and also 
make the necessary adjustment in relative costs more sustainable.4 
Many countries still have a way to go in this regard. Admittedly, in many crisis countries ULCs 
have fallen and relative prices between the tradable and non-tradable sectors have adjusted. 
Yet sectoral labour flows show that, in the early phase of the crisis, there was no reallocation 
of jobs to the tradable sector. Rather, employment declined across all sectors in a context of 
collapsing domestic demand.5 More recently, although some countries have added jobs in the 
tradable  sector,  by  far  the  largest  sectoral  contributor  to  employment  gains  has  been  the 
services sector, which in many countries is largely non-tradable.6 
What is more, preliminary evidence shows that there is still a lot of progress to be made in the 
reallocation of resources within sectors. This plays an even more important role for total factor 
productivity growth in mature economies such as those in the euro area.7 
All this points to a need for further internal adjustments. But it also highlights the continuing 
importance of product market reforms, such as completing the single market, which open up 
services markets to competition. This would encourage intra-sector reallocation among the 
most productive firms. And by making services more tradable, it would mean that employment 
growth in that sector would also contribute to rebalancing. 
Second, despite the flow improvements, external imbalances in stock terms remain high. The 
net international investment position (NIIP) of most countries with large net foreign liabilities 
has stabilised, thanks to current account improvements. But it has not yet fallen towards safer 
levels. All five (former) programme countries still have a negative NIIP in excess of 90% of 
GDP, and in some cases much greater. The NIIP of major surplus countries, such as Germany 
and the Netherlands, has also continued to grow. 
That suggests further adjustment is still needed to achieve a sustainable external position. 
European  Commission  projections  suggest  that  the  NIIPs  of  Greece,  Spain,  Cyprus  and 
Portugal will remain at levels associated with substantial external vulnerabilities over the next 
decade.8  To  meet  the  threshold  specified  in  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  – 
which  is  an  NIIP/GDP  ratio  of  –35%  over  a  10-year  period  –  each  would  have  to  make 
substantial improvements. 
It is also important to note that internal debt levels – the debt a country owes to itself – remain 
high as well in several countries. For example, in Spain more than 60% of public debt and 80% 
of private sector debt is held by Spanish residents. This may not contribute to net external 
liabilities,  but  it  contributes  to  the  general  debt  overhang,  which  holds  back  credit  and 
investment. Internal debt, therefore, also needs to be tackled to achieve a sustainable internal 
rebalancing. 
                                                
4   For a description of how current account adjustment takes place at the extensive margin (creation of new goods 
and services), rather than at the internal margin (increased trade in existing goods and services), see Corsetti, 
G., Martin, P. and Pesenti, P. (2013), “Varieties and the transfer problem”, Journal of International Economics, 
Vol. 89, pp. 1–12. 
5   See  Tressel,  T.  and  Wang,  S.  (2014),  “Rebalancing  in  the  Euro  Area  and  Cyclicality  of  Current  Account 
Adjustments”, IMF WP 14/130. 
6   See  ECB  (2015),  “What  is  behind  the  recent  rebound  in  euro  area  employment?”,  article  in  the  Economic 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/eb201508_article01.en.pdf?07f79a90715d-
Issue 
Bulletin, 
214297004b476b416430. 
8: 
7   For the importance of within-sector resource reallocation to foster sector and aggregate productivity growth see, 
for  example,  Krizan,  C.J.,  Foster,  L.  and  Haltiwanger,  J.C.  (2006),  “Market  selection,  Reallocation,  and 
Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, 
Vol. 88(4), pp. 748–758, November. 
8   See http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/eu/forecasts/2015_spring/box3_en.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Structural rebalancing 
In short, former deficit countries still face twin challenges to achieve sustainability: they need 
to  further  lower  their  net  external  liabilities,  while  continuing  to  rebalance  their  economies 
internally. The difficulty is how to do this without the one objective cancelling out the other. Let 
me explain. 
In terms of addressing the external position, there are two, admittedly stylised, ways in which 
countries can do this: they can pay down debt or they can grow out of debt. Yet given the size 
of the net liabilities involved, each option taken in isolation has challenges. 
Paying down external debt would require very large surpluses coupled with sizeable nominal 
adjustments. As rebalancing towards the tradable sector has not yet been completed, it is 
difficult to see how this could happen without depressing incomes and employment. Further 
still, the scale of the required adjustment would create prolonged disinflationary expectations, 
which  would  raise  expectations  of  future  real  interest  rates,  depress  demand  and  hinder 
internal rebalancing.9 
At the same time, growing out of debt through boosting nominal GDP – a so-called “beautiful 
deleveraging" – is also not feasible on its own. Reducing NIIPs solely through the denominator 
would require unrealistically high rates of growth, beyond even the most heroic assumptions 
for structural reforms and/or fiscal and monetary stimulus. What is more, a large growth spurt 
without structural change might simply suck in imports and lead to new external imbalances 
emerging. 
Incidentally, a third option would be to aim to change the composition of net external liabilities 
– that is, to replace debt with equity and foreign direct investment. This would not alter the level 
of NIIPs, but it would reduce vulnerabilities by improving risk sharing. In this context, the Capital 
Markets Union project could be powerful. However, this has to be considered a longer-term 
goal. 
The only way ahead over the medium term, then, is for crisis-hit countries to find a combination 
of current account surpluses and nominal GDP growth that can produce both external and 
internal balance. So how can that be achieved? 
Further action on the nominal side is clearly necessary, in particular to support employment 
and resource reallocation. And, within limits, that would not necessarily be inimical to growth: 
a  recent modelling  exercise  by  the IMF  shows  that  wage moderation may  have  a  positive 
economic  effect  on  crisis-hit  countries,  especially  if  accompanied  by  more  dynamic  wage 
growth in surplus countries.10 The structural reforms undertaken since the crisis would also 
allow such adjustments to be made more quickly and with less employment cost than in the 
past. 
However,  at  some  point  nominal  adjustment  leads  to  a  change  in  dynamics  –  that  is,  the 
positive substitution effects of relative price changes are dominated by the negative effects on 
incomes and real rates. That is why any effective adjustment strategy also has to be based 
around productivity growth. Productivity growth both lowers ULCs, supporting exports, and lifts 
permanent income and potential output, supporting debt reduction through real GDP growth. 
And though this might lead to higher investment, that would not necessarily be contrary to 
current account adjustment. If new investment occurs in the tradable sector it should lead to a 
stronger exporting base in the future. 
Another factor in favour of focusing on productivity is that the types of reforms that will deliver 
productivity growth are likely to have less negative effects when monetary policy is at the lower 
                                                
9   See Cœuré, B. (2014), “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, keynote speech at the 
Economic conference, Latvijas Banka, Riga, 17 October. 
10   See https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1522.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
bound. That is because they act more on fixed costs than marginal costs, and hence have less 
impact on prices and real rates. For example, measures such as judicial reform or opening up 
closed professions are likely to primarily boost investment – and hence productivity – with little 
disinflationary effect. 
For all these reasons, and as I have said on several occasions11, seeing rebalancing as all 
about  cutting  costs  –  which  is  what  policymakers  often  think  of  as  “competitiveness”  –  is 
misguided. Productivity growth is central to competitiveness and to growing out of debt. This 
is confirmed by the IMF exercise I just mentioned: the benefits of wage moderation diminish 
as more countries engage in it, whereas if all countries engage in structural reforms to raise 
productivity the benefits are large and uniform. 
Among the structural reforms that reduce fixed costs, one that is likely to have the strongest 
impact in the current environment is improving insolvency regimes. This would help tackle the 
debt overhang for viable firms by reducing the costs of debt workout. And it would also allow 
non-viable  firms  to  fail  faster,  supporting  reallocation  to  more  productive  ones.  This  is  the 
message  of  a  recent  analysis  from  the  European  Commission,  which  finds  that  a  good 
insolvency framework is associated with speedier adjustment of non-performing loan ratios.12 
Symmetrical rebalancing 
That said, it is also clear that sustainable rebalancing cannot only involve measures in crisis-
hit countries. Rebalancing has to be somewhat symmetrical, i.e. surplus countries also have a 
contribution to make. 
Such a contribution is partially about strengthening domestic demand, though we know that 
spillovers to crisis-hit countries through higher imports are likely to be small.13 But what is more 
important, in my view, is the role of surplus countries in supporting euro area price stability – 
i.e. an inflation rate of below but close to 2%. This would allow the remaining relative price 
changes within the euro area to take place against a higher nominal bar. And that would in turn 
avoid deflationary nominal adjustments that raise real interest rates.14 
So how could this be achieved? 
As I already mentioned, wages have been rising more robustly in surplus countries, which is 
welcome and consistent with rebalancing. Yet some argue that more is still needed in terms of 
demand-side policies. Such measures would no doubt support euro area price stability. But 
they  would  have  very  limited  impact  on  potential  output  and  the  permanent  income  of 
households. One can therefore question how much they would, in isolation, contribute to a 
sustainable rebalancing over the medium term. 
The situation may be different, however, if growth is boosted by a combination of higher public 
investment and structural reforms creating incentives for higher private investment, which will 
induce a rise in permanent income. This could be a major confidence boost to the economy 
                                                
11   See Cœuré, B. (2015), “Paradigm lost: Rethinking international adjustments”, Egon and Joan von Kashnitz 
Lecture, Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November. 
12   See Carcea, M.C., Ciriaci, D., Cuerpo, C., Lorenzani, D. and Pontuch, P. (2015), “The economic impact of 
rescue and recovery frameworks in the EU”, EC Discussion Paper, No 004, September. 
13   See https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Reden/2014/2014_03_17_weidmann.html. 
14   This line of thinking has been formalised in a recent paper by Olivier Blanchard and co-authors which looks at 
the effect of higher government spending and inflation in core countries on those in the periphery. They find 
that, in normal times, the benefits for periphery countries are minimal as terms-of-trade gains are offset by the 
central bank raising rates. In a liquidity trap situation, however, the effects are markedly different. Crucially, if 
monetary policy is expected to not raise rates for a couple of years or more – as it is the case today – the 
stimulus for the periphery can be large. See Blanchard, O., Erceg, C.J. and Lindé, J. (2015), “Jump starting the 
euro area recovery: would a rise in core fiscal spending help the periphery? “, NBER WP 21426. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
resulting in a surge in investment expenditure and a corresponding endogenous increase in 
inflation. But at a later stage, when the real effects of structural reforms show through, supply 
would catch up and inflation pressures would abate. 
For  surplus  countries  this  would,  in  my  view,  be  a  win-win  outcome,  thus  setting  the  right 
domestic incentives to adjust. In some surplus countries the output gap is currently closing in 
the presence of low potential growth and a significant savings-investment imbalance. With the 
policy measures I have mentioned, they would instead be able to move towards a new, win-
win equilibrium. An equilibrium that would not only be consistent with the external balance, but 
also tackle the interrelated domestic challenges of weak private and public investment and low 
potential growth. At the same time, this adjustment would be “self-limiting”, in the sense that 
upward pressure on inflation would be temporary and would not fundamentally undermine the 
country’s external competitiveness. 
How rebalancing plays out between surplus and deficit countries will determine the role of the 
euro area in global growth. As crisis-hit countries need to run continued surpluses to reduce 
their net liabilities, the euro area as whole will continue, unless the surpluses of other countries 
fall, to run a large surplus with the rest of the world. With weakening demand in emerging 
markets, this essentially puts the burden of generating global growth squarely on the shoulders 
of the United States. That may be asking a lot, especially if the secular stagnation hypothesis 
is to be believed. 
Indeed, as I pointed out in a recent speech in Berkeley, export-led strategies risk a fallacy of 
composition: they may be relevant for one economy, but in the aggregate they risk leading the 
global economy into a high saving, low real interest rate trap. It is vital that all major economic 
areas contribute to global growth to avoid a descent into beggar-thy-neighbour policies.15 
The alternative risk is that, if adjustment in the euro area is too asymmetric, it may ultimately 
stall in crisis-hit countries. Pre-crisis imbalances would then not be fully reversed. That might 
contribute to a reduction in the euro area current account surplus, but at the cost of creating 
new risks down the line. That is neither in the interest of the euro area nor the global economy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Euro  area  countries  have made substantial  progress  with  rebalancing  in  recent  years.  But 
many still have a way to go to make rebalancing sustainable. Doing so is not only essential for 
their own stability and growth. It is also key to creating the conditions for completing monetary 
union in a way that will prevent imbalances from emerging again. 
The full potential of using the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure to strengthen euro area 
surveillance has so far not been realised, neither for preventing nor for correcting imbalances. 
From now on, it is important that its corrective arm is used forcefully and without exception as 
soon as excessive imbalances which endanger the smooth functioning of EMU are identified. 
The  roadmap  to  a  complete  monetary  union  is  there:  it  was  laid  out  in  the  recent  Five 
Presidents’ Report. But the political will to enact it will not exist unless economic divergences 
are first ironed out. It is clear that monetary union cannot now be built from behind the veil of 
ignorance. But all countries can take measures to make their economic policies converge and 
reduce foreseeable risks, which is what makes mutual insurance possible. 
Ultimately, it is economic divergence that fuels political divergence, and this is what makes the 
euro  area  so  fragile.  Sustainable  rebalancing  is  the  first  step  towards  avoiding  such 
divergence. 
                                                
15   See Cœuré, B. (2015), op. cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
