  Mario Draghi: Laudatio for Theo Waigel 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  honour  of 
Dr Theodor Waigel, at SignsAwards, Munich, 17 June 2016. 
 James Freeman Clarke, a 19th century theologian, once observed that “a politician is a man 
who  thinks  of  the  next  election,  while  a  statesman  thinks  of  the  next  generation”.  This 
captures well why we are here to honour Theo Waigel today. 
Theo Waigel’s political career cannot just be defined by the elections he won, however many 
there were during his 30 years in the Bundestag. Nor can it be defined by his time as head of 
the CSU and as finance minister of Germany. 
It is defined by his legacy: a legacy that is still shaping Europe today. 
He became finance minister in 1989 at a turning-point in post-war European history – when 
the Iron Curtain that divided Europe was being lifted; when the walls and barbed wire that 
divided Germany were being removed. 
It was a time of great hopes and expectations. But it was also a time of some anxiety. It was 
clear that the successful reunification of Germany would be a tremendous undertaking. And 
many wondered what those changes would mean for the European Community – whether it 
would upset the balance of power that had prevailed between nations since the war. 
In that uncertain setting, Theo Waigel’s leadership was pivotal – both as a German and as a 
European. 
He  was  one  of  the  strongest  advocates  of  German  reunification,  and  was  instrumental  in 
getting  Germany’s  federal  and  state  governments  to  finance  the  reconstruction  and 
modernisation of East Germany. 
And under his influence, the German government took a fundamental decision for Europe: 
that the reunification which made Germany stronger should not make Europe weaker. Free 
of the threat of the Soviet Union, Germany chose not to go down a path of its own making. 
Instead,  it  renewed  its  commitment  to  Europe.  And  it  demonstrated  the  strength  of  that 
commitment  by  sharing  its  currency  with  its  neighbours.  As  Theo  Waigel  said,  Germany 
brought the Deutsche Mark to Europe, and in doing so brought the euro into being. 
This historic sequence of events spoke to three character traits which define Theo Waigel: 
his vision, his resolve and his statesmanship. 
He  was  a  person  who  took  the  long  view  and  followed  his  convictions  rather  than  the 
zeitgeist. He was not discouraged by the obstacles that stood in his way, however high they 
were. And he had that crucial quality of all great statesmen – the ability to take others with 
him. 
He  brought  these  same  three  qualities  to  bear  in  the  design  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union some years later. His voice carried particular weight in the decision to add the Stability 
and Growth Pact to the architecture of monetary union. Against considerable resistance in 
some  corners,  his  advocacy  ensured  the  euro  was  born  within  a  framework  for  fiscal 
discipline. 
This was visionary, because the Pact was more than just a set of rules. What Theo Waigel 
understood is that a union of separate nations, with different histories, traditions and cultures, 
but bound together by common interests and common needs, could only be built on mutual 
trust. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Trust was the key ingredient for countries take further steps towards integration without fear 
of moral hazard. But trust had to be earned. 
First,  by  countries  showing  that  they  accepted  the  shared  responsibilities  that  monetary 
union  creates.  And  second,  by  converging  towards  similar  levels  of  income,  which  would 
assuage fears of a future “transfer union”. 
Theo Waigel’s insight was to see that the Stability Pact could achieve both. Responsibility 
would  be  demonstrated  by  compliance  with  the  rules  that  had  been  agreed  by  all.  And 
compliance would lead to greater stability, higher growth and ultimately faster convergence. 
When the Pact was agreed in the late 1990s, it was in a climate of optimism and prudence 
where this expectation seemed feasible. Fiscal discipline had spread through the euro area 
as countries prepared for membership. And the addition of the single currency to the single 
market was expected to lead to a rapid narrowing of differences between richer and poorer 
members. 
But the reality was of course different, and convergence was slower than we thought  – at 
least sustainable convergence that did not unwind with the bust. 
This was in part due to a lack of conviction among euro area countries that compliance with 
the rules would generate jobs and growth. It was in part due to a lack of determination in 
applying those rules. And it was in part due to external factors, namely the global financial 
crisis. 
Fundamentally, the culture that should have underpinned trust – of responsibility leading to 
solidarity – needed to be stronger. And without that, as Theo Waigel foresaw, our monetary 
union was more fragile than it should have been. 
So today we face a choice – between leaving things as they are and moving forward. And 
this is not a choice without costs. 
We have seen that the price of inaction is high. We have seen how it leaves the economy 
vulnerable to instability. We have seen how the perceived impotence of public authorities in 
meeting the needs of their people feeds into frustration and rejection. And we have seen how 
that risks undermining trust in and support for our institutions – and even the European Union 
itself. 
So to my mind there is only one  way ahead, and that is to complete the vision that Theo 
Waigel left us. But progress today must be different from the past. We have to find a new 
way to build trust among the Member States and the peoples of Europe – a way that builds 
on existing institutions to better ensure that the common needs of the people are met. 
The  needs  that  we  share  in  common,  and  that  can  be  more  safely  delivered  in  common, 
must be identified and explained more clearly. 
They  include  economic  interests,  such  as  the  benefits  provided  by  a  large  and  fully 
integrated financial area. They include defence, and more generally security against internal 
and external threats, the capacity to address global migration challenges and the protection 
of intellectual property – all of which the European Union helps deliver, in ways that individual 
governments may not necessarily be able to do. And they include environmental protection 
and the fight against climate change. 
It is the demonstration of why, and how, those interests can be better protected in common 
that will gradually complement compliance and convergence as the basis for trust and the 
cement of the Union. 
And  I  think  that  in  many  cases  the  evidence  is  already  there  for  all  to  see.  But  to  move 
forward, and I believe it is in our interests to do so, will require us to draw on the qualities that 
made Theo Waigel a leader. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  His focus on the long horizon rather than the demands of the day. 
His courage in his convictions and his resilience in seeing them through. 
And above all his mastery at convincing and building consensus. 
That would be the best way to honour Theo Waigel’s legacy, and to deliver the stability and 
prosperity that our Union was built for. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
