  Haruhiko Kuroda: Introduction of “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary 
Easing with a Negative Interest Rate” 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Kisaragi-kai meeting, 
Tokyo, 3 February 2016. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak at the Kisaragi-kai meeting. At 
the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  January  29,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  introduce 
“Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate” in order 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. Today, I will first 
explain  the  Bank’s recognition  of  and  prospects for  economic  activity  and  prices  in Japan, 
and then elaborate on the background to the policy decision made this time around. 
Economic activity in Japan 
I. 
First, I would like to talk about economic activity in Japan. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately on the back of firm domestic private 
demand, although exports and production have been affected by the slowdown in emerging 
economies. In the corporate sector, profits clearly have continued to improve, registering a 
record high, with support from an improvement in the real economy as well as the low crude 
oil prices and the low yen rate (Chart 1). Against this background, business fixed investment 
has been on a moderate increasing trend. According to the business fixed investment plans 
in the December 2015 Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan (Tankan), firms 
have maintained their positive fixed investment stance. In the household sector, labor market 
conditions  have  continued  to  tighten.  The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  and  the 
diffusion index for employment conditions in the December Tankan have improved to almost 
the same levels as around the first half of 1992 (Chart 2). Moreover, the unemployment rate 
has been declining and is in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent for the first time in 18 years, since 
1997.  It  can  be  judged  that  the  labor  market  is  in  a  situation  of  “full  employment,”  where 
remaining  unemployment  is  due  solely  to  mismatches  between  job  openings  and  job 
applicants. Reflecting the tightening of labor market conditions, employee income has been 
increasing  moderately.  Under  such  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation, private consumption has been resilient. 
Looking  ahead,  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from 
income to spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors. Exports 
are expected to increase moderately on the back of emerging economies moving out of their 
deceleration  phase.  As  in  the  January  2016  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices 
(Outlook Report) released by the Bank last week, the real GDP growth rate is projected to be 
1.1 percent for fiscal 2015 and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and thus is estimated to continue 
to  exceed  the  potential  growth  rate  (Chart  3).  Against  this  backdrop,  Japan’s  economy  is 
likely to shift from the phase of recovery to expansion; namely, the output gap is expected to 
turn  positive  (excess  demand).  In  fiscal  2017,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  is  projected  to 
maintain positive growth of 0.3 percent, although with a slowing in its pace to around a level 
somewhat  below  the  potential  growth  rate,  reflecting the  effects  of a front-loaded  increase 
and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike as well as the 
cyclical developments in the economy. 
Price developments in Japan 
II. 
Let me now turn to price developments in Japan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food), 
which had been minus 0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE, increased to as high 
as  1.5  percent  in  April  2014,  excluding  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  4). 
However,  as  a  result  of  a  substantial  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014,  it  has 
declined gradually and currently is around 0 percent. Nonetheless, the Bank is of the view 
that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  been  improving  steadily.  Next,  I  would  like  to 
elaborate on the background to our view on prices. 
To begin with, I would like to touch on the relationship between the price stability target of 
2 percent and the underlying trend in inflation. The Bank has set the target at 2 percent in 
terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  all-item  CPI.  It  is  common  in  major 
economies to define the price stability target as the all-item inflation rate. This is because the 
all-item  CPI  comprehensively  covers  goods  and  services  that  households  consume. 
However,  when  assessing  price  developments  at  each  point  in  time,  there  is  a  need  to 
exclude  the  effects  stemming  from  the  factors  that  fluctuate  temporarily  and  evaluate  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  appropriately.  Since  such  factors  will  dissipate  eventually,  we 
cannot make appropriate policy decisions if we look only at superficial price developments, 
which are affected by temporary factors. 
We usually refer to the CPI (all items less fresh food) to explain price developments because 
prices  for  fresh  food  fluctuate  remarkably  in  Japan.  Given  this,  in  a  case  where  crude  oil 
prices  fluctuate  largely,  it  is  natural  to  think  that  the  CPI  should  be  looked  at  on  a  basis 
excluding energy. 
On this basis, I would like to examine the underlying trend in inflation in Japan. The Bank is 
of  the  view  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  been  improving  steadily,  and  this  is 
based on two factors. First, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food 
and  energy  –  both  of  which  are  with  large  fluctuations  –  had  been  negative  until  the 
introduction  of  QQE,  but  turned  positive  in  October  2013.  Since  then,  it  has  remained 
positive for 27 consecutive months and increased to 1.3 percent recently (Chart 4). Second, 
both  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  which  determine  the 
underlying trend in inflation, have been improving. Let me now briefly reflect on the output 
gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations. First off, the output gap – an indicator 
for the supply and demand balance – fluctuates, reflecting the utilization of labor and capital. 
As I mentioned earlier, the labor market is in a situation of “full employment,” and the output 
gap has steadily followed an improving trend driven mainly by labor market developments, 
with  the  tightening  trend  in  labor  market  conditions  having  continued  (Chart  5).  With  the 
economy continuing to grow at a pace above its potential, the tightening of the labor market 
conditions  is  likely  to  strengthen  and  capacity  utilization  rates  are  expected to  increase  as 
exports  and  production  pick  up.  Against  this  background,  the  output  gap  is  likely  to  turn 
positive, or in other words, become a situation of excess demand. 
Secondly, we have medium- to long-term inflation expectations. According to various survey 
results and the beak-even inflation rate using inflation-indexed bonds, there is concern that 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  somewhat  weak  recently,  mainly 
reflecting  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  the  share  of  price-increasing 
items  minus  the  share  of  price-decreasing  items  in  the  CPI,  as  well  as  daily  and  weekly 
indices  of  the  prices  of food  and  daily  necessities,  have  been  on  a  remarkable  expanding 
trend since last spring up to the present (Chart 6). In the annual labor-management wage 
negotiations,  2015  represented  the  second  consecutive  year  of  base  pay  increasing,  and 
movements toward wage increases have continued to be seen in various sectors this year. 
What  these  indicators  and  developments  suggest  is  that  firms’  price-  and  wage-setting 
stance  has  clearly  changed  and  that  households  seem  to  be  increasingly  accepting  price 
rises.  Against  this  backdrop,  price  hikes  by  firms  have  been  widespread  and  sustained. 
Inflation  expectations therefore  appear to  be rising  on  the  whole  from  a  somewhat  longer-
term  perspective  and  it  can  be  assessed  that  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset  has 
been progressing steadily thus far. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I  have  just  explained  the  recent  developments  and  outlook  for  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation. I would now like to give an overview of the Bank’s projections for the CPI (all items 
less fresh food) in the January 2016 Outlook Report (Chart 3). In brief, the forecasts of the 
CPI (all items less fresh food) are obtained by adding the underlying trend in inflation to the 
contribution  of  energy  items  to  the  CPI.  The  January  Outlook  Report  assumes  that  Dubai 
crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent 35 U.S. dollars per barrel to the range of 
45–50 dollars per barrel toward the end of fiscal 2017, which marks the end of the projection 
period. The contribution of energy items to the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all 
items less fresh food) is estimated to be slightly more than minus 1 percentage point and is 
at  its  highest  level  recently.  However,  under  the  aforementioned  assumption  of  crude  oil 
prices, the contribution is projected to decrease gradually. Meanwhile, since the underlying 
trend in inflation is likely to rise steadily, this is likely to be seen clearly in the CPI (all items 
less fresh food) as the contribution of energy items to the CPI lessens. Taking these factors 
into  account,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  is 
projected to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – around the first half of fiscal 
2017. 
Risk factors regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices 
III. 
Thus  far,  I  have  explained  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  that  the  Bank 
considers most probable. The baseline scenario assumes that Japan’s economy is likely to 
be on a moderate expanding trend and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to 
accelerate toward 2 percent. However, there are various risks associated with this outlook. In 
the following, I would like to touch on two important factors to this end. 
Changes in firms’ behavior 
The first factor is changes in firms’ behavior. 
As I mentioned earlier, corporate profits are at historical high levels and the labor market is in 
a situation of “full employment.” In theory, under an economic mechanism, this situation will 
lead  to  economic  growth  and  an  increase  in  wages  and  prices.  In  fact,  as  I  have  noted, 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, and the underlying trend in inflation 
has  been  improving  steadily  in  a  situation  where  wages  have  increased  moderately. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that,  given  the  high  level  of  corporate  profits  and  the  degree  of 
tightening  of  labor  market  conditions,  the  spread  of  this  favorable  condition  to  the 
expenditure  side,  such  as  in  terms  of  wages  and  business  fixed  investment,  is  somewhat 
weak at an aggregate level. Of course, many firms are proactively investing in physical and 
human  capital.  The  Bank  judges  that  firms’  and  households’  deflationary  mindsets  have 
steadily been converting under QQE. However, the degree of conversion differs largely by 
industry  and  firm;  thus,  seeing  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole,  it  cannot  be  said  that  firms’ 
incentives to spend have fully taken hold. Moreover, it is inevitable that a conversion of firms’ 
deflationary mindset, which had taken root under the protracted deflation, will take time. At 
this  stage,  attention  is  warranted  to  a  significant  risk  that,  in  the  case  where  business 
sentiment deteriorates, reflecting uncertainties over overseas economies, firms might revert 
to acting based on a deflationary mindset. 
Slowdown in emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
Next,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  the  slowdown  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies, which has been drawing attention recently as the most significant risk factor. 
The  baseline  scenario  for  the  global  economy  assumes  that  advanced  economies  will 
continue  to  grow  firmly  and  that  emerging  economies,  with  the  spread  of  such  growth’s 
effects,  will  move  out  of  their  deceleration  phase.  A  similar  projection  is  presented  in  the 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in January by the International Monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Fund  (IMF)  (Chart  7).  Recently,  however,  uncertainties  over  the  outlook  for  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies, mainly China, have heightened in the financial markets. 
In this situation, international commodity prices, such as crude oil prices, have been declining 
substantially  (Chart  8).  The  decline  in  commodity  prices  exerts  positive  effects  on 
commodity-importing economies, mainly advanced economies. In Japan, this decline is one 
of  the  factors  that  encourage  favorable  corporate  profits  and  it  also  has  been  supporting 
households’ real income. In contrast, the possibility that the decline might exert considerable 
downward  effects  on  commodity-exporting  economies  –  mainly  Brazil,  Russia,  and  oil-
producing countries in the Middle East – warrants attention. 
What  kinds  of  risks  would  these  be  for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices?  A  further 
slowdown  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  could  possibly  lead  to  a 
decrease in exports. But what warrants more attention is its effect brought through sentiment. 
Specifically,  if  business  sentiment  were  to  deteriorate,  reflecting  uncertainties  over  the 
outlook for emerging and commodity-exporting economies or reflecting volatile developments 
in  the  financial  markets,  there  is  a  risk  that  firms’  fixed  investment  stance  and  price-  and 
wage-setting  stance  will  become  cautious.  If  such  risk  materializes,  the  virtuous  cycle  of 
economic recovery from income to spending would be impaired and the underlying trend in 
inflation would also be affected. As I have explained, although business sentiment has been 
on an improving trend, it still is not bullish enough, and thus warrants extra attention. 
IV. 
Monetary policy management 
Rationale for a negative interest rate policy and its effects 
Taking  account  of  the  environment  surrounding  Japan’s  economy,  such  as  the  decline  in 
crude oil prices and the developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, as 
well  as  the  volatility  in  global  financial  markets  reflecting  these  developments,  there  is  an 
increasing  risk  that  an  improvement  in  business  sentiment  and  conversion  of  peoples’ 
deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed  and  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  might  be 
negatively  affected.  In  order  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  this  risk  and  to  maintain 
momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” at its Monetary Policy Meeting on January 29, 
2016 (Chart 9). I will explain the objectives and rationale for the newly introduced policy as 
follows. 
The  Bank  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013,  about  three  years  ago.  The  main  transmission 
mechanism  of QQE  is  envisaged  as  pushing  down  real  interest  rates  by  lowering  nominal 
rates across the entire yield curve by large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs) and by raising inflation expectations through a strong and clear commitment toward 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. QQE has been exerting its intended effects. 
Yields on 10-year JGBs have been lowered to a record low level, and inflation expectations 
have been rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective. The decline in real 
interest rates has been stimulating private demand, and, as I explained earlier, has brought 
record profits of firms and a full-employment labor market condition. 
“QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” introduced this time is a new policy framework in which 
a “negative interest rate” is added to the existing options of “quantity” and “quality.” So what 
does  a  “negative  interest  rate”  mean  in  practice?  If  an  interest  rate  is  negative,  you  can 
receive interest when you borrow money and you have to pay interest when you lend money. 
In  normal  financial  transactions,  such  a  thing  would  never  happen.  When  a  central  bank 
wants to lower interest rates through its monetary policy, it normally will increase the amount 
of money provided to the markets. As a result, a greater number of people want to lend or 
invest extra money. With the supply of money exceeding the demand for money, the interest 
rate,  which  is  a  charge  for  money  lent,  will  decline.  If  a  central  bank  continues  to  provide 
more money to the markets, to what extent will the interest rate be lowered? The lower limit, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  or floor,  should  be  at  the  level  where  one  cannot  make  more  profits  even  if  one  can  lend 
more money; i.e., at zero percent. This is called the “zero lower bound” of a nominal interest 
rate. 
Since  central  banks  in  major  advanced  economies  started  their  unconventional  monetary 
policies after the global financial crisis, they have been providing money to the markets in 
various  ways,  and  the  last  constraint  to  be  conquered  was  the  “zero  lower  bound”  of  a 
nominal interest rate. However, in some European countries, as various policy options have 
been tried to address slowdown in economic activity and lower inflation, a negative interest 
rate was introduced, starting with the central bank in Sweden, followed by those in Denmark, 
Switzerland,  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  How  have  these  central  banks 
overcome the “zero lower bound”? The starting point of the mechanism is a framework where 
an  interest  rate  applied  to  deposits  financial  institutions  hold  at  the  central  bank  is  set  in 
negative territory. As financial institutions incur losses on cash they hold at the central bank, 
they  will  try  to  invest  it  in  the  markets  even  at  a  negative  interest  rate  if  they  can  reduce 
losses  in  comparison  with  holding  it  at  the  central  bank.  As those raising funds  can make 
profits  by  simply  borrowing  money,  there  will  be  demand  for  funds  in  the  markets.  As  the 
needs  of  both  investors  and  those  needing  funds  match  in  this  way,  short-term  money 
market transactions will be made at a negative interest rate. This is how a negative interest 
rate is achieved in practice. A negative interest rate in the money markets means that the 
short end of the yield curve will be lowered to below zero percent. The objective of monetary 
easing is to push down the entire yield curve; therefore, a negative interest rate will be a very 
powerful “weapon” for monetary easing. In combination with the continuation of large-scale 
purchases of JGBs, a negative interest rate will exert downward pressure on interest rates 
across the entire yield curve more powerfully. It will lower real interest rates, and thus have 
favorable effects on the economic activity of firms and households. 
So why did the Bank of Japan adopt a negative interest rate at this timing? QQE has been 
exerting its intended effects. If judged necessary, there is ample room to further expand the 
size of asset purchases. We do not share the view that the Bank’s asset purchases are now 
approaching their limit. 
That said, after nearly three years have passed since the launch of QQE, it is true that it took 
time  more  than  initially  envisioned  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  due 
mainly  to  a  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  Against this  background,  we  decided  to 
further  enhance  and  strengthen  QQE  by  taking  account  of  the  experiences  in  European 
countries with a negative interest rate. 
However, it should be noted that financial conditions significantly differ between Japan and 
Europe. In Japan, the relative size of the current account balance at the central bank is far 
larger than that in Europe. Moreover, it will continue to increase at an annual pace of around 
80 trillion yen under QQE. If a negative interest rate is applied to the entire balance of the 
current account, financial institutions will have to bear excessive burdens. In that case, there 
is a risk that a negative interest rate will actually have an adverse impact on the functions of 
financial intermediation. With this in mind, a “multiple-tier system,” where a negative interest 
rate is applied only to a marginal increase in the current account balance, has been adopted. 
The multiple-tier system is designed so that a negative interest rate can have its full impact 
on  market  rates  while  minimizing  its  side  effects.  This  is  a  unique  policy  framework  of  a 
negative interest rate that fits well into the Japanese system. 
Scope for further monetary easing in terms of three dimensions 
Under the newly introduced framework of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” the Bank will 
pursue  monetary  easing  by  making  full  use  of  possible  measures  in  terms  of  three 
dimensions: quantity, quality, and a negative interest rate (Chart 10). 
Going  forward,  if  judged  necessary,  it  is  possible  to  further  cut  the  interest  rate  from  the 
current  level  of  minus  0.1  percent.  In  Europe,  the  ECB  has  set  the  deposit  rate  at  minus 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  0.3 percent, Swiss National Bank at minus 0.75 percent, and Riksbank (the central bank in 
Sweden)  at  minus  1.1  percent.  As  shown  by  these  examples,  there  is  sufficient  room  for 
further monetary easing in the “negative interest rate” dimension. If deemed necessary, the 
Bank will cut the interest rate further into negative territory. 
With regard to the purchases of JGBs, which are conducted so that the Bank’s holding will 
increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen, about two thirds of the total outstanding 
JGBs  are  left  in  the  market.  Therefore,  we  believe  that  there  is  sufficient  room  for  further 
expansion in the size of purchase. In this context, let me remind you that, at the Monetary 
Policy Meeting last December, the Bank decided various measures, including the expansion 
of  eligible  collateral  that  it  will  accept  from  banks,  the  extension  of  the  average  remaining 
maturity  of  its  JGB  purchases,  and  the  increase  in  the maximum  amount  of  each  issue  of 
Japan real estate investment trust (J-REIT) to be purchased. Possible technical obstacles for 
further monetary  easing  in  terms  of “quantity”  and  “quality”  dimensions already  have  been 
removed. 
You might think that the introduction of a negative interest rate would make it difficult for the 
Bank  to  carry  out  its  asset  purchase  operations.  At  first  sight,  such  concern  sounds 
reasonable, because when financial institutions sell their assets such as JGBs to the Bank, 
they end up holding the current account balance as proceeds, on which a negative interest 
rate will be applied. In that case, however, the costs of holding the current balance with a 
negative  interest  rate  will  be  compensated  by  higher  sales  prices,  or  lower  yields,  of  the 
assets sold to the Bank. Therefore, a negative interest rate policy will not necessarily make 
the Bank’s purchases difficult. Of course, the Bank will implement JGB purchases by paying 
due attention to how a negative interest rate affects the dynamics of JGB markets. 
Monetary policy going forward 
The Bank will continue with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” aiming to achieve the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent,  as  long  as  necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable 
manner.  It  will  examine  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  take  additional  easing 
measures in terms of three dimensions – quantity, quality, and a negative interest rate – if it 
is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. It is no exaggeration that “QQE 
with a Negative Interest Rate” is the most powerful monetary policy framework in the history 
of modern central banking. 
Sometimes  it  is  argued  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  running  out  of  ammunition  for  further 
monetary easing. Frankly speaking, I feel uncomfortable with such an argument. If we judge 
that existing measures in the toolkit are not enough to achieve the goal, what we have to do 
is  to  devise  new  tools,  rather  than  give  up  the  goal.  Indeed,  the  constraint  of  “zero  lower 
bound” of a nominal interest rate, which was believed to be impossible to conquer, has been 
almost overcome by the wisdom and practices of central banks, including those of the Bank 
of Japan. I am convinced that there is no limit to measures for monetary easing. The Bank 
will continue to devote itself to innovation in monetary policy measures. 
The  commitment  by  the  Bank  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  is  firm  and 
unshaken. Given that the central bank is firmly committed to the price stability target and is 
taking necessary measures as appropriate, the goal will surely be achieved. Let me conclude 
my speech by reiterating what I have repeatedly stated since I took the governorship of the 
Bank of Japan: 
The Bank of Japan will do whatever we can to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. 
Thank you. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
