  Øystein Olsen: Guardian of the monetary system 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
official event to mark the bicentenary of Norges Bank, Trondheim, 14 June 2016. 
 Your Majesty, President of the Storting, Minister and honoured guests, 
Exactly two hundred years ago today, the Act relating to the monetary system of Norway was 
signed into law by King Karl II of Norway. The Act was an important step in the restoration of 
Norway as an independent nation. 
Two  years  earlier  –  at  Eidsvoll  –  Christian  Magnus  Falsen,  a  key  member  of  the  1814 
Constituent  Assembly,  had  asserted  that  no  state  can  exist  without  a  well-functioning 
monetary  system.  A  national  currency  would  be  a  symbol  of  Norway’s  sovereignty  and 
freedom. And to secure independence, the country’s economy had to be brought into order. 
With a monetary system in ruins, this was no easy task. 
Norway’s governing men – and no doubt Norway’s women too – had long been aware that a 
country  without  its  own  bank  was  at  a  disadvantage.  It  was  a  long  way  to  Copenhagen, 
where the nearest bank was located. With no easy access to a bank, people had to rely on 
friends  and  relatives  or  business  acquaintances  instead. Theatres  were  not  only  places  of 
entertainment,  but  important  meeting  places  where  deals  could  be  struck  and  money 
exchanged. And if the theatregoer was lucky, he might go home with a loan in his pocket. 
With  the  king’s  signature  on  14  June  1816,  the  foundations  of  the  monetary  system  were 
laid. A new currency was issued – the speciedaler. And Norway’s first bank was founded and 
named, not surprisingly, Norges Bank. Branches were established in the largest towns, and 
the Bank’s first headquarters was located here in Trondheim, a twelve-day journey from the 
government  in  Christiania  (now  Oslo),  and  even  farther  from  Stockholm1.  This  provided  a 
geographical  distance from king  and government,  in  addition  to  the more  important formal 
distance. 
The  people’s  elected  representatives  at  Eidsvoll  had  taken  responsibility  for  the  monetary 
system,  as  stated  in  Article  75  c  of  the  Constitution:  “It  devolves  upon  the  Storting  […]  to 
supervise the monetary affairs of the Realm”. The Storting, the Norwegian parliament, and 
not the king, would be Norges Bank’s employer. The king would no longer have the authority 
to print money at will. Although bitter memories of the decline of the monetary system during 
the  Napoleonic  Wars  lay  behind  this  decision,  it  was  also  inspired  by  the  ideas  of 
Enlightenment philosophers. Absolute monarchy under the Danish king was to be replaced 
by  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  and  the  separation  of  powers.  Institutions  with  clearly 
distinguished roles would foster confidence and prevent the arbitrary use of power. 
To restore confidence in the monetary system, the promise of a stable monetary value had to 
be supported by concrete values. There could be no more empty promises. Confidence in 
the speciedaler would be based on a stock of silver in Norges Bank’s vault. The promise to 
ensure that banknotes could be exchanged for the equivalent of their face value in silver was 
to be honoured. 
But the stock of silver had to be procured first. Appeals to raise sufficient funds through share 
subscription on a voluntary basis were not successful and the government had to resort to 
coercive measures. Anyone with the means to do so had to contribute to finance the newly 
established bank. For many Norwegians, the silver tax – as it came to be known –  was a 
                                                
1 
In  1814,  Norway  entered  into  a  personal  union  with  Sweden  under  the  Swedish  king,  who  reigned  from 
Stockholm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  heavy burden. Years of war and crop failures had set the economy back. 1816 is known as 
the  year  without  a  summer.  In  many  cases,  families  were  forced  to  relinquish  their  life 
savings or beautiful silver ornaments in order to pay the tax. Farmers from the Hallingdal and 
Valdres  valleys  marched  on  Christiania  in  protest.  The  finance  minister,  Count  Herman 
Wedel Jarlsberg, chopped up the family silver himself and threw it onto the scales, with the 
heirlooms still wet from the tears shed by his wife, Karen, Prime Minister Anker’s daughter, 
so the story goes. 
Many years later, the poet Henrik Wergeland put words to the struggle – and the reward – 
brought by the silver tax. “The spirit of the people”, said Wergeland, “demanded and created 
the  bank  …  in  the  midst  of  hardship.  It  gave  them  the  strength  of  the  tired,  who  rouse 
themselves from  their  rest to  soldier  on  and  complete their task,  and  are  rewarded  by  the 
sun’s benevolent smile.”2 
With  the  silver  tax,  many  Norwegian  citizens  involuntarily  became  shareholders  of  Norges 
Bank.  However,  holding  shares  in  the  Bank  proved  to  be  a  sound  investment,  for  the 
shareholders  and  for  the  country.  Confidence  in  the  monetary  system  was  painstakingly 
restored. The Bank also extended loans to private individuals. Acquaintances or loan sharks 
were  no  longer  the  only  sources  of  credit.  The  foundations  had  been  laid  to  enable  the 
economy to grow and to lift living standards. 
In 1874, the stock of silver was exchanged for gold. The transition to a gold standard met 
little  opposition.  The  proposed  currency  union  with  Denmark  and  Sweden,  however,  was 
difficult for many Norwegians to accept. Norway’s own currency  was an important symbol. 
The  general  aversion  to  government  officials,  who  had  proposed  the  union,  also  weighed 
heavily in the debate. And under the proposal, the currency itself would be changed. People 
were used to counting in speciedaler, divided into 120 skilling. Although the decimal system 
of krone and øre was  in fact far simpler, many people found it unnecessarily complicated. 
The proposal fell at the first vote in the Storting. 
One  Norwegian  who  expressed  pleasure  at  the  apparent  rescue  of  the  speciedaler  was 
cantor Olafsen from Romsdalen in the west of Norway. He exclaimed: “People here in the 
rural  communities  are  shocked  and  astonished  to  hear  that  the  Norwegian  people  were 
within a hair’s breadth of losing their currency, after the enormous sacrifices they had made, 
and  being  given  a  new  one  instead  with  all  the  terrible  disadvantages  and  problems  that 
would inevitably have accompanied it …” 3 
The cantor’s joy was to be short-lived. Norway joined the Scandinavian Monetary Union only 
a year later. The speciedaler was abandoned and the krone took over. The advantages of 
being able to use Norwegian money as legal tender in Denmark and Sweden trumped the 
symbolic value of the speciedaler. Looking back, Norway’s participation in a monetary union 
reflected a nation that had become self-assured and that viewed itself as its Scandinavian 
relatives’ equal. 
In  the  1800s,  Norway’s  economy  and  monetary  system  underwent  extensive  changes. 
Increased  trade  and  economic  progress  required  a  more  advanced  monetary  system. 
A banking system developed, initially in the form of savings banks that extended credit based 
on their members’ deposits, followed by the emergence of commercial banks. By the end of 
the 1800s, Norges Bank’s role had changed: from being Norway’s only bank, it was now the 
bankers’ bank. 
                                                
2  Henrik Wergeland (1834): Speech at Eidsvoll, “Til forfædrenes minde” [In memory of our ancestors], Samlede 
skrifter [Collected Works], Vol. 2: 1834–37. 
3  Kolbjørn  Skaare  (1995):  Norges  mynthistorie  [A  numismatic  history  of  Norway]  (p.  171),  Vol  1.  Oslo: 
Universitetsforlaget. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A new Norges Bank Act was adopted in 1892. Norges Bank’s district branches lost their right 
to set the interest rate in their own district – Norway became one interest rate kingdom. And 
the stock of gold would no longer set an absolute limit on the supply of banknotes. A formal 
obstacle to the Bank’s provision of emergency liquidity to private banks in a crisis had been 
removed – and, as it turned out, the need for emergency liquidity would soon arise. 
A more complex banking system with a growing number of links to the international financial 
system  had  set  the  stage  for  financial  turbulence.  Just  before  the  turn  of  the  century,  a 
speculative  economy  had  developed  in  Christiania.  Property  prices  soared  and  newly 
established banks willingly provided loans – often based on short-term foreign credit. 
The ensuing crash was to claim many victims. One day in June 1899, a delegation from one 
of the banks, Discontobanken, marched into Norges Bank with some very bad news: one of 
the country’s largest companies could not meet its payment obligations and Discontobanken 
was on the verge of collapse. If the bank fell, panic could ensue, triggering a domino effect in 
the  banking  system.  Norges  Bank,  under  the  leadership  of  Governor  Bomhoff,  took 
immediate action to provide liquidity support. Credit was injected into the economy. Norges 
Bank  soon  had  to  take  on  the  additional  task  of  resolving  speculative  banks  while  at  the 
same time protecting healthy banks from being caught in the undertow. 
Norges  Bank  was  later  praised  for  its  approach.  During  the  Storting’s  deliberations  on 
Norges  Bank’s  activities,  the  following  comment  was  made:  “…  Norges  Bank  had  offered 
immediate  support  at  a  moment  when  it  was  less  important  to  be  the  Bank’s  director  and 
more  important to keep a  cool  head  and  a  warm  heart.”  Norges  Bank’s  heart  beat for the 
monetary  system.  Cold  reason  dictated  that  if  the  turbulence  in  the  banking  system  was 
allowed to spread, the country’s economy would suffer a heavy blow. 
The  year  1905  is  regarded  as  a  milestone  in  Norway’s  history.  But  in  the  history  of  the 
monetary system, the year is almost a non-event, although Norges Bank noted some unrest 
through summer and autumn. There was a risk of war, and as the population braced for what 
might  come,  Norwegian  banknotes,  rather than gold,  were  in  demand.  In  other  words, the 
Norwegian currency was regarded as safe, reflecting the progress achieved in Norway in the 
shadow  of the  union  with  Sweden. When the  union  was  dissolved,  Norway  stood  on  solid 
foundations  with  well-developed  social  institutions.  Among  these  were  a  central  bank  of 
Norway and a monetary system that inspired confidence at home and abroad. 
With the German occupation of Norway in 1940, disorder returned to the monetary system. 
The occupying power needed money and could in practice simply commandeer the banknote 
printing press to meet its needs. But one thing was not seized – Norway’s gold reserves. It is 
said that a central bank must have foresight, so that it can take action in time and contribute 
to the stability of the economy. Foresight on a different level  was demonstrated by Nicolai 
Rygg long before the invasion of Norway. Two years earlier, in 1938, Rygg had assigned a 
secret  mission  to  the  21-year  old  Ivar  Borg.  Every  morning  for  several  months,  the  young 
man was locked into the Bank’s vault to pack up the gold reserves. When German troops 
were  approaching  Oslo,  the  gold  was  ready  to  be  quickly  loaded  onto  pre-requisitioned 
lorries  and,  after  a  dramatic  escape,  was  safely  shipped  out  of  the  country.  The  gold 
reserves  gave  the  government-in-exile  in  London  the  financial  freedom  to  pursue  its 
activities. 
A central bank safeguards value. Norges Bank no longer guards the nation’s gold. The gold 
was  sold  long  ago.  Today,  the  Bank  manages  the  nation’s  income  from  the  black  gold 
beneath our seas. This will provide financial freedom of action for future generations. 
A well-functioning monetary system with stability in the value of money is still at the core of 
Norges  Bank’s  public  mission,  as  it  has  been  for  the  past  two  hundred  years.  Inadequate 
access to reliable means of payment affects trade in goods and services and can cause the 
economy to stall – now, as then. At the same time, the role of the central bank has evolved 
over time, requiring it to adapt to a constantly changing stage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In the early stages of Norges Bank’s history, lending to retail customers was an  important 
part of the Bank’s public mission. This task has since been transferred to other agents. This 
is  a  rational  division  of  responsibility.  At  the  same  time, the  Bank  is  true  to  its role  as  the 
bankers’ bank, for better and for worse. When bank lending is impaired, the costs to society 
are considerable. A central bank cannot stand on the sidelines when banks’ sources of credit 
are drying up, and we keep a vigilant eye on financial markets and offer advice on measures 
we regard as necessary. With the increased complexity of money and financial markets, this 
task has become more demanding, but also increasingly important. 
Issuing banknotes is still the central bank’s responsibility. People must be confident that the 
banknotes  they  hold  in  their  hands  are  genuine.  Thus,  beneath  their  elaborate  exterior  lie 
increasingly  advanced  security  features.  Beautifully  illustrated  banknotes  can  also  function 
as  a  calling  card  for  Norway.  We  are  looking  forward  to  launching  the  new  series  of 
banknotes  –  which  all  embody  the  shared  theme  of  “The  Sea”  –  over  the  next  couple  of 
years. 
But for a modern central bank, the responsibility for means of payment stretches far beyond 
banknotes and coins. We can use deposit money to make payments quickly and efficiently – 
as  long  as  the  payment  system  functions  as  it  should.  The  core  of  Norway’s  electronic 
payment system is located in Norges Bank. It is a part of the Bank’s public mission that is 
afforded  little  attention  in  everyday  life.  And  that  is  how  it  should  be.  When  interbank 
settlement is not something people talk about, we know it is working as it should. The uptime 
requirement cannot be lower than 100 percent. 
Technological advances have not stopped at online banking, card terminals and the forms of 
contactless payment we are familiar with today. New means of payment are being created 
and new financial motorways are evolving. But stability and confidence will also be essential 
elements of future payment systems – not only for the individual user, but also to prevent a 
collapse  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  A  central  hub  is  still  needed  to  guarantee  that  the 
payment system is subject to the necessary control. That hub is the central bank. 
Throughout  the  Bank’s  two  hundred  years  of  history,  one  of  its  most  important  tasks  has 
been to ensure stability in the value of money. The Bank has performed this task with varying 
success.  The  pendulum  swings  back  and  forth.  In  some  periods,  price  stability  has 
admittedly been below par. In other periods, the Bank has been criticised for being too “one-
eyed”.  And  Norges  Bank’s  room  for  manoeuvre  in  terms  of  keeping  inflation  in  check  has 
also, at times, been limited. 
Today, this responsibility has been clearly and unequivocally delegated to Norges Bank. And 
this time, confidence in the value of money is not based on a quantity of precious metal, but 
on  the  Bank’s  ability  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  low  and  stable  –  confidence  that  the 
Bank will keep its promise. 
History has shown that it can be appropriate to delegate responsibility for price stability to a 
central  bank,  with  its  long-term  perspective  –  even  in  times  of  turbulence.  Another  of  the 
lessons learned over the past few years is that monetary policy cannot be put on autopilot. 
As  the  central  bank,  we  have  a  responsibility  for  economic  stability.  Long-term  objectives 
must often be weighed against short-term gains. Maintaining the balance can be demanding. 
A former Chair of the Federal Reserve4 said that the role of the central bank is to order “the 
punch bowl removed just when the party [is] really warming up”. This is a role Norges Bank 
must be prepared to take on. But not tonight. 
The past year has also shown that the Bank can ease the burden in difficult times. Today’s 
key policy rate is the lowest in the Bank’s history. When inflation is firmly anchored, monetary 
                                                
4  William  McChesney  Martin,  Jr.,  (1955):  Address  before  the  New  York  Group  of  the  Investment  Bankers 
Association of America. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  policy can be used to stimulate output and employment and thereby to some extent facilitate 
the demanding restructuring facing the Norwegian economy today. 
Since  the  Bank  was  established  in  1816,  its  position  has  been  regulated  through  specific 
legislation. But confidence will always be essential for true central bank independence. That 
confidence  is  only  on  loan.  Changing  circumstances  require  the  ability  to  adapt  and  think 
differently, and the same applies to central banks. What matters is results, and how they are 
achieved. 
Norges Bank’s first demanding objective – to restore confidence in the monetary system – 
was  achieved  and  made  an  important  contribution  to  the  success  of  the  nation  building 
process of the 19th century. The Chair of the Bank’s first board of directors, Jacob Fredrik 
Oxholm, also enjoyed success in other arenas. He was an acclaimed amateur actor – right 
here in Trondheim. 
The  institution  he  directed  –  Norges  Bank  –  is  not  looking  for  acclaim  and  enthusiastic 
cheering.  The  Bank  has  a  more  sober  objective  –  to  be  a  useful  public  institution  and  a 
dependable guardian of Norway’s monetary system. 
But just tonight, we would not say no to a little applause. And let me wish Norges Bank many 
happy returns! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
