   Karnit Flug: Macroeconomic policy and the performance of the Israeli 
economy 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the conference of the Israel 
Economic Association, Tel Aviv, 18 May 2016. 
 I  would  like  today  to  speak  about  the  performance  of  the  Israeli  economy  and  about 
macroeconomic policy – both the policy adopted and the policy that is desirable in the future. 
It is important to distinguish between policy operating in the short-term, which is intended to 
moderate the economic fluctuations referred to be economists as “the business cycles”, and 
policy that operates in order to achieve long-term goals with the objective of leading to great 
achievements in the future. It is important to note that macroeconomic stability in the short term 
is a necessary condition for realizing long-term goals. 
In order to ensure macroeconomic stability, policymakers use monetary policy and fiscal policy. 
Monetary policy focuses on maintaining price stability, and on supporting economic activity 
and employment when there are shocks moderating them. Fiscal policy balances the need to 
support growth in such conditions and the need to maintain a reasonable deficit, manage the 
public debt burden over time so as to minimize the burden of interest payments in the future, 
and provide the government with room to operate, referred to as “fiscal space” in times of crisis. 
Economic policy that focuses on long-term goals – chiefly inclusive growth over time – operates 
through  the  various  components  of  budgetary  policy  (size  and  composition  of  government 
expenditure,  size  and  composition  of  taxes),  and  by  promoting  structural  changes  and 
reforms, upon which I will focus later on. 
The more effective the Bank of Israel’s monetary policy is in creating macroeconomic stability 
in view of the business cycles, the more it provides the government’s budgetary policy with the 
required room to operate in order to focus policy on dealing with the long-term challenges. The 
budget’s  focus  on  long-term  challenges  becomes  even  more  important  as  the  term  of  the 
budget becomes longer, such as with a two-year budget. 
Economic policy is influenced by various factors, but due to the fact that we are a small and 
open economy, we are greatly affected by the global environment. 
The global environment in which macroeconomic policy operates was moderate in 2015 as 
well,  with  weak  global  growth  that  included  a  further  slowdown  in  the  emerging  markets, 
continued relatively low growth rates in the US and the eurozone, more moderate growth in 
world  trade,  and  a  sharp  decline  in  energy  and  commodity  prices  both  due  to  relatively 
moderate demand, and due to increased supply. Against this background, the major central 
banks continued, and some of them further enhanced, their very accommodative monetary 
policy. 
From the standpoint of the Israeli economy, which is a net importer of commodities and energy, 
the changes in commodity prices were reflected in improved terms of trade, which led to a 
significant  increase  in  the  Current  Account  surplus.  The  increase  in  the  Current  Account 
contributed to appreciation pressure on the real exchange rate, which for its part weakened 
the competitive ability of the Israeli economy and contributed to the slowdown of growth in 
exports  and  of  growth  in  general.  With  the  decline  of  “surplus  growth”,  or  the  growth  gap 
between  Israel  and  its  main  trading  partners,  the  pressure  for  continued  real  appreciation 
weakened. Throughout this process, the composition of growth changed, with the contribution 
of surplus exports declining while the contribution of private consumption to economic activity 
increased. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   These developments took place while inflation was very low, affected by global commodity and 
fuel  prices  and  by  government-initiated  price  decreases,  and  to  a  certain  extent  by  the 
appreciation of the shekel. 
Monetary policy has operated against this background. The Monetary Committee adopted a 
very accommodative monetary policy this year as well, leaving the interest rate at an historic 
low of 0.1 percent, and announced that in its assessment the interest rate will remain low for a 
considerable time. In addition, the Bank of Israel continued to purchase foreign exchange as 
part of two programs it is running – the program intended to offset the effects of natural gas 
production  on  the  Current  Account,  and  the  program  to  moderate  fluctuations  that  are  not 
consistent with the basic economic forces. In view of the fact that the effective exchange rate 
is  appreciated  relative  to  equilibrium  according  to  various  estimates,  it  continues  to  pose 
difficulties for export growth and for the tradable sector. Exchange rate policy operated in the 
past and will continue to operate with determination in the future in order to assist growth in 
exports. The  Monetary  Committee’s  announcement  of  its  assessment that monetary  policy 
would  remain  accommodative  for  a  considerable  time,  which  means  that  the  Committee’s 
assessment  is  that  it  would  not  raise  the  interest  rate  immediately  after  the  interest  rate 
increase in the US, which is what actually happened when the interest rate in the US was 
raised  in  December,  also  serves  as  a  counterforce  to the forces for  appreciation. The  CPI 
figure for April and the disappointing growth figures for the first quarter that were published this 
week will of course be examined by the Monetary Committee. Since those discussions will 
take place at the beginning of next week, I won’t go into this now. 
In order to minimize the risks for mortgage borrowers and to support financial stability, the 
series of mortgage limitations imposed by the Banking Supervision Department also remains 
in place. 
One  of  the  main  channels  where  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  succeeded  in 
influencing economic activity is in consumer credit. Credit increased, its price decreased, and 
the reduction of the interest rate led to significantly lower prices for consumer credit, and later 
to an increase of such credit, which in the end supported a more rapid increase in private 
consumption in recent years, and especially in 2015. 
Private  consumption,  which  accounts  for  55  percent  of  GDP,  was  the  dominant  factor 
contributing to economic growth in 2015, and partly offset the weakness in activity resulting 
from the decline in exports and in investment. This was also reflected in the labor market, 
increased employment in the services industry, and increased wages. Despite the increase in 
wages which, alongside the decline in consumer prices, led to increased purchasing power for 
households, employers’ cost of labor did not increase, and even declined slightly. This was 
mainly due to the increase in output prices, which was a result of the decline in energy prices 
and  reduced  financing  costs  –  also  a  result  of  the  low  interest  rate  set  by  the  Monetary 
Committee. This is a positive result for the economy from all standpoints. 
Budgetary policy in 2015, which was mainly based on a transition budget, was reflected in a 
decline in the cyclically-adjusted deficit – the deficit adjusted for the effect of a deviation of 
growth  from  the  long-term  rate  –  to  2.7  percent  of  GDP.  Policy  thus  minimized  the  fiscal 
impulse (the anti-cyclical effect). This is a reasonable policy given that the level of the cyclically-
adjusted  deficit  is  still  relatively  high,  and  that  accommodative  monetary  policy  supported 
economic  activity.  However,  the  fact  that  the  government  operated  with  a  transition  (1/12) 
budget for most of 2015 led to the fact that there was no discussion within the government or 
the Knesset regarding the targets of economic policy, and the budget therefore did not reflect 
the government’s set of priorities and was not focused on achieving goals to increase growth 
over the long term, which I will talk about later. 
The decline in the deficit, together with the relatively large increase in output prices and the 
erosion of CPI-indexed debt, supported the continued decline of public debt as a share of GDP 
– the opposite of the trend in most advanced economies and of the average level in those 
economies.  The  interest  burden  on  the  public  debt  remains  high  compared  to  the  OECD 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   average, but is in a downward trend that was accelerated in the past two years. The reduction 
of the interest burden, from about 4.5 percent of GDP in 2010 to about 2.5 percent of GDP 
today, frees up significant sources – about NIS 20 billion per year – for other uses. It is therefore 
important to maintain this trend. 
The  Bank  of  Israel’s  first  assessments  regarding  2017  indicate  that  the  automatic  pilot  for 
expenditures,  meaning  the  increase  in  expenditures  required  as  a  result  of  government 
commitments  and  expected  demographic  developments,  is  NIS  14  billion  higher  than  the 
expenditure ceiling – similar to the Ministry of Finance’s estimate that was published this week. 
Should the government make the necessary adjustments to meet the expenditure ceiling, then 
according to initial forecasts of tax receipts, the government is expected to meet the deficit 
target of 2.5 percent of GDP. The government will need to choose between cutting expenditure, 
which will make it difficult to achieve the long-term goals I will detail later, and increasing tax 
revenue, whether through the cancellation of exemptions or through raising tax rates. 
Success in dealing with the short-term challenges, and the fact that the economy is in 
a  reasonable  state  relative  to  the  global  environment,  make  it  possible  to  increase 
efforts to narrow the gaps in a series of issues between us and the other advanced 
economies, and to lay the economic groundwork for the future. 
It is important for the government to formulate a set of priorities that will enable it to focus on 
dealing with the fundamental problems in the economy and Israeli society in the long term. 
How? 
Economic  policy  to  achieve  long-term  goals  –  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth  –  acts  by 
providing public services at a proper level, supporting growth engines in the economy, using 
policy tools to narrow gaps, reforms to increase efficiency in the use of infrastructure and public 
services, and increased competition in industries where it is not sufficient. 
What are the challenges facing policy makers in the long term? 
A  forward-looking  view  shows  that  there  are  processes,  some  global  and  some  domestic, 
working as headwinds to growth: According to an analysis by international organizations, the 
growth rate of global GDP is expected to be more moderate in the next few years than prior to 
the Global Financial Crisis, and the growth rate of world trade is expected to moderate even 
more due to the weakening link between global growth and the development of world trade. 
In Israel, the combination of demographic trends (an increase in the proportion of population 
groups with relatively low employment rates and a slowdown in growth of the primary working 
age population) alongside the fact that the contribution of increased education, as reflected in 
the average number of years of schooling, has neared its limit, will act to slow the future growth 
rate. Active policy is therefore needed to offset these trends. 
Against the background of these future trends, it is important to examine the labor productivity 
trends of recent years and the directions in which policy must act in order to deal with the 
challenges. 
In terms of productivity – measured as output per work hour – we are not closing the gap 
with the other advanced economies, even during the period since the global crisis. This gap 
between output per worker in these industries in Israel and output per worker in the same 
industries in the other advanced economies, is focused mainly on industries that manufacture 
mainly  for  the  domestic  market,  which  are  by  their  character  domestic  industries,  and  are 
therefore  not  exposed  to  competition  from  abroad.  It  is  important  to  know  that  these  are 
industries that produce most of the output, and also employ the vast majority of workers, in the 
economy. The discussion on productivity seems very theoretical. But to illustrate, if we would 
close the productivity gap vis-à-vis the OECD average, we would raise the standard of living 
by about one-third – about the increase that we would receive in per capita GDP. 
In  this  context,  let  us  for  example  take  the  construction  industry,  which  employs  about 
7.5 percent  of  those  employed  in  the  business  sector  –  clearly  a  domestic  industry  –  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   examine the output per worker in the industry over a long period. Productivity in the industry 
declined in the 1970s and 1980s, and remained at a standstill since the 1990s, in contrast with 
an increase in manufacturing productivity that accelerated following the program to expose the 
Israeli economy to foreign manufacturing imports in the 1990s (the Exposure Program), and 
the agriculture industry where there was a moderate increase in productivity throughout the 
period. The construction industry “benefits” from the availability of foreign workers with wages 
lower  than  domestic  workers  with  the  same  characteristics,  and  therefore  suffers  from  a 
significant  technological  lag.  The  recent  government  decision  to  allow  foreign  construction 
companies to enter residential construction projects, if it is implemented to a significant extent, 
may contribute to a turnaround in the productivity trend in the industry. Companies that will 
bring advanced technologies to Israel will require domestic contractors to streamline as well, 
and will also contribute in the long term to an increase in the wages of domestic workers in the 
industry. 
Last year, I also spoke to this honorable forum about productivity, and I focused on a number 
of  sources for  the  disappointing  increase  in  output  per  work  hour  in most  industries  in the 
business sector in the past two decades. I focused on the low stock of capital per worker, on 
the low level of infrastructure, and on the low government investment in R&D. In addition, I 
related  to  a  number  of  opportunities  for  improving  public  services  through  investment  in 
physical and human infrastructure in them, as well as to reinforce the policy of narrowing gaps 
and integrate various population groups in the labor market. 
We can go back and talk about these problems and challenges, which have certainly not been 
solved in one year, this year as well. But this time, I would like to expand the discussion on the 
structural issues that have an impact on productivity picture. These mostly do not involve a 
marked increase in budgets, but mainly involve streamlined processes and creating changes, 
some  of  which  may  negatively  impact  the  profitability  of  certain  groups  in  the  economy. 
Therefore, it is relatively difficult to make them. The updated Doing Business report by the 
World Bank shows that Israel fell to 53rd place in the easiness (or difficulty) of doing business 
here, from 26th place in 2007. This is a result of worsening bureaucratic conditions in Israel, 
and of the reforms in cleansing regulation that were implemented in other economies. Among 
all OECD countries, Israel is in 31st place out of 34 countries – fourth worse after Turkey, 
Greece and Luxembourg, and beneath all the others. Our weakness is particularly prominent 
in the areas of opening, registering and licensing businesses, building permits, tax payment 
processes,  and  barriers  to  international  trade.  Barriers  and  restrictions  on  the  trade  of 
commodities and services were also noted in the OECD report on Israel as being particularly 
high. By the way, our strengths are reflected in the protection of small investors, and in the 
relative ease of closing businesses. (It’s too bad this is not true of opening them.) 
In order to illustrate the types of problems that make it difficult to do business in Israel, we can 
focus on the “tax payment index”. An analysis of the sub-indices of this parameter shows that 
despite  the  fact  that  the  tax  rate  on  businesses  operating  in  Israel  is  low  by  international 
comparison, the number of payments that businesses are required to pay is high, and the time 
required to complete procedures is also high when compared to other advanced economies. 
For this reason, the bureaucratic cost is high, and despite the advantage of low tax rates, Israel 
is ranked 103rd out of 189 countries on the index. There is a similar effect in the index that 
examines  the  ease  of  opening  a  new  business. While  the  monetary cost  imposed  on  the 
entrepreneur is low by international comparison, the number of required procedures and the 
time involved in them is high. We are therefore ranked 56th on this index. Another parameter 
where Israel’s negative position is prominent is international trade, where Israel’s low ranking 
is caused due to the long time and high cost imposed on importers and exporters in order to 
trade  with  their  opposites  abroad,  compared  to  the  leading OECD  members.  Israel  is  also 
negatively prominent in registering properties and building permits, which are characterized by 
many prolonged processes, which is widely divergent from the other advanced economies. 
Among other things, these reflect the problem of a lack of synchronization between the various 
regulatory authorities in the construction and infrastructure area (the planning authorities, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   local authorities, and so forth). This is the place to note that Ministry of Finance is taking steps 
to shorten the length and increase the efficiency of procedures in this area. The medium rating 
in obtaining credit data is for the most part explained by the lack of a credit database, an issue 
that  as  we  know  was  recently  passed  as  legislation  and  the  database  is  currently  being 
established by the Bank of Israel. 
In  order  to  examine  the  potential  of  reforms  to  reduce  surplus  regulation  and  to  increase 
competition in these areas, I rely on an analysis carried out by the International Monetary Fund 
Research Department and presented in the most recent World Economic Outlook, and in the 
excelled  OECD  report  on  the  Israeli  economy.  Areas  in  which  Israel  has  a  lot  of  room  for 
improvement by advancing reforms include: increasing competition in the goods and services 
markets,  including  by  reducing  trade  barriers;  active  labor  market  policy;  and  continued 
reduction of surplus regulation, particularly in industry with a “network effect”. 
The  IMF’s  assessment  is  that  reforms,  mainly  through  deregulation  and  investment  in 
industries with a “network effect” – such as air transport networks, trains, roads, electricity and 
gas, and communications, can increase GDP by about 1 percent in about 4 years. 
This is the place to note several areas in which reforms to increase competition were carried 
out  in  Israel,  generating  far-reaching  cost-cutting  results:  air  shipping  and  cellular 
communications. 
The liberalization of air shipping (both of passengers and of cargo) by making air policy more 
flexible  and  signing  an  “open  skies”  agreement  with  the  European  Union  (which  replaced 
bilateral agreements with a number of countries) are reflected in a marked increase in the 
frequency of low-cost flights and the number of routes on which service is operated by 3 or 
more  companies. These  are  reflected  in  a  marked reduction  of the  cost  of tourism  and  air 
shipping of goods. 
The reform in cellular communications which, among other things, disconnected the service 
agreements  from  the  equipment  purchase  agreements,  reduced  interconnectivity  fees, 
cancelled the fine for leaving a plan, and made it possible for virtual operators to enter the 
market, reduced the cost of service by more than 50 percent, and markedly increased the 
volume of activity, thereby contributing to consumer well-being. 
These  two  reforms  illustrate  the  potential  for  growth  and  improvement  of  well-being  from 
reforms  that  lower  the  barriers  to  competition.  Investment  in  the  volume  of  public  transit, 
improved interconnectivity in public transit, and increasing competition in this area are already 
bearing fruit in improved and less expensive service (alongside the government-initiated price 
decline). However, alongside this improvement, tremendous further investment is necessary 
in order to come close to the accepted public transit standards in metropolitan areas around 
the world. 
A more friendly regulatory atmosphere in the goods and services markets – and particularly 
the removal of barriers in the goods and services trade areas and reference to the competitive 
supply from abroad – can contribute between 0.5 and 0.75 percent to annual growth in Israel 
according to the OECD’s assessment. 
Beyond the advancement of reforms that will lower barriers to growth, as reflected in our low 
ranking  in  the  Doing  Business  index,  and  increased  competition  in  industries  where  it  is 
insufficient (including in the financial sector), it is important to also act to improve the level of 
public  services  to  the  citizen,  including  in  education  and  training,  particularly  technological 
training, in health, welfare, active labor market policy – with particular focus on the integration 
of population groups with low integration levels into the labor market, inter alia by giving them 
the  skills for the  labor market. We should  also  not  minimize  the  importance  of  investing  in 
infrastructure and in growth engines, as I have shown at many previous opportunities. 
The  concept that I  call  to  adopt  is  that  “the  long  range  is  already  here”,  and  the more  we 
advance to adopt a strategic plan focused on the issues that I have raised, the better we will 
be able to deal with these challenges. The adoption of such a program is critical in view of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   processes I have described in both the global and the Israeli economy, which require us to do 
all we can to realize the tremendous potential we have. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
