  Mario Draghi: Eighth ECB Statistics Conference 
Welcome address by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eighth 
ECB  Statistics  Conference  “Central  bank  statistics:  moving  beyond  the  aggregates”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 July 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank (ECB), allow me to warmly 
welcome you to the Eighth ECB Statistics Conference. These biennial conferences are by 
now a well-established tradition and always give new and valuable impetus to our work in the 
field of statistics. 
The title of today’s conference is “Central bank statistics: moving beyond the aggregates”. 
Disaggregated  data  are  indeed  necessary  to  identify  and  analyse  the  heterogeneity  that 
characterises  the  real  world.  For  central  banks  this  is  particularly  important:  to  implement 
policy in the most effective way, we need to know how our policy actions affect all sectors of 
the economy. Both the challenges posed by the current economic climate for monetary and 
macroprudential policy, and the information required to carry out microprudential supervision 
by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) increase our need for granular data. 
But this need for a greater level of disaggregation of data comes with its own challenges. The 
first one is to ensure that data are collected in a way that permits multiple uses. This requires 
greater  harmonisation,  and  an  ability  to  share  data  between  institutions  in  a  way  that  still 
respects  confidentiality.  The  second  challenge  is  to  engage  with  the  financial  sector  to 
ensure that the increase in data collection does not become burdensome. 
Why the need for granular data? 
Improving the collection of disaggregated data will support the ECB’s main policy functions in 
several ways. 
On the monetary policy side, greater understanding of the functioning of money markets and 
of  the  impact  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  on  individual  sub-sectors  of  the 
economy  helps  to  underpin  our  analysis  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  and  to 
effectively target future measures. Indeed, this week saw the official go-live of the reporting 
of data on up to 35,000 daily transactions in the money market, complete with information on 
quantities,  prices  and  counterparties.  This  is  a  very  rich  information  set,  crucial  for  our 
liquidity  management  and  for  understanding  the  first  step  of  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism. 
Collecting more granular data also helps us to better understand the transmission process 
through  the  economy  more  broadly.  We  need  more  information  on  the  linkages  between 
individual  sectors  of  the  economy  and,  even  more  so,  between  large  financial  institutions. 
There  are some  important  areas  of the financial  sector  where  we  lack  complete  statistical 
coverage,  especially  relating  to  what  we  call  the  “shadow  banking  system”.  These  areas 
include some complex market products and instruments. 
Similarly,  our  new  responsibilities  in  European  banking  supervision  call  for  new  data 
concepts and definitions, greatly extending the need for granular data. A successful start has 
been made, with a new set of legal acts. The collection of loan-by-loan data is already being 
implemented, but further improvements are possible. In particular, we need to make sure that 
the data we collect are of a high quality and comparable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Effective data integration and cooperation 
But today’s conference is about more than just collecting additional data. The sharing of data 
by  authorities  is  also  critical.  Doing  this  effectively  and  efficiently,  while  maintaining  data 
confidentiality,  is  a  priority  for  policymakers.  It  requires  action  from  policy  institutions  and 
lawmakers.  Putting  in  place  the  right  architecture  will  permit  a  faster  and  more  efficient 
response  to  requests  across  all  our  policy  areas,  greatly  enhancing  the  usefulness  of 
granular data. 
We have made some progress on the legal foundations for sharing granular data. Council 
Regulation 2533/98 has been amended to permit the ECB to (re)use confidential statistical 
information to perform its supervisory tasks. The information can also be shared with Union 
institutions,  including  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities,  the  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board and the European Stability Mechanism for the purposes of prudential supervision and 
ensuring financial stability. This is a major achievement. 
The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) has also taken important steps to improve 
the  harmonisation  and  standardisation  of  data. The  current  work  on the  Banks’  Integrated 
Reporting  Dictionary,  a 
involving  seven  national  central  banks  and 
26 commercial  banks  under  the  leadership  of  the  ECB,  is  the  best  example. This  process 
could and should ultimately enable us to organise the various reporting requirements into a 
single, comprehensive and harmonised European Reporting Framework. 
But the need for harmonisation and standardisation also extends beyond Europe. Finance is 
a global business, and both the regulation and the underlying data requirements for global 
institutions  would  benefit  from  more  harmonisation  worldwide.  Concrete  steps  towards 
standardisation  include  the  establishment  of  mandatory  requirements  regarding  the  use of 
the  International  Securities  Identification  Number  and  the  global  Legal  Entity  Identifier. 
Europe  should  retain  its  prominent  role  in  the  implementation  of  the  second  phase  of  the 
G20 Data Gaps Initiative. 
joint  project 
Engagement with industry 
As  the  banking  industry  has  pointed  out,  lack  of  standardisation  pushes  up  costs  for  the 
private sector and heightens the risk of mistakes or misinterpretation. And there is some truth 
to this view. 
Policymakers and the industry clearly have a shared interest in focusing on and discussing 
data collection. It would allow banks to contain their reporting burden and remain competitive 
at the global level. And it would allow policymakers to improve the quality and relevance of 
the data they receive. The two groups have quite different roles, but they also share common 
goals. 
As  such,  data  collection  should  be  a  joint  exercise  carried  out  by  the  authorities  and  the 
banking industry. They can support each other and jointly benefit from the results. After all, 
there  is  likely  to  be  a  large  overlap  between  the  data  the  authorities  need  and  the  data 
managers of a financial institution require for their own purposes. 
Standardising 
transactions,  products  and  reporting 
requirements in general falls within our mandate and is probably our best course of action. I 
know that this is easier said than done. The establishment of European banking supervision 
under the auspices of the ECB, and of the three European Supervisory Authorities,1 gives us 
a unique opportunity to make progress in this area in Europe. 
identifiers  of  counterparties, 
the 
                                                
1   The  European  Banking  Authority,  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  and  European 
Securities and Markets Authority. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
Let me finish by saying that the well-established ESCB statistics will continue to provide the 
“big  picture”  of  economic  developments.  But  we  should  also  offer  a  magnifying  glass. 
Looking  at  the  details  beyond  the  aggregates  enriches  our  understanding  of  economic 
phenomena and at the same time increases our flexibility to respond to unexpected policy 
needs, contributing to even better statistics. 
So, once again, I welcome you to this conference and also take this opportunity to thank all 
the  organisers  for  their  efforts  in  making  it  happen.  I  wish  all  of  you  an  interesting  and 
successful day. I hope you find some answers to the challenges I have mentioned, and I look 
forward to hearing the results of your discussions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
