  Már Guðmundsson: Lifting capital controls in Iceland 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of Iceland,  at  a meeting 
organised by the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, 26 May 2016. 
 Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Comprehensive capital controls were introduced in Iceland in November 2008, as part of the 
economic programme that the Icelandic authorities had developed with the IMF. The month 
before,  around  90%  of the  banking  system  had collapsed  when  Iceland’s  three  overblown 
cross-border banks failed. Earlier that year, Iceland had experienced a full-scale sudden stop 
currency crisis during which the currency plummeted by 26%. It depreciated by another 26% 
during  the  banking  collapse  and  in  the  weeks  afterwards.  And  if  this  were  not  enough, 
Iceland  was  at  this  point  on  its  way  into  a  recession,  as  the  big,  unsustainable 
macroeconomic  imbalances  –  most  clearly  demonstrated  in  a  double-digit  current  account 
deficit – were beginning to correct. 
The economic programme with the IMF had three key goals: stabilisation of the exchange 
rate, fiscal sustainability,  and  reconstruction  of the financial  sector.  Comprehensive  capital 
controls were an important element in the programme, but the rationale behind them was to 
help stabilise the exchange rate after the currency had fallen more than 50% in 2008, and in 
addition,  the  stock  of  relatively  liquid  foreign-owned  krónur  –  a  legacy  of  carry  trade  and 
other capital inflows – amounted to around 40% of GDP and would have resulted in a further 
meltdown of the currency if it had begun to flow out through Iceland’s shallow FX market. 
After the split of the failed banks had been executed towards the end of 2010, it gradually 
became clear that it had not been a pure domestic/international split. The estates of the old 
banks held significant domestic assets, while only a small part of their claims were domestic. 
This posed a significant balance of payments problem for Iceland and, if left unmitigated at 
the  point  of  resolution  and  distribution  to  creditors,  could  potentially  have  had  a  severely 
detrimental effect on the exchange rate and financial stability. The estates of the old banks 
were therefore brought under the capital controls in March 2012. 
In late 2008, the combination of capital controls and exchange rate stability was in several 
ways a key to stabilising the economy. First, a very significant part of private sector debt was 
either directly linked to the exchange rate or indirectly linked to it through price indexation. 
The negative effect that further depreciation would have had on consumption and investment 
would therefore have been stronger than the stimulative effect on the traded goods sector. 
The latter effect comes with a lag in any case, and the real depreciation of about one-third, 
which  had  already  taken  place,  was  sufficient  for  that.  Second,  a  large  fiscal  deficit  had 
opened up and had to be financed domestically, as the sovereign was cut off from foreign 
markets. The capital controls facilitated this. Third, the capital controls gave monetary policy 
more scope to focus on the domestic economy, as interest rates would otherwise have had 
to be higher in order to defend the currency. Fourth, the capital controls provided the shelter 
needed to restructure domestic balance sheets, rebuild the financial sector, and develop a 
better  framework  for  economic  and  prudential  policies  that  would  be  suitable  for  a  post-
capital controls environment. 
These stabilisation gains of the capital controls were greatest to begin with but have faded 
with time as balance sheets have been repaired and Iceland has recovered. The economic 
costs  of  the  controls  work  in  the  other  direction:  they  increase  over  time  as  lost  business 
opportunities accumulate, as support to domestic asset markets begins to feed bubbles, and 
as  risk  diversification  in  domestic  balance  sheets  decreases.  In  Iceland’s  case,  this  was 
partly mitigated through the liberalisation of capital inflows in October 2009 and legislative 
provisions  that  authorise  the  Central  Bank  to  grant  exemptions  from  the  capital  controls, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
provided that the balance of payments effects are not negative. But that does not change the 
big  picture.  Furthermore,  the  potential  distortion  stemming  from  the  combination  of  free 
capital inflows and restricted capital outflows has materialised recently, as carry trade and 
other forms of capital inflows have increased following the announcement and subsequent 
execution  of  the  resolution  of  the  old  banks  in  a  manner  that  fully  mitigated  the  negative 
balance  of  payments  effect.  This  has  created  appreciation  pressures  that  are  not 
counteracted by outflows, as would have occurred under normal conditions. Finally, in the 
long run, comprehensive capital controls are inconsistent with Iceland’s membership of the 
EEA and thus the EU internal market. 
You might then ask: why have we not just lifted the capital controls? This is where the twist in 
the tale comes in. The problem is that our own success in preserving Icelandic asset prices 
and fostering the recovery of the economy has created the conditions for a stronger currency 
but  has  also,  in  some  sense,  preserved  the  obstacles  to swift  and  orderly  liberalisation  of 
capital  controls.  If  Parliament  had  not  passed  the  emergency  legislation  in  October  2008, 
thereby  ensuring  that  there  was  a  functioning  banking  system  and  that  domestic  deposits 
were secure, if capital controls had not been introduced in November 2008, if we had not 
been so successful in repairing domestic balance sheets, if the economic recovery had been 
weaker and the rate of return on domestic assets had been lower, then the domestic assets 
of  the  old  banks  would  have  been  worth  much  less,  as  would  the  offshore  krónur.  In  this 
scenario, these positions might have exited Iceland long since, at just a small fraction of the 
value they had just before the resolution of the old banks. Instead, the domestic assets of the 
old  banks  amounted  to  25%  of  GDP  and  the  stock  of  offshore  krónur  was  estimated  at 
around 15% of GDP. It was clear that free exportation of these positions without mitigating 
action  would  have  resulted  in  a  new  currency  crisis,  with  potentially  serious  effects  on 
financial  stability.  That was  both  economically  and  politically  unacceptable.  As  a  matter of 
fact,  the  population  had  been  promised  solutions  to  these  problems  entailing  no  negative 
effect on the exchange rate. 
The Icelandic authorities have publicised three versions of their capital account liberalisation 
strategy: the first in 2009, the second in 2011, and the current one in June 2015. It was under 
the  second  strategy  that  the  stock  of  offshore  krónur  was  reduced  through  a  series  of 
auctions. That strategy, however, did not include a solution to the problem of the old banks. 
The split between the old and new banks was only finalised towards the end of 2010, and in 
any case, the old banks were largely exempted from the controls until March 2012. 
The current strategy is based on a guiding principle and a set of criteria that any proposed 
solutions would have to fulfil. If I explain these to you now, you will better understand what 
we have done to date and what is forthcoming. 
An overall guiding principle in the design of the liberalisation strategy was that it should entail 
comprehensive,  cautious,  and  clearly  communicated  solutions,  allowing  the  country  to  lift 
capital controls without undue risks to macroeconomic and financial stability. 
The strategy is comprehensive in the sense of mitigating, in a sufficient manner, the risk that 
excessive  capital  outflows  would  overburden  Iceland’s  small foreign  exchange  market  and 
inflict systemic negative externalities on the general public. In particular, it involved reducing 
the size of capital outflows associated with the resolution of the failed banks’ estates through 
composition  agreements  based  on  explicit  stability  conditions,  with  a  Pigouvian  tax  as  a 
necessary backstop mechanism. 
The strategy is cautious in the sense that liberalisation is planned, timed, and sequenced so 
that  the  largest  challenges  are  solved  sequentially,  in  a  manner  that  mitigates  the  risk  of 
disorderly dynamics in the foreign exchange market. Furthermore, the general liberalisation 
of capital controls on domestic residents will take place once the largest obstacles have been 
successfully removed or neutralised and when certain economic criteria have been fulfilled, 
such  as  adequate  FX  reserves,  market  access  for  the  sovereign  and  the  banks,  a  well-
balanced and growing economy, etc. The aim is to minimise the risk of capital flight. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  Icelandic  authorities  have  emphasised  public  disclosure  and  transparency  of  relevant 
information  about  the  liberalisation  strategy.  Last  year,  the  solution  to  the  failed  banks’ 
estates,  as  well  as  the  economic  analysis  on  which  it  was  based,  was  presented  in  a 
comprehensive  manner.  A  few  days  ago,  a  bill  of  legislation  on  the  treatment  of  offshore 
krónur  was  passed  by  Parliament.  An  English  translation  of  the  bill  was  posted  on  the 
website of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, along with the Explanatory Notes 
and a Q&A (with links on the Central Bank website). Yesterday the Central Bank published 
terms of a foreign currency auction directed at offshore krónur, to be held on 16 June. This 
speech  is,  of  course,  part  of  the  process  of  disclosure  and  explanation.  Furthermore,  in a 
week or two, the Central Bank will issue a special publication on the economic analysis of 
capital account liberalisation in Iceland. 
One of the criteria was that solutions should solve Iceland’s balance of payments problem in 
a manner that allowed Iceland to lift capital controls without taking undue risk with economic 
and financial stability; preserved stability in both the short and the long run; limited risk to 
Government finances, reserve adequacy, and credit ratings; avoided socialisation of private 
debt or risk; allowed the exchange rate to reflect economic fundamentals, unaffected by non-
governmental legacy issues; honoured international obligations concerning equal treatment 
under the Icelandic Constitution; and gave preference to measures offering simplicity over 
complexity, minimal legal risk, and as much finality as possible. 
The guiding principle and the criteria were used to design the solution for the estates of the 
old banks. The solution allowed the estates to choose between two options. Under the first 
option,  they  would  receive  exemptions  from  the  capital  controls  in  order  to  go  into 
composition and make distributions to creditors while offering to fulfil stability criteria that fully 
mitigate the negative effect on the exchange rate and/or the FX reserves. According to the 
stability criteria, the estates would pay sufficient stability contributions (through the transfer of 
króna assets) to mitigate the negative effect, lengthen the maturity of their FX financing of 
domestic  banks,  and  repay  Government  and  Central  Bank  support  and  debt.  Under  the 
second option, a tax would have been levied on the estates that fully mitigated the negative 
balance of payments effect of the resolution. All of the estates decided to fulfil the stability 
criteria, and the solution has mostly been implemented. 
The same principle and the same criteria will guide the Icelandic authorities in the next step, 
which is to mitigate the risks associated with the stock of offshore krónur before lifting capital 
controls on domestic residents in the near future. This will take two forms. 
First,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  offered  to  use  part  of  its  own  FX  reserves  to  buy 
offshore krónur in a single-price auction that will take place on 16 June. This will be the last 
auction of this type before the authorities begin to lift capital controls on domestic residents, 
which  is  expected  to  commence  in  the  autumn.  In  the  terms  of  the  auction,  which  were 
announced yesterday, you can see that the exchange rate in the auction will vary inversely 
with the amount of offshore krónur traded in the auction. It will start at 210 krónur per euro for 
any amount and could rise as high as 190 krónur per euro if the volume exceeds 175 billion 
krónur. The total eligible stock of offshore krónur is 319 billion krónur. Outside the auction, 
anyone can sell offshore krónur to the Central Bank for 220 krónur per euro at any time until 
1 November 2016. 
Participation  in  this  auction,  as  in  the  21  similar  auctions  that  preceded  it,  will  be  entirely 
voluntary. We are aware that some holders of offshore krónur may wish to remain in Iceland 
and  await  future  developments.  The  authorities  will  revisit  the  situation  concerning  any 
offshore  króna  positions  that  remain  after  this  auction,  once  sufficient  progress  has  been 
made  in  liberalising  capital  controls  on  residents.  We  cannot  predict  how  smoothly  that 
liberalisation  process  will  proceed; therefore,  we  cannot  state exactly  when  the  authorities 
will again be able to devote FX resources to mopping up any residual offshore krónur. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Second, last Sunday Parliament approved a bill of legislation whose principal objective is to 
segregate offshore krónur in a secure manner, so that it will be possible to lift capital controls 
on domestic residents and re-establish cross-border transactions with krónur, irrespective of 
the  outcome  of  the  auction.  This  involves  some  technical  changes  to  the  bank  accounts 
involved. The environment will be largely the same, however. Offshore króna holders will be 
allowed  to  invest  in  the  same  instruments  as  they  may  invest  in  now,  with  the  addition of 
special certificates of deposits issued by the Central Bank of Iceland. And they may continue 
to  hold  the  instruments  they  currently  hold,  including  long-term  Government  bonds  and 
equities. And this is very important: there is no forced or distressed debt exchange involved, 
and all Government debt will be paid in full and on time, as it has been hitherto. 
There is one change, though: the banks holding the accounts of offshore króna holders will 
be required to buy certificates of deposit from the Central Bank for that same amount. These 
instruments will initially bear an interest rate of 0.5%, which will be reviewed annually. This 
mapping  into  the  Central  Bank  is  part  of  the  mechanism  that  is  intended  to  keep  the 
remaining offshore krónur segregated in the face of domestic liberalisation. But why 0.5%, 
you  might  ask?  You  see  this  if  you  look  at  the  Central  Bank  balance  sheet  and  take  into 
account that we are accumulating reserves. Basically, this rate reflects the rate at which the 
Bank is, at the margin, investing these funds, and no one can expect us to incur a significant 
cost of carry because of these positions. And this rate should not be confused with our key 
Central  Bank rate,  which  is  5.75%  on seven-day  deposits. This rate  is as  high  as  it  is for 
monetary  policy  reasons;  it  is  intended  to  affect  the  spending  and  saving  decisions  of 
domestic residents and has nothing to do with these positions. 
I know that there are more questions, and Sturla Pálsson, Director of Market Operations and 
Treasury at the Central Bank of Iceland, and I are willing to answer them during the Q&A 
session. But let me take two before I conclude. 
First, why 220–190 krónur per euro? Why not the onshore rate? First of all, this is a different 
asset  class  from  onshore  krónur  and  has  been  trading  at  very  different  exchange  rates. 
Second, even if the authorities should, for some obscure reason, allow these krónur to go 
through the onshore market at this point, they would never command the current onshore 
rate. The  position  is  simply  too  large,  and  that applies  even  if  we  look only  at  the  current 
liquid part. It would simply push the market in front of it. Third, these numbers are within the 
range where offshore krónur have been trading in auctions and in the market. Fourth, the 
most important number is 190. 
This is found partly by looking at what will happen to our FX reserves if we buy the entire 
position  at  this  rate.  It  will  take  us  below  the  metrics  that  both  we  and  the  IMF  think  we 
should prudently meet when we start lifting capital controls on domestic residents. We are 
willing  to  stretch  that  far,  however,  in  order  to  facilitate  an  amicable  solution,  as  we  are 
confident that we can rebuild reserves to the required level in the next few months. 
Second, why are the authorities not offering longer-term bonds as a part of the solution? That 
was the initial intention when work on auction design began. At that time, the idea was to 
have a multi-product auction offering foreign currency, long-term euro-denominated bonds, 
and long-term króna-denominated bonds. The deliberations revealed, however, that such a 
structure  would  have  involved  significant  risks  for  Iceland.  First,  a  multi-product  auction 
carries more operational risk than a straightforward FX auction. Second, there was a risk that 
offering  these  bonds  with  special  conditions  might  be  construed  as  distressed  debt 
exchange.  Third,  these  bonds  could  be  seen  as  legacy  bonds  and  might  have  had 
detrimental  effects  on the  Government  bond market  in  both krónur  and euros.  Fourth, the 
Government  does  not  need  to  borrow  these  funds,  as  it  has  a  financial  surplus  and 
Government debt as a share of GDP is on a declining trend. Fifth, as capital controls were 
lifted  on  domestic  residents,  it  would  become  possible  for  holders  of  the  long-term  króna 
bonds  to  exit  through  the  FX  market  much  earlier  than  they  would  otherwise,  through 
hedging contracts with domestic residents. In principle, this could have been avoided through 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
prudential and other measures, but it would have been messy. It is for these reasons that 
when Iceland – by accumulating significant reserves in recent months – became able to offer 
much  more  FX  in  the  auction  than  was  previously  envisaged,  it  was  decided  to  opt  for  a 
straightforward FX auction. In this regard, remember what I said earlier about our preference 
for finality. 
Let me stop here, listen to the discussant, and then take questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
