  Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Politico 
Interview  with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, and Politico, conducted by Mr Pierre Briançon on 23 March 2016, and published on 
30 March 2016. 
 The  last  Governing  Council  meeting  on  10  March  seemed  to  be  marked  by  some 
ambiguity  on  negative  interest  rates.  On  the  one  hand,  the  message  was  that  rates 
wouldn’t  get  much  lower.  On  the  other,  there  was  the  signal  that  there  could  be 
exceptions… 
The question we are always trying to address is how to design our policy so that it is effective 
in the situation we face at a given moment. The package announced on 10 March was very 
potent, both in intensity and in sheer volume. 
Negative interest rates are not our main instrument, they just support our overall policy. And 
looking ahead, we’re not short of instruments – our choice is quite large. We will be able to 
deal with adverse situations if necessary. 
You  indicated  that  the  ECB  wasn’t  deaf  to  the  banking  sector’s  concerns  about  the 
impact of negative rates on banks’ profitability. 
Banks’ profitability has improved when you look at the global overall impact of our monetary 
policy, that is, stronger credit demand and lower risk in the economy. And, as a matter of 
fact, the interest margin of banks has gone up, not down. Of course, the impact is different 
depending on banks’ business models and on how negative the rates are. I think banks have 
been reassured about the possible negative impact of negative rates on some of them. They 
know we will not take rates into absurdly negative territory. But we can never rule out further 
moves. That would not be credible anyway. 
Over the last few months the ECB has been suggesting that it has done its part in the 
euro zone recovery, and has been asking governments to do theirs. At the same time, 
it insists it could do even more if needed, and that its toolbox is far from empty. Isn’t 
that partly contradictory? 
The roles of the ECB and governments are different. Our job is to bring inflation back to its 
near-2%  level.  That’s  our  mandate;  you  could  say  that’s  our  contract. Whenever  we  have 
doubts that the  goal  will  be  reached,  we  act.  Monetary  policy  has  a  short-to-medium-term 
horizon. We think it is up to governments to act to foster long-term growth. According to the 
European  Commission,  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  at  around  1%  today.  It  was 
almost twice that in the years before the crisis. And we think that structural and fiscal policy 
must be used wherever there is scope to do so, in terms of both quantity and quality. But it is 
not the ECB’s role to go into detail about what governments should do. The founding treaties 
are  explicit  and  give  us  different  roles.  The  idea  that  the  central  bank  should  be  the 
gendarme of economic policy among euro area countries simply doesn’t work. 
Even though, in the past, the ECB didn’t seem too shy about going into such detail? 
There  is  a  European  tradition  –  different  in  this  respect  from,  say,  the  U.S.  –  of  central 
bankers  being  more  outspoken,  when  they  feel it  can  be  useful.  At the ECB,  we  feel  it  is 
legitimate to speak our mind and explain what is needed to make the euro work better. But 
what we can’t and shouldn’t do is go into the detail of what should be government policy. 
Mario  Draghi,  in  his  last  press  conference,  described  the  concept  of  “helicopter 
money” – the idea that the central bank could finance economic agents directly – as 
“very interesting”. Is that something the ECB is debating? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
No.  As  an  economist,  of  course  I  find  the  academic  discussion  exciting.  It  is  good  that 
academics force us to think outside the box. But as a policymaker, as interesting as it may 
be, helicopter money is not currently part of the discussion in the Governing Council. If we 
decided to get into that discussion, we  would have to deal  with many  questions, such as: 
how exactly would it work in practice? How would “helicopter money” fit within our monetary 
policy?  And  finally  and  most  importantly,  how  do  we  make  sure  it  doesn’t  cross  the  line 
between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy?  To  be  honest,  I  don’t  see  how  it  could  work  without 
some  kind  of  risk-sharing  with  governments,  which  could  be  practically  and  legally 
problematic. So whatever my own intellectual interest in helicopter money, as a Governing 
Council member I have a fair deal of skepticism and circumspection. 
So we’re not near the point where the ECB could, for example, decide to finance by 
itself  the  big  public  investment  boost  it  has  been  calling  for?  Say,  by  lending 
€100 billion or more to the European Investment Bank (EIB)? 
The theoretical example you cite underlines the problem I just mentioned of the borderline 
between monetary and fiscal policy. We are already supporting investment in the euro area 
through our monetary policy. We have brought down the entire yield curve and we are buying 
securities of public entities such as the EIB as part of our asset purchase programme. But it 
is absolutely not our role to decide which investment should go ahead, which bridge should 
be repaired or which school built, nor whether the investment should be private or public. 
Ben  Bernanke,  in  his  memoirs,  suggests  that  if  the  United  States  and  Europe  took 
different paths out of the crisis, that is partly because Europe’s monetary policy in the 
first years was too tight, and its fiscal policy too strict at the wrong moment… 
I’m not for rewriting history, but the ECB and governments reacted with the tools they had at 
the  time.  They  went  through  three  crises  –  the  subprime  crisis  in  2007,  the  2009  global 
economic slowdown and the euro crisis from 2010 on – without a common fiscal backstop 
(that  only  came  in  2010  with  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility)  and  without  the 
foundations of a banking union. 
If we were to draw lessons from the experience, I would rather insist on the fact that the euro 
area was too late and too timid in cleaning up and shoring up its banking system, i.e. stress 
testing  the  banks,  raising  capital  and  shedding  bad  loans.  That  partly  explains  why  our 
recovery is lagging behind that of the United States. In banking matters, forbearance doesn’t 
serve a purpose. You can’t buy time. We’re catching up now, but we still have some way to 
go, and the banking union isn’t complete. 
Some  countries,  such  as  Germany,  insist  that  there  should  be  a  limit  on  euro  area 
banks’ sovereign exposure. Do you agree? 
There are three dimensions in my view. There is the question of sovereign risk for banks. But 
we must also consider the consequences for government financing, and the functioning of 
financial markets, which need risk-free assets as liquidity instruments. If you focus on one 
aspect of the problem and ignore the others, you run the risk of shifting risk around instead of 
reducing it. 
The  ECB’s  policy  is  increasingly  unpopular  in  Germany.  Do  you  foresee  a  moment 
when it might become an obstacle to your own action? 
Europe nowadays is a source of irritation for many. Not only its monetary policy, and not only 
in Germany. We will keep explaining to our critics in Germany – and also to German savers – 
that  their  country  is  one  of  the  main  beneficiaries  of  the  euro.  A  stronger  euro  area,  with 
inflation of below but close to 2%, would be good for Germany. 
As for the debate we may have from time to time with some academics in Germany, I would 
say there is a certain irony in them taking us to task because we are focusing on our inflation 
target, since it is at Germany’s insistence that the ECB was given that mandate – and that 
mandate only – in the euro’s founding treaties, and in my view rightly so. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Did the euro’s jump after your announcement on March 10 disappoint you? It doesn’t 
help your return-to-inflation goal… 
The ECB, as you know, doesn’t have a foreign exchange target. What I saw is that financial 
markets in general understood what we did, which is more important than the instant reaction 
of forex operators. 
The dollar/euro exchange rate is mostly driven by different monetary policies in the United 
States  and  Europe.  What  would  be  more  worrisome  for  us  would  be  a  further  decline  of 
emerging countries’ currencies, and increased volatility of the pound sterling due to the EU 
referendum debate in the United Kingdom. 
Does the ECB have a plan for a possible “Brexit”? 
I don’t want to meddle in a decision that is for the British people to make. However, as a 
citizen  and  a  European,  of  course  I  want  the  United  Kingdom  to  remain  in  the  European 
Union, to which it brings so much. That said, it is normal for us to prepare for any possible 
scenario, and its impact on euro area banks. 
If the  other  scenario  prevails  and  the  United  Kingdom  remains  in Europe, were  you 
reassured by the results of the Brexit negotiations between London and its partners? 
We  had  two  main  concerns.  One  was  to  make  sure  that  the  discussion  would  not  make 
further  euro  area  integration  more  difficult.  The  second  was  that  it  wouldn’t  fragment  the 
single  market  for  financial  services  and  strip  the  capital  markets  union  project  of  its 
substance,  notably  the  single  rulebook  for  financial  regulation.  The  final  agreement  is  a 
balanced one and we have been reassured, even though ambiguities remain, of course. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
