   Karnit Flug: Reforms in Israel’s banking system 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the launch of Prof. Meir Heth’s 
book “Reforms in Israel’s Banking System”, Tel Aviv, 18 February 2016. 
 This event marks the publication of Meir Heth’s book, which provides a broad view of the trends 
and  turmoil  that  have  characterized  the  banking  system  for  almost  the  last  50  years.  His 
viewpoint is particularly interesting in view of the variety of positions he has held over the years: 
researcher in the Research Department of the Bank of Israel, the Supervisor of Banks, the 
chairman of one of the large banks and a professor in academia who is studying the system. 
One may assess that the processes and trends that the banking system will experience in 
coming years will be no less interesting and challenging. I will be relating to some of them. 
I will present the position of the Bank of Israel with regard to the reforms that in our opinion 
should be promoted in order to increase competition in the credit market and in the financial 
system  and  also  those  which  in  the  name  of  “competition”  are  liable  to  adversely  impact 
consumers and the public in general. 
Before we begin discussing the reforms, it is important to start with an examination of the data 
and the facts and only on that basis to define the problems and the ways to solve them. What 
are  the  trends  in  the  various  credit  aggregates  over  time?  How  does  the  Israeli  system 
compare to those in other countries? And so on. I will say already at this point and will soon 
expand on this point – the credit market has changed dramatically in recent years and the 
proposed reforms should be based on current trends and not on the approaches of the past. 
Using the data, we will try to get a full picture of competition, which has served as the basis for 
the Bank of Israel’s position on this issue. I will say already at this point, and I will illustrate 
later on, that the Bank of Israel is promoting competition in the financial system and its actions 
in recent years have proven that. 
I will also briefly touch on the public interest in maintaining the stability of the banking system, 
which is often taken for granted. The volatility that affected the global banking system, primarily 
in Europe, during the last two weeks, provide a reminder of the importance of maintaining the 
stability of the financial system. 
As of now, more than half of the business credit in Israel is provided from outside of the banking 
system, and this of course has major implications for the level of competition in this sector. 
From the point of view of business customers, and primarily large ones, there is an alternative 
to the banking system. Of course, the development of the nonbank credit market also has 
implications  for  stability.  I  would  mention  that  the  corporate  bond  market,  which  was  less 
supervised than the bank credit market, was the only market in Israel that was significantly 
affected by the global crisis. 
The  development  of  the  consumer  credit  market  and  the  reforms  carried  out  to  reduce 
concentration have also affected banks’ credit activity. The freed-up sources of capital were 
increasingly channeled to consumer credit, both housing and non-housing, which was provided 
for the most part by the banks and has been characterized by a high rate of growth in recent 
years. The growth in consumer credit and the fact that it was divided among all of the banks is 
evidence of the increasing competition between the banks in this market. As is known, the 
mortgage  market  is  a  particularly  competitive  market  and  the  growth  in  the  volume  of 
mortgages  began  a  number  of  years  before  the  growth  in  consumer  credit.  It  is  possible, 
therefore, that we are in midst of a process of increasing competition in the consumer credit 
market. Who hasn’t recently received a text message or email with an offer of credit? Within a 
few years, we have arrived at a situation in which the quantity of consumer credit is equal to 
almost half of the quantity of housing credit and therefore we are starting to see an increase in 
the  level  of  competition  in  the  non-housing  consumer  credit  market  as  well,  against  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
background of steps taken by the Bank of Israel in recent years, even prior to the planned 
reforms in this sector. 
In view of the rapid growth in consumer credit (which is intended for current consumption, such 
as non-housing credit, student loans, and the like) in recent years, it is worthwhile to examine 
these developments relative to other countries. As a result of the rapid expansion in recent 
years, we have arrived at a situation in which the ratio of consumer credit to GDP in Israel is 
relatively high – similar to its level in the US and higher than in countries such as the UK, 
France, the Netherlands and Sweden. 
One of the sectors generally considered problematic, from the viewpoint of both prices and 
access to sources of financing, is the small business sector. This problem is not unique to 
Israel and the volume of credit to the small business sector in Israel is not low relative to other 
countries. The government is working to help small businesses through loan funds and it must 
do more in that area. The interest rate spreads are relatively high in this sector. It is reasonable 
to assume that part of the difference is the result of high operating costs (such as underwriting 
costs) of credit to small businesses relative to other sectors. In any case, there is undoubtedly 
a need to increase competition and access to credit and to reduce the prices in the small 
business sector. I expect that the transition to digital services will also lead to reduced prices 
in this sector. 
The interest rates on credit cards in Israel are relatively low in comparison to other countries 
and the interest rates on overdrafts and revolving credit in Israel are similar to those in other 
countries.  (It  should  be  noted  that  a  report  ordered  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  from  the 
McKinsey company shows that the prices of credit in Israel and the level of fees are lower than 
in the countries chosen as reference in that report.) 
Prices  are  also  ultimately  reflected  in  the  banks’  return  on  assets,  which  is  not  out  of  line 
relative  to  the  average  in  other  countries.  This  situation  is  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the 
banking  system  in Israel  is  characterized  by  a  low  level  of  efficiency  relative  to  the  global 
average, which apparently affects profitability; yet at the same time, the system in Israel is 
characterized  by  a  lower  level  of  risk  than  banking  systems  in  other  countries.  In  some 
countries,  the  profitability  of  the  banking  system  has  been  very  adversely  affected  by  the 
realization of risks that were the result of imprudent conduct. 
Cautious conduct and close supervision of the banking system in Israel are also reflected in 
the fact that Israel did not have to rescue a single bank from failure during the global financial 
crisis. Such rescues in other countries were costly to their taxpayers. The fact that in Israel we 
did not have to rescue any of the banks contributed to Israel’s rapid exit from the global crisis 
with minimal effect on growth, employment and standard of living. The experience of other 
advanced economies illustrates the damage that we avoided thanks to the maintenance of 
stability in our banking system and also the extent of damage that may occur if as policy makers 
we will not do so in the future. 
Even though we in Israel did not experience the global financial crisis in the banking system, 
we have learned from the experience of other countries and we have aligned ourselves with 
global regulation. In recent years, the Banking Supervision Department at the Bank of Israel 
has taken numerous measures in order to strengthen the stability of the system. For example, 
in accordance with international standards, the capital requirements of the banks have been 
raised  markedly,  more  stringent  liquidity  requirements  have  been  introduced,  etc.  These 
measures, together with additional regulation that is meant to improve the management of risk 
in  the  banks  and  along  with  regulatory  measures  to  reduce  concentration  in  the  banking 
system, have helped achieve a stable banking system that can deal with future crises. This is 
not something to be taken for granted, especially now. 
What can be learned from what I have so far presented with respect to competition in the 
financial system? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      There is no doubt that the credit market for large businesses is characterized by a 
high level of competition. 
The mortgage market is also characterized by a high level of competition, as well as 
wise consumption by the customers themselves who compare the options available 
before signing, and this is reflected in the level of prices. It is important to remember 
that there is a high level of competition in mortgages even under the current structure 
of the banking system! 
The segments in which there is room to continue to increase competition, as pointed 
out in past Bank of Israel reports and by the committee that was headed by the former 
Supervisor of Banks, are the small business sector and the household sector (aside 
from housing credit). 
Even in these segments, there are processes that are leading to increased competition. Some 
of these originated in the banks themselves, that have identified the retail sector as a strategic 
objective and have been increasing their scope of activity in this sector. This can be seen, for 
example, in the notable increase in consumer credit. Some of these processes are external to 
the banking system, such as the development of non-bank entities, which has partly been 
made possible by technological advances. A considerable part of these processes is the result 
of policies promoted by the Bank of Israel to increase competition, and I will relate to them in 
a moment. It is important to remember in this context that numerous measures have been 
implemented  in  the  last  two  years  and  their  effects  have  not  yet  been  fully  felt.  Thus,  for 
example, the banking ID card which will be distributed shortly to all of the banks’ customers is 
the result of work started more than two years ago and whose full effect will only be felt in a 
few  months.  Changes  in  the  financial  system  are  not  accomplished  by  declarations  and 
headlines but rather by wise, thorough and well-thought-out long-term policies, policies that 
require a measure of perseverance. 
How then do we promote competition in the financial system in general and in the banking 
system  in  particular?  How  do  we  expand  the  competition  in  the  business  sector  and  the 
mortgage market to also include households and small businesses? 
In view of the statements made recently, I would like to stress, as unambiguously as possible, 
that the  Bank  of  Israel  has  been  working  towards  ensuring the  interests  of the  public, 
including the promotion of competition! 
Competition is critical for the existence of an advanced financial sector. Without competition, 
our  banking  system  will  not  develop,  the  quality  of  service  provided  to  customers  will  be 
adversely impacted, the consumer will lose confidence in the system and eventually there may 
also  be  consequences for stability. Therefore,  we  are  in favor  of  encouraging  competition. 
Competition does not contradict stability. Let me repeat that in order to make sure that the 
message gets across – we are promoting competition in the banking system. We have 
done so in the past and we will do so in the future. 
How has the Bank of Israel worked to encourage competition? 
One of the barriers to competition is the difficulty in switching between banks and the entities 
that  compete  with  them.  The  Bank  of  Israel  is  working  to  remove  these  barriers  and  will 
continue to do so. 
The Zaken Committee did not wait for the entry of new players and drew up a list of measures 
that strengthened the position of households and small businesses and increased the level of 
competition. The vast majority of those measures have already been implemented by the Bank 
of Israel. These include, among others, making it easier to switch banks and providing the 
possibility of implementing more bank activities on the Internet, such as opening and closing 
of accounts. The Banking Supervision Department recently issued an innovative directive that 
expands the activities that can be implemented by electronic communication, which has a huge 
potential for increasing competition between the banks. In general, the Bank of Israel views 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
technology as a challenge for the banking system and also as a powerful lever for improving 
service to customers and lowering its price. 
The activity of the Bank of Israel to increase competition for the benefit of the consumer goes 
beyond making it easier to switch banks. Another barrier to switching banks is the fact that a 
customer’s current bank knows the customer better than the bank he would like to move to 
and as a result the customer may be apprehensive that he will not be able to obtain loans at a 
good interest rate from a bank that doesn’t know him as well. We have started to deal with this 
problem as well through the Zaken Committee and we have required that the banks issue a 
banking ID card to customers, which as I mentioned will be sent to bank customers in the 
coming days. In addition, we are promoting the creation of a central credit register at the Bank 
of Israel which will complement the work we have started with the banking ID card. 
By means of directives issued by the Banking Supervision Department, we have worked to 
reduce bank fees and the cost of banking services, in cases where we have found that a market 
failure exists. And again, it must be emphasized that the effect of some of these changes is 
not felt immediately. The recommendations of the Zaken Committee were implemented over 
the last few years and it is reasonable to assume that when their full effects are felt, we will 
see an increase in the level of competition. 
The Bank of Israel believes that these measures to increase competition between existing 
entities  are  not  sufficient  and  therefore  we  have  created  a  less  stringent  supervisory 
environment for nonbank entities, such as the separated credit card companies or companies 
that will provide large-scale credit against the issue of bonds. This new category will encourage 
the activity of these entities, in the recognition that regulation in this case can be less stringent 
since their activity is not financed by deposits. In other words, the supervision will be risk-
adjusted. This  policy  will facilitate the  entry  of  new  competitors  into the area  of credit  and 
acquiring. 
Finally, as is known, the Minister of Finance and I established the Strum Committee and the 
Bank  of  Israel  is  taking  a  leading  role  in  the  work  of  the  committee  and  in  formulating  its 
recommendations (and many important ones have not generated any controversy or public 
discussion). One of the main recommendations of the committee is the separation of two of 
the credit card companies from the large banks. However, it is important to understand that 
the  credit  card  companies  have  systemic  importance  for  the  economy  and  therefore  must 
continue  to  be  supervised  by  the  Bank  of  Israel,  on  a  risk-adjusted  basis.  The  transfer  of 
supervision over these companies from the Bank of Israel to a regulator with a different focus 
and different expertise raises a real concern that the damage from separating the credit card 
companies will be greater than the benefit. 
All of the many steps to improve competition have been carried out responsibly and after a 
professional and comprehensive examination of the potential benefits and risks involved. It is 
possible to promote competition without harming stability. 
We have seen what happens when financial entities are allowed or even encouraged to seek 
profits by taking on excessive risk and at the same time imposing high risks on the general 
public. This occurs when regulators are unable to monitor these risks or, even worse, ignore 
them. 
Our responsibility to the public is a long-term one and requires us to prevent such a situation. 
We will not agree to measures that in the name of competition will enable financial entities to 
operate without there being a supervisory body with an overall perspective of stability and 
consumer welfare, which in the first stage will harm the consumer and in the second stage the 
general public. Many countries and millions of unemployed people all over the world are still 
paying the price of irresponsible financial activity. 
How does the Bank of Israel view the maintenance of stability? We have seen that the banking 
system  in  Israel  is  indeed  stable  and  weathered  the  worst  global  crisis  since  the  1930s 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
relatively unscathed. We at the Bank of Israel want to make sure that the system will also 
endure the next crisis, if it occurs. 
How are we doing so? 
First and foremost, it is important to understand – and this is something that is not sufficiently 
emphasized in public discourse – that maintaining the stability of the banking system is 
not meant to serve the interests of the banks or their managers and employees, but 
rather to serve, first and foremost, the interests of the banks’ customers, the economy 
as a whole – the public. Maintaining stability means that when we deposit our salaries with 
the bank, we can sleep at night and can feel sure that we will be able to use that money when 
we need to; that when we save for our children, we can be confident that those savings will be 
available  to  them  when  they  grow  up;  and  when  a  businessman  or  factory  receives  a 
commitment, that commitment will be honored. 
The lessons from the global crisis in 2008 taught us that instability in the financial system has 
long-term consequences on employment, growth and welfare in general. The fact that Israel 
weathered the crisis in 2008 relatively well emphasizes the need for professional and efficient 
supervision and illustrates the possible implications of not having such supervision. 
The responsibility for maintaining a stable financial system rests with the Bank of Israel and 
we will fulfill that responsibility; but it also rests with the government and other regulators. The 
Financial Stability Committee is an appropriate framework for coordinating activity and for the 
monitoring of risks and will make it easier to deal with those risks at an early stage. 
As we have come to realize following the series of financial crises during the last decade in 
many advanced economies, credit providers, which are financed through deposits or bonds 
issued  to  the  public,  and  entities  that  settle  most  of  the  payments  in  the  economy  have 
systemic importance for financial stability and therefore we will insist that they continue to be 
supervised by the Bank of Israel. This is also the trend we are beginning to see worldwide, 
such that more and more central banks are being given responsibility for financial stability, 
together with the tightening of regulation of banks and nonbank entities. 
The  Bank  of Israel,  like  other  central  banks  worldwide,  has  the  necessary  knowledge  and 
expertise  and  is  the  entity  most  capable  of  supervising  systemically  important  financial 
institutions. Reducing the supervisory powers of the Bank of Israel in order to ease prudential 
supervision will create trends that are liable to pose a risk to the stability of the economy. It is 
interesting that although many countries have learned the hard way how much damage a lack 
of stability can cause depositors and taxpayers, there is no lobby for stability. There is no public 
cry to “promote stability”. Therefore, it is also important that an apolitical entity, which is not 
measured  according  to  its  day-to-day  popularity,  will  have  responsibility  for  maintaining 
stability. 
We will continue to work according to these principles in the future, with determination and with 
the sense of purpose and responsibility that is required for this important task. Therefore, we 
will oppose any change in the regulatory structure that will reduce the Bank of Israel’s ability 
to fulfill its role in preserving stability. 
Our position with respect to competition and stability is also based on our position with respect 
to the recommendations of the Strum Committee. We are in favor of measures to strengthen 
competition but are opposed to measures that will negatively impact the consumer. For 
example: 
The Strum Committee recommendation to prohibit the issuing of credit cards by the banks: 
This will create essentially a monopoly of three companies that will be issuing credit cards as 
opposed to 10 today. It is easy to see that this will lead to an increase in the price of credit. For 
example,  when  the  mobile  telephone  market  was  opened  to  competition,  the  existing 
companies were not prevented from selling devices, maintaining their customers and recruiting 
new ones. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
The Bank of Israel is opposed to separating Cal-Cartisey Ashrai LeYisrael (Israel Credit Cards) 
from the banks that own it. Leaving Cal-Cartisey Ashrai LeYisrael (Israel Credit Cards) in the 
hands of Discount Bank and First International Bank will strengthen their ability to compete 
with the larger banks. 
Encouragement of consumer credit: We have seen that the quantity of consumer credit in Israel 
is not low relative to that in other countries and encouraging the growth of consumer credit 
against pension savings may lead to a reduction in the level of pension security. In this case, 
the short-term perspective is clear – of course all of us are happy to increase our consumption 
by taking a loan, but in the long term loans have to be repaid and if they are not, it is the 
borrower who suffers the most, followed by the possible systemic threat to the economy and 
consumers in general. 
To sum up: 
Competition  can  be  increased  in  the  financial  intermediation  market  without  harming  the 
stability of the financial system. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  will  insist  on  maintaining  its  ability  to  continue  supervising  the  credit 
providers and acquirers that have systemic importance. 
The Bank of Israel’s supervision will be adjusted to the supervised entity’s level of risk. 
Within the framework of the reforms, the consumers’ protection must be ensured, according to 
standards similar to those for the whole system. 
The Bank of Israel will adamantly oppose measures that might set the stage for the next crisis 
or that might adversely impact customers. 
The continued implementation of measures initiated by the Bank of Israel, the creation of a 
central  credit  register  and  the  promotion  of  measures  for  which  a  consensus  has  been 
achieved and which reflect the long-term welfare of consumers and the economy, will achieve 
significant improvements in the level of competition in the financial system without endangering 
stability or harming the consumer. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
