  Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Mauritius’s long history of banking 
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the launching 
ceremony of the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited, Balaclava, 27 September 2016. 
 Her Excellency, Madam President of the Republic of Mauritius 
Honourable Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Honourable Ministers 
His Excellency the Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China 
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Bank of China, and Leader of the Chinese Delegation 
The CEO of the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good morning 
Years ago, under my  watch, five banks were licensed by the Bank of Mauritius: Deutsche 
Bank  (Mauritius)  Ltd,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  (Mauritius)  Ltd,  Standard  Bank  (Mauritius) 
Ltd, Banque des Mascareignes and Investec Bank (Mauritius) Ltd. Afrasia Bank Ltd and the 
SBI (Mauritius) Ltd were about to set foot in our jurisdiction before my departure in 2006. On 
March 18 this year, I handed over a banking license to the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited 
– a bank from the second largest economy of the world and the oldest society that is once 
again  writing  its  own  story  under  a  new  mandate.  It’s  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  be 
associated with the Chinese delegation this morning for the launching of the bank. The bank 
gets its moment under the sun in our jurisdiction as from today. Let me once again extend a 
very warm welcome to the Bank of China. 
Established  in  1912,  the  Bank  of  China  successively  served  as  China’s  central  bank, 
international  exchange bank  and  specialized  international  trade  bank  until  1949. The  bank 
eventually rose to a leading position in the Chinese financial industry and developed a good 
standing  in  the  international  financial  community.  It’s  reckoned  as  a  Global  Systemically-
Important Bank and ranked 4th worldwide and 3rd in China in terms of Tier 1 capital in 2015. 
The  bank,  largely  owned  by  the  Government  of  China,  had  wished  to  open  a  branch  as 
opposed to a subsidiary in Mauritius. But the Bank of Mauritius required the Bank of China to 
go  for  a  subsidiary  and  not  for  a  branch  as  is  imperatively  demanded  by  our  prudential 
standards. The bank respectfully complied.  
The  Bank  of  China’s  stated  capital  stands  at  nearly  Rs2.0  billion  –  almost  ten  times  the 
amount required as per our Banking Act – reflecting its determination to use its presence in 
Mauritius as a strong and powerful conduit for facilitating and expanding businesses between 
Africa and Mauritius and between Mauritius and China. The stated capital defines clearly the 
scope  and  character  of  activities  that  the  Bank  of  China  is  resolved  to  undertake  in  our 
jurisdiction. Strong banks with strong stated capital give credibility to a jurisdiction. Low levels 
of stated capital convey the perception that the requirements for obtaining a banking license 
are  very  lax,  even  though  there  may  be  stringent  conditions  that  need  to  be  satisfied  for 
opening  a  bank.  Most  banks  in  our  jurisdiction  have  stated  capital  well  above  what  the 
Banking Act prescribes. 
Lately,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  been  taxed  as  being  inflexible,  and  even  arrogant,  with 
regard to issues having to do with regulation and supervision of deposit-taking institutions. 
This is rightly an occasion for me to share some of my concerns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Under the post-World War II gold standard, there never was a financial crisis that thrusted 
systemic  risk  to  the  world  economy.  Since  1971,  when  the  Bretton  Woods  System  broke 
down, the international monetary and financial system experienced 13 major crises: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
1973 oil price shock and international monetary crisis 
1979 oil price shock and the US dollar crisis 
1982 Latin American debt crisis 
1984 banking crisis and effective nationalization of Continental Illinois Bank in the 
US 
1987 October stock market crash 
1989–91 S&L crisis and bailout in the US 
1990 Japanese bubble collapse and banking crisis 
1992-The European Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis 
1994 Mexican peso crisis 
1997 Asian currency crisis 
2001 dot com crash 
2007–09 Housing market collapse in the US and international financial crisis 
2010–2012 European sovereign debt crisis 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I am sure none of us feels good about a world ridden with crises. On average, every 4-year 
period the world economy has suffered from a major currency or financial crisis over the last 
45  years,  let  alone  occasional  political  disturbances  and  rivalries  between  countries  that 
wreak  mayhem  in  financial  markets.  The  high  frequency  of  crises  and  their  increasingly 
lasting  character  have  kept  regulators  on  their  toes.  Every  crisis  is  known  to  have  given 
Ministers of Finance and Governors of central banks more and more troublesome times with 
taxpayers bearing the brunt for regulatory mistakes and regulatory forbearance. From trusted 
life-savers they turn into potential drowning victims. There are few worse sins in the business 
of  regulating  and  supervising  financial  institutions  than  falling  “behind  the  curve”.  The 
consequences  are  usually  dire  for  the  economy.  Insouciance  is  costly  to  society.  The 
exigencies of universally accepted rules, laws and by-laws in the business of banking do not 
allow  us  to  adopt  a  relaxed  and  unperturbed  attitude  towards  regulatory  and  supervisory 
issues.  To  use  a  Shakespearean  lexicon,  the  responsible  regulator  often  has  to  be  “cruel 
only  to  be  kind”  to  the  financial  system,  the  economy  and,  by  extension,  to  society  as  a 
whole.  Under  what  appears  to  be  the  arrogance  of  central  banking,  lies  the  unspoiled 
humility of the central banker. 
A Damocles’ sword is hanging, since quite some time, above the necks of banks in a number 
of jurisdictions, particularly the smaller ones. Banks in smaller jurisdictions are operating in a 
penalizing  environment.  Many  of 
larger 
correspondent banks overseas. A study conducted by the World Bank reveals that half of the 
91 financial regulators surveyed have seen a decline in correspondent banking facilities in 
the past three years. Correspondent banking is the business that banks do with one another 
and is an essential link in cross-border payments, cheque clearing and remittance. Many of 
us  must  be  aware  that  a  barrage  of  regulation  aimed  at  stemming  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing has led to billion-dollar fines for major banks recently. Several large banks 
domiciled in advanced countries are retreating from some countries deemed high-risk. This 
process of de-risking is on and it threatens to upend regional financial security. Most of the 
170  smaller  banks  surveyed  reported  a  loss  of  access  to  “scale  and  breadth”  of  services 
provided  by  large  banks  overseas.  The  regions  hardest  hit  are  East  Asia  Pacific,  Central 
Asia, the Caribbean, Eastern Europe and small jurisdictions with “significant offshore banking 
them  have  already  been  sanctioned  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  activities and high-risk jurisdictions”. There are indications that some countries in Africa are 
already  losing  correspondent  banking  facilities  from  larger  overseas  banks.  Newly  set  up 
banks unknown in the banking world are having serious problems regarding correspondent 
banking  facilities.  Cheque  clearing,  payments  and  settlements,  cash  management  and 
international  wire  transfers  have  suffered  the  most.  Foreign  trade  in  the  afflicted  countries 
have suffered as a result. This problem is best tackled at the very licensing stage of banks by 
the regulatory authority. 
In  our  domestic  market,  foreign  currencies  equivalent  to  as  much  as  US$11.0  billion  are 
purchased  and  sold  annually  against  rupees.  In  the  last  eighteen  months,  the  Bank  has 
equipped itself with the right technology to pick up unfamiliar smells in financial transactions. 
As  regulator,  we  have  defined  our  bearings  in  today’s  overbearing  and  unforgiving 
environment. Mauritius cannot afford to take the kind of risk that could seriously jeopardize 
its trade and financial transactions with the rest of the world. 
Regulatory  authorities  in  jurisdictions  like  ours  have  two  choices:  either  to  sound  like 
Cassandra or to get laid back on a multiple dose of congenital optimism and take it lightly as 
another  speed  bump  on  the  road  to  an  imaginary  perfect  world.  It’s  not  amusing  being 
Cassandra. But remember, Cassandra ended being right. And the Trojan, having blissfully 
disregarded  her  warnings,  ended  up  being  very  wrong  and  very  dead.  With  due  regard to 
some  business  persons  seeking  a  banking  license,  I  must  say  with  all  the  humility  of  a 
central  banker  that  the  regulator  cannot  afford  to  embrace  crude  populism  as  a  way  of 
professional life. 
Effective  enforcement  of  prudential  norms  requires  a  strong  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework.  In  the  light  of  many  regulatory  challenges  that  the  Bank  has  been  facing  for 
several years, various attempts were made to consolidate our legal framework. The attempts 
were in vain. This year, following the 2016–17 Government Budget, quite a good number of 
amendments to the  Banking  Act  and the  Bank of  Mauritius  Act  were  proposed. This  is  an 
occasion  for  me  to  thank  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  for  having  taken  the 
amendments to the National Assembly, defended them with conviction and got them through. 
Regulators  need  authority;  they  need  discretion  to  use  the  authority  as  evolving  situations 
demand. But the Bank does also recognize that the inherent complexity and unpredictability 
of markets and, more importantly, of human behaviour necessitate flexibility. The Bank does, 
however, keep in mind a few basic principles when using this discretion. The authority thus 
granted to the Bank of Mauritius is used responsibly and not vainly. 
Mauritius  has  a  very  long  history  of  banking.  The  oldest  Mauritian  bank  is  the  Mauritius 
Commercial Bank Ltd, established in 1838. Quite a few banks were operational long before 
1838. And Mauritius used to be a regional financial hub since as far back as the 17th century 
to the early decades of the 20th century. The Pound sterling, the Indian rupee, the US dollar, 
gold, silver and some Middle Eastern currencies were used as media of exchange. Mauritius 
had  emerged  as  an  important  regional  platform  for  payments  and  settlements  between 
traders from the West, Africa, the Indian sub-Continent and East Asia. The construction of 
the  Suez  Canal  and  the  two World Wars  arrested  the  evolution  of  the  financial  hub.  After 
several decades, the platform was revived in 1989 with the hosting of our Offshore Banking 
Centre. Mauritius does have its historical roots in serving international finance. We don’t take 
this  attribute  and  the  aptitude  of  our  jurisdiction  lightly.  I  seize  this  opportunity  to  tell  the 
people of China and the Chinese business community in Africa that we have no restriction 
whatsoever on capital flows since 1994. Business people bring capital in and take capital out 
of  Mauritius  freely  –  as  long  as  anti-money  laundering  parameters  set  by  the  laws  of  the 
country  are  positively  observed.  This  vitally  important  characteristic  of  our  jurisdiction 
combined with a robust regulatory and supervisory framework for financial institutions makes 
of Mauritius a safe and credible financial hub. 
Mauritius  is  already  a  jurisdiction  through  which  vast  amounts  of  capital  flow  from  various 
parts of the world to China. The mass of trade between Africa and China needs a credible 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  jurisdiction for the usage of the RMB. The renminbi has moved fast from a regulatory-driven 
currency to a market-driven currency in the past few years. Mauritius does have the potential 
to  grow  into  a  regional  “node”  for  the  internationalization  of  the  RMB.  To  the  Chinese 
business  community  in  Africa,  in  particular,  I  wish  to  reassure  that  fund  management, 
treasury management of corporate bodies etc are competently conducted in our jurisdiction. 
The advent of the Bank of China in our jurisdiction is thus a promising development. 
Last  year,  I  was  in  Shanghai,  at  the  heart  of  the  Chinese  financial  centre.  During  a 
conversation over dinner with a group of bankers, I was a little surprised at their ignorance of 
Chinese  people  having  settled  down  here  in  Mauritius  for  around  two  centuries.  They 
listened to me in disbelief and jaw-dropped silence when I told them that the Spring Festival 
is celebrated in Mauritius and the day of celebrations is a national holiday. To the people of 
China, particularly to those Chinese businessmen having enterprises in Africa, I wish to tell 
them that the Chinese Diaspora’s contribution to the economic development of Mauritius has 
been  enormous.  Sino-Mauritian  relationship  is  a  great  story  line  which  the  Chinese 
immigrants  have  constructed  and  woven  through  thick  and  thin  since  they  first  set  foot  in 
Mauritius. The establishment of the Bank of China is a welcome response to the demands for 
closer co-operation between Mauritius and the People’s Republic of China. 
The  bank  is  headed  by  Mr  Zhang  Xiaoqing,  a  career  banker.  I  understand  the  bank  is 
expected to be a game changer in the region under his leadership. On behalf of the Board of 
Directors and the staff of the Bank of Mauritius, and on my own behalf, I wish the Bank of 
China the very best. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
