  William C Dudley: Opening remarks at the Transatlantic Economy – 
Convergence or Divergence Conference 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Transatlantic  Economy:  Convergence  or  Divergence 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 April 2016. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to today’s conference. Over the past decade, the New York 
Fed has been working together with the European Commission and the Centre for Economic 
Policy  Research  in  sponsoring  a  number  of  conferences  on  interdependencies  and  policy 
challenges  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  Today,  as  in  the  past,  we  have  a  great 
program  with  many  distinguished  speakers  from  academia,  and  the  private  and  public 
sectors.  In  particular,  I  would  highlight  the  keynote  speech  following  lunch  by  Pierre 
Moscovici,  European  Commissioner  for  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs,  Taxation  and 
Customs. 
As the two largest economies in the world, the United States and the European Union have a 
shared stake in the vitality of the global economy. Without growth in both our regions, the 
global economy will not prosper and we will not be able to provide the conditions to enable 
our citizens to fulfill their aspirations. Both the United States and Europe suffered large social 
and  economic  costs  from  the  financial  crisis  and  the  deep  recession  that  followed.  We 
continue to take steps to minimize the risks that we will ever find ourselves in that situation 
again.  In  many  respects,  the  United  States  and  Europe  face  similar  challenges  and  have 
similar goals. 
Today I want to focus on some of the challenges. 
On the regulatory side, there is considerable good news. In particular, substantial progress 
has been made in strengthening the global banking system. Capital and liquidity standards 
for internationally active banks have been raised significantly. This should reduce the risk of 
failure for these banks. Also, the financial system is being made more resilient and robust. 
For  example,  the  global  set  of  principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures  has  been 
updated and strengthened. 
Moreover,  some  steps  have  been  taken  to  better  deal  with  the  failure  of  systemically 
important financial firms on a cross-border basis. Key attributes for resolution regimes have 
been promulgated by the Financial Stability Board. Efforts are underway to improve how we 
can work together in a coordinated way on a global basis. 
But more needs to be done. The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need 
to be fully identified and dismantled. This is necessary to solve the so-called “too big to fail” 
problem.  Also,  cross-border  regulatory  cooperation  needs  to  be  further  enhanced.  This 
includes greater exchange of confidential supervisory information so that national regulators 
can be fully informed about the conditions of the banks that operate within their borders. It 
also requires efforts to ensure a level playing field across jurisdictions so that the focus is on 
promoting  safety  and  soundness  rather  than  on  trying  to  protect,  favor,  or  shield  national 
champions. 
On  the  macroeconomic  side,  the  news  for  the  United  States  is  mostly  favorable.  Labor 
market conditions have significantly improved over the past few years and unemployment is 
now around 5 percent. The household sector is much less leveraged, the housing sector is 
recovering,  the  banking  system  is  much  healthier,  and  the  corporate  sector  is  highly 
profitable,  even  as  business  fixed  investment  spending  remains  quite  weak.  Although 
inflation  has  fallen  short  of  our  objective,  I  am  confident  that  inflation  will  return  to  our 
2 percent  objective  over  the  next  few  years  as  the  labor  market  tightens  further  and  the 
transitory factors that have held inflation down dissipate. After years at the effective lower 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
bound for short-term interest rates, economic conditions have finally warranted the start of 
U.S. monetary policy normalization. But these monetary policy adjustments are likely to be 
gradual and cautious, as we continue to face significant uncertainties and the headwinds to 
growth from the financial crisis have not fully abated. 
For  Europe,  the  economic  outlook  has  started  to  improve.  The  European  Union  is 
experiencing a cyclical recovery and the unemployment rate has been steadily declining over 
the past two years. The end of fiscal tightening appears to be a key factor in this recovery. 
Risks of low inflation, however, remain a concern for the European Central Bank and have 
motivated their aggressive use of unconventional monetary policy instruments. 
Today’s conference touches on a range of interesting questions concerning both regions: 
• 
Are there policy strategies that can ensure that the global economy will escape from 
this very long period of very low inflation and very low real interest rates? 
Is there scope for fiscal policy to take on some of the burden of ending this period of 
persistently low inflation and low interest rates? 
Are  we  now  in  a  period  of  secular  stagnation  or  are  we  in  the  midst  of  a 
deleveraging process that will gradually dissipate? 
Why has investment spending failed to respond to the low level of interest rates? 
What do we believe are the factors underlying the recent slowdown in productivity 
growth globally? 
Is a banking union with a common deposit guarantee scheme achievable in Europe? 
Are there opportunities for further regulatory and supervisory convergence between 
the United States and Europe? 
    I would like to thank the participants for addressing these and other questions during today’s 
three panels, and I look forward to insightful discussion over the course of the day. 
It is now my pleasure to introduce the European Union Ambassador to the United States, His 
Excellency David O’Sullivan. The ambassador is extraordinarily well-versed to speak on the 
issues  of  interdependence  and  the  policy  challenges  we  face.  Welcome,  Ambassador 
O’Sullivan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
