  Jon Nicolaisen: Can crises be curbed? 
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 12 April 2016. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Keynes versus Hayek 
On 17 October 1932, a letter on the subject of public and private spending was published in 
The Times newspaper. The letter was signed by several economists, one of whom was John 
Maynard Keynes. In the letter, Keynes argues in favour of public spending: 
“If the citizens of a town wish to build a swimming-bath or a library, or a museum, 
they will not, by refraining from doing this, promote a wider national interest. [...] 
Through their misdirected good will the mounting wave of unemployment will be 
lifted still higher.” 
Two  days  later,  on  19 October  1932,  another  letter  was  published  in  response. This  letter 
was also signed by several economists, among them Friedrich Hayek: 
“... many  of the  troubles  of  the world  at the  present  time  are  due  to  imprudent 
borrowing and spending on the part of the public authorities. [...] the existence of 
public debt [on a large scale] imposes frictions and obstacles to readjustment [...] 
If the Government wish to help revival, the right way for them to proceed is, not to 
revert to their old habits of lavish expenditure ... “ 
The debate between Keynes and Hayek took place at a time when millions of people were 
out of work. Governments, firms and households were heavily in debt and many banks were 
on their knees. In many countries, deflation made debt even heavier to bear. At the same 
time,  pessimism  and  caution  put  a  damper  on  the  willingness  to  spend.  Deflation  and 
unemployment led to a low level of consumption, and investment that could have generated 
jobs and growth was held back. 
The  question  is,  then,  can  the  authorities  curb  a  crisis  by  spending  borrowed  money? 
According to Keynes, spending would not only prevent the economy from sinking even lower, 
it would also reduce the extent of the crisis and bring the economy back into balance more 
quickly.  Or  was  Hayek  right  when  he  claimed  that  misjudged  attempts  to  curb  a  crisis  by 
means  of  debt-financed  spending  can  sow  the  seeds  of  a  subsequent  and  even  deeper 
crisis? 
According  to  Hayek,  measures  should  be  focused  on  the  underlying  challenges,  such  as 
public  debt,  that  had  created  the  crisis.  In  Hayek’s  opinion,  higher  public  debt  would 
inevitably  end  up  funding  unproductive  investments  and  consumption  in  the  public  sector, 
which  would  lead  to  low  growth.  Instead,  government  budgets  should  be  brought  into 
balance and regulations hampering economic activity should be removed. In Hayek’s view, 
this would over time provide the basis for healthy, self-driven economic growth, even if the 
measures taken might deepen the crisis in the short term. 
Keynes  won  the  public  debate  in  the  1930s.  His  views  influenced  economic  policy  in  the 
West,  particularly  in  the  post-war  years.  However,  Keynesian  policies  would  later  prove  to 
have their weaknesses too. 
Deeper causes 
Major  crises  are  usually  the  result  of  a  series  of  unfortunate  events  that  occur  in  close 
proximity  in  time.  A  triggering  factor  can  often  be  identified.  But  there  is  often  an  equally 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  important and deeper underlying cause. If this is overlooked or not dealt with, the road out of 
the crisis may be long. Let me give an example from Norwegian economic history:1 
The oil price shock in 1973 and 1974 led to a recession in western economies – the worst 
recession since the Second World War. The Norwegian economy was also affected. At the 
same time, the Norwegian oil age had just begun. With prospects of high future income, the 
authorities  responded  with  an  expansionary  countercyclical  policy  with  large  fiscal  deficits. 
Targeted measures were also implemented to help manufacturing through the most difficult 
period.  Manufacturing  firms  operating  at  a  loss  received  funding  support  to  cover  hourly 
wage costs and support for production for inventory. The aim was to curb the crisis. 
But the diagnosis was wrong. What was interpreted as a cyclical problem was fundamentally 
a  structural  problem.  There  was  a  pressing  need  for  restructuring.  Norwegian  industries  – 
shipping  and  wood  processing,  shipyards  and  steel  works  –  had  allowed  themselves  to 
become dependent on high growth and cheap energy. High wage increases pushed up cost 
levels in manufacturing, and inflation accelerated, amplifying imbalances instead of solving 
problems  and  weakening  international  competitiveness  even  further.  The  current  account 
deficit was record-high. 
A  countercyclical  policy  that  resulted  in  labour  market  pressures  and  that  kept  firms  alive 
artificially provided little help. It delayed restructuring, while inflation and fiscal deficits made 
restructuring  even  more  urgent.  Economic  structures  were  protected  rather  than  being 
reformed. Countercyclical policy became counterstructural policy.2 
When economic policy changed course around 1980, the Norwegian economy started to get 
back  on  its  feet  again,  but  Norway’s  growth  potential  was  low  and  new  imbalances  were 
building  up.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  in  1986  sparked  a  new,  and  even  deeper,  crisis  in  the 
Norwegian economy. 
The  economic  policy  conducted  in  the  1970s  was  intended  to  follow  Keynes’  advice. 
Subsequent  developments  proved  Hayek’s  point.  To  curb  a  crisis  on  a  lasting  basis,  the 
measures implemented must also address the deeper causes of the crisis. 
The  global 
the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy  on 
15 September  2008.  The  crisis  has  been  attributed  to  a  number  of  factors.  One  important 
event was China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 11 December 2001, 
almost seven years earlier. With China now a member of the WTO, the global labour force 
expanded  considerably.  Low  wages  and  cheap  goods  from  China  exerted  downward 
pressure on goods prices. As China’s substantial savings surplus continued to grow, large 
amounts of savings were exported to the West. Inflation slowed in the decade following the 
turn  of  the  millennium,  in  spite  of  high  growth  and  falling  unemployment.  Combined  with 
China’s savings surplus, this resulted in persistently low interest rates. 
Low  interest  rates  coincided  with  weaker  regulation  of  the  banking  and  financial  sectors, 
particularly in the US, but also in Europe. That proved to be a dangerous cocktail. Banks took 
more  risk  and  levels  of  equity  capital  were  too  low.  Household  debt  rose  substantially.  In 
many European countries, government debt ballooned in the shadow of low  interest rates. 
When the crisis erupted in 2008, many were ill-prepared. 
financial  crisis  was 
triggered  by 
                                                
1  Chap. 8 and 9 in Lie, Einar and Christian Venneslan (2010), Over Evne: Finansdepartementet 1965 – 1992, 
Pax, Oslo (Norwegian only). 
2  The expression “counterstructural policy” was used by Hermod Skånland in autumn 1977 when he wrote “The 
countercyclical  policy  conducted  in  Norway  has  to  some  extent  also  become  a  counterstructural  policy”. 
Skånland (1977): “Konjunkturperspektiver og norsk næringsliv” in Sosialøkonomen 10/1977, p.10 (Norwegian 
only). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Two aftershocks – China and Europe 
The  global  economy  is  still  struggling  with  the  repercussions  of  the  crisis,  with  record-low 
interest rates and overcapacity. Growth is low. In the past couple of years, growth has also 
slowed in Latin America and Asia. The number of unemployed in the EU has reached around 
22 million. This is equivalent to the combined populations of Norway, Sweden and Denmark. 
Instead of being gainfully employed, workers are idle and their skills are eroding. 
Unemployment  is  a  waste  of  resources  and  a  tragedy  for  the  individual.  A  generation  of 
young people are suffering the consequences, particularly in southern Europe. 
Government debt is still high in European countries, and in many of them debt burdens have 
risen further. Government budgets are still showing sizeable deficits. Several countries have 
also experienced economic decline and deflation. 
Overcapacity is high in China, particularly in heavy industry. Some manufacturing segments 
in other parts of the world are also facing excess production capacity, and profitability is low. 
Overcapacity  and  lower  prices  for  manufactured  goods  are  adding  to  global  deflationary 
pressures. 
Around  half  of  China’s  steelworks  are  operating at  a  loss,  and  debt  is  rising.3  China  lacks 
efficient  bankruptcy  procedures,  and  as  enterprises  in  heavy  industry  are  mostly  state-
owned, the industry can be run at a loss. This makes it difficult to effect change. The US has 
imposed  a  penalty  tariff  on  Chinese  steel  imports,  and  steel  works  in  Europe  are  closing 
down. 
If he was to comment on China’s current situation, Hayek would have stated the following: 
Debt  in  the  steel  industry  and  other  heavy  industry  must  be  restructured.  Industrial 
enterprises  that  are  running  at  a  loss  should  be  closed  down.  Chinese  authorities  now 
appear to be doing just that. 
In the 1930s, many countries resorted to devaluations, tariff barriers and regulation of cross-
border  capital  movements  to  protect  their  own  manufacturing  industry.  But  this  was  the 
wrong medicine. World trade fell, and the international division of labour went into reverse. 
This led to lower income for everyone. In his letter to The Times, Hayek made the following 
comment: 
“.... the right way [...] to proceed is [...] to abolish those restrictions on trade and 
the  free  movement  of  capital  which  are  at  the  present  impeding  even  the 
beginning of recovery.” 
Today, the global system of trade and cross-border investment is again under pressure. In 
both Europe and the US, influential groups have argued in favour of erecting new walls and 
barriers to the international exchange of goods. This is a recipe for yet another downturn. 
Norway is a small open economy with substantial wealth invested abroad. As a nation, we 
are completely dependent on a functioning international system of free trade and investment. 
In the short term, major economies have less to lose from closing themselves off. We trust 
that they will not, after all, abandon the global economic system that has been built up over 
the past 70 years. 
Hayek or Keynes? 
The  current  situation  on  our  continent  –  Europe  –  has  much  in  common  with  the  1930s. 
Unemployment is high, while there is a need for investment in infrastructure, new technology 
                                                
3   Data from CEIC Data Company, which uses China Iron and Steel Association (CISA) as its source. According 
to CEIC, debt-to-equity ratios at these companies are around 70 percent, up from 50 percent in 2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and  education.  There  are  also  many  advocates  of  investing  in  a  “green”  shift  towards 
sustainable growth. 
But investment is not forthcoming. In the light of the pessimism now holding sway in Europe, 
this is perhaps not surprising. As Keynes wrote in his letter in 1932: 
“....  the  [released]  real  resources  do  not  find  a  new  home  waiting  for  them.  In 
present conditions their entry into investment is blocked by lack of confidence.” 
Keynes would have said that this is the time to deploy public investment to create jobs for 
idle labour. The cost to society would be low. Wages would replace expenditure on benefits 
and  social  security.  Value-added  would  be  generated,  unemployment would  decrease  and 
employment would rise. This solution seems obvious. But it is not happening. 
In  southern  European  countries  in  particular,  government  debt  is  high  and  growth  is  low. 
Future public funding is tied up in servicing debt and funding public services and pensions. 
Public  administrations  are  cumbersome,  inefficient  and  often  over-staffed.  The  willingness 
and  ability  of  governments  to  increase  taxes,  and  perhaps  the  public’s  confidence  in  the 
authorities, is low. 
The trap many European countries fell into was accumulating debt and spending borrowed 
money  in  good  times,  leaving  them  without  the  fiscal  muscle  to  pursue  a  rational 
countercyclical  policy  in  the  face  of  crisis.  This  has  made  the  economic  downturn  even 
heavier to bear. 
A number of European countries have experienced stagnation or a fall in GDP – some have 
faced  a  considerable  decline  in  nominal  GDP.  As  a  result,  debt  to  revenue  ratios  have 
increased,  further  reducing  the  ability  to  escape  the  debt  crisis.  The  unrest  surrounding 
Europe is not making matters any easier. The Russian economy is struggling. There is war in 
the  Middle  East  and  Libya.  And  on  top  of  high  levels  of  debt  and  mass  unemployment, 
countries all over Europe are now facing terrorist threats and a refugee crisis. 
Only a few north European countries – including Norway – still have room for manoeuvre in 
fiscal policy. These countries have a savings surplus and export capital. But there are few 
northern  European  countries,  including  those  within  the  EU,  willing  to  finance  southern 
Europe’s expenses over the tax bill – be it for refugees or for investment. With a common 
currency, euro area countries cannot rapidly adjust relative intra-area wages and prices. And 
there is no European federal government to enforce large-scale transfers from the north to 
the south. 
Building up even more debt is rarely the way to resolve a debt crisis. If a household, firm, 
bank or government has become too heavily indebted, all experience to date indicates that, 
sooner or later, the debt will have to be restructured. 
Hayek would probably have reiterated the view he expressed in 1932: 
“  .....  the  existence  of  public  debt  [on  a  large  scale]  imposes  frictions  and 
obstacles  to  readjustment  very  much  greater  than  [the  frictions  and  obstacles 
imposed by] the existence of private debt.” 
Perhaps Hayek, originally from Austria, had in mind Germany’s enormous reparations debt 
from the First World War, which probably contributed to the fall of the Weimar Republic. 
We  should  not  exaggerate:  after  all,  Europe  is  still  a  region  of  peace,  prosperity  and 
cooperation.  This  is  perhaps  the  greatest  difference  between  the  current  situation  and  the 
1930s.  Nonetheless,  the  1930s  taught  us  that  deep  economic  crises  can  also  have 
substantial social and political consequences. 
The European Central Bank – the ECB – is the only institution in  Europe that can have a 
material  influence  on  developments  across  the  continent  in  the  short  term.  The  ECB  is 
keeping  government  debt  yields  low  by  means  of  record-low  policy  rates  and  large 
government  bond  purchases.  This  is  keeping  the  wheels  in  motion.  It  is  also  supporting 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  government  finances  in  a  number  of  European  countries.  In  today’s  situation,  private 
investors would probably have required considerably higher yields on sovereign bonds – as 
was  the  case  in  2011  and  2012  –  if  they  did  not  know  that  the  ECB  was  buying  large 
volumes of these bonds. 
No  treatment  is  without  side-effects.  The  same  goes  for  low  interest  rates:  there  is  little 
incentive to reduce debt and measures that could have strengthened government budgets 
can be postponed. Firms that are not making money can continue to operate. 
Monetary policy in Europe has been stretched to its limits. What monetary policy can do is to 
build a bridge – from the old economy in crisis to a new economy. But someone else – and 
something else – must create solid ground on the other side. Otherwise, the bridge will be 
left hanging in mid-air. 
Keynes would probably have supported the ECB’s policy. Without countermeasures, a crisis 
can become a catastrophe. A slower process of economic restructuring may be a reasonable 
price to pay. 
Europe is again seeing a modest pick-up in economic growth. Unemployment has reached 
the peak and is falling in countries such as Germany, Ireland and Spain. It is a slow process 
and the ordeal can seem unnecessarily protracted, but at least things are moving in the right 
direction. 
Can  the  crisis  in  Europe  be  curbed?  The  answer  is  probably  yes,  provided  authorities 
succeed in establishing a form of coordination that has so far been absent. At a deeper level, 
there is a need for structural and institutional reforms. 
Such reforms will take time. 
Immune system 
The situation in Europe illustrates how difficult it can be to curb a crisis once it has arisen. It 
might  therefore  be  wise  to  give  priority  to  crisis  prevention.  A  healthy  economic  system  is 
less vulnerable. Crises can be curbed – or even avoided – by boosting the resilience of the 
economy.  Rather  than  treating  the  disease  after  it  has  taken  hold,  much  can  be 
accomplished by strengthening the economy’s immune system. 
The financial crisis revealed deficiencies and system failures worldwide. Many governments 
and  households  had  taken  on  too  much  debt.  US  investment  banks  such  as  Lehman 
Brothers operated a high-risk business model with low levels of equity. European banks were 
too dependent on short-term funding in international markets. 
In a period of growth, it is easy for banks to obtain funding. But the system is fundamentally 
unstable. Without  adequate  capital  requirements  in  the  banking  system,  credit  growth  can 
spiral out of control. 
Hayek gave lectures on this topic at the London School of Economics in the early 1930s.4 
The  LSE  is  still  home  to  many  economists  who  argue  against  the  risks  of  debt-financed 
growth.5  
Solid banks are built in good times. Solid banks bolster the resilience of the economy and 
make  crises  easier  to  manage.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  G20  countries  have 
implemented substantial changes in the global regulatory framework for banks. Under new 
                                                
4  See  Wapshott,  Nicholas  (2011):  Keynes  Hayek:  The  ClashThat  Defined  Modern  Economics,  New  York, 
London: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., pp. 72–78. 
5  For  the  past  few  decades,  Charles  Goodhart  has  been  a  leading  researcher  at  the  London  School  of 
Economics (LSE) within both monetary policy and financial stability. Another well-known researcher in these 
areas at the LSE is former Governor of the Bank of England Mervyn King. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  rules,  investors  are  required  to  take  losses  if  large  global  banks  encounter  difficulties.6  A 
system  for  joint  supervision  and  resolution  of  systemically  important  banks  was  put  into 
operation by the euro area countries in 2014 and 2015.7 This is great progress. A credible 
global  system  for  crisis  management  and  bank  regulation  will  in  itself  contribute  to  crisis 
prevention. 
Bank’s capital requirements have increased, in Norway as elsewhere. This is a good thing. 
We are going to need solid banks. 
Reforms and economic restructuring 
The Norwegian economy is not in a crisis, but we are facing a period of restructuring. We 
have been in a similar situation before – when oil prices fell in 1986. The crisis that ensued 
eventually also led to positive changes. In the wake of the crisis, the authorities implemented 
reforms through the first half of the 1990s that laid the basis for renewed economic growth. 
The  Act  establishing  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  adopted  in  1990.  Banks  were 
instructed  to  increase  efficiency.  The  1992  tax  reform  streamlined  the  tax  system  and  tax 
rates were substantially reduced. It became easier for investors to find projects that yielded 
high returns. State-ownership policy in Norway was changed to introduce a clearer division of 
roles  and  healthier  commercial  principles.  And  not  least,  the  EEA  Agreement  provided 
access to the European Single Market for most of the Norwegian business sector. 
When oil prices fell again in 2014, Norway was better prepared. But as a nation, our income 
has  nonetheless  been  reduced  by  the  fall  in  oil  prices  and  we  should  be  cautious  about 
introducing measures that will increase consumption. Reasonable measures in a period of 
restructuring are those that promote economic growth over time, without crowding out private 
enterprise. 
Monetary  policy  can  facilitate  restructuring.  And  it  is  able  to  do  so  because  there  is 
confidence that inflation will remain low and stable. With low and stable inflation, a weaker 
krone and higher import prices will not pass through to wage growth and inflation, as was the 
case after the fall in oil prices in 1986. On the contrary, the depreciation of the krone over the 
past couple of years has compensated for more than a decade of high cost inflation. This has 
improved  the  competitiveness  of  Norwegian  firms  –  in  foreign  and  domestic  markets.  In 
addition, lower interest expenses are easing the burden for many households and firms. 
There is still room for manoeuvre in monetary policy. In contrast to most European countries, 
Norway also has room for manoeuvre on the fiscal front, if necessary. But – as in the rest of 
Europe  –  the  authorities  cannot  solve  the  deeper  challenge,  namely  the  need  to  establish 
new private sector activity. This is a task for the business sector. What the authorities can do 
is to establish framework conditions that promote innovation and growth. 
Hayek and Keynes 
In  my  introduction,  I  posed  the  question:  can  crises  be  curbed?  quickly  followed  by:  can 
misjudged attempts to curb a crisis sow the seeds of an even deeper crisis? 
Keynes and Hayek did not come to agreement on how a crisis should  be managed. Their 
debate is still relevant today. Keynes advocated the use of public spending to curb crises. 
                                                
6  See  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  (2011),  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions”  and  FSB  (2015)  “Principles  on  Loss-absorbing  and  Recapitalisation  Capacity  of  G-SIBs  in 
Resolution”. 
7  The first pillar of the European Banking Union, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM),  with the ECB as 
supervisory authority for the 130 largest banks in the euro area, started in November 2014. The second pillar 
of  the  European  Banking  Union,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  became  operational  in  January 
2015 and the joint crisis resolution authority, the Single Resolution Board, started its work. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Hayek  warned  against  such  a  policy:  the  misjudged  application  of  government  measures 
could easily lead to deeper crises and credit bubbles. 
Both  were  right.  Crises  can  and  should  be  curbed,  using  measures  to  strengthen  the 
economy’s immune system as well as measures that reduce the impact once the crisis has 
erupted.  This  means  that  government  intervention  using  public  funds  may  be  the  right 
approach in a situation of decline and deflation, low interest rates, high unemployment and 
pessimism. But crisis-related measures must also be focused on the deeper causes of the 
crisis  in  order  to  strengthen  economic  sustainability  over  time.  Countercyclical  policy  must 
not become counterstructural policy. 
Crises are not necessarily just an evil. A crisis can lead to reforms and measures that foster 
progress, as it did in Norway in the 1990s. The regulation of the banking sector in the wake 
of  the  global  financial  crisis  is  another  example.  Experiences  such  as  these  may  give  us 
some comfort in the bleakest of times. The world will go on, even after a deep crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
