  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Mr Markus Zydra on 22 September 2016, and 
published on 26 September 2016. 
 Mr  Cœuré,  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  will  meet 
members  of  the  Bundestag  next  week.  Does  this  mean  the  ECB  still  has  a  problem 
with Germany? 
No,  not  at  all.  We  are  legally  accountable  to  the  European  Parliament  but  we  are  always 
willing to exchange views informally with national parliaments. It is a very useful exercise for 
us. The President had the first such exchange four years ago in the midst of the financial 
crisis  in  Europe.  Now  we  have  made  headway,  growth  has  returned  and  the  overall 
economic situation has improved a lot, partially thanks to our decisions. This makes it a good 
time to explain what we have been doing, to show the results of our actions and to respond 
to any concerns that might be voiced. 
The  ECB  has  been  accused  by  some  German  politicians  of  fuelling  populist  parties 
like the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD). How would you react to such remarks? 
The  ECB  is  not  a  political  institution.  Our  mandate  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  Political 
issues must be handled by politicians and monetary issues by central bankers. We should 
not mix these two things. 
For many politicians the ECB is seen as the bogeyman… 
There is a temptation everywhere, also outside Europe, to drag central banks into political 
discussions. Some expect too much of us and want solutions to high unemployment or long-
term growth problems, while others blame us for the political outcome. Politics and monetary 
policy don’t belong together. 
The ECB continues to give advice to governments. Is that legitimate? 
In  Europe,  there  is  a  long  tradition  of  central  banks  giving  economic  policy  advice.  The 
Deutsche Bundesbank has always done this and so have other European central banks. The 
ECB  gives  advice,  only  insofar  as  it  relates  to  monetary  policy.  Price  stability  relies  on 
economic and social stability. We have a duty to speak our mind and tell citizens what we 
see as being the right conditions for us to fulfil our mandate properly. However, there is a line 
that  should  not  be  crossed  and  it  is  certainly  not  our  role  to  tell  national  governments 
precisely what they should do. 
The ECB has asked Germany to use its “fiscal space” and spend more public money… 
What  matters  to  us  is  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  economy.  A  growth  model  that  relies 
excessively on external demand poses risks because it puts the fate of recovery in the hands 
of  American  or  Chinese  consumers.  We  need  strong  consumption  and  investment  in  the 
euro area. The good news is that this is starting to happen. Internal demand is picking up in 
the euro area as a whole, also in Germany. 
So Germany should export less and import more? 
Strong exports are a sign of competitiveness. They are an asset for Germany and therefore 
for Europe. Nevertheless, increased investment in Germany would make the economy even 
stronger  and  prepare  it  for  the  future.  In  France  and  Italy,  preparing  for  the  future  means 
giving priority to reforming labour markets and reducing debt. In Germany, debt has already 
been  greatly  reduced  which  makes  it  possible  to  increase  investment  for  the  future.  This 
would also help to foster long-term growth and address demographic challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  You are said to be politically to the left. What does that mean to you? 
We all come from different backgrounds in the Governing Council and it does not influence at 
all how we conduct monetary policy. I personally believe that we need strong social systems 
to protect the poorest people in our societies, which also implies that these systems should 
be reformed to make them sustainable. But, given the challenges we see today both globally 
and in Europe, the defining question is not about being left or right. It is about protecting our 
societies  and  keep  them  open  and  it  is  about  the  role  that  Europe  can  play  in  doing  so. 
Europe needs to be reformed. It needs to demonstrate in a convincing way that it can cope 
with the inequalities created by globalisation and by new technologies and that it can keep 
our economies and societies open, while still protecting people. 
But it is the ECB’s monetary policy that makes the rich people in Europe even richer. 
A recent study by the Deutsche Bundesbank points out that our accommodative monetary 
policy has helped unemployed people to find new jobs. Try to imagine the situation if, from 
2007  onwards,  the  ECB  had  done  nothing  in  response  to  the  crisis.  Would  the  poorest 
people be better off now? I don’t think so, because the crisis would have been far worse. 
The ECB has been pumping money in the financial system for years. Are you now also 
planning to buy shares and bank bonds or even to distribute helicopter money? 
We  haven’t  discussed  these  options  in  the  Governing  Council.  And  I  am  not  in  favour  of 
buying  bank  bonds.  It  would  create the  wrong  incentives  for  banks  to  reform,  to  get  rid  of 
their non-performing loans and to identify new business models. As for helicopter money, it 
clearly blurs the line between monetary and fiscal policy. 
Will the ECB take further action or will it end its monthly asset purchase programme in 
March 2017 as planned? 
When the Governing Council met on 8 September 2016, economic and monetary data did 
not justify changing our plans. There are downside risks but the economic recovery has been 
resilient. We will continue to purchase assets on a monthly basis until March 2017 or beyond 
if necessary; and in any case until we see a sustained adjustment of inflation towards 2%. 
Do  you  think  it  is  possible  to  exit  the  zero  interest  rate  strategy  without  causing 
turbulences in the financial markets? 
It  will  be  a  long  time  before  we  can  even  start  to  think  about  exiting  our  accommodative 
monetary policy. When we reach that point, it will be essential for the financial sector to be 
robust enough to adapt to higher interest rates. We won’t stand for our monetary policy being 
reigned in as a result of concerns that it could pose problems for the banking sector. 
Before  the  financial  crisis  central  banks  were  only  closely  followed  by  specialists  – 
nowadays central banks are always in the spotlight. Do you find that helpful? 
Sometimes we have to be in the spotlight in order to fulfil our mandate. In the first years of 
the crisis it was all about maintaining monetary and financial stability. We had a natural role 
to  play  in  that  context  and  we  were  at  the  forefront  alongside  all  the  other  major  central 
banks. Now the challenge is to create long-term growth and jobs in a sustainable way. The 
ECB cannot do much in those areas. It is high time for the focus to shift away from central 
banks. 
What if politics fails? 
We live in democracies and I can’t simply assume that democracies will not be able to deliver 
good solutions to the problems they face. It takes time because the problems our societies 
face today are exceptionally complex and interrelated. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
The  ECB  was  considered  a  hero  in  2012.  Now  people  frown  upon  the  ECB’s  zero 
interest rate policy. How does that feel? 
We  don’t  want  to  be  a  hero,  and  it  is  not  decisive  whether  or  not  we  are  popular.  People 
should trust in the fact that we will achieve price stability. That is why the Treaties made the 
ECB independent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
