   Louis Kasekende: Improving financial literacy in Uganda 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Financial 
Literacy Information Sharing Group (FLISG) Meeting, 9 December 2015. 
 Governor emeritus, Leo Kibirango, 
Dr.  Dirk  Steinwand,  Head  of  Agriculture  and  Rural  Finance  Programme  at  GIZ  (Germany 
International Cooperation), 
Members of the Financial Literacy Information Sharing Group (FLISG); 
Mr. Fagil Mandy, 
Management and Staff of the Bank of Uganda present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I welcome you all to the annual Financial Literacy Information Sharing Group meeting. 
I thank you all for the work that you have accomplished in the last twelve months, to enhance 
the  knowledge,  attitudes,  and  skills  of  Ugandans  in  as  far  as  access  and  use  of  financial 
products and services is concerned. 
In a special way, I recognize the contribution of our colleagues and partners from the Germany 
International  Cooperation  towards  the  financial  inclusion  programmes  and,  more  broadly 
financial markets development in Uganda. 
Bank of Uganda, as an institution that took the lead in the development and implementation of 
the Strategy for Financial Literacy in Uganda, is proud of the achievements we have jointly 
achieved in the last one year. Nonetheless, there is still a lot that needs to be done and let me 
highlight just a few of the challenges for your contemplation. 
First; we need to ask ourselves why the “loan sharks” popularly known as “money lenders” 
sustain their business in this country charging very high interest rates, inspite of the many 
financial  institutions  including  SACCOS  that  are  charging  relatively  lower  interest  rates.  I 
presume that part of the answer lies in an information-asymmetry problem that needs to be 
addressed. 
Second; as part of our financial literacy drive and initiative, we have witnessed many savings 
and investment groups / clubs formed. The task now is to enhance our tactics in delivering 
financial literacy messages to facilitate the graduation of these largely informal savings and 
investment groupings into formal establishments with linkages to the productive / real sector 
of  the  economy.  How  can  financial  literacy  support  these  entities  to  maintain  the  crucially 
important element of mutual trust among members, adopt proper management and accounting 
procedures,  appropriate  corporate  governance  practices,  and  avoid  the  pitfalls  that  fell  to 
similar institutions in the past? 
Third; beyond any regulatory constraints that might exist, how can we adapt financial literacy 
messages  to  improve  on  the  access  of  our  Small  Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs)  to  capital 
markets to catch up with the relatively good performance of other EAC partner states? For 
instance  in  the  2015/2016 Global  Competitiveness  Report  of the World  Economic  Forum1, 
Uganda ranked third in the EAC region behind Kenya and Rwanda in as far as “financing 
                                                
1   http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2015–2016/competitiveness-
rankings/#indicatorId=GCI.B.08. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
through the local equity market” was concerned. In other words, Uganda lags behind two of 
our EAC partners in using the capital markets to raise funds to finance our businesses. 
Similarly, it is also worth asking, how we can use financial literacy to increase the participation 
of Ugandans both at individual and SME institutional level in the existing financial instruments 
like Treasury bills and bonds. The statistics show that the “others category” in which SMEs and 
individuals are classified contributed only 9.9 percent2 of investments in Uganda government 
securities  at  face  value  as  at  June  2015.  This  is  in  contrast  to  a  share  of  44.5  percent, 
34.3 percent, and 11.3 percent of commercial banks, pension & provident funds, and offshore 
players, respectively. These statistics underscore the need to enhance the financial literacy 
messaging so as to encourage people to utilise the financial investment opportunities available 
to them and make the most optimal decisions using the available information. 
Fourth,  many  Ugandans  have  embraced  the  mobile  money  revolution,  with  the  number  of 
mobile money registered users rising from 17.9 million in September 2014 to 19.8 million in 
September  2015,  while  bank  accounts  have  remained  relatively  stable  at  5  million.  Our 
challenge  therefore  regards  the  use  of  financial  literacy  messages  and  the  design  of 
appropriate products and services by the financial institutions to support the transformation of 
these mobile money accounts into accounts within the formal banking industry. 
Responding  to the  above  challenges requires,  in  part, the  dissemination  of  consistent  and 
quality-assured messages, encompassing both financial and economic education. Our flagship 
program, the Training of Trainers (ToT) remains the major way through which individuals who 
would like to train the population in financial literacy are prepared and certified. Over the years, 
we have trained a critical mass of people who can extend financial consumer education to a 
sizeable proportion of the Ugandan population, using the curriculum that was agreed upon and 
can still be accessed from the “Simplify Money Magnify Life” website and the Trainers Manual. 
Going forward, we may need to adapt the programme to further strengthen quality assurance, 
respond to the challenges, and safeguard against any “mis-education” of consumers. 
I urge members to continue using the website and Trainers Manual as the primary source of 
information in their training. It is important that our starting point in educating consumers is the 
same. When in doubt, please always refer to the Financial Literacy Strategy that was launched 
in August 2013 by the Honorable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
(MoFPED). 
On our part, we reiterate our commitment both in terms of financial and human resources to 
further bolster the financial and economic education agenda in Uganda. We are also working 
closely with the requisite Ministries, Departments and Agencies of Government to ensure that 
the diversity and quality of institutions providing financial services expands, and that they are 
well regulated. To that end, I trust that once the amendments to the Financial Institutions Act 
and the regulations for the Tier-four institutions that are being considered are passed into law, 
we shall have more Ugandans served and probably more efficiently. 
As  I  conclude  my  remarks,  I  once  again  thank  the  members  present  here  today  for  the 
tremendous work thus far. However, we must not rest on our laurels as a lot remains to be 
done. 
I thank you all and wish you good deliberations in the meeting. 
It is now my pleasure to declare the Financial Literacy Information Sharing Group (FLISG) 
meeting open. 
                                                
2   Bank of Uganda Statistics Department. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
