  Gent Sejko: Bank of Albania – strengthening governance and recent 
other challenges 
Introductory statement by  Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the 
Annual  Report  2015  to  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economy  and  Finance,  Tirana, 
29 March 2016. 
 Honourable Chair of the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, 
Honourable Members of the Committee, 
It is my special pleasure to present, in this hearing session with the Parliamentary Committee 
on Economy and Finance, the Annual Report of the Bank of Albania for 2015. 
In 2015, the Bank of Albania has worked to successfully fulfil its objectives stemming from 
the Law “On the Bank of Albania”, as well as all the other obligations arising from relevant 
sublegal acts and relations with our international partners. 
I would like to start my presentation, focusing on the activity of the Supervisory Council of the 
Bank of Albania. 
Decisions of the Supervisory Council 
1. 
At  the  beginning  of  2015,  the  management  team  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  was  rendered 
complete. Thus, thanks to the support of the Assembly of the Republic of Albania, the vacant 
positions  in  the  Supervisory  Council  were  completed,  the  Governor,  the  Second  Deputy 
Governor and Inspector General of the Bank of Albania were appointed. 
During 2015, the Council met 15 times and approved 98 decisions. Of them, 63 consisted in 
acts  approved  for  the  first  time,  and  35  in  amendments  to  existing  acts.  Eight  meetings 
focused on the monetary policy decision, whereas four meetings focused on decisions about 
issues pertaining to supervision and financial stability. 
The  decisions  have  been  communicated  to  the  public  through  press  conferences,  full 
publication of relevant reports and explanation, on a case by case basis, in accordance with 
requests  by  various  media  outlets.  All  the reports  compiled  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  on the 
monetary policy and financial stability have been fully submitted, within the envisaged legal 
time frame, to the Assembly of the Republic of Albania and its Committee on Economy and 
Finance. 
In  line  with  the  above  said,  and  in  accordance  with  earlier  public  statements,  the 
strengthening of governance has assumed a key place in the Supervisory Council decision-
making process. From this perspective, I will now briefly focus on: 
Establishment of the Audit Committee 
The  establishment  of  the  Audit  Committee  is  an  important  development  with  regard  to 
strengthening  the  internal  control  at  the  Bank  of  Albania,  especially  the  supervisory 
capacities of the Supervisory Council. The meetings held in 2015 discussed the organisation 
and  functioning  of  the  Control  [Internal  Audit]  Department,  the  audit  universe  and  annual 
plan, main findings, risk assessment and effectiveness of the internal control system at the 
Bank  of  Albania.  Another  important  aspect  of  the  activity  was  to  monitor  the  work  for  the 
preparation of financial statements in accordance with the International Financial Reporting 
Standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Approval of the internal audit policy 
The  approved  internal  audit  policy,  followed  by  the  revision  of  the  Regulation  on  the 
Functioning  of  the  Control  Department,  defines  clearly  the  position  of  the  activity  of  the 
internal  audit  within  the  organisational  structure  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  This  document 
provides  for  the  implementation  of  the  Standards  for  the  Professional  Practice  of  Internal 
Auditing and the Code of Ethics, and specifies the line of reporting of the Inspector General 
to the Audit Committee, Supervisory Council and Assembly of the Republic of Albania. 
Approval of the new Statute of the Bank of Albania 
The new Statute provides for the compliance of many of the provisions for the organisation 
and  functioning  of the  Bank  of  Albania  with  the  best  practices  of  the  European  System  of 
Central Banks. Among others, I would like to mention: 
- 
specification  of  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  Administrators  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania; 
specification  of  procedures  for  the  replacement  of  the  administrators,  during  their 
absence or when they are unable to act; 
reformulation  of  provisions 
financial 
independence  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  by  approximating  them  to  the  provisions 
stipulated in the Statute of the European Central Bank. 
the  administrative  and 
that  stipulate 
  Approval of the Medium-Term Development Strategy and Budget for 2016–18 
The medium-term strategy summarises key objectives and major ambitions of the Bank of 
Albania for the next three years. Following are some of the strategic objectives of the Bank of 
Albania: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
To  materialise  the  strategy,  the  medium-term  budget  has  been  prepared  for  the  financial 
management of the institution in the upcoming three years. 
maintaining price stability around 3%; 
strengthening financial stability; 
strengthening banking supervision; 
enhancing financial market security and efficiency; 
enhancing and approximating institutional capacities to the European model. 
Approval of the new organisational structure of the Bank of Albania 
The new structure of the Bank of Albania adapts the activity of its units to the needs and new 
process  imposed  by  economic  developments  and  changes  in  the  banking  legislation. 
Moreover, it aims at improving the institution’s management and strengthening the internal 
control. The establishment of the specialised unit to monitor and manage the operational risk 
is a crucial step in this regard. Also, the new structure aims to strengthen the vertical and 
horizontal control in compliance with international best practices, models and standards. 
Strengthening cash security and management systems 
The  Supervisory  Council  and  other  administrative  structures  have  reviewed  the  entire 
regulatory framework for the security and protection of physical values and information at the 
Bank  of  Albania,  enhancing  both  human  and  technology-related  elements.  A  series  of 
decisions have been made to strengthen the security measures and physical monitoring of 
the  premises  where  cash  is  stored  and  processed,  in  the  form  of  banknotes  and  coins. 
Significant improvements have been made to procedures related to the inventory, processing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and storage of banknotes, including those for destruction. Particular attention has been paid 
to setting clear criteria to guarantee high integrity of the employees designated in charge of 
values or assigned in other units engaged in control, supervision or other similar activities. 
Economic developments and monetary policy 
2. 
The Albanian economy continued to improve in 2015. The growth rate accelerated compared 
to  the  previous  year,  and  the  main  indicators  of  economic  and  financial  equilibriums  have 
been overall improving. Thus: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
current account deficit reduced; 
budget deficit fell 1.6 percentage points against the GDP; 
firms’ balance sheet appear more liquid; 
banking  system  non-performing  loans  and  profitability  indicators  have  been 
improving. 
However,  aggregate  demand  remains  insufficient  to  fully  utilise  production  capacities. 
Subsequently,  the  internal  economic  environment  has  exercised  low  pressures  for  rising 
inflation,  which  have  been  further  strengthened  by  the  disinflationary  trend  noted  in 
international  markets.  While  upward,  inflation  continued  to  range  below  our  3.0%  target, 
during the past year. 
Following,  I  will  present  a  summary  of  the  macroeconomic  backdrop  underlying  Bank  of 
Albania’s monetary policy decisions and their results. 
According  to  INSTAT  data,  the  Gross  Domestic  Product  rose  2.7%  during  the  first  three 
quarters  of  2015.  Available  data  suggest  that  the  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  similar 
pace even in the fourth quarter. 
From the sectorial perspective, the sources of growth are broader than in the previous year. 
With  a  few  exceptions,  all  the  sectors  have  contributed  positively  to  the  expansion  of 
economic activity. 
From  the  demand  perspective,  economic  growth  was  driven  mainly  by  the  expansion  of 
private  investments  and  improvement  of  the  balance  of  trade  exchanges  with  partner 
countries. Private consumption showed volatility, but its contribution was positive during the 
third  quarter.  Fiscal  policy  continued  the  consolidating  stance.  In  line  with  previous 
statements,  fiscal  consolidation  is  the  right  approach  for  preserving  the  macroeconomic 
foundations. Consolidation creates more space for the expansion of the private sector and 
produces long-term benefits for the Albanian economy, for its capacity to withstand various 
shocks. 
However, while associated with higher employment and utilisation of production capacities, 
the growth of aggregate demand has not been adequate to absorb all the spare capacities in 
the  economy.  Unemployment  averaged  17.5%  in  2015,  reflecting the  unused  capacities  in 
the  labour  market.  Thus,  pressures  on  the  rise  of  wages,  productions  costs  and  profit 
margins were weak. Annual inflation averaged 1.9% for 2015, up 0.3 percentage point from a 
year earlier. 
To  address  low  inflationary  pressures,  the  Bank  of  Albania  continued  to  implement  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  It  lowered  the  key  interest  rate,  increased  the  liquidity 
injection  in  the  banking  system  and  engaged  publicly  in  maintaining  the  accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance  in  the  medium-term  period.  The  key  interest  rate  fell  to  the  new 
historic level of 1.75% at the end of 2015. 
These  decisions  have  aimed  at  creating  the  appropriate  conditions  for  boosting  domestic 
demand, and for the return of inflation to target in the medium term. Moreover, our monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  policy  has  been  transmitted  in  lower  interest  rates  across  all  financial  instruments  in  the 
domestic currency. 
During the fourth quarter, the transmission was also helped by the shift of the budget deficit 
financing,  from  domestic  to  foreign  resources.  The  shift  has  increased  the  liquidity  in 
domestic  financial  markets  significantly  and  has  reinforced  the  downward  trend  of  their 
interest rates. 
Consequently,  the  average  interest  rate  on  loans  dropped  further  during  2015.  Combined 
with the measures taken for reducing non-performing loans, monetary stimuli were reflected 
in the easing of credit standards. Excluding the effect of write offs from the balance sheets, 
credit to the private sector grew by ALL 12 billion, or 2.2% in the past year. The monetary 
policy  pass  through  was  reflected  also  in  the  reduction  of  the  euroisation  in  the  Albanian 
economy. At the end of 2015, lek credit to the private sector amounted to 41% of total loans, 
from 32% at the end of 2010. 
The Bank of Albania expects credit to perform better in the medium term, but this projection 
remains  largely  dictated  by  the  further  improvement  of  the  crediting  climate  in  Albania. 
Against this backdrop, I take the opportunity to reiterate that the national plan for addressing 
non-performing loans should be considered as a non-negotiable prerequisite for the growth 
of credit in the future. 
In  parallel,  pressing  ahead  with  structural  reforms  agenda  will  provide  for faster  and  more 
sustainable development of the Albanian economy. 
Banking system highlights 
3. 
For 2015, indicators of banking sector soundness were evidently better than the regulatory 
requirements  for  solvency,  liquidity  and  specific-risks  provisioning  levels.  These  indicators 
show  a  satisfactory  level  of  resilience  even  when  adverse  macroeconomic  scenarios  are 
assumed. 
The number of banks operating in the Republic of Albania remained unchanged, at 16 banks. 
The major part of the banking sector is owned by subsidiaries of EU-based banking groups 
that exercise their activity in accordance with the Albanian legislation and in accordance with 
Bank of Albania’s regulatory framework in force. 
During 2015, the American Bank of Investments entered the Albanian banking market, the 
first  investor  since  2009.  This  development  is  considered  as  a  very  positive  one  for 
promoting competition within the banking system. 
At the end of 2015, banking sector assets expanded by 2%, reaching 91.3% of the Gross 
Domestic Product. The activity continued to be financed by the growth of public deposits by 
2.6%, accounting for 83% of the total banking sector balance. 
Average profitability indicators improved during 2015. The Return on Assets (RoA) stood at 
1.2%  and  the  Return  on  Equity  (RoE)  stood  at  13.2%.  This  financial  result  forms  a  good 
basis for the stability of the banking system. 
The capital adequacy ratio stood at 15.7%, notably higher than the 12% minimum required in 
the  regulatory  framework.  Good  capitalisation  remains  a  feature  of  our  banking  system.  It 
was maintained due to the continuation of positive values in net financial result. 
Addressing the non-performing loans issue has been one of the major engagements of the 
Bank of Albania throughout 2015. For the first time, after a four-year period, the level of non-
performing  loans  fell  below  20%.  Decisions  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  have  constantly 
increased  the  pressure  on  the  banking  system,  which,  in  turn,  has  added  the  efforts  for 
managing non-performing loans through restructuring, execution, provisioning and their write 
off from the balance sheet, accordingly. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  inter-institutional  initiative  materialised  in  the  Plan  of  Measures  for  Reducing  Non-
Performing Loans, which consists in a multidimensional action of legal, fiscal and regulatory 
improvements,  contributed  to  lowering  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans  to  18.2  %  at  the 
end of 2015. This plan includes other steps over the course of 2016, which will render the 
positive result even more visible in the system. 
Moreover, in 2015 the banking system was tested by the psychological pressure arising from 
the Greek crisis; however, it passed the test successfully. On the other hand, the situation 
served to test the effectiveness of prudential measures that the Bank of Albania had taken in 
due time. 
Banking supervision 
4. 
During 2015, we have worked on further bolstering banking supervision. In concrete terms, 
we have worked on the following: 
- 
- 
Implementation of the risk-based supervisory policy; 
Implementation  of  the  risk  assessment  manual  and  of  the  new  bank  assessment 
system; 
Implementation  of  the  new  regulation  for  calculating  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  in 
compliance with Pillar I of Basel II. 
 The  implementation  of  these  contemporary  methodologies  guarantees  a  high  degree  of 
compliance  with  international  best  standards,  rendering  our  approach  able  to  identify  the 
risks in due time and dictate taking corrective measures for preventing the occurrence. 
Another  achievement  in  terms  of  the  approximation  with  the  standards  of  EU  homologous 
institutions was the positive assessment of the confidentiality regime of the Bank of Albania 
by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA).  In  October  2015,  through  a  Memorandum  of 
Cooperation,  this  Authority  certified  this  regime  as  in  full  compliance  with  the  relevant  EU 
standard, including the Bank of Albania in the list of non-EU supervisory authorities that may 
take part in the work of EU colleges of supervisors. 
In the framework of the system’s supervision, during 2015, a considerable number of on-site 
examinations were carried out. Upon completion, the examined institutions were left relevant 
recommendations  to  make  the  necessary  improvements  and  to  draft  a  plan  of  measures, 
whose implementation will be rigorously monitored. In the past year, the process of licencing 
continued for new financial institutions such as microcredit and electronic money institutions 
and a considerable number of foreign exchange bureaus. 
5. 
Other activities of the Bank of Albania 
Payment systems 
i. 
In  2015,  the  Bank  of  Albania  undertook  a  series  of  measures  to  improve  the  regulatory 
framework  and  oversight  procedures  for  the  payment  systems.  The  approval  of  the 
Regulation “On licensing, regulation, and oversight of payment systems and clearing houses” 
is one of the main steps that will promote private initiatives for the clearing and settlement of 
payments. 
In  October  2015,  the  National  Committee  of  Payment  Systems  met  for  the  first  time.  The 
Committee  will  serve  as  a  forum  for  discussing  issues  related  to  payment  systems  and 
instruments,  to  support  the  decision-making  process  by  the  relevant  institutions.  Another 
development  in  the  area  of  payments  is  related  to  the  methodology  “On  the  reporting  of 
electronic money instruments by electronic money institutions”, which preceded the licencing 
of two electronic money institutions in 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Currency issue 
ii. 
In the framework  of  its unique function  as the  issuer  of the  national  currency, the  Bank of 
Albania continued to fulfil the needs of the economy for banknotes and coins, in accordance 
with contemporary standards for their quality and security features. Compared to 2014, the 
structure  of  the  currency  in  circulation  has  changed.  Thus,  the  number  of  higher 
denominations, ALL 2000 and ALL 5000 increased. Also the use of coins increased, as their 
value rose by 8.2%. 
Foreign-exchange reserve management 
iii. 
The  reserve  management  continued  to  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  regulatory 
framework  in  force.  The  primary  objective  of  the  reserve  management  is  the  principle  of 
liquidity  and  security.  In  line  with  our  policy  and  international  standards  on  adequacy,  we 
continued in this year to ensure that the reserves are at adequate levels and in conformity 
with our goal. 
Year  2015  was  characterised  by  a  further  decline  in  negative  territory  of  interest  rates  for 
treasury issues in the euro area. Thus, for the euro portfolio, the possibilities of investment 
with  a  positive  rate  of  return,  compared  to  the  previous  year,  are  reduced  significantly. 
Regardless  of  this  fact,  the  result  created  by  the  management  of  the  reserve  portfolio  for 
2015 was positive. 
Legal service 
iv. 
The improvement of the legal and regulatory framework has been a constant priority for the 
Bank of Albania. During the year, the Law “On Savings and Loans Associations” was drafted, 
consulted  and  submitted  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Republic  of  Albania  for  review.  The  law 
regulates the SLAs licencing, supervision and activity in accordance with the best standards. 
In close cooperation with the Albanian Deposit Insurance Agency, amendments have been 
drafted to the Law “On deposit insurance”, which improve the implementation of the Law on 
SLAs and include certain categories of legal persons in the deposit insurance scheme. The 
law on the treatment of banks facing financial difficulties, also known as the Resolution Law 
is another important project we have been working on during 2015 and are still working in 
cooperation with the World Bank. Significant work has been carried out also with regard to 
the regulatory framework. 
Monetary and financial statistics 
v. 
Last year was a successful one for the Bank of Albania in its role as one of the three national 
agencies producing statistics. Expanding statistical information, and perfecting some of the 
methodologies underlying the statistical product of the Bank of Albania have been evaluated 
positively  by  international  institutions,  making  thus  significant  progress  towards  the 
approximation with Eurostat and IMF standards. 
In 2015, the Bank of Albania published, for the first time, the annual information on the flow 
of  foreign  direct  investments  by  country,  flow  of  foreign  direct  investments  by  economic 
activity and situation of foreign direct investments by country and economic activity. 
Research 
to  problems  and  potential  solutions 
vi. 
During  2015,  the  Bank  of  Albania  completed  over  20  empirical  studies  and  analyses 
dedicated 
issues  related  monetary  policy 
effectiveness and safeguarding financial stability. During 2015, the revaluation of the Macro-
econometric  Model  of  the  Albanian  Economy  was  completed.  The  process  improved  the 
identification and interpretation of cause-effect macroeconomic correlations. 
Research  work  has  been  presented  in  various  events  and  conferences,  including  those 
organised  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  notably,  the  9th  Workshop  of  Economic  Research  in 
for 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Southeastern  Europe  “Rethinking  Economic  Policies  and  Central  Banks’  Methodologies”, 
where 20 research papers were presented by central banks, academic institutions and the 
Bank of Albania. 
Communication 
vii. 
Enhancing the transparency is a constant priority of the Bank of Albania. During 2015, we 
have  aimed  at  establishing  permanent  channels  of  communication  with  the  public.  They 
reflect Supervisory Council’s monetary policy decisions, the underlying factors and expected 
results.  The  periodic  reports  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  publish  comprehensive  analysis  on 
economic  and  financial  developments,  the  outlook  for  the  short  and  long  term,  and  the 
performance of the banking sector along with the risks facing the financial stability of Albania. 
Events  organised  with  representatives  of  the  banking  system,  business  community, 
specialised international institutions are another aspect of our communication with the public. 
Examples include the Forum on “Promoting credit growth” in April 2015, “Albania Financial 
Forum III” organised with the International Monetary Fund in June 2015, and a meeting with 
the banking system discussing on “The economy and banks: present and future challenges” 
in September 2015. 
Public education 
viii. 
The launching of the Museum of the Bank of Albania was the main highlight in the area of 
public education. Designed as an inter-disciplinary museum, it integrates numismatic, historic 
and educational functions, which contribute to enhancing the financial literacy of the public in 
general and of the younger generation in particular. 
European integration 
ix. 
Another important aspect of our work has been the contribution of the Bank of Albania in the 
context  of  approximation  to  the  European  Union.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  intensified  its 
cooperation  with  the  European  Central  Bank,  central  banks  of  the  European  System,  and 
European  structures  that  regulate  financial  aspects  in  the  EU.  At  the  same  intensity,  we 
strengthened the cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the 
Bank for International Settlements, as well as regional central banks. 
The Bank of Albania has continued its contribution to the reporting for the Progress Report 
and  the  National  Plan  for  European  Integration,  leading  Chapter  4  “Free  movement  of 
capital”  and  Chapter  17  “Economic  and  monetary  policies”  and  contributing  in  6  other 
chapters of the Acquis. 
Human resources 
x. 
Improvement to the organisational structure of the institution has constantly been at the focus 
of human resources policies, with the main aim to enhance the efficiency of the activity of the 
Bank of Albania. It seeks to provide a better coordination and communication between the 
units,  especially  the  successful  implementation  of  engagements  arising  from  strategic 
objectives and the approximation with the model of the European System central banks or 
the European Central Bank. 
The policies in the area of human resources have aimed at promoting the most experienced 
and proficient employees, through a professional competition. Staff motivation policies have 
aimed at preserving the stability and continuity of staff. Particular attention has been paid to 
observing gender equality. 
The professional development of the staff is realised, among others, through participation in 
specialised  training  organised  by  central  banks  or  international  financial  institutions.  In 
addition to enhancing professional capacities, there are also possibilities for the exchange of 
professional  experiences  and  familiarisation  with  the  most  contemporary  central  bank 
theories and practices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Information technology 
xi. 
In  2015,  the  aspect  of  Information  Technology  saw  several  achievements.  The  AFISaR 
system  started  to  operate.  It  is  a  central  electronic  register  for  the  documentation  of  each 
element involved in the issue and transactions with securities by the Albanian state. Other 
achievements include: 
- 
- 
automation of the reporting system for banking activity indicators; 
integration  and  optimisation  of  the  IT  network  utilisation,  reducing  therefore 
operational costs of the Bank of Albania; 
automation of accounting transactions in Bank of Albania branches and improving 
information processing and storing capacities. 
 Internal audit 
xii. 
In 2015, in addition to planned audits, auditing and non-auditing commitments were carried 
out,  upon  the  request  of  the  Supervisory  Council,  Audit  Committee,  Administrators  and 
Inspector General. 
Another  important  development  in  this  regard  was  the  Quality  Assessment  for  the  Control 
[Internal  Audit]  Department  at the  Bank  of  Albania  by  the  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  (DNB). 
Conducted for the first time, the assessment serves as an important development plan for 
strengthening the audit activity in the future. 
During  2015,  nine  full-scope  audits  were  conducted.  In  addition,  three  full-scope  audits 
started in 2015, but were completed in the first months of 2016, bringing the total number to 
12. The findings and recommendations of each audit have been addressed to the heads of 
the respective units, the Administrators of the Bank of Albania, the Audit Committee and the 
Supervisory Council, as part of the periodic reporting by the Inspector General. 
Financial activities of the Bank of Albania 
xiii. 
After  intensive  efforts  by  our  staff  members  with  the  assistance  by  foreign  experts,  and  in 
close  communication  with  the  external  auditor,  for  the  first  time  in  2015  the  financial 
statements  were  compiled  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(IFRS).  This  is  a  qualitative  development  for  enhancing  the  financial  transparency  at  the 
Bank of Albania. 
The Bank of Albania’s financial statements in accordance with the IFRS are expected to be 
finally approved on 30 March 2016, at the Supervisory Council meeting. It will also include 
the  opinion  of  our  external  auditor,  KPMG  Albania.  Following  the  Supervisory  Council’s 
approval,  the  statements  will  be  sent  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Republic  of  Albania  for 
information. 
Honourable Chairman, 
Honourable Committee Members, 
The presentation of the activity of the Bank of Albania is a key moment for its annual activity. 
In my brief presentation, I tried to speak about all the aspects of our activity, and shared our 
expectations and objectives for the period ahead. In the full version, we have tried to include 
more data, analyses and informative sections. I hope that the Annual Report 2015 is in line 
with the expectations of the Assembly, and take this opportunity to assure you that the Bank 
of Albania will continue its endeavours to improve its performance towards perfection in the 
future. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Price stability, banking system solidity, credit recovery, market supply with liquidity, reducing 
non-performing  loans,  implementation  of  best  practices  of  supervision,  strengthening  of 
governance and enhancing communication with the Assembly, the state institutions and our 
strategic partners will be major objectives for our work in 2016 and beyond. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
