   John McDermott: Forward guidance in New Zealand 
Speech by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Chief Economist of the Reserve Bank 
of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Goldman  Sachs  Annual  Global  Macro  Conference  2016,  Sydney, 
4 February 2016. 
Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I would like to thank Goldman Sachs for the invitation to speak here in Sydney today. It is a 
pleasure  to  take  the  trip  across  the  Tasman  to  be  part  of  your  annual  Macro  Economic 
Conference. 
The focus of my comments today will be the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s approach to 
forward guidance, and in particular, the publication of an endogenous outlook for the 90-day 
interest rate. I’ll touch on the benefits of this approach and how we aim to minimise the potential 
costs. I’ll highlight the importance of understanding the conditional nature of our forecasts. And 
I’ll finish by providing an illustration of the Bank’s conditional forward guidance in practice. 
Over the past few decades, transparency has become much more valued in the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  Transparency  can  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  and 
increases the accountability of the central bank. Transparency is a value held in high regard 
at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, which is seen as one of the most transparent central 
banks in the world.1  
This value is applied to the way we conduct forward guidance, where the Bank is very open 
about its monetary policy outlook.2 In New Zealand, this includes the publication of a forward 
projection for the 90-day interest rate, comments on the outlook for policy, discussion of risks 
in our Monetary Policy Statement and the presentation of alternative scenarios. The Bank is 
one of only a handful of central banks that publish forecasts for the short-term interest rate.3 
This is a practice we have maintained since 1997. 
The publication of the 90-day interest rate projection can improve the effectiveness of monetary 
policy in a number of ways. 
First of all, informing the public on our thinking about the transmission of monetary policy and 
a possible path of for interest rates can help individuals and businesses make more informed 
decisions.4 There are times when the Bank will know more about the economic situation and 
outlook than does the public or financial market participants. Every so often this will relate to 
                                                
1   Dincer and Eichengreen (2014), “Central bank transparency and independence: updates and new measures”, 
International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp 189–253, March 2014. For a discussion of the New 
Zealand  experience  see  Bascand  (2013),  “Communication,  understanding  and  credibility”,  comments  from 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Deputy Governor Bascand, December 2013. 
2   The practice and definition of forward guidance can vary between both central banks and academics. Forward 
guidance can range from brief qualitative statements on the policy outlook in central bank communication, time 
or state dependent policy outlooks like those adopted by the United States Federal Reserve and the Bank of 
England post crisis, or the full publication of an endogenous interest rate forecast like at the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand. 
3   These central banks include New Zealand, Czech Republic, Israel, Norway and Sweden. 
4   See Rudebusch and Williams (2008), “Revealing the Secrets of the Temple: The value of publishing central 
bank interest rate projections”, Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, University of Chicago Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
some research or insight we hold, but more typically this extra knowledge relates to knowing 
what the Bank itself plans to do. 
Second, the entire yield curve, rather than just the current level of the 90-day interest rate, has 
an influence on economic behaviour. Publishing the Bank’s projection for the 90-day interest 
rate  can  help  shift  the  entire  yield  curve towards  levels  consistent  with medium-term  price 
stability, improving the effectiveness of monetary policy.5  
Third, the  publication  of  the  90-day  interest rate  projection  helps  accountability.  Under  the 
Policy Targets Agreement (PTA), the Bank is required to keep future average inflation close to 
the  mid-point  of  the  1  to  3  percent  target  range,  whilst  avoiding  unnecessary  instability  in 
output,  interest rates  and  the  exchange  rate,  and  having  regard for financial  stability. This 
multitude of considerations influences the Bank’s judgement about how monetary policy should 
be adjusted to help move inflation towards its medium-term target.6 The publication of a 90-day 
interest rate projection, together with an inflation projection, conveys the Bank’s view of what 
it considers appropriate when making these considerations, and how this changes when new 
information becomes available. 
The Bank uses a range of modelling techniques and expert judgement to prepare a forecast 
for the 90-day interest rate. Our structural model, NZSIM7, is used to summarise all the new 
information provided by recent data, financial market developments, indicator models and our 
discussions with New Zealand businesses. Judgement is then added to this framework after 
the deliberation of our Monetary Policy Committee and Governing Committee. 
The 90-day interest rate projection, based on a range of assumptions, provides a guide of what 
monetary policy settings may be needed to return or keep inflation at target. We feel that this 
is a more informative approach than assuming a constant or market path for interest rates – 
which  may  present  an  interest  rate  path  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  Bank’s  price  stability 
mandate. 
Forward guidance – avoiding potential pitfalls 
This transparent approach comes with potential costs. First, research highlights that increased 
transparency, in some cases, can be detrimental to the economy. This is particularly the case 
if the public takes the Bank’s information as definitive, despite it being noisy or imperfect.8 We 
aim to minimise such instances by offering a full discussion of the assumptions and risks that 
underpin our projections, to clearly highlight the limitations in our knowledge. 
Second, some research claims that when a central bank provides an endogenous interest rate 
projection, fears of credibility loss may lead it to stick to a previously published policy path, 
even when faced with new economic developments.9 I can say, from my experience, that this 
has never been a problem at the Bank. 
                                                
5   For  further  discussion,  see  Woodford  (1999),  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  Inertia”,  The  Manchester  School 
Supplement, Vol.67, Issue S1, pp 1–35. 
6   See Ford, Kendall and Richardson (2015), “Evaluating Monetary Policy”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 
November 2015. 
7   See Kamber, McDonald, Sander and Theodoridis (2015), “A structural model for policy analysis and forecasting: 
NZSIM”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, DP2015/05. 
8   These points are expanded on in: Morris and Shin (2002), “Social value of public information”, The American 
Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 5, pp1521–1534; Dale, Orphanides and Osterholm (2011), “Imperfect central 
bank communication: information versus distraction”, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol.7, No. 2, 
pp 3–39, June 2011. 
9   This issue is discussed in: Mishkin (2004), “Can central bank transparency go too far?”, NBER Working Paper 
10829; Goodhart (2009), “The interest rate conditioning assumption”, International Journal of Central banking, 
Vol. 5, No.2, pp 85–108, June 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Third, some have argued that it may be difficult for a central bank to reach consensus on an 
entire path for interest rates.10 Practically, this has not been a problem at the Bank. Committee 
practices  are  efficient  enough  for  the  Governing  Committee  to  reach  an  agreement  on  a 
qualified projection for the 90-day interest rate.11  
More broadly, it is important that financial market participants and the public understand the 
90-day  interest rate  is  a  conditional  projection. It  is  not  a  commitment from  the  Bank  to  a 
specific set of actions. The effectiveness of monetary policy can be hampered if the public and 
financial market participants take the forecast as a commitment.12  
The 90-day interest rate projection shows how interest rates may need to evolve to achieve 
price  stability  if  the  economy  evolves  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  forecasts.  Of  course,  the 
uncertainties faced in forecasting mean that the economy will almost always evolve differently 
to  what  the  Bank  expects.  Cyclical  factors  like  the  strength  of  the  international  economy, 
movements  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  the  exchange  rate  can  develop  in 
unexpected ways. For example, at the current juncture, the economy is faced with a number 
of unique supply-side developments which add additional uncertainty to the outlook. These 
include reconstruction activity in Canterbury, the recent sharp fall in oil prices, a rapid rise in 
inward migration and the potential impacts of El-Nino. 
In addition to these business cycle developments, structural aspects that may be linked to 
factors such as globalisation, technology and demography can also have major impacts on 
economic growth and inflation. In normal times these structural aspects move relatively slowly. 
However they are important in determining how interest rates might affect inflation and the 
cycle in output and can move sharply in a crisis. All of these factors can affect the neutral 
interest rate, potential output and inflation expectations.13  
If financial market participants understand the conditional nature of our forecasts, the 90-day 
interest  rate  projection  can  help  participants  understand  how  we  are  likely  to  respond  to 
changes in the economic outlook. 
Every three months we provide a new projection for the 90-day interest rate. The changes in 
this projection, and the analysis in the Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) on the state of the 
economy, illustrate how unforeseen events have shaped the Bank’s outlook for policy. 
Over  time,  this  should  help  financial  market  participants  understand  the  Bank’s  “reaction 
function” – that is, how economic events affect the outlook for inflation and the implications we 
draw for monetary policy. If financial market participants have a good understanding of our 
reaction function, and share similar views on the economy, interest rates should adjust to levels 
                                                
10   For example, see Goodhart (2009). 
11   Approaches to aggregating committee views are discussed further in: Svensson (2003), “The inflation forecast 
and the loss function”, Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart, 
Vol. 1, pp 135–152. 
12   Bergstrom and Karagedikli (2013), “The Interest Rate Conditioning Assumption: Investigating the Effects of 
Central Bank Communication in New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, mimeo, find that if the public 
interpret  interest  rate  forecasts  as  conditional,  the  forecasting  performance  of private agents for  short-term 
interest rates is improved at short horizons. If the communication is interpreted as the central bank deviating 
from  its  interest  rate  rule,  the  forecasting  performance  of  the  public  for  short-term  interest  rates  is  again 
improved, but the forecasting performance for macroeconomic variables is worsened. 
13   The Bank has recently published a range of research on these factors. For more information see: Lienert and 
Gillmore (2015), “The Reserve Bank’s method of estimating ‘potential output’“, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Analytical Note, AN2015/01; Richardson and Williams (2015), “Estimating New Zealand’s neutral interest rate”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2015/05; Armstrong (2015), “The Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand’s output gap indicator suite and its real time properties”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 
AN2015/08; Lewis (2016, forthcoming) “Inflation expectations curve: a tool for monitoring inflation expectations”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
consistent  with  medium-term  price  stability  without  the  need  for  constant  comment  and 
intervention from the Bank. 
We  try  to  facilitate  this  understanding  by  presenting  a  description  of  key  judgements  and 
alternative scenarios in our Monetary Policy Statements. These help illustrate how monetary 
policy  would likely need to respond if judgements were to prove incorrect or if risks to the 
outlook were to crystallise. 
Financial market participants seem to have had a good understanding of the conditional nature 
of our projections. Figure 1 illustrates the point for the period since 2004. The red line in the 
chart shows how the market implied 1-year-ahead 90-day interest rate moves from the day 
after a Statement to the day before the next Statement. This change represents how market 
participants have interpreted the incoming economic data and events and how they think the 
Bank will respond. 
The blue line shows how the Bank revised its 1-year ahead 90-day interest rate projection from 
one Statement to another. The blue line gives an indication of how the Bank interpreted new 
economic events and the subsequent monetary policy response. 
Generally, market participants change their outlook for interest rates in a similar way to the 
Bank as new economic and financial information becomes available. The majority of the move 
in  interest  rates  occurs  before  we  have  provided  financial  market  participants  with  our 
interpretation of new events. This suggests market participants have a good understanding 
about how new information changes the Bank’s own outlook, the conditionality of the Bank’s 
projections and the Bank’s reaction function. 
Conditional commitment in action – changes in the policy outlook since 2014 
The changes in the Bank’s policy stance since the beginning of 2014 provide a good illustration 
of the conditional nature of forward guidance in practice. At the March 2014 Statement, the 90-
day interest rate had averaged 2.85 percent in Q1 2014, and the Bank was projecting it to rise 
to 5.5 percent by Q3 2017. 
However, a number of factors led to a moderation in the outlook for inflationary pressure over 
the quarters that followed. Both cyclical and structural aspects of the New Zealand economy 
evolved in unforeseen ways. These events included significant falls in the prices of oil and New 
Zealand’s  commodity  exports,  a  stronger-than-expected  exchange  rate,  weaker-than-
expected  capacity  pressures  (and  stronger  potential  growth),  and  weaker  non-tradables 
inflation. 
Despite these developments, by the December 2015 Statement the Bank was projecting even 
stronger  economic  growth  than  had  been  expected  in  March  2014  (figure  2).  This  is  not 
because the fundamental outlook had improved, but because this new information led the Bank 
to change its outlook for monetary policy and provide more stimulus to the economy. Indeed, 
the December 2015 Statement projected that the 90-day interest rate would be 2.6 percent in 
Q3 2017, almost 300 basis points lower than was forecast in March 2014 (figure 3). Given the 
weaker starting point for inflation, stronger growth was needed to bring inflation back to target. 
However, as discussed, this projection for stronger growth is conditional on a set of certain 
assumptions, and the Bank may need to change its activity and policy outlook if new events 
were to unfold. 
The changes in the 90-day interest rate projection over this time illustrate how flexible inflation 
targeting operates in practice. The forecasts evolved to ensure that medium-term price stability 
would be maintained. Therefore, despite inflation being weaker than expected and the revision 
to the 90-day interest rate outlook, the credibility of the monetary policy framework has been 
maintained. Medium-term inflation expectations have fallen over the past six months, but are 
currently near the 2 percent target midpoint (figure 4). External forecasters also expect inflation 
to return to target over the medium term. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Crucially, the Bank is – and perceived to be – committed to its inflation target, which helps 
anchor inflation expectations. When formulating monetary policy, the PTA directs the Bank to 
have a forward-looking focus, irrespective of past inflation outcomes. The projection, at any 
time, seeks to ensure that price stability can be achieved while avoiding unnecessary instability 
in output, interest rates and the exchange rate. The Bank will continue to adjust monetary 
policy as conditions evolve to ensure that price stability is achieved over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
When it comes to communication, central banks use a diverse range of practices, and best 
practices differ from country to country. For New Zealand, we find it beneficial to publish a 
projection for the 90-day interest rate. It supports transparency, and its evolution over time 
contributes to market participants’ understanding of how the Bank responds to unexpected 
economic events. 
The projections are conditional in nature, reflecting the many challenges faced in forecasting 
the New Zealand economy. It is important financial market participants understand that these 
forecasts are not a commitment to a certain path of policy. Indeed, financial market participants 
generally have a very good understanding of the conditional nature of our forecasts. 
The experience since the beginning of 2014 highlights the conditional nature of our interest 
rate forecasts. Unforeseen economic events led to weaker-than-expected inflationary pressure 
in the economy. As a result, we significantly revised down the outlook for short-term interest 
rates. The Bank will continue to adjust monetary policy as conditions evolve to ensure that 
price stability is achieved over the medium term. 
 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
        6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
