  Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy decision and 
assessment of the economic situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 16 June 
2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s news conference. I will 
begin  by  explaining  our  monetary  policy  decision  and  our  assessment  of  the  economic 
situation.  I  will  then  hand  over  to  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  who  will  present  this  year’s  Financial 
Stability Report. After that, Andréa Maechler will review the situation on the financial markets 
and  outline  some  innovations  affecting  financial  market  infrastructure.  Finally,  we  will  –  as 
ever – be pleased to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
Let me begin with our monetary policy decision and the inflation forecast. 
As  you  will  have  gathered  from  our  press  release  a  few  minutes  ago,  we  are 
maintaining our expansionary monetary policy. Interest on sight deposits at the SNB is 
to  remain  at  –0.75%  and  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  is  unchanged  at 
between  –1.25%  and  –0.25%.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  remain  active  in  the  foreign 
exchange market, as necessary. 
Our monetary policy thus continues to be based on two key elements: the negative interest 
rate  and  our  willingness  to  take  an  active  role  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Both  are 
intended  to  make  Swiss  franc  investments  less  attractive,  thereby  easing  pressure  on  the 
franc.  This  is  important  given  that  the  franc  remains  significantly  overvalued.  Our 
expansionary  monetary  policy  is  aimed  at  stabilising  price  developments  and  supporting 
economic activity. 
Our new conditional inflation forecast suggests that inflation will rise faster over the coming 
quarters than we predicted in March, principally due to the significant increase in oil prices in 
the intervening period. The effect of this oil price rise on annual inflation vanishes after the 
first quarter  of  2017. The  new  conditional  forecast moves  closer to that  of the  last quarter 
from then on, and is in line with it from 2018. This forecast shows that our expectations for 
the  medium-term  development  of  inflation  and  the  Swiss  economy  remain  essentially 
unchanged. 
At –0.4%, our inflation forecast for the current year is 0.4 percentage points higher than in 
March.  For  2017,  we  expect  inflation  to  be  0.3%,  somewhat  higher  than  assumed  in  the 
previous  quarter.  For  2018,  we  continue  to  anticipate  inflation  of  0.9%.  The  conditional 
inflation  forecast  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  three-month  Libor  will  remain  at  –
0.75% over the entire forecast horizon. 
Global economic outlook 
Since  the  assessment  of  the  inflation  and  economic  outlook  for  Switzerland  is  heavily 
influenced  by  economic  developments  abroad,  let  me  now  present  our  assessment  of  the 
global economy. 
The  moderate  recovery  in  the  global  economy  is  continuing,  supported  by  ongoing  highly 
expansionary monetary policy worldwide. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in 
the  US  where 
is  particularly  well  advanced 
Economic  recovery 
labour  market 
developments in the first few months of the year were generally positive. The US is on the 
cusp  of  full  employment  for  the  first  time  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008. 
Economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  gradually  becoming  more  broad-based,  and  this  is 
increasingly  spilling  over  into  the  labour  market.  The  unemployment  rate  has  again  fallen 
slightly in recent months. In China, growth remains robust, thanks to various economic policy 
measures aimed at stimulating domestic demand. Overall, international growth is principally 
being driven by domestic demand and the services sector. By contrast, global manufacturing 
and trade remain subdued. 
The  international  financial  markets  were  dominated  by  turbulence  at  the  start  of  the  year, 
however  positive  economic  signals  since  then  have  helped  to  ease  the  situation.  Risk 
premiums  and  volatility  have  fallen  perceptibly  in  recent  months.  At  the  same  time, 
commodity prices have also recovered from their multi-year lows. 
We expect the global economic recovery to sustain over the next few quarters. Nevertheless, 
significant  risks  remain.  Global  growth  continues  to  be  fragile  due  to  deeply  entrenched 
structural problems. Furthermore, uncertainty emanating from political events could escalate, 
hampering economic development. The imminent UK referendum on whether to stay in the 
European Union has already caused volatility on the financial markets to rise. 
Swiss economic outlook 
I shall now turn to the economic outlook for Switzerland. 
After a robust fourth quarter in 2015, the pace of growth slowed in the first quarter of 2016. 
According  to  the  first  official  estimate,  annualised  real  GDP  increased  by  0.4%  in  the  first 
quarter.  However,  this  deceleration  is  not  a  sign  of  a  more  fundamental  slowdown.  If  we 
disregard short-term volatility, an upward trend is discernible. Available indicators thus point 
to a continuation of the moderate but steady recovery that has prevailed since the beginning 
of the year. This would suggest that growth is likely to gather pace in the second quarter. 
The  gradual  improvement  in  the  international  environment  will  also  benefit  Switzerland. 
Exports  are  likely  to  continue  to  recover.  Until  now,  the  positive  development  was  largely 
driven  by  pharmaceutical  exports.  As  global  economic  activity  gradually  picks  up,  other 
industries  too  are  likely  to  show  signs  of  recovery.  Exports  of  machinery,  precision 
instruments and metal goods have rallied slightly since the beginning of the year. Utilisation 
of production capacity in manufacturing should continue to improve. This is likely to stimulate 
corporate  investment  and  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  labour  market.  Various  industry 
surveys confirm these emerging signals. The employment outlook has brightened somewhat 
recently. We expect the unemployment rate to stabilise in the second half of the year. We still 
anticipate real GDP growth for 2016 as a whole of between 1% and 1.5%. 
The  continuation  of  this  moderate  recovery  and  the  impact  of efficiency  measures  already 
taken  will  help  industry  to  improve  margins.  However,  many  challenges  remain.  Not  all 
industries and companies will benefit equally from the upturn in demand. Furthermore, our 
companies are faced with technological, institutional and market-led changes, irrespective of 
the  economic  situation.  Examples  include  the  digitalisation  of  the  economy,  structural 
adjustments to domestic trade due to new consumer habits and distribution channels, new 
business  models  in  the  financial  sector  and  shifting  tourism  flows.  To  overcome  these 
challenges,  companies  must  continue  to  position  their  products  successfully  through 
innovation  and  new  business  ideas.  This  capacity  has  proved  to  be  a  key  strength  of  the 
Swiss economy in recent years. Equally, Switzerland must continue to do everything it can to 
offer conditions which allow companies to compete globally. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  low 
long-term 
inflation  rates,  medium  and 
Inflation expectations, interest rates and exchange rates 
I  will  now  review  changes  in  inflation  expectations  and  monetary  conditions  since  the 
beginning of the year. 
Due  to  the  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  decline  in  commodity  prices,  Swiss 
inflation  once  again  moved  well  into  negative  territory  at  the  beginning  of  2015.  Despite 
persistently 
inflation  expectations  have 
nevertheless remained stable. According to the Consensus Economics forecast published in 
April, expected inflation for a horizon of six to ten years stands at 1.2%. 
In the current environment, a relaxed monetary policy is still needed to ensure price stability 
and  support  the  economy.  Consequently,  interest  on  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  stands  at 
−0.75%.  Negative  interest  has  led  to  a  decline  in  interest  rates  on  the  money  and  capital 
markets, which has been quite substantial in some cases. Mortgage rates have only dropped 
slightly,  however.  Fritz  Zurbrügg  and  Andréa  Maechler  will  discuss 
interest  rate 
developments in more detail later. 
After  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  Swiss  franc  appreciated 
significantly  in  trade-weighted  terms.  This  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  euro  had 
reached  a  low  point  in  early  2015  in  the  context  of  the  Greek  crisis.  Our  expansionary 
monetary policy has since helped to weaken the Swiss franc. Since January 2015, the franc 
has  offset  about  half  of  the  effective  appreciation.  It  nevertheless  remains  significantly 
overvalued. 
Monetary policy outlook 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my main points. Our monetary policy is based on 
two key elements – the negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene in the foreign 
exchange market. Unlike during the period when the minimum exchange rate was in force, 
we now decide on a case-by-case basis when – and on what scale – we will intervene. Our 
monetary  policy  aims  to  have  a  stabilising  effect  on  the  price  level  and  to  support  the 
economy. The negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene make the Swiss franc 
less attractive and thereby help to achieve these goals. 
The persistently low interest rate environment presents a challenge for savers and investors. 
However,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  negative  interest  is  an  absolutely  essential 
instrument  at  this  point  in  time.  In  the  current  climate,  higher  interest  rates  in  Switzerland 
would cause monetary conditions to deteriorate. If the SNB were to aim for higher interest 
rates,  investments  in  Swiss  francs  would  be  far  more  attractive  than  investments  in  other 
currencies. A substantial appreciation of the franc – and its consequent effects on the Swiss 
economy – would be virtually unavoidable in these circumstances. Such a scenario would be 
beneficial neither for savers nor investors. 
As  a  small  open  economy,  Switzerland  is  highly  exposed  to  developments  abroad.  Next 
week’s  UK  referendum  on  whether  to  remain  in  the  EU  may  cause  uncertainty  and 
turbulence to increase. We will be monitoring the situation closely and will take measures if 
required. 
Our National Bank 
I  would  like  to  close  with  a  few  words  about  something  completely  different,  a  new  online 
information  platform  for  the  general  public  called  “Our  National  Bank”.  This  has  been 
available for a few days now at our.snb.ch, and provides basic information on the SNB and 
money, price stability, and monetary policy. Additional focus topics featured on “Our National 
Bank” include the minimum exchange rate and the real estate market. The complex subject 
of monetary policy is explained in a manner that is easy to understand, using a multimedia 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  approach.  Charts  and  illustrations  visualise  the  content,  while  short  films  provide  a  more 
in-depth insight into the SNB. 
The  associated  app  presents  detailed  information  and  the  brochure  summarises  the  key 
points in a succinct form.1 These new products are currently available in German and French; 
from autumn 2016, they will also be available in English and Italian. All this information may 
also be accessed via our main website, www.snb.ch. 
“Our National Bank” helps us to fulfil one of our statutory tasks – informing the public about 
our  activities.  The  new  platform  replaces  “The  world  of  the  National  Bank”,  which  has 
provided the general public with information until now. We hope that this new resource will 
prove useful to you, too, in one way or another. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Fritz Zurbrügg, who will present this year’s Financial Stability Report. 
                                                
1  The Our National Bank brochure can be accessed in the form of a pdf file at our.snb.ch or ordered through 
library@snb.ch. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
