  Alberto G Musalem: International spillovers and policies 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alberto  G  Musalem,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Integrated  Policy 
Analysis Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the People’s Bank of China-
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Joint Symposium, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 15 Mach 
2016. 
 Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak here in Hangzhou about the important 
theme of international spillovers. By exchanging perspectives and experiences we can forge 
relationships and a shared understanding that can lead to better economic outcomes. I will 
focus mostly on the interaction of international spillovers with policy frameworks within and 
across countries. I will do this from the vantage point of a domestic economy experiencing 
foreign spillovers. I will then briefly turn to considerations from a U.S. perspective. As always, 
my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), or the Federal Reserve System.1  
International spillovers encompass a broad topic with respect to their sources and channels. 
Before  narrowly  focusing  on  monetary  sources  and  associated  channels,  it  seems 
appropriate  to  first  take  a  broader  view  of  the  various  sources.  Foreign  spillovers  can 
emanate  from  monetary,  fiscal,  regulatory,  currency  or  trade  policies.  Spillovers  can  also 
arise from endogenous productivity changes, from financial stability developments, and from 
a global financial cycle.2  
The  Mundell-Fleming  logic  remains  relevant  for  thinking  about  policy  options  of  open 
economies.  It  provides  lessons  on  channels  of  transmission,  basic  tradeoffs  across 
objectives, and the effectiveness of policy responses.3 The channels of macroeconomic and 
financial transmission among open and interdependent economies occur through the current 
account of the balance of payments, the capital account, or both. From the vantage point of 
the domestic economy, there are three main channels of transmission: the exchange rate; 
the  external  demand;  and  the  interest  rate  or  risk-premia  channel.  The  last  can  be  more 
broadly defined as the financial conditions channel. 
The intensity of transmission of spillovers will depend on the monetary policy, currency policy 
and  the  real  and  financial  openness  of  the  economy  being  affected  by  external 
developments.  Other  relevant  characteristics  include  the  flexibility  of  labor  and  product 
markets;  the  depth,  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system;  and  the  economy’s 
position as an international creditor or debtor. 
The  Mundell-Fleming  framework  suggests  that  a  country  with  a  high  degree  of  capital 
mobility and a flexible currency will be in a favorable position to use monetary policy to attain 
its internal growth and inflation objectives. When foreign interest rates increase and financial 
conditions tighten, changes in relative prices brought about by currency fluctuations can help 
to  absorb  the  external  shocks.  The  positive  expenditure  switching  effect  from  currency 
depreciation improves the trade balance and supports demand. It is sufficiently larger than 
the negative investment demand effect from higher interest rates, such that internal balance 
is attained and monetary policy is able to pursue domestic inflation and growth objectives.4 
                                                
1   Linda Goldberg, Paolo Pesenti, Joseph Tracy and Matthew Higgins contributed to these remarks. 
2   A global financial cycle refers to the global co-movement of credit by banks and capital markets, asset prices, 
term premia, and risk premia. 
3   Fleming (1962) and Mundell (1963). 
4   Krugman  (1999).  The  balance  sheet  effects  imparted  from  a  large  international  debtor  position  may  work 
against achievement of an improved external balance and attainment of internal balance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 for  currency  stability, 
to  effectively  manage 
 
 
Different policy options are available to a country with a high degree of capital mobility and a 
preference  for  currency  stability.  A  country  may  prefer  currency  stability  as  an  effective 
nominal  anchor,  or  because  of  concerns  about  the  broader  uncertainties  associated  with 
currency volatility. Regardless of the reason and because the exchange rate is not available 
to absorb external shocks, this country will be in an unfavorable position to achieve domestic 
macroeconomic  objectives  by  using  monetary  policy.  Instead,  monetary  policy  is  aimed  at 
external  adjustment.  Tighter  foreign  monetary  policy  and  financial  conditions  need  to  be 
validated by tighter domestic monetary policy to maintain currency stability. With domestic 
monetary  conditions  effectively  imported  from  abroad,  they  may  sometimes  conflict  with 
domestic growth and inflation objectives. Simply put, currency stability is prioritized. 
These policy considerations are summarized in the well-known international policy trilemma. 
It says that a country cannot simultaneously maintain independent monetary policy focused 
on domestic objectives, a high degree of capital mobility, and currency stability. Any two of 
these regime characteristics can be chosen, but not all three. While the trilemma suggests 
sharp tradeoffs, additional policy tools can soften the tradeoffs. 
Fiscal  policy  is  one  tool  that  serves  this  purpose.  When  foreign  credit  conditions  tighten, 
expansionary fiscal policy can allow a country with a high degree of capital mobility, and a 
policy  preference 
towards  domestic 
macroeconomic  objectives  and  internal  balance.  In  fact,  fiscal  policy  can  also  be  used  to 
rebalance  the  composition  of  demand  towards  the  desired  mix  of  investment  and 
consumption. 
Softer  tradeoffs  than  implied  by  the  trilemma  are  suggested  by  some  of  the  empirical 
evidence  on  interest  rate  co-movements.  For  example,  there  is  ample  evidence  that 
domestic  short-term  interest  rates  become  progressively  less  correlated  with  short-term 
interest rates in large foreign countries, and that monetary policy is more autonomous, as 
countries move from high capital mobility to low capital mobility, and from rigid currencies to 
flexible currencies.5  
Using foreign exchange reserves to support currency stability is unlikely to be as effective in 
enabling the country to attain domestic growth and inflation objectives. If losses of foreign 
reserves are not sterilized, the effect will be similar to that of domestic monetary tightening, 
and  as  already  discussed,  might  work  against  domestic  growth  and  inflation  objectives.  If 
reserve losses are sterilized and the underlying cause of capital outflows is not addressed, 
reserves losses can be persistent. 
Macroprudential policy provides an additional tool that can add degrees of freedom and help 
soften the tradeoffs of the trilemma. Macroprudential policy can potentially temper spillovers 
by modulating the type of buildup of financial imbalances that contributed to the Asian crisis 
of 1997, countless other emerging market crisis, the global financial crisis of 2008 and the 
subsequent  euro  area  crisis  of  2011.  Progress  continues  to  be  made  in  designing 
macroprudential policy frameworks, in definition of objectives, and in developing appropriate 
instruments, calibration and communication. 
Capital  flow  management  can  be  viewed  as  the  part  of  the  macroprudential  toolkit  that 
operates  across  borders.  Over  the  last  five  years,  capital  flow  management  has  received 
increased attention, first in managing inflows and, more recently, in managing outflows.6 A 
consensus has emerged that capital flow management can be useful as part of a broader set 
of  policy  tools.  In fact, the  effectiveness  of capital flow  management may  be  limited  if  not 
appropriately  supported  by  monetary,  fiscal,  exchange  rate  and  prudential  policies,  or  the 
                                                
5   Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005), Goldberg (2013), Klein and Shambaugh (2015) and Obstfeld (2015). 
6   G20 (2010), IMF (2012), Farhi and Werning (2014) and IMF (2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
warranted  macroeconomic  adjustment.  Also,  capital  flow  management  practices  that  are 
transparent, temporary, and targeted seem to work best. 
Spillovers from foreign countries are not confined only to conventional monetary policies, nor 
is the U.S. the sole source of transmission. There also is evidence that the unconventional 
monetary policies of the ECB and the BOJ have spilled over onto the U.S. yield curve and 
broader financial conditions.7 This is interesting because all three monetary areas share the 
characteristics of flexible currencies and capital mobility. 
I will now conclude with a few related comments from the U.S. perspective. 
The  Fed’s  statutory  mandate,  like  that  of  other  central  banks,  is  domestic.  The  Federal 
Reserve  Act  states  that  the  Fed  should  “promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum 
employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates”.  Within  this  mandate, 
there  are  good  reasons  to  consider  the  international  effects  of  monetary  and  regulatory 
policies.  The  U.S.  economy  and  the  economies  of  the  rest  of  the  world  have  important 
feedback  effects  on  each  other,  and  adverse  international  spillovers  can  harm  U.S. 
prosperity. 
Like  other  central  banks,  the  Federal  Reserve  can  help  promote  global  prosperity  and 
stability, by promoting growth and stability at home. The FOMC has taken a number of steps 
in recent years to increase transparency and improve communications, to effectively convey 
policy  intentions  to  market  participants  and  policymakers. The  Fed  has  also  made 
considerable  progress  in  strengthening  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  U.S.  financial 
system,  through  improved  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks  and  a  broader  group  of 
systemically  important  institutions.  A  stronger  U.S.  banking  system  better  protects  against 
future  shocks,  provides  a  more  solid  foundation  for  domestic  growth,  and  therefore  also 
enhances prospects for growth and financial stability abroad. 
I  look  forward  to  a  discussion  with  fellow  panelists  and  also  to  engaging  with  conference 
participants over the next two days. 
Thank you for your attention. 
(2005).  Equal  Size,  Equal  Role? 
References 
Ehrmann,  M.  &  M.  Fratzscher 
Interest  Rate 
Interdependence  Between  the  Euro  Area  and the  United  States,  Royal  Economic  Society, 
vol. 115 (506), pages 928–948, October. 
Farhi,  E.  and  I.  Werning  (2014).  Dilemma  not  Trilemma?  Capital  Controls  and  Exchange 
Rates with Volatile Capital Flows, IMF Economic Review, pp. 62: 569–605. 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (2016),  Statement  on  Longer-Run  Goals  and  Monetary 
Policy  Strategy,  Adopted  effective  January  24,  2012;  as  amended  effective  January  26, 
2016. 
Federal Open Market Committee (2016), Policy Statement, January 27, 2016. 
Fleming, M. (1962). Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange 
Rates, IMF staff papers, 9 (3), pp. 369–380. 
G20 (2010), Summit Leaders’ Declaration, Seoul, Korea, November 11 – 12, 2010. 
Goldberg, L. (2013). Banking Globalization, Transmission, and Monetary Policy Autonomy, 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review (Special Issue), pp. 161–193. 
                                                
7   http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
IMF (2105), The IMF’s Approach to Capital Account Liberalization Revisiting the 2005 IEO 
Evaluation, Independent Evaluation Office, Washington, D.C. 
IMF (2015), 2015 Spillover Report, Washington, D.C. 
IMF  (2012),  The  Liberalization  and  Management  of  Capital  Flows:  an  Institutional  View, 
Washington, D.C. 
Klein, M. and Shambaugh, J. (2015). “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma: Sources 
of Monetary Policy Autonomy”,  American  Economic  Journal:  Macroeconomics  2015, 7 (4): 
33–66, http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/mac.20130237. 
Krugman,  P.  (1999).  Balance  Sheets,  the  Transfer  Problem,  and  Financial  Crises,  in 
International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert Flood, edited by Peter 
Isard, Assaf Razin and Andrew Rose (Springer Netherlands) pp. 31–55. 
Mundell,  R.  (1963).  Capital  Mobility  and  Stabilization  Policy  under  Fixed  and  Flexible 
Exchange Rates, Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, 29 (4), pp.475–485. 
Obstfeld, M. (2015). Trilemmas and tradeoffs: living with financial globalization, BIS Working 
Papers No 480. 
Obstfeld,  M.,  Shambaugh,  J.,  and  Taylor,  A.  (2005).  The  Trilemma  in  History:  Tradeoffs 
among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility, Review of Economics and 
Statistics, vol. 87 (3). 
Rey,  H.  (2014).  International  Channels  of  Transmission  of  Monetary  Policy  and  the 
Mundellian Trilemma, London Business School, Paper presented at the 15th Jacques Polak 
Annual Research Conference Hosted by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 
November 13–14. 
United States Congress (1913), Federal Reserve Act, Amended 1977, Section 2A. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
