  Vítor Constâncio: Introductory remarks at the fifth ECB conference on 
accounting, financial reporting and corporate governance for central 
banks 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
at the fifth ECB conference on accounting, financial reporting and corporate governance for 
central banks, Frankfurt am Main, 21 June 2016. 
 The conference is organised along four main themes: 
Developments in international accounting standards; 
Impact of accounting on financial regulation and supervisory reporting; 
Managing risks on central bank balance sheets; and 
Governance and financial reporting issues at central banks. 
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome  to  the  fifth  ECB  conference  on  accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate 
governance for central banks. This two-day conference is dedicated to the memory of Niall 
Merriman,  Head  of  the  ECB’s  Financial  Reporting  and  Policy  Division,  who  unexpectedly 
passed away in September 2015. 
A special welcome and thank you to the distinguished speakers for sharing their thoughts on 
the topics covered today and tomorrow. 
This  conference  is  by  now  well  established,  as  demonstrated  by  the  great  interest  among 
central banks around the globe, and the ever increasing participation. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
On the first topic, the ECB has stepped up its efforts in monitoring international accounting 
developments over the last two years. There are two reasons underlying this. 
First,  as  you  certainly  remember,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  became 
operational in November 2014. Accounting information forms the basis for various elements 
of prudential regulation and supervision. As already highlighted in an ECB report published in 
December  2006,  a  harmonised  and  comparable  accounting  framework  is  an  important 
element for consistent supervision.1 
After the eruption of the financial crisis in 2008, the G20 called for a single set of high quality 
global accounting standards in order to strengthen credibility and comparability of financial 
information. The main aim of this request was to alleviate risks in the financial sector and to 
help prevent future financial crises. Therefore, the ECB supports the recent activities of the 
IASB which are geared towards achieving this objective. 
Second, the ECB has recently become more directly involved in the European process for 
adopting 
is  a  major 
consequence of the Maystadt report on how to reinforce the EU’s contribution to the IFRS 
Standards  and  improve  the  governance  of  the  European  institutions  developing  these 
standards.2 
Since January 2015, the ECB has an observer status in both the new Board of the European 
Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) and the related Technical Expert Group (TEG). 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS).  This 
the 
                                                
1  ECB (2006), Assessment of accounting standards from a financial stability perspective. 
2  Maystadt, P. ( 2013), Should IFRS Standards be more “European”? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  EFRAG  is  a  private  association  that  provides  technical  advice  to  the  European 
Commission  on  the  endorsement  of  IFRS  Standards,  as  well  as  related  interpretations 
issued by the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (IFRIC). The ECB 
also participates in a number of other committees dealing with IFRS Standards, such as the 
IFRS  Advisory  Council,  the  Accounting  Expert  Group  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision and the Accounting Subgroup of the European Banking Authority. Our aim is to 
ensure  that  coordinated  positions  of  the  ECB  on  relevant  accounting  matters  are  duly 
considered in the accounting standard-setting process. 
The colleagues in session one will provide insights into the current challenges in relation to 
international  accounting  standard-setting,  the  role  of  international  accounting  standards  in 
the EU as well as their formal adoption and implementation in the Single Market. 
With  respect  to  the  second  topic,  the  impact  of  accounting  on  financial  regulation  and 
supervisory reporting, I have already touched upon the mounting relevance of the interaction 
between  international  accounting  standards  and  prudential  regulation  and  supervision 
following  the  creation  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  I  will  confine  myself  to  a  few 
remarks on two related matters: 
• 
• 
the issue of non-performing exposures (NPEs);3 and 
the regulatory guidance on the new expected credit loss model and its interaction 
with prudential capital requirements. 
The year 2015 was the first full operational year of the SSM. One of the first items on the 
SSM’s task list was to follow up on the results of the 2014 comprehensive assessment. The 
comprehensive  assessment  helped  us  to  identify  problems  on  the  balance  sheets  of  the 
significant banks. One of the important outcomes was the scale of NPEs now classified using 
a harmonised definition. As you are aware, some euro area banks still have high levels of 
NPEs on their balance sheets. 
In the euro area, the average ratio of NPEs for significant institutions stood at 7.1% at the 
end of 2015, which is high by international standards.4 
For instance, a proxy for the ratio of NPEs in the US has continued to decline in recent years 
and amounts to only 1.5% at the end of 2015. A comprehensive policy response to the high 
levels of NPEs in Europe is necessary, and as part of that, the SSM is working to take stock 
of supervisory best practices. More action is needed to address shortcomings in insolvency, 
collateral and taxation frameworks. 
Accounting  standards  are  also  important  to  address  the  issue.  In  the  US,  accounting 
standards require US banks to reduce, after six months, their NPEs to the market value of 
their collateral, if any. Balance sheets are therefore cleaned up of bad loans rather swiftly. 
This illustrates how accounting standards interact with supervisory concerns. Until now, the 
incurred loss model has been applied under IFRS which does not impose a timely treatment 
of  NPEs  by  the  banks.  As  a  consequence,  NPEs  accumulate  in  banks’  balance  sheets, 
consuming capital and not contributing to banks’ profitability. The introduction of IFRS 9 as 
from 2018 will change this situation. 
The ECB has already publicly expressed its support for a swift endorsement of IFRS 9. In our 
view, the new requirements for the classification, measurement and impairment of financial 
instruments, as well as the new general hedge accounting model, constitute an improvement 
over  the  previous  requirements  in  IAS  39.  Moreover,  we  believe  that  some  aspects  of  the 
                                                
3  Non-performing  exposures  (NPEs)  can  be  defined  as  impaired  exposures  and  past  due  (>  90  days) 
exposures. 
4  The ratio of non-performing loans refers to the ratio of non-performing loans to total gross loans. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  new standard may be an improvement from a financial stability perspective. The merits of the 
new  expected  credit  loss  model  will  clearly  depend  on  its  proper  and  consistent 
implementation in the financial sector. In this perspective, it is important that more granular 
instructions  are given  by  the  standard-setters  and  regulatory  authorities  in  order to  ensure 
that  the  implementation  of  the  new  standard  is  not  subject  to  different  interpretations  that 
would not respect a proper level playing field. At the same time, it will be crucial to monitor 
the  application  of  IFRS  9  in  order  to  ensure  that  there  are  no  unintended  cyclical 
consequences of its implementation. 
In the US, the FASB just announced the approval of similar standards that nevertheless will 
only start to be applied in 2020. US banks have been critical of what will be a major change 
in  frontloading  provisions  for  credit  risk.  The  introduction  of  both  new  standards  will  be  a 
substantial  change  that will  affect  banks,  already  subject  to  more  demanding  regulation  to 
which new features will continue to be added until year-end, albeit with the promise of not 
leading  to  a  “significant  increase  in  capital  requirements”,  as  stated  by  the  Group  of 
Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS). 
In  this  same  vein,  regulators  should  monitor  carefully  the  consequences  of  the  new 
standards and, if need be, should consider an appropriate transition period from a prudential 
point of view. One must not forget the interaction of the new accounting rules under IFRS 9 
and the solvency requirements for banks. The Basel Committee is currently doing some work 
in this area, to which the ECB contributes on an ongoing basis. 
Against  this  background,  the  ECB  also  welcomes  the  Basel  Committee’s  supervisory 
guidance on sound credit risk practices and the application of accounting impairment models 
based on expected credit losses.5 
European banks will need to consider any possible impact of this guidance on their plans for 
the  implementation  of  IFRS  9.  Hence,  we  are  confident  that  the  guidance  will  achieve  its 
stated  objective  and  contribute  to  a  consistent  implementation  of  the  expected  credit  loss 
model across European banks. 
The second day of this conference will be devoted to “traditional” central bank topics – risk 
management and governance. 
Proper risk management remains high on the agenda of central banks and is therefore the 
“guiding  theme”  of  session  three.  Due  to  extraordinary  circumstances,  such  as  persisting 
low inflation and its potential effect on investment behaviour, central banks worldwide have 
been forced to take extraordinary measures. For example, in the last year and in an attempt 
to secure a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% over the medium term, the Governing 
Council decided to expand its asset purchase programme. Under this programme, the target 
level  for  the  combined  monthly  purchases  of  public  and  private  sector  securities  is  now 
€80 billion. 
All  these  measures  have  and  will  continue  to  transform  central  bank  balance  sheets.  In 
particular, central bank balance sheets have been expanded considerably which requires risk 
managers to pay special attention to possible medium- and long-term risks. For this reason, 
risk  management  is  becoming  an  even  more  critical  component  of  the  ECB’s  and  other 
central banks’ daily activities. 
Against this background, I am happy to welcome speakers from around the globe that will 
provide first-hand information about these extraordinary measures and how they may affect 
risk exposures and risk management of central banks worldwide. 
Session four is dedicated to “governance and financial reporting issues at central banks”. 
Discussions  about  the  credibility  of  central  banks  have  intensified  over  the  last  couple  of 
                                                
5  BCBS (2015), Guidance on credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  years. I will leave it to the speakers tomorrow to highlight the latest developments in these 
areas. I will just describe some specific elements of our recent internal reorganisation at the 
ECB which are geared towards improving the quality of our governance function. 
Firstly,  the  ECB  has  created  a  new  position  in  2015,  the  Chief  Services  Officer  (CSO), 
responsible for matters pertaining to administrative services, IT services, human resources 
and finance. 
Secondly,  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  decided  to  create  an  independent  Finance 
department, reporting to the CSO and responsible for budgeting and controlling, financial and 
cost accounting, financial reporting and procurement. 
Finally, also in 2015, the ECB decided to establish a dedicated Compliance and Governance 
Office (CGO) as a key risk management control function to strengthen the ECB’s governance 
framework.  The  purpose  of  this  Office  is  to  support  the  Executive  Board  in  protecting  the 
integrity  and  reputation  of  the  ECB,  to  promote  ethical  standards  of  behaviour  and  to 
strengthen the ECB’s accountability and transparency. To this end, the new CGO performs 
activities relating to the ECB’s revised ethics framework and other governance activities. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  four  sessions  of  today  and  tomorrow  provide  a  representative 
sample of current key topics and challenges for central banks worldwide. I therefore wish you 
a productive and inspiring conference. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
