   Veerathai Santiprabhob: Enhancing Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) 
connectivity 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Veerathai  Santiprabhob,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Euromoney Conferences “The Greater Mekong Investment Forum”, Bangkok, 26 May 2016. 
 Excellencies, Honorable speakers,  
Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good morning to you all! 
Let me start by thanking the Euromoney for organizing this important conference, and inviting 
me to share my views on the role of connectivity in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). 
A few years back, my predecessor, Governor Prasarn, said in this forum that he pictured the 
GMS in the next twenty years as “a much more connected and integrated subregion”. Driven 
by international trade, foreign direct investment, and global and regional production networks, 
economic  integration  in  the  GMS  has  been  strengthened  at  a  pace  faster  than  we  had 
expected. Over the past decade, the share of intra-regional trade within the GMS to total trade 
volumes has doubled to stand at around 8 percent. This is why I truly believe that the GMS will 
continue to be an ideal choice for regional and global investors, and Thailand stands ready to 
connect businesses wishing to benefit from this vibrant subregion.  
While trade and investment are definitely major aspects of regional connectivity, the integration 
that has shaped the GMS takes more diverse forms, which profoundly influence each other, 
including,  physical  infrastructure,  people-to-people,  and  financial  connectivity.  To  promote 
regional connectivity on a sustained basis, it is vital that we strive to strengthen all these key 
aspects by joining forces of both the government and the private sector. Let me now address 
each of them one by one. 
The first and most fundamental is the physical infrastructure connectivity, for 
instance, through transportation channels, power lines and digital channels. 
The work to connect physical infrastructure will always be a work in progress. The past two 
decades have seen the fruits of various projects to close “missing links” in road, rail, waterway, 
and energy networks in the GMS. 19 permanent border crossing points have been established 
to  connect  Thailand  with  Laos,  Myanmar  and  Cambodia.  Energy  connection  within  the 
subregion has been strengthened. Thailand, for example, bought 314 million USD worth of 
electricity from Laos each year, increasing about 8 times over the past ten years. A frequency 
of flights within the GMS, especially by low-cost airlines, has also risen markedly. 
Nevertheless, we still need to do a lot more to be better connected with each other. Many roads 
remain  not  fully  operationalized  or  underutilized.  Road  transportation  in  the  GMS  is  not 
seamless as it should be. In some routes, large trucks carrying containers still have to offload 
their goods to smaller vehicles to navigate the roads. Also, cross-border procedures remain 
obstacles to easy access of goods and people. Apart from building new infrastructure, it is 
therefore equally important to ensure that the existing ones are fully utilized to their potentials. 
In  addition,  sufficient  digital  infrastructure  should  be  put  in  place  as  it  will  considerably 
strengthen other modes of connectivity. The internet and mobile communication connectivity 
will radically change the ways in which businesses operate and people interact, as they drive 
productivity and efficiency of all sectors. It will also facilitate financial, transport and logistics 
services, as well as open door to knowledge sharing for people across the subregion. While 
digital  technology  is  rapidly  improving  in  some GMS  countries, there  remains  large “digital 
divide” both within and between countries that should be narrowed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The second aspect is trade and investment connectivity. 
Intra-regional  trade  and  investment  activities  have  continued  to  flourish,  mainly  thanks  to 
complementarities among GMS economies. Many GMS countries have varied and abundant 
natural  resources,  young  population  and  low  labor  costs,  while  the  others  can  offer 
technological  know-how  and  financing.  With  varying  industry  specializations,  the  diversity 
among GMS members has contributed to stronger regional supply chain network, and in the 
future  should  magnify  national  strengths  towards  a  higher  competiveness  of  the  whole 
subregion. 
Amid thriving trade and investment, Thailand is well-positioned to serve the whole subregion, 
owing  to  our  established  legal  framework,  financing  facility,  infrastructure,  logistics  and  IT 
capability. This can be seen by prospering business activities along the Thai border with other 
GMS countries. Last year, Thailand’s 25 border customs checkpoints with Myanmar, Laos and 
Cambodia registered impressive trade flows of more than 500 billion baht. This accounts for 
around 80% of total trade volumes between Thailand and these three countries. In this respect, 
it is important that GMS governments harmonize rules and regulations for trade and investment 
transactions, both within each country and between countries, with a view to improving ease 
of doing business and lowering trade and investment transaction costs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Connections in physical infrastructure and thriving trade bring people together and 
that comes to the third aspect, people-to-people connectivity. 
Close  proximity,  improved  infrastructure,  and  economic  connection  in  the  subregion  have 
brought  people  to  connect,  either  through  labor  movements  or  tourism.  At  present,  it  is 
estimated  that  above  2  million  foreign  workers  in  Thailand  are  from  CLMV  countries, 
contributing in various sectors. Each year, based on official records, they remit over 10 billion 
baht back to their home countries. With regard to tourism, around 2 million visitors from CLMV 
have made Thailand their destination every year. 
In the future, people connectivity should not be confined only to labor movement and tourism, 
but should develop into strengthened knowledge-sharing networks. GMS economies are in 
need to move up and integrate our value chains, and it is the people with skills, knowledge and 
innovative spirit who can make this happen. Strengthening knowledge networks for tertiary 
education, knowledge creation and knowledge sharing among industries will be a bedrock for 
building the subregion’s capacity, and help harmonize different rules and regulations. 
For Thailand, I am glad to see that we have increasingly offered educational training to citizens 
of the GMS. Recently, Thai universities have offered international courses, aiming to attract 
students from GMS countries, who express greater interest to study in Thailand. 
Health is another important dimension of people connectivity. An increasing number of citizens 
from the GMS have chosen to receive medical services from Thai hospitals. I am certain that 
this trend will continue to rise in the future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to the fourth aspect of regional integration, financial connectivity, 
which is a principle area of policy that the Bank of Thailand, in collaboration with other 
agencies, will continue to drive going forward. 
Better  connected  financial  systems  support  and  underpin  all  other  aspects  of  connectivity. 
Infrastructure  development, trade  and  investment  activities,  and  people  mobility  need  well-
functioned financial infrastructure and proper eco-system in order to thrive. In the past decade, 
financial  regulators  of  GMS  countries  have  made  noticeable  progress  to  promote  financial 
connectivity. Examples include introducing a more accommodative regulatory regime to allow 
Lao  entities  to  raise  funds  from  the  Thai  capital  market.  As  a  result,  since  2013,  the  Lao 
government and firms have issued baht-denominated bonds, worth 28 billion baht in total, to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   support  infrastructure  projects  in  Laos.  For  the  banking  sector,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has 
encouraged banks to expand their regional presence to support growing trade and investment. 
As of now, there are 30 branches and subsidiaries of Thai commercial banks, set up in GMS 
countries. ATM connectivity has also been established between Thailand and Myanmar and 
between Thailand and Laos to facilitate cross-border money transfer. 
Like other areas of regional connectivity, there is a need to upgrade financial connectedness 
to support closer economic relations among the GMS. For today, let me highlight three key 
areas that Thailand will pursue in this endeavor. 
The first one is to strengthen cross-border banking networks. 
With  regard  to  the  banking  sector,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  aims  to  further  liberalize  banking 
activities  by  broadening  cross-border  banking  networks.  We  encourage  Thai  commercial 
banks to further expand their regional presence to support businesses operating in the GMS. 
In addition, we fully support foreign banks to use Thailand as a springboard to expand their 
businesses into the subregion. Recently, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi acquired a microfinance 
bank in Cambodia, using Bank of Ayudhya as such a springboard; and in 2014, CIMBThai 
bank set up its first branch in Vientiane. 
Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  been  relaxing  regulations  to  further  accommodate 
investors in the GMS. We will allow them to take loans from Thai banks for direct investment 
in the GMS without a cap. We also lifted the cap on outflows of transporting baht in cash to 
GMS countries from half a million to two million baht per trip. 
In this connection, we have now started to see the results of the increased flexibility, which 
helps multinational corporations to establish Treasury Centers and International Headquarters 
in Thailand. As of now, there are 13 companies holding Treasury Center licenses, of which 4 
have been granted in the past 3 months, with one more awaiting approval from the Ministry of 
Finance. Many more have also made inquiries, which I am pleased to see. 
The second area is to foster the growth of regional capital markets. 
Apart  from  the  banking  sector,  well-developed  capital  markets  are  critical  to  nurture 
sustainable  development  of  financial  interconnections.  In  this  light,  Thailand  is  playing  a 
proactive role to enhance our capital market capacity, aiming to link up GMS capital markets 
with global investors. Firms from the GMS 7 can raise funds through the Thai capital market 
to facilitate their businesses, while global investors can invest in products with GMS exposure. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  seen  successful  and  fast-selling  baht  bonds,  issued  in 
Thailand by the Lao government and corporates. A few years ago, we allowed companies 
operating  in the GMS  to  be  listed  on  the Thai stock  exchange using  the  holding  company 
structure. In addition, Thailand offers a more opened platform for GMS investors and global 
players looking for opportunities in the GMS. A new rule has allowed foreign firms, including 
those from the GMS, to launch IPOs in Thailand and become listed in the Thai stock exchange. 
This is aimed to provide global investors with wider choices of investment, and to provide an 
ideal financing destination for both GMS members and global players. 
The last area of policy to promote GMS financial connectivity is the better-connected 
payment networks. 
Under  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  Payment  Systems  Roadmap,  we  will  continue  to  work  with 
regional  regulators  to  advance  payment  systems  connectivity  to  support  trades,  labor 
movements and tourisms. At present, we are building new electronic payment infrastructure 
under  the  National  e-Payment  Plan.  GMS  countries  can  leverage  on  this  infrastructure  to 
improve system capability and connectivity. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The GMS  is  a  subregion  of  opportunities. The ASEAN  Economic  community  is  now  in  full 
swing, and CLMV members have now eliminated the last set of tariffs since the beginning of 
this year. Economic transitions following the liberalization in GMS countries have unlocked 
opportunity for foreign investors. Higher purchasing power from growing and young middle-
class  translates  into  higher  demand  for  goods,  services  and  more  sophisticated  financial 
services to be met. 
Enhanced regional connectivity is a key to shared prosperity of the GMS. The Bank of Thailand 
is  committed  to  promoting  financial  system  connectivity  to  facilitate  closer  economic 
integration, and is ready to move forward with our partners both in Thailand and the GMS. 
Finally, I thank Euromoney once again for organizing this important conference. I wish you 
productive and engaging sessions throughout the conference. 
Kob Khun Krub. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
