  Raghuram Rajan: IDRBT Banking Technology Excellence Awards – 
Governor’s remarks 
Remarks by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 12th IDRBT 
(Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology)  Banking  Technology 
Excellence Awards function, Hyderabad, 18 July 2016. 
 I  congratulate  all  the  awardees  of  the  IDRBT  Banking  Technology  Excellence  Awards. 
IDRBT instituted these Awards in the year 2001, which reflects the long road traversed by 
the  banking  sector  in  terms  of  technology  adoption.  The  last  few  years  have  seen  the 
convergence  of  various  factors  in  the  payment  systems  sphere,  which  makes  possible  a 
near-revolutionary  improvement  in  financial  access.  Unless  we  take  concerted  steps  to 
address some of the challenges, however, the full potential of the opportunities may not be 
achieved.  I  intend  to  briefly  touch  upon  some  of  these  issues  and  challenges  in  my  short 
remarks today. 
Payments systems are the plumbing of the financial system; so long as there is no leakage 
or  clogging,  we  are  unaware  of  their  functioning.  But  when  they  do  back  up,  the  situation 
becomes catastrophic quickly. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  as  the  regulator  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  country, 
develops the necessary regulatory framework, generally through a consultative process, to 
ensure that different types of payment systems cater to the needs of different segments of 
society.  The  aim  is  to  ensure  easy  accessibility  and  interoperability  of  the  payment 
infrastructure, while ensuring safety and security of transactions. We encourage a variety of 
payment channels not only because they cater to diverse needs but also because they add 
resilience in case some channel breaks down. 
Banks have been the traditional gateway to payment services. However, with the fast pace of 
technological changes, this domain is no  longer the monopoly of banks. Non-bank entities 
are providing innovative payment products and services, forcing banks to reflect upon their 
strategy – to compete or to collaborate? Banks may not have the  wherewithal to compete 
effectively if they have not been investing in technology and associated personnel. However, 
if they collaborate without building these capabilities, they may be left with crumbs from the 
client while their partner takes the whole client cake. 
From  the  RBI’s  perspective,  we  welcome  both  competition  and  collaboration. What  we  do 
find concerning is stasis – for instance, the long period when mobile companies and banks 
were  not  willing  to  work  together  for  fear  that  one  would  capture  the  other’s  clients.  The 
licensing of payment banks has broken that logjam, and a number of alliances are now under 
way. Let me broadly describe how we would like to see the payment system evolving. 
Some desirable features of payments systems 
Our  regulations  governing  payments  systems  have  to  be  ownership,  institution,  and 
technology neutral so that we encourage the most efficient outcomes. We are more open to 
experimentation at the early stages of a product or method of service, as will be clear in the 
soon-to-be-released peer-to-peer lending regulations. At the same time, we have to be more 
conscious of the risks to stability as innovations catch on and expand. This phased approach 
is now being called the sand-box approach elsewhere. 
Second, we prefer payment platforms that offer broad based access, rather than those that 
limit access significantly. We would especially like critical channels to be publicly or widely 
owned rather than monopolised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Third, we would like payment mechanisms to be cheap and scalable, so that they are suited 
to  our  economy  where  ticket  sizes  are  small  but  transaction  volumes  huge.  An  additional 
desirable  element  would  be  for  the  different  payment  systems  to  be  interoperable  –  or  at 
least be able to talk to each other. 
Fourth,  we  need  systems  that  offer  security  even  to  the  unsophisticated  user,  and  do  not 
place  a  huge  burden  of  care  on  them.  This  requires  greater  emphasis  on  transaction 
monitoring  and  identification  of  suspicious  patterns  by  the  system  operator, rather than  an 
insistence on ever increasing levels of care by the unsophisticated user. 
And fifth, we need an effective process of consumer redressal that allows speedy and fair 
resolution  of  customer  complaints.  So  long  as  customers  adhere  to  a  reasonable  level  of 
care, residual risks should be absorbed by the operator. 
Some recent developments 
Let me now describe some of what has been happening in payments and relate back to our 
desires. 
• 
Various  payment  products  and  interfaces  are  now  available  –  Internet  banking, 
cards,  mobile  banking,  ATMs  and  micro  ATMs,  prepaid  payment  instruments 
including e-wallets and m-wallets. 
Remittance  facilities  through  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  system  (NEFT), 
Real Time Gross Settlement system (RTGS), Immediate Payment System (IMPS), 
Instant Money Transfer (IMT), etc., most of which can be accessed through multiple 
channels 
including  net  banking,  mobile  banking,  ATMs  and  Business 
Correspondents. 
Leveraging on the high mobile density in the country, mobile banking services are 
being  encouraged  through  interoperable  USSD  channel  like  *99#  and  the  Unified 
Payments  Interface  (UPI)  provided  by  National  Payments  Corporation  of  India 
(NPCI).  I  am  especially  enthused  by  UPI,  as  smartphones  become  more  widely 
available. Transfers from bank account to bank account will become easier in a few 
weeks via smartphone through the Unified Payment Interface. A villager needing to 
pay a shopkeeper only needs to know the latter’s alias – say Ram@xyzbank.psp. 
He feeds that into his mobile app, writes the payment amount, puts in his password, 
and presses “send” and the payment is made, with both getting messages to that 
effect. Neither needs to visit the bank to take out or deposit money, no point of sale 
machine  is  needed.  With  the  price  of  smartphones  falling  sharply,  we  are  on  the 
verge of solving the last mile problem. 
Government  direct  benefit  payments  are  being  made  through  Aadhaar  linked 
payment  systems  like  Aadhaar  Payment  Bridge  System  (ABPS)  and  Aadhaar 
Enabled Payment System (AEPS) 
Bulk  and  repetitive  payments  of  corporates  and  governments  can  be  processed 
through centralised system of National Automated Clearing House (NACH) to which 
the  decentralised  system  of  Electronic  Clearing  Service  (ECS)  is  also  being 
migrated. 
In ensuring the safety and security of transactions to build confidence and trust in 
electronic  payments  some  of the  measures  put  in  place  include  mandatory  online 
alerts  for  card  transactions,  mandatory  PIN  entry  for  every  transaction  at  ATM, 
additional  factor  of  authentication  for  card  transactions,  need  for  entering  PIN  for 
even  magstripe  Debit  cards  when  used  at  POS  (Point  of  Sale),  migration  from 
magstripe  to  Chip  and  PIN  cards  in  a  phased  manner,  processing  of  ATM 
transactions on chip data when EMV Chip and Pin cards are used, encouraging use 
of  contactless  cards  using  interoperable  protocols,  etc.  Merchants  who  complain 
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    about  “dropped”  transactions  as  we  require  additional  factors  of  authentication 
should also recognise the additional traffic as customers feel safer using their cards. 
At the same time, we are open to innovative ideas on how to ease transaction costs 
while preserving security. 
Bharat Bill Payments System (BBPS) has been put in place to address the needs of 
the  large  bill  payments market,  to  provide  the  convenience  of  anytime, anywhere, 
any bill payment facility to the users. It is expected to roll out shortly. 
Another  significant  area  of  development  has  been 
the  Trade  Receivables 
Discounting  System  (TReDS)  which  ought  to  be  a  game-changer  for  meeting  the 
financing needs of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) segment. MSMEs 
get squeezed all the time by their large buyers, who pay after long delays. All would 
be better off if the MSME could sell its claim on the large buyer in the market. The 
MSME would get its money quickly, while the market would get a claim on the better 
rated large buyer instead of holding a claim on the MSME. All this will happen as the 
three Trade-Receivables Discounting Systems (TReDS) which the RBI has licensed, 
start later this financial year. The key is to reduce transaction costs by automating 
almost  every  aspect  of  the  transaction  so  that  even  the  smallest  MSMEs  can 
benefit. 
With these changes taking place and more yet to come, the roles and responsibilities of the 
banks need to be underscored. Some of the challenges that merit attention are: 
• 
Does the bank’s vision  and strategy take into account payment services aspects? 
Are there adequate human resources to project requirements and implement them? 
Adopting  technology  is  more  than  automation.  It  calls  for  serious  efforts  at  re-
engineering  business  processes.  Workaround  solutions  do  not  last  long  and  the 
price  for  overhauling  the  system  in  the  long  run  may  be  just  too  expensive  to 
manage. There  has to  be  a  conscious  evaluation  of  process  dependencies  taking 
into account customer experience, security issues etc. besides having a long term 
view  of  the  developments,  particularly  those  of  interoperability  within  and  across 
systems. 
Despite  the  huge  potential,  activation  rates  and  usage  levels  of  various electronic 
payment services remain at low levels, though growth is picking up. No doubt the 
fear of taxation as payments move from cash to electronic plays a part in dampening 
activity. As information technology brings down the possible space to avoid or evade 
tax,  and  as  the  benefits,  for  example  in  access  to  credit,  of  building  verifiable 
histories of transactions increase, I have no doubt that merchants will push more for 
electronic payments. Some tax benefits to those merchants who show increases in 
digital 
to  encourage  customer 
participation,  may  be  beneficial.  For  example,  service  providers  could  enter  every 
transaction into a high-payout monthly lottery, with a few lucky customers rewarded 
every month. 
At  the  same  time,  we  should  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  reluctance  to 
transact  is  because  of  the  unknown  security  consequences  and  costs  of  using 
technology.  While  banks  find  it  more  profitable  to  cater  to  the  requirements  of 
privileged customers, the digital divide should not widen, with more and more digital 
payment  options  being  designed  to  serve  the  requirements  of  those  who  already 
have access to digital, while a large segment of society is left dependent on cash as 
they are neither aware of the options nor is the infrastructure made accessible at low 
cost.  Creating  appropriate  customer  awareness  would  not  only  enable  the 
customers  to  choose  their  mix  of  payments  taking  into  account  time  criticality, 
security and risk, and the cost involved, but also enable the banks to optimize their 
payment product mix depending upon their customer profiles. 
transactions,  and  perhaps 
innovative  ways 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    No  technology-based  or  digital  services  can  be  offered  without  consideration  for 
security  of  transactions.  Recently,  there  have  been  a  spate  of  frauds  (through 
vishing  and  phishing)  in  some  segments  of  payment  services.  Banks  have  a  very 
high  level  of  responsibility  when  adopting  digital  channels  –  to  not  only  ensure 
security of the channel at infrastructure level, to protect data security and personal 
privacy at system level but also address the need to build customer awareness in 
security matters. There is no point creating security for the ideal customer, instead 
the system should incorporate the possibility of mistakes by the actual customer that 
we have. RBI has set up an Information Technology (IT) subsidiary to support the IT 
requirements  of  the  RBI  and  the  sector. The  IT subsidiary  would  focus on  IT  and 
cyber  security  (including  related  research)  of  the  financial  sector  and  assist  in  IT 
systems audit and assessment. 
A related matter is the issue concerning customer liability and risk management for 
electronic  payment  transactions.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  soon  be  laying  down  the 
framework for customer liability in electronic payments. Banks have to necessarily 
build this aspect into their customer education and grievance handling processes. 
To  conclude,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  payments  revolution.  There  is  a  tremendous 
opportunity  for  us  to  solve  some  of  the  critical  problems  of  the  financial  system  such  as 
financial inclusion. However, opportunity also brings responsibility, and I am fully confident 
that the institutions represented here will rise to the challenge. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
