  Glenn Stevens: Summary of economic developments during 2015 and 
outlook for Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 12 February 2016. 
 Chair 
Members of the Committee 
Since the Committee’s previous meeting in September, we have continued to see evidence 
that  economic  activity  outside  the  resources  sector  has  been  gradually  improving.  The 
pattern  observed  six  months  ago  whereby  business  surveys  were  suggesting  improving 
conditions by and large continued through to the end of the year. 
Inevitably, this expansion is not uniform across the country or across industries. Areas that 
led the growth dynamic a few years ago are on the trailing edge now. Conversely, some that 
were subdued for a few years are among those leading growth today. 
But few, if any, expansions are completely even, either geographically or by industry. Given 
the  nature  of the  economic  events  through  which  we  have  been  living,  moreover,  it  is  not 
surprising  that  there  are  differences.  The  good  thing  is  that  there  are  strong  areas  to 
counteract the weak ones. 
The available information suggests that real GDP is expanding at pace a bit lower than what 
we used to think of as normal. Our estimate is that growth over the four quarters of 2015 was 
about  2½  per  cent.  This  continued  expansion  has  occurred  in  the  face  of  a  very  large 
contraction in capital spending in the mining sector, restrained public final spending and the 
reduction in national income coming from the declining terms of trade. It has been helped by 
easy monetary policy and the lower exchange rate. 
Notwithstanding below-average GDP growth, the demand for labour increased at an above 
average  pace  in  2015.  The  number  of  people  employed,  as  measured,  increased  by  well 
over  2 per  cent,  participation  in  the  labour  force  picked  up  and  the  rate  of  unemployment 
declined, to be below 6  per cent. That is a noticeably better outcome than we expected a 
year ago. 
This  poses  the  obvious  question  of  how,  with  apparently  still  somewhat  below-trend  GDP 
growth,  the  rate  of  unemployment  has  fallen.  And  whether  the  pattern  will  continue.  Of 
course, it may be that the labour force data overstate the strength. Alternatively they may be 
telling us something not yet apparent in the GDP estimates. More data may shed light on this 
question over time. 
Part  of  the  reconciliation  appears  to  be  that  growth  has  been  concentrated  somewhat  in 
labour-intensive areas, like certain household and business services. 
Another part of the reconciliation probably lies in the very modest pace of growth of labour 
costs. At any given rate of unemployment, wages growth appears to have been lower than 
would  have  been  expected  based  on  historical  relationships.  In  fact,  at  an  economy-wide 
level, unit labour costs – that is, wages per unit of aggregate output – have not risen for four 
years. This has surely helped employment. 
This same phenomenon is also important in understanding the behaviour of inflation, which 
has been quite low. As measured by the Consumer Price Index, inflation was 1.7 per cent 
over 2015. This was affected by falling prices for petrol and utilities, the latter in part due to 
government  policy  decisions.  But  even  the  underlying  measures,  which  remove  or 
down-weight such effects, at around 2 per cent, are low. Price rises for non-tradeable items 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  are at their lowest for many years, and this reflects, among other things, the modest growth 
of labour costs. 
In  summary  then,  the  economy  is  continuing  to  grow  at  a  modest  pace,  in  the  face  of 
considerable  adjustment  challenges.  It  has  apparently  been  generating  more  employment 
growth and lower unemployment than we expected, while inflation has remained quite low. 
Turning then to the rest of the world, there have been some key developments since we last 
met with the Committee. 
In  December,  the  United  States  Federal  Reserve  raised  its  policy  interest  rate for the first 
time in 9½ years. The last time the Fed actually started an upward phase in rates was as far 
back as 2004. The Fed’s rationale for this change was that the US economy had sufficient 
strength  that  a  zero  interest  rate  was  no  longer  needed  –  and,  as  such,  it  is  a  welcome 
development.  The  change  had  been  very  well  telegraphed  and  was  absorbed  by  financial 
markets without any immediate disruption. 
That  said,  US  dollar  funding  costs  are  important  to  many  financial  strategies  around  the 
world  and  when  they  start  to  increase,  however  gradually,  investors  adjust  their  positions. 
This had already been happening in anticipation of the Fed’s decision, with funds seeking to 
lessen their exposures to emerging markets, high-yield debt instruments and so on. 
These  adjustments  continued  subsequent  to  the  Fed  announcement.  For  some  emerging 
market  economies,  facing  lower  commodity  export  prices,  things  have  become  more 
challenging. 
At the same time, some other major jurisdictions have sought to ease their monetary policies 
further. Both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have pushed rates on some 
deposits at the central bank below zero. In other words, policy trajectories among the major 
jurisdictions  are  diverging,  which  creates  the  potential  for  market  movements,  not  least  in 
exchange rates. 
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy has become more of a concern for many observers. It is 
not that the actual data on the Chinese economy are all that different from what we had been 
seeing. They paint a picture of softness in growth – but they were already saying that some 
time ago. The more recent anxiety is probably best described as greater uncertainty over the 
intentions  of  Chinese  policymakers  and  over  whether  they  will  be  able  to  carry  off  the 
economic transition China needs. This anxiety has been reflected in capital flows. 
Commodity prices have generally fallen further over recent months. Most prominent was the 
further fall in crude oil prices to about US$30 per barrel. While this level of oil prices is not 
especially low in a longer-run historical context, it is a large decline from prices prevailing in 
recent years and is bringing considerable adjustment. Oil-producing companies and nations 
are seeing a decline in their incomes, and yields on debt issued by corporates in the energy 
sector  have  increased  sharply.  Exploration  expenditure  and  investment  in  new  capacity  is 
being rapidly curtailed. Sovereign asset managers for some key oil producers are liquidating 
some assets to help manage the effects on fiscal positions. 
As with most price changes, there are gainers as well as losers. The fall in energy costs is a 
windfall  to  energy  users  and  represents  a  terms  of  trade  gain  for  countries  that  are  net 
importers. Importantly, it does not appear to be the case that the fall has predominantly been 
caused by weak demand for oil. Indications are that oil demand has still been rising, albeit 
not as quickly as it had been. Supply increases appear to have been more important than 
demand  factors  in  explaining  the  large  price  fall,  at  least  thus  far.  Hence,  we  should  not 
interpret the decline in oil prices as uniformly negative. On the contrary, a fall in oil prices 
resulting from additional supply has usually been seen clearly as a bonus for consumers and 
many businesses in advanced economies, including Australia. 
In  financial  markets,  as  investors  and  traders  have  sought  to  make  sense  of  all  these 
conflicting currents, we have seen a period of volatility recently. This has been apparent in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
equity  and  bond  markets,  as  well  as  foreign  exchange  markets.  Equity  markets  are  lower, 
yields  for  core  sovereign  obligations  are  lower,  spreads  for  lower-rated  corporates  and 
emerging  market  sovereigns  are  wider.  Exchange  rates  have  seen  more  variability,  with 
currencies for many emerging market countries weaker. The Australian dollar is around the 
same  level  now  as  when  we  last  met  with  the  Committee,  though  commodity  prices  are 
lower. 
Looking  ahead,  forecasters  expect  a  bit  less  growth  in  the  global  economy  this  year  than 
they did a few months ago. Expectations for Australia’s trading partner group itself are for 
growth to be a bit below average, little changed from six months ago. Inflationary pressures 
globally look quite subdued. Global interest rates will still be very low, even if short-term rates 
move up a bit further in the United States. 
For Australia, the adjustment we have been experiencing for a couple of years now will most 
likely continue. The terms of trade are still falling. The fall in mining investment spending will 
continue for at least one more year, though it is probably having its most significant effect on 
the rate of growth now. Other areas of demand are expected to add to growth. The net effect 
of all this is likely to be continuing expansion at a moderate pace. 
One key question will be  whether the recent financial turbulence itself will have a material 
negative effect on aggregate demand – in Australia or abroad. I don’t expect that we will be 
able to answer that question for a little while yet. 
Another question is what the recent unexpected strength in the labour market means for the 
outlook. If it turns out that the strength is just temporary, then the outlook is still for moderate 
growth, but no near-term acceleration. If, on the other hand, recent trends were to continue, 
the income gains coming from higher employment may start to feed into stronger demand 
growth, which would probably lead in due course to higher levels of investment. Alternatively, 
if demand growth were to be in areas that require relatively little capital to support the labour 
employed, then the apparent weakness in capital spending outside mining could be of less 
concern anyway. 
As  usual,  there  are  many  questions  regarding  both  our  current  circumstances  and  the 
outlook.  At  its  recent  meetings,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  has  kept  the  stance  of  policy 
unchanged, with the cash rate at 2.0 per cent. We will be examining new information over the 
months ahead as we try to discern the answers to these and other questions. With inflation 
unlikely to cause a problem by being too high over the next year or two, the statement after 
the  recent  meeting  indicated  that  the  Board  retains  the  flexibility  to  ease  further,  should 
that be helpful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
