  Fernando Restoy: European banking sector – situation and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  based  on  the 
address delivered at the UIMP seminar “¿Qué hemos aprendido de la crisis?” (“What have 
we learned from the crisis?”), organised by the APIE (Association of Economics Journalists), 
Madrid, 17 June 2016. 
 Thank you, Miguel Ángel, for your introduction. As you know, it is a pleasure to be here once 
again  in  Santander,  participating  in  the  closure  of  the  seminar  organised  by  the  APIE 
(Association  of  Economics  Journalists)  at  the  Menéndez  Pelayo  International  University 
(UIMP). As always, I greatly appreciate having been invited to what has become a traditional 
event on the calendar. 
Some days back in the course of a meeting, a renowned economics practitioner told me how 
complex it can be for interested citizens to obtain a well-founded view of the situation of the 
Spanish banking system. This struck me as a very appropriate remark. Despite the extensive 
work  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  other  public  and  private  agencies  to  compile  and 
disseminate information and analysis on banks, it is not always easy to gain proper insight 
into the sector as a whole. 
That  is  why  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  today  to  offer  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the 
situation  and  outlook  for  Spanish  and  European  financial  institutions  in  the  context  of  the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  In  this  connection,  I  shall  first  briefly  review  the 
situation of the banking sector, focusing thereafter on the challenges banks will have to face 
in the short and medium term. I shall conclude with some brief thoughts on the ECB’s new 
supervisory framework. 
Recent developments in the banking sector 
1. 
In  recent  years,  and  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis,  banks  have  substantially  improved 
their solvency levels, largely as a result of the new regulatory and supervisory requirements. 
At  SSM-supervised  banks,  in  the  last  year  alone  their  highest-quality  (i.e.  CET1)  capital 
increased  on  average  by  70  bp,  from  12.7%  in  2014  to  13.4%  in  20151.  In  the  case  of 
Spanish banks, whose starting levels were somewhat lower, the increase exceeded 80 bp, 
making for an average of 12.5% of CET1 at end-2015. 
The profitability of the banking business, however, remains at low levels and, in any event, 
far  off  the  double-digit  figures  seen  before  the  crisis.  Among  SSM  banks  as  a  whole,  the 
return  on  equity  (ROE)  in  2015  was  slightly  below  5%,  whereas  in  Spain,  in  consolidated 
terms, it was scarcely 5.6%. 
Admittedly,  it  is  unusual  for  the  return  on  capital  to  stand  in  most  euro  area  countries  at 
levels below the average cost of capital, on estimates made by the Banco de España. In the 
case  of  Spanish  banks,  estimates of  the  cost of  capital stood  at  6.8%  in  December  2015, 
drawing close to levels of 8% in early 2016, as a result of the period of instability observed in 
financial markets. 
We  are  thus  in  an  environment  in  which  the  return  demanded  by  investors  is,  in  general, 
lower than that obtained by banks at present. And this despite the fact that the risk that the 
acquisition of bank shares entails should have lessened as a consequence of the reduction 
in banks’ leverage. 
                                                 
1   Average of SSM institutions according to Banco de España calculations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Naturally,  the  disappointing  performance  of  bank  profits  is  one  of  the  factors  behind  the 
decline in banks’ share prices in recent months which, across the board, stand significantly 
below their book value, as can be seen in Chart 1. This decline has been somewhat greater 
in the case of Spanish banks, although these continue to evidence a higher ratio than that of 
the main euro area banking systems. 
 
Chart 1 
PRICE TO BOOK VALUE RATIO OF THE BANKING SECTOR
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
June 2015
SPAIN
GERMANY
ITALY
EURO AREA
May 2016
FRANCE
EUROPE
SOURCE: Datastream.
  Challenges for the banking sector 
2. 
Several factors account for the low profitability of the banking business in Europe. 
Low interest rates 
2.1 
One of the main factors is the maintenance of interest rates at low levels which, along with 
the low level of economic activity, exerts downward pressure on banks’ net interest income. 
The  pressure  exerted  by  low  interest  rates  does  not  only  affect  Spanish  banks  but  is 
common to most European entities, albeit with differing intensity depending on balance sheet 
structure and the predominant type of banking business. 
Hence,  the  adverse  effect  on  profitability  of  interest  rates  holding  at  low  levels  is  all  the 
greater the higher the percentage of loans extended at a floating interest rate, the lower the 
percentage of  assets  recorded  at fair  value  or  the  greater  the  proportion  accounted  for  by 
deposits in the bank’s financing structure. That is to say, the current environment of low rates 
particularly  affects  the  traditional  banking  business  of  financial  intermediation,  namely  that 
which prevails in Spain. 
Additionally, it should be borne in mind that the impact of changes in interest rates on bank 
profitability  is  not  linear.  Any  reduction  in  interest  rates,  in  what  is  an  environment  with 
already  very  low  levels,  affects  bank  margins  with  particular  intensity.  Indeed,  the  work 
performed at the Banco de España shows (see Chart 2) that, for high levels of interest rates, 
a moderate reduction in the Euribor exerts a positive impact on net interest income, since the 
stimulus effect (quantity effect) exerted by lower rates on the demand for credit offsets the 
reduction  in  the  unit  return  on  the  loans  (price  effect).  However,  when  interest  rates  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
already very low, a decline in the Euribor is associated with a reduction in the interest margin 
(the price effect exceeds the quantity effect) as banks have less capacity to pass through the 
reduction in interest rates to retail deposits owing to their proximity to the zero-rate level. It is 
possible  that  these  non-linearities  may  be  exacerbated  when  interest  rates  move  into 
negative territory. 
 
Chart 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
That said, there are also factors that mitigate the impact of low interest rates on results. In 
particular, low interest rate levels contribute to reducing loan loss provisions, insofar as they 
are  conducive  to  a  decline  in  non-performing  loans.  This  mitigating  effect  is  particularly 
significant in Spain, owing to the prevalence of assets with floating rates on bank balance 
sheets. 
Non-performing loans 
2.2 
The second factor weighing down on bank profitability is the still-high level of non-productive 
assets on the balance sheets of banks located in specific countries, despite the continuing 
downtrend we have observed for some time. As can be seen in Chart 3, in some instances 
the NPL ratio exceeded levels of 15% in mid-2015. With its ratio at approximately 7%2, Spain 
stands only slightly above the euro area average, thanks to the reduction witnessed in the 
past two years. 
Nonetheless, the NPL ratio can be an imperfect indicator of the effect that non-productive or 
problem assets may have on a bank’s solvency, since it does not take into account the asset 
collateral or the provisions set aside. The so-called Texas ratio, an approximation to which is 
                                                 
2  According  to  data  for  Spain  from  the  EBA  2015  transparency  exercise  (consolidated  data,  significant 
institutions). With data for business in Spain, drawn from individual financial statements, the related ratio for 
the resident private sector in Spain stood at 10.4% in December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
illustrated in Chart 4, offers a much broader view in that it also includes in its calculation the 
provisions and capital available to the bank. 
 
 
Chart 4 
Chart 3 
NPL RATIO
TEXAS RATIO PROXY (a)
 30
25
20
15
10
5
0
UK
DE
FR
EU 
Avrg.
SSM 
Avrg. 
(a)
ES
PT
IT
IE
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
UK
DE
FR
EU 
Avrg.
ES SSM 
Avrg.
PT
IT
IE
DECEMBER 2014
JUNE 2015
DECEMBER 2014
JUNE 2015
SOURCE: European Banking Authority.
Transparency Exercise 2015 (104 institutions).
SOURCE: European Banking Authority. 
Transparency Exercise 2015 (104 institutions).
a. The SSM average includes data on 15 of the 19 euro area countries. No 
data for Greece, Slovakia, Estonia or Lithuania.
a. The ratio has been calculated dividing NPL by the sum of provisions
and capital (including equityinstruments eligibleas CET1 and reserves).
 
 
In any event, ensuring a suitable level of provisioning for problem assets is key to properly 
identifying impairments and correctly measuring the bank’s solvency. Moreover, a rigorous 
provisioning  review  policy  provides  banks  with  the  right  incentives  for  the  management  of 
their non-productive assets, since it reduces the book losses that the disposal of such assets 
may  generate.  This  is  only  achieved  with  stringent  accounting  regulations  and  strict 
supervision  of  asset  valuation  on  the  bank’s  balance  sheet  which,  as  you  are  aware,  has 
been  a  key  element  in  the  Banco  de  España’s  supervisory  strategy.  Indeed,  we  have 
recently  amended  the  accounting  Circular  to  which  banks  must  conform  in  order,  among 
other  purposes,  to  fine-tune  the  accounting  criteria  in  respect  of  provisioning  credit  risk 
losses.  Further,  for  some  time  we  have  been  actively  contributing  within  the  SSM  to 
developing a common methodology in this field encompassing best practices and ensuring 
their uniform application across all countries. 
Regulatory reform 
2.3 
The  ongoing  and  still  incomplete  reform  of  the  regulatory  framework  is  another  factor  of 
uncertainty that has affected banks’ share prices. 
With regard to the Basel Committee’s agenda, major headway has been made in reforming 
prudential  standards  and,  in  particular,  in  the  treatment  of  credit,  market  and  operational 
risks.  One  of  the  most  relevant  areas  of  work  under  way  seeks  to  correct  the  excessive 
variability of risk-weighted assets (the denominator of the capital ratio) prompted by the use 
of insufficiently homogeneous internal models. Such heterogeneity leads to inadequate risk 
measurement  and  generates  competitive  distortions,  harming  those  institutions  subject  to 
more demanding regimes of model supervision. 
The current challenge is to come up with a parameterisation of the new requirements that 
enables  risk  measurement 
increasing  capital 
requirements for the system as a whole, as this is one of the commitments announced by 
to  be  enhanced  without  significantly 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
global supervisory authorities, in order to hold prudential requirements at levels compatible 
with the pursuit of banking activity on a proper footing. 
Banks must also meet the requirements stemming from the new resolution regulations, which 
seek to minimise the need to use public funds to manage bank crises. In particular, under the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), significant institutions shall, in addition to 
meeting the established capital requirements, have a minimum volume of liabilities enabling 
losses  to  be  absorbed  should  it  be  necessary.  That  is  to  say,  they  shall  have  debt 
instruments  at  hand  that  may  be  converted  into  capital  if  they  experience  problems  of 
viability. 
These requirements will likely prove a binding restriction for some financial institutions. The 
issuance of these instruments may pose a challenge, especially for unlisted banks with little 
experience in the issuance of convertible instruments or of subordinated debt. This concerns 
a  quite  substantial segment  of  the  European  banking  sector.  Consider  that  almost  70%  of 
banks  supervised  by  the  SSM  have  not  issued  listed  shares,  59%  have  not  issued 
convertible  bonds  and  18%  do  not  have  subordinated  debt  on  their  balance  sheets  (see 
Chart 5). 
Many of these banks will foreseeably have to make adjustments to their business model, to 
align it to the change in size and composition of bank balance sheets required under the new 
regulations. 
Chart 5 
SSM SIGNIFICANT INSTITUTIONS 
BY OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
SOURCE: Banco de España
LISTED
COOP. and 
SAV.BANKS
STATE 
OWNED
NON-SSM 
PARENT
OTHER
•  59% have not 
issued any AT1 
instrument (e.g. 
convertible bonds)
•  18% have not 
issued any T2 
instrument
(e.g. subordinated 
debt)
 Possible responses by the banking sector 
3. 
Macroeconomic  and 
increasingly  widespread 
perception that there is excess capacity in the European banking industry that will heighten 
competition and  jeopardise  the  viability  of  those  institutions least  able  to  adapt  to  the  new 
environment. 
regulatory  developments  support 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Efficiency 
3.1 
Naturally, credit institutions’ first line of defence is to gain in efficiency. In recent years, as 
observed  in  Chart  6,  cost-to-income  ratios  across  the  European  industry  have  not 
appreciably  improved  in  the  different  banking  systems  and  they  remain  significantly 
heterogeneous. That suggests there is considerable room for improvement. 
Spanish banks, for their part, are in a relatively good position compared with their European 
counterparts, with a relatively high and growing degree of efficiency. In any event, it is also 
true  that  office  density,  despite  falling  in  recent  years,  remains  high,  especially  when 
compared with that of other European countries (see Chart 7). 
In  this  area,  new  technological  developments  should  allow  further  gains  in  efficiency  by 
providing for proximity to customers and for the marketing of products via means other than 
face-to-face contact. 
Chart 6 
Chart 7 
  New products and services 
3.2 
The second foreseeable response by the industry to the narrowing of financial margins is the 
search for income supplementing that from the traditional commercial banking business. 
Net fee income relating to services (management or transactional), as a proportion of total 
operating income, has been on a slightly rising trend in most countries. In the current setting, 
it  appears  this  trend  is  reflecting  a  lesser  propensity  of  banks  to  subsidise  certain 
transactional services with a charge to net interest income. 
That said, fee-generating business is subject to growing competition owing to the emergence 
of new unlicensed bank competitors, which have demonstrated ample ability to harness the 
new  technologies  (the  so-called  fintech  companies).  These  new  competitors  specialise  in 
specific  segments  of  the  services  value  chain,  services  that  in  the  past  were  exclusively 
provided by banks, without being subject to banking regulation requirements. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Unquestionably, this scenario of new technologies and new emerging competitors poses a 
challenge  to  the  traditional  banking  business.  However,  technical  progress  is  also  an 
opportunity  for  the  more  dynamic  banks  to  generate  efficiency  and  to  extend  the  services 
provided to their customers. 
For  instance,  banks  are  proving  very  adept  at  developing  instant  payment  services.  And 
some of them might be well-positioned to develop direct lending facilities (P2P) competing 
with the new non-bank operators (e.g. crowdfunding). Banks retain advantages in terms of 
experience,  market  roots  and  the  ability  to  offer  a  full  range  of  transactional  and 
intermediation services which should help them face competition which, nonetheless, will be 
increasingly intense. 
In our capacity as regulators and supervisors, we should seek to strike a balance between 
facilitating technical progress, supporting the development of new products and services, and 
properly safeguarding customers and financial stability. 
Consolidation 
3.3 
Finally,  orderly  correction  of  the  excess  capacity  in  the  banking  industry  will  foreseeably 
require greater consolidation in the sector. I spoke to you about this exactly a year ago in this 
same  forum  and  I  believe  that  since  then  the  view  that  such  a  process  is  becoming 
increasingly likely has become widespread. 
Ideally,  consolidation  should  take  place  at  the  European  level,  in  order  to  overcome  the 
strictly  domestic  vocation  of  the  overwhelming  majority  of  banks.  The  existence  of  more 
banks  with  a  pan-European  outlook  would  amount  to  a  private  national  risk  pooling 
mechanism  that  would  help  weaken  the  link  between  the  macroeconomic  risks  existing  in 
each country and the stability of its banking system, adding robustness to the monetary and 
banking union. 
It is therefore important to identify and attempt to eliminate those obstacles that continue to 
hinder  such  banking  consolidation  in  Europe,  in  spite  of  the  establishment  of  the  banking 
union. In particular, we must consider whether regulation and supervisory practices tend to 
unduly penalise geographical diversification of a bank’s business. 
It would also be desirable to ascertain whether the current structure of the industry in various 
countries,  characterised  by  the  existence  of  numerous  banks  that  are  not  listed  public 
companies  and  that  maintain  strong  links  with  national  business  sectors,  hampers  the 
participation of foreign competitors, whether directly or through acquisitions. 
All told, in the short or medium term it is likely that the need to continue reducing costs will 
encourage bank mergers and acquisitions within each country in order to harness potential 
economies  of  scale.  In  the  largest  European  countries,  there  would  seem  to  be  room  for 
more consolidation. In fact, in many countries the level of concentration in the industry, as 
measured  by  the  Herfindahl-Hirschman  index,  is  below  that  which  might  be  considered  to 
pose a possible threat to competition (see Chart 8). 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Chart 8 
  
 
Accordingly, the European banking industry is facing important challenges arising from the 
new  macroeconomic  environment,  which  is  not  conducive  to  income  generation,  and  from 
regulatory  reform  which,  in  order  to  protect  financial  stability,  is  introducing  new  rules  and 
safeguards that restrict the risk transformation business. 
As  a  result,  there  is  a  need  for  banks  to  adapt  their  business  models  and  corporate 
strategies, and this will undoubtedly affect the structure of the sector. 
The role of the supervisor is not, generally, to impose specific strategic action, which should 
be  determined  by  the  banks  themselves.  Rather  it  is  a  matter  of  facilitating  the  process 
maintaining the required supervisory standards and, thereby, offering incentives so that the 
right decisions are made at the right time and in an orderly fashion, always for the benefit of 
the shareholders, which almost always contributes to the sector’s stability. 
Allow me to conclude by briefly mentioning the banking union. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
4. 
The supervisory framework in Europe has been significantly strengthened by the setting up 
of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  Barely  a  year  and  a  half  after  it  started  to 
function, it has succeeded in putting into operation a supervisory model consistent with the 
most  demanding  standards.  As  the  result  of  the  action  taken  following  the  analysis  of  the 
banking  sector  conducted  in  2014,  the  SSM  has  led  to  an  appreciable  increase  in  the 
sector’s  capital  and  has  prompted  the  most  vulnerable  banks  to  start  cleaning  up  their 
balance sheets. 
The SSM has also shown itself capable of participating effectively in the resolution of crisis 
episodes, like the one involving Greek banks. 
Moreover, the SSM has managed to eliminate many of the national regulatory particularities, 
has created a common methodology for the supervisory review of all banks and has made 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
significant progress in harmonising inspection practices by drafting and developing a manual 
of common procedures. 
At the operational level, in record time, joint supervisory teams have been put in place for 
each  significant  institution  and  an  ambitious  programme  of  on-site  inspections  has  been 
developed.  All  these  actions  have  been  carried  out  within  a  framework  of  cooperation 
between national authorities and the European Central Bank which is, generally, functioning 
appropriately. Naturally, the fact that almost 100 employees of the Banco de España have 
been recruited to the ECB’s supervisory arm, making it the national authority that the ECB 
has most relied on to cover its supervisory staff requirements, is something to be proud of, 
although it is also an organisational challenge. 
Given  the  complexity  of  the  project,  which  includes  coordinating  the  staff  of  19  national 
supervisors plus the ECB, and the short time that the SSM has existed, there is obviously still 
room for improvement. That said, there is also palpable determination on the part of those 
responsible for the SSM and its Supervisory Board (on which we participate) to continuously 
review  the  arrangements  and  processes  used  in  order  to  promote  its  improvement  when 
needed, counting on the conscientious contribution of all supervisory staff. 
In  sum,  as  a  national  supervisory  authority,  we  can  only  congratulate  ourselves  on  the 
impetus the banking union is giving to the institutional strengthening of the euro area and on 
its role in preserving financial stability. We also positively value our contribution (through our 
staff and experience) to the effective operation of the SSM and ongoing improvement in its 
procedures and supervisory arrangements. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
