   Mohammed Laksaci: Impact of the oil price decline on the Algerian 
banking system 
Keynote address by Mr Mohammed Laksaci, Governor of the Bank of Algeria, at a meeting 
with bank executives, Algiers, 26 April 2016. 
 I would first like to point out that in terms of external shocks, the Algerian economy, which is 
closely  linked  to  hydrocarbon  sector  resources,  has  particularly  suffered  from  the  shock 
inherent to the sharp and sustained fall in world oil prices. It is therefore from this perspective 
that I start my presentation. I shall talk first of the macroeconomic implications of this external 
shock, before outlining its impacts from the perspective of financial stability, in light of the new 
challenges for the banking system in the financing of non-hydrocarbon growth.  
1.   Macro-economic stance  
Economic and financial performance during 2001-2008, particularly the significantly improved 
external  financial  position  and  a  substantial  accumulation  of  budget  savings,  enabled  the 
Algerian economy to demonstrate resilience in the face of the severe external shock in 2009 
inherent to the intensification of the international economic and financial crisis. Following the 
strengthening of the external financial position over 2010-2013, Algeria continued to preserve 
monetary and financial stability during 2014, in a context of persistent fiscal deficit and a return 
to a balance of payments deficit. The impact of the oil price decline on the Algerian economy 
can be examined through the main recent economic and financial developments.  
First,  following  the  sharp  decline  of  hydrocarbon  prices  in  2014,  the  large  contraction  of 
hydrocarbon exports in 2015, in a context of still high imports after the significant increase of 
imports of goods over the period 2007-2014, resulted in a high external current account deficit 
(-16.4 percent of GDP). With hydrocarbons remaining Algeria’s main export, the external shock 
resulted in a significant contraction in international reserves, from US$ billion 179 in 2014 to 
US$ billion 144 in 2015. Nonetheless, this level remains comfortable, representing 27 months 
of  imports  of  goods  and  services,  in  a  situation  of  historically  low  medium  and  long  term 
external  debt  (1.8  percent  of  GDP)  and  the  absence  of  any  external  indebtedness  of  the 
hydrocarbon sector for more than a decade.  
Second, the exchange rate of the dinar vis-à-vis the US dollar depreciated by 20 percent in 
2015,  while  it  depreciated  by  only  3.8  percent  vis-à-vis  the  euro.  In  view  of  the  large 
depreciation of Algeria’s main partners’ currencies, the real effective exchange rate of the dinar 
remains close to its equilibrium level. Therefore, the exchange rate played, to a large extent, 
its  role  as  an  external  shock  absorber,  reflecting  its  flexibility,  supported  by  the  Bank  of 
Algeria’s interventions in the interbank exchange market.  
Third, as a result of the sharp contraction in fiscal oil revenue and the expansion of public 
spending,  the  fiscal  deficit  rose  to  16  percent  of  GDP  in  2015  from  7.3  percent  in  2014. 
However, public debt has remained historically low, representing 13.6 percent of GDP at end 
2015.  
Fourth, the significant reduction in the Treasury’s financing capacity in 2014 and 2015 is well 
reflected in the aggregate monetary survey, with the Treasury becoming a net borrower in 
2015 vis-à-vis the banking system for the first time in many years. On the other hand, the 
decline  in  net  external  assets  and  the  significant  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  credits  to  the 
economy  more  than  offset  the  reversal  of  the  Treasury’s  net  position.  Overall,  monetary 
expansion, as measured by M2 growth, was only 0.12 percent in 2015, the lowest rate ever, 
mainly reflecting the magnitude of the impact of the oil price decline. Excluding hydrocarbon 
sector deposits, the money supply increased by 2.8 percent.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The credits to deposits ratio rose from 69.5 percent by end 2013 to 74.7 percent by end 2014 
and 86.7 percent by end 2015, indicating a decline in the surplus of banks’ collected resources 
compared to extended credits. The evolution of credits, in particular medium and long term 
credits, in a situation of stable deposits, is the main factor explaining the decline in the public 
banks’  short  term  liquidity  ratio.  Deposits  in  the  banking  sector,  which  rose  in  2013  (7.5 
percent) and 2014 (17.5 percent), slightly declined in 2015 (-0.2 percent) as a result of the 
sharp contraction in the deposits of the hydrocarbon sector (-41 percent). Consequently, the 
banking sector’s liquidity, in excess since 2002, declined gradually during 2015 to reach dinar 
billion 1833 by the end of the year (a decline of 33 percent), after relative stability in 2014 (dinar 
billion 2731 by end 2014).  
With a milder recession in the hydrocarbon sector in 2014 and an upturn as of 2015, economic 
activity  strengthened  during  these  two  years  despite  the  external  shock.  Growth  was  3.8 
percent and 3.9 percent respectively (2.8 percent in 2013) and inflation rose from 2.9 percent 
in 2014 to 4.8 percent in 2015.  
To face the external shock and the resulting drop in fiscal oil revenue, the Government initiated 
a  programme  of  spending  rationalisation  in  2015,  notably  through  the  prioritisation  of 
investment projects. In 2016 fiscal consolidation further included a relatively low reduction in 
current  expenditure  (-3.3  percent)  and  a  more  substantial  reduction  in  capital  spending 
(-16 percent), totalling a 9 percent reduction in public spending. Furthermore, the 2016 budget 
includes an upward adjustment of the tax on energy products (petroleum, diesel, electricity and 
gas). This is aiming at reducing public finances’ vulnerability to oil price decline and lies within 
the strategic objective of ensuring medium term fiscal sustainability. Moving ahead, the gradual 
fiscal adjustment should also rely on increasing non-hydrocarbon revenue.  
Impact on financial stability  
2.  
Like other central banks, the Bank of Algeria faced the need to strengthen the surveillance of 
systemic  risk,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  volatility  of  hydrocarbon  prices  in  international 
markets  and  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  within  the  banking  sector.  To 
address these concerns, banking legislation, as amended in 2010, has extended the central 
bank’s mandate to include the objective of financial stability.  
With this amendment, the financial stability mandate becomes of equal importance to the price 
stability  mandate.  In  practice,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to 
monetary and financial stability in Algeria is crucial in view of the dominance of the banking 
sector in the financial system and its potentially important role in the development of financial 
intermediation. This contribution is of particular importance in the context of persistent excess 
liquidity in the money market since 2002.  
To strengthen the operational framework of financial stability, and following the introduction, in 
2010, of new accounting rules of international standard, risk assessment rules with regard to 
new financial products and the introduction, in 2011, of new regulations regarding liquidity risk 
identification, measurement, management and control, the Council of Money and Credit (the 
monetary authority) promulgated in 2014 a new prudential framework to ensure conformity of 
the  prudential  rules  to  the  new  Basle  norms  and  standards.  Within  this  new  regulatory 
framework, the minimum tier one capital adequacy ratio is set at 9.5 percent, exceeding the 
minimum  ratio  recommended  by  the  Basle  Committee,  and  the  adequacy  ratio,  based  on 
regulatory equity, is set at 12 percent.  
An assessment of financial soundness indicators at end 2015 shows that the Algerian banking 
sector soundness is relatively well preserved despite the boom phase of the credit cycle in the 
context of the ongoing external shock.  
Capital adequacy ratios remained comfortable in 2015, standing at 14.5 percent in relation to 
tier one capital and 17 percent in relation to regulatory equity. The quality of banks’ capital, 
essentially comprising tier one capital, and the substantial increase in the required minimum 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   capital  for  banks  and  financial  institutions,  implemented  in  December  2009,  significantly 
contributed to maintaining financial soundness indicators at a comfortable level. By end 2015, 
the banking system remained well capitalised and profitable. Return on equity and on assets 
strengthened to 24.6 percent and 2.2 percent respectively, in a situation of still comfortable 
liquidity. However, the acuity of the impact of the external shock in terms of banking liquidity 
contraction, following its relative stability in 2014, is such that some banks no longer met the 
requirements  in  terms  of  short  term  liquidity  ratio  in  2015.  Medium  and  long  term  credit 
expansion, in a situation of a small reduction in collected deposits, is the main factor explaining 
the decline in public banks’ short term liquidity ratio to below the regulatory ratio of 100 percent.  
The oil price decline has engendered new challenges to financial stability in Algeria, notably 
with regard to the substantial impact on the balance of payments, which affects the external 
financial position and weighs on external financial stability, even if the banking sector has no 
external debt and is only marginally impacted by depreciation of the dinar, as banks can only 
have limited open foreign exchange positions.  
The  resilience  of  the  Algerian  banking  system  to  the  external  shocks  in  2014  and  2015, 
supported by banks’ still comfortable financial soundness indicators, calls for more efficient 
resource  allocation,  notably  to  benefit  productive  investment.  In  view  of  the  low  levels  of 
banking intermediation, the bank credit channel remains potentially important in financing non-
hydrocarbon potential growth, as it places less dependency on the budget in the medium term.  
Based on audits of the banks, a wide stress testing exercise has been recently completed, 
allowing the assessment of the resilience of the banking sector in the face of recent economic 
developments.  In  the  context  of  strengthening  bank  supervision,  the  new  approach,  more 
prospective and risk-based, will be more focused on the process of banks’ credit allocation 
with a view to containing both the re-emergence of risk concentration and increase in non-
performing loans. In the pursuit of this objective, the Bank of Algeria will use all of the available 
data provided by the new credit bureau, which complies with the international standards and 
was fully implemented in September 2015.  
Given the expected reversal of the liquidity cycle during 2016, the role of the Bank of Algeria 
as  a  lender  of  last  resort,  following  fourteen  years  of  structural  excess  liquidity,  will  be 
reactivated in the second half of the year to refinance the banking sector. This will contribute 
to the activation of the role of interest rates as a transmission channel of monetary policy, in 
the context of an active interbank money market. To mitigate the liquidity stress some banks 
are starting to face, the Bank of Algeria may reduce the reserve requirement rate, which now 
stands at 12 percent.  
In this situation of external shock coupled with an emerging acceleration of the credit cycle, 
the use of macro-prudential tools will support the conduct of monetary policy, itself being in 
transition as of 2016, with credit risk remaining the main risk to financial stability in the medium 
term.  
Finally, the role of the committee on financial stability will shortly be strengthened, notably with 
regard to the regular assessment of banks’ financial soundness using relevant indicators and 
stress tests. This will be supported by a strengthening of the Bank of Algeria’s capacities in 
conducting macro-prudential policy.  
3.   Transition to a new investment financing pattern  
In the context of structural excess savings over investment, which characterised the period 
2000-2013, the structure of investment financing in Algeria during 2008-2014 showed a very 
high level of self-financing (84 percent), particularly with regard to the Government’s and the 
national oil company’s investments.  
Investment in the economy (excluding the hydrocarbon sector) has also been, to a large extent, 
self-financed (59.7 percent over 2008-2014), while the financial savings of private firms and 
households have significantly increased. In particular, the years 2010 and 2011 recorded a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   substantial  increase  in  self-financing  (71.4  percent  and  24.1  percent  respectively),  which 
contributed to the significant recovery of investments in the non-hydrocarbon sectors. In the 
meantime, the relative share of medium and long term domestic bank credit in the financing of 
investments in the productive non-hydrocarbon sectors increased substantially between 2012 
and 2014, up from 38.4 percent to 45.2 percent.  
Reflecting dynamic medium and long term bank financing, credit to the economy recorded 
strong growth in 2013 (20.3 percent) and 2014 (26.1 percent), following already high growth in 
2012 (15.1 percent). Improved credit conditions, together with Government support measures 
with regard to credit to SMEs, which improved their access to bank credit as of 2010, have 
contributed to the sustained expansion of overall credits to the private sector, which recorded 
an average annual growth rate of 19.4 percent over the period 2001–2014. In the context of a 
greater  expansion  of  credits  to  the  economy  during  the  past  two  years,  particularly  in  real 
terms, the net flow of credits to private enterprises has mainly consisted of medium and long 
term credits extended to finance investment. Overall, excluding credits repurchased by the 
Treasury, bank credits to the private sector (enterprises and households) stood at dinar billion 
3120 by end 2014, with the share of medium and long term credits increasing from 62.3 percent 
by end 2013 (61.3 percent by end 2012) to 64.3 percent.  
The dynamism of bank credit to the economy, mainly for the benefit of private enterprises, 
clearly reflects the improvement in the financing structure and conditions as a result of the 
measures  taken  by  the  Government  to  boost  medium  and  long  term  credits  to  the  private 
sector, notably measures implemented in 2013 to facilitate SMEs’ access to bank credit. In 
parallel,  banks  improved  information  provided  to  SMEs  on  required  investment  credit 
documentation and made notable progress in reducing processing times.  
After fourteen years of savings surplus, 2014 and 2015 recorded a cycle reversal. The drastic 
oil price fall as of mid-2014 resulted in a widening savings-investment gap. Six years after the 
international  economic  and  financial  crisis,  the  Algerian  economy,  like  other  oil  exporting 
countries, has been affected by the resource contraction as of 2015. However, credits to the 
economy  continued  to  expand  (15.9  percent  in  2015),  mainly  for  the  benefit  of  private 
enterprises.  
Despite  the  significant  excess  liquidity  contraction  in  2015  and  the  re-emergence  of  the 
crowding out effect in 2016, bank credit remains a potentially important channel in financing 
productive  investment.  This  highlights  the  importance  of  effective  bank  intermediation  to 
benefit inclusive, non-hydrocarbon growth, with the objective of attaining in the medium term 
a target ratio of investment financing and SME loans to non-hydrocarbon GDP. To this end, 
and in parallel with the gradual development of the financial market, banks should diversify 
their financing tools whilst pursuing their efforts in improving credit risk analysis, monitoring 
and control. The new credit bureau will be most helpful in this regard. Banks should also further 
develop  their  advisory  activity  for  SMEs,  particularly  with  regard  to  investment  projects 
analysis.  
To  bolster  the  new  financing  scheme  of  non-hydrocarbon  growth,  where  the  recourse  to 
external  borrowing  should  be  gradual,  banks  must  expand  their  medium  and  long  term 
resources through the promotion of attractive financial products, notably in terms of real returns 
for savers. The substantial level of currency in circulation (30 percent of GDP in 2015) provides 
a valuable opportunity to improve banking intermediation during this period of a resources gap. 
To reduce the impact of the crowding out effect associated with the Treasury’s financing needs 
as of 2016, in a context of significant contraction in the hydrocarbon sector’s self-financing 
capacity, the Bank of Algeria will provide liquidity to the economy to stimulate the dynamism 
of sound credits, whilst preserving the sustainability of the net external position. This is dictated 
by the need to strengthen growth potential.  
Achieving the non-hydrocarbon growth potential will rely on productive investment, notably in 
the private sector, in a context of continued public investment programme implementation at 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   an  appropriate  pace,  given  the  constraints  imposed  by  the  acuity  and  persistence  of  the 
external shock.  
The  development  and  dissemination  of  economic  information  for  the  benefit  of  economic 
agents,  particularly  SMEs,  is key  to  better  investment  orientation.  In  particular,  appropriate 
ministerial departments should focus on promoting advisory structures to improve the provision 
of accurate information on investment sectors and markets.  
Sustained improvement in the business environment is crucial to boost the private sector’s 
contribution  to  high  and  inclusive  non-hydrocarbon  growth.  In  this  regard,  improving 
investment  effectiveness  and  increasing  its  impact  on  employment  should  be  a  strategic 
objective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
