  Mark Carney: Opening remarks to the “Empowering productivity: 
harnessing the talents of women in financial services” report launch 
Opening remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the 
Financial Stability Board, at the Gadhia Review launch, Bank of England, London, 22 March 
2016. 
 Good morning and welcome to the Bank of England. It’s a pleasure for us to host the launch 
of  the  “Empowering  productivity:  harnessing  the  talents  of  women  in  financial  services” 
report. 
A series of transformations are sweeping financial services. 
First, since the crisis, a comprehensive series of reforms have strengthened the resilience of 
banks.  Capital  requirements  are  now  seven  times  the  old  standards  for  most  banks.  For 
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), they are more than ten times higher. For UK 
banks, liquid asset holdings have tripled. Trading assets are down by a third and inter-bank 
exposures have shrunk by two thirds. 
Second,  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  exposed  serious  deficiencies  in  the  conduct  of  many 
market participants. 
Now, the tide of ethical drift is being reversed and trust in our institutions is beginning to be 
rebuilt as a result of the conclusion of the Fair and Effective Markets Review, the launch of 
the Banking Standards Board and the FICC Markets Standards Board, as well as the start of 
the Senior Managers Regime, and the embedding of new compensation regimes that better 
align rewards with risks taken. 
Third, the disruptive possibilities of the fintech revolution are beginning to touch the core of 
the financial sector. 
Now it is time for a similar transformation of the diversity of one of the most important sectors 
of the UK economy. 
In  many  respects,  Jayne-Anne  Gadhia’s  report  is  long  overdue.  For  too  long  the 
representation of women in middle and senior tiers of management has lagged that in other 
leading sectors. 
For too long, results have fallen short of good intentions. 
And  for  too  long  the  financial  sector  has  suffered  the  economic  consequences  of  this 
inequality while society has borne the broader costs. 
Greater  diversity  –  in  all  its  forms,  cognitive,  gender,  background,  ethnicity,  religion  –  can 
help transform the financial sector. 
Research  has  shown  that  companies  with  a  significant  proportion  of  women  in  senior 
management  positions  perform  better  in  part  because  of  some  leadership  behaviours  that 
women exhibit more consistently than their male colleagues.1 
In  particular,  women  are  found  to  excel  at  people  development,  participative  decision 
making,  presenting  a  compelling  vision  and  acting  as  role  models  –  all  drivers  of financial 
performance.2 
                                                
1  http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters.  
2  https://hbr.org/2012/03/a-study-in-leadership-women-do. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Research  on  board  membership  has  also  shown  that  female  directors  enhance  board 
independence, partly because women bring different perspectives and networks to the table, 
and partly because they are more likely to ask difficult questions.3 There is also evidence of a 
point of critical mass – when there are at least 3 out of 10 women on the board.4 
And it’s well established that diversity encourages debate, leading to more creative thinking, 
and  that  heterogeneous  teams  are  more  successful  at  solving  complex  tasks,  particularly 
when people have a shared goal.5 
Almost all decisions in finance are taken under uncertainty. Even if there is a range of known 
plausible outcomes, distributions of these outcomes are unknown. This makes it especially 
important  that  decision  makers  are  exposed  to  a  range  of  views,  with  open  debate  that 
includes perspectives that challenge prevailing wisdom. 
Moreover, when there are judgment-based responsibilities – such as assessing appropriate 
values and conduct – diversity is crucial. 
The value of diversity permeates organisations. 
Sustained  emphasis  on  diversity  in  hiring  and  development  programs  promotes  improved 
values throughout an institution and acts as a catalyst to sustained behavioural change. 
In  its  first  report  on  diversity  and  inclusion  published  in  November,  the  BBA  highlighted 
progress in the banking sector, driven in part by the Davies Review and important industry 
initiatives like the 30% Club.6 
Encouragingly,  the  proportion  of  FTSE  100  female  board  directors  has  risen  from  12%  in 
2007  to  26%  in October  2015. The  BBA  rightly  stressed,  however,  that more  needs to  be 
done  to  raise  the  number  of  female  senior  managers,  and,  more  generally,  tackle  the 
reputation of the industry for “pinstripes and braces”. 
That  is  why  Jayne-Anne  Gadhia’s  report,  brimming  with  practical  recommendations,  is 
potentially so valuable. To be clear, the report’s recommendations are voluntary, they are not 
regulatory  requirements.  It  is  for  institutions  themselves  to  determine  how  best  to  take 
forward  the  findings.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  leadership  of  those  here 
today who are committing to implement the steps recommended. 
The principles, values and recommendations of the Report are familiar to us at the Bank of 
England.  Two  years  ago,  with  the  launch  of  our  strategic  plan,  we  made  “diverse  and 
talented”  a  central  pillar  of  our  efforts  to  promote  the  good  of  the  people  of  the  United 
Kingdom. 
We recognised that, as a public institution, our workforce should reflect the diversity of this 
country. We saw that given our broad range of new powers and tremendous responsibilities, 
we needed to work more effectively and collaboratively across all aspects of One Bank. And 
we  concluded  that  we  needed  to  be  more  diverse  and  open  to  different  ideas  and  strong 
internal challenge, not only to avoid the dangers of groupthink, but also to harness the best 
from all of our people. 
Our focus on building diversity is paying off. 
In June 2013 we had no women deputy governors and just one female Executive Director. 
Today,  two  out  of  five  Deputy  Governors,  and  four  out  of  sixteen  Executive  Directors  are 
                                                
3  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31480/11-745-women-on-
boards.pdf. 
4  http://www.catalyst.org/system/files/why_diversity_matters_catalyst_0.pdf. 
5  http://www.catalyst.org/system/files/why_diversity_matters_catalyst_0.pdf.  
6  https://www.bba.org.uk/news/reports/diversity-and-inclusion-in-banking/#.Vu_NbXJxqUk. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Focussed recruiting 
Active mentoring 
Consistent and comprehensive performance management, and 
A flexible work environment that values diversity of thought 
women. Within our senior management cohort, female representation has gone from 21% to 
27%, and our graduate intake has gone from 26% female to 34%. 
The direction of travel is encouraging, but we are far from satisfied. Diversity will remain a 
key pillar of the Bank’s strategy. Our goal is to attract and inspire the best people to public 
service. We want people with diverse ideas, willing to challenge and debate, and we want 
them to feel empowered at all levels, to take the initiative. 
To support these objectives, we have introduced diversity targets that for the first time are 
reviewed and challenged regularly by Court. We have two Bank-wide targets for gender. 
The  first  is for  35%  of  our  senior  management  staff  to  be  female  by  2020;  a  two  thirds 
increase from its 2013 level. The second is to have an equal split of men and women in the 
organisation at all levels below senior management by 2020 (from our current 44%). 
But achieving these goals isn’t just going to happen. It requires: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Today, each division of the Bank knows where it stands and has plans in place to improve, 
where  necessary.  So  in  this  sense,  the  Bank  has  implemented  two  of  the  Report’s 
recommendations. 
The  Bank  has  also  recognised  the  importance  of  executive  accountability  for  diversity, 
another  key  recommendation  of  Jayne-Anne  Gadhia’s  report.  Charlotte  Hogg,  our  COO, 
oversees the Bank-wide diversity initiatives under our Senior Managers’ responsibilities. 
The Bank’s commitment to diversity cascades through the organisation. Our diversity goals 
now  form  an  explicit  part  of  the  objectives  of  each  Executive  and  the  management  of 
individual directorates. 
Our recruitment process is open and transparent to all, including for senior appointments. 
The Bank has also been focussing heavily on how to create the right environment to achieve 
these  targets.  We  are  looking  closely  at  what  drives  performance,  differentiates  talent, 
motivates the right behaviours, and creates barriers to success. 
We have made a strong commitment to flexible working at all levels of the organisation. Over 
11%  of  our  staff  are  employed  on  a  formalised  flexible  working  arrangement.  In  a  recent 
survey, almost two thirds felt that they had a good balance between their work and personal 
life. Encouragingly three quarters believe that the Bank takes diversity seriously. 
Our Women in the Bank network set up a mentoring programme, which is now in its second 
year.  This  is  complimented  by  the  work  of  some  of  our  other  thriving  staff  networks  –  our 
Bank  of  England  Ethnic  Minority  (BEEM)  network  for  example  has  established  a  “building 
bridges”, reciprocal mentoring programme – designed to foster relationships, networks and 
understanding  between  senior  management  and  more  junior  BAME  colleagues.  We  also 
have  an  LGBT  network  working  hard  to  promote  understanding,  increase  awareness  and 
break down barriers. 
Our broader leadership training programme emphasises unconscious bias training to ensure 
diversity can flourish and progress. 
This training  is  part  of  our  broader focus  on  values.  Values  count  heavily  when  assessing 
performance and reward. All managers – including myself – are assessed by colleagues on 
their values and behaviours – with direct and explicit feedback. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  We are monitoring the effect of all of these changes, including through regular staff surveys. 
We  are  aiming  for  further  significant  improvement  in  how  our  staff  perceive  the  Bank’s 
support for diversity initiatives and goals over the next two years. 
There  is  more  to  do  to  reach  our  medium-term  target,  but  we  are  encouraged  by  the 
momentum  that  we’ve  established,  we  believe  we  have  the  right  plan  in  place,  and  are 
heartened to see that our approach chimes with the conclusions in today’s report. 
Finally, we are conscious that sustained effort across the financial service sector will be self-
reinforcing; we will all benefit from each other’s progress. 
So without further ado, I will pass over to the Economic Secretary to the Treasury so that she 
may tell you more about the Report and the broader initiative it supports. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
