  Javier Guzmán Calafell: Global divergences - implications for Latin 
America 
Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 2016 
Institute of International Finance (IIF) Latin America Economic Forum, organized by the IIF 
with  the  sponsorship  of  Mercantil  Servicios  Financieros,  during  the  session  on  “Global 
divergences – implications for Latin America”, Nassau, Bahamas, 9 April 2016. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal.   
Let me start by thanking the organizers for the kind invitation to participate in this interesting 
discussion. 
While  different  paths for  the  main macroeconomic  and financial  variables  across  countries 
and regions are a normal characteristic of the world economy, divergence has become one 
of the major subjects of concern more recently. The most important feature in this regard is 
the observed and expected decoupling of monetary conditions and policy cycles in the main 
advanced economies, with the United States having recently initiated a rate hiking phase, on 
the  one  hand,  and  Japan  and  the  Euro  Area  still  implementing  ultra-accommodative 
monetary policies with the perspective of further easing, on the other.  
Monetary  policy  divergence  in  the  advanced  economies  is  the  ordinary  result  of  different 
economic  cycles  and  the  efforts  of  the  corresponding  central  banks  to  comply  with  their 
mandates.  In  fact,  as  would  be  natural  to  expect,  divergence  has  been  a  frequent  trait  of 
previous  policy  cycles  in  advanced  economies.  To  the  extent  that  these  policies  are 
implemented efficiently and as required by current and expected conditions, they should be 
beneficial  for  the  world  economy.  Furthermore,  unsynchronized  economic  and  monetary 
policy cycles in advanced economies would in principle tend to make life easier for emerging 
market economies, since some of the negative spillovers could be at least partially offset.  
With  this  in  mind,  why  is  divergence  such  a  source  of  anxiety  this  time?  In  my  view,  the 
answer lies in a combination of factors. 
First,  monetary  policies  in  advanced  economies  have  major  spillover  effects.  In  particular, 
asynchronous  monetary  policies  have  important  implications  for  the  behavior  of  exchange 
and interest rates in these countries and, given their systemic role at the global scale, in the 
rest of the world. The accompanying volatility in asset prices and capital flows is accentuated 
by  the  presence  of  financial  market  imperfections.  The  situation  looks  even  more 
complicated when the insufficient understanding of global monetary policy spillovers is taken 
into consideration. 
Second, with globalization and in particular the push for less restricted capital movements in 
many  economies,  cross-border  financial  linkages  and  therefore  international  spillovers  of 
monetary policy in the advanced economies have increased. For instance, in a recent study 
the BIS concludes that the sensitivity of emerging market local currency yields to bond yields 
in the US has accentuated over time, with potential of spillovers from US long-term Treasury 
bonds larger at the end of 2015 than during the “taper tantrum”.1  
Third, in a situation of global uncertainty resulting from concerns about the strength of the 
world economy, subdued world trade, low commodity prices, tightening international financial 
conditions, and problems of a geopolitical nature, among others, the volatility of capital flows 
and unease about the implications for exchange and interest rates resulting from monetary 
policy divergence further accentuate the perception of risk.  
                                                
1 Bank for International Settlements, Uneasy Calm Awaiting Lift-Off, BIS Quarterly Review, December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Fourth,  the  causes  of  policy  divergence  themselves  have  been  a  source  of  apprehension. 
This includes discomfort about the potential impact of the normalization of monetary policy in 
the  United  States  on emerging market  economies,  as  well  as  doubts  about the  underlying 
strength of the US economy and therefore the justification to increase interest rates in this 
country.  The  situation  is  worsened  by  the  growing  perception  that  monetary  policy  is 
reaching its limits, and results from monetary policy actions that sometimes run counter to 
expectations,  as  shown  by  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  euro  following  a 
relaxation of the monetary stances by the corresponding central banks.  
Fifth, the extent to which divergence may provide some breathing space for emerging market 
economies may not be wide, given the dominance of the US dollar in international financial 
markets. It may be useful to note in this respect that according to IMF estimates, the share of 
total  variation  in  domestic  bond  yields  in  the  five  largest  Latin  American  economies 
attributable to US shocks is twice the share corresponding to euro area shocks.2 
Sixth, vulnerabilities in emerging market economies have become increasingly evident. This 
has been partly the result of external factors, commodity price declines and tighter financial 
conditions particularly important among them, which have put pressure on both external and 
fiscal accounts. However, problems of a domestic origin have also played a prominent role in 
some economies. In this context, economic activity in this group of countries has decelerated 
for five consecutive years and prospects are bleak.  
Is monetary policy divergence likely to persist? 
The possible evolution of policy divergence among advanced economies is subject to some 
question marks. To start with, while improvement in labor market conditions has allowed a 
reduction of the unemployment rate in the US to levels around long-run estimates, progress 
in  the  inflation  front  is  more  modest  and  some  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have 
shown a downward adjustment. One must add to this the possible  implications for the US 
economy of global economic and financial developments. As a result, the anticipated pace of 
monetary policy normalization has moderated and the possibility of an additional relaxation, 
even  though  remote,  has  not  been  totally  discarded.  Furthermore,  some  have  argued  that 
the  US  economy  may  be  crossing  through  a  period  of  secular  stagnation,  i.e.  a  chronic 
excess  of  saving  over  investment  that  acts  as  a  drag  on  demand,  reducing  growth  and 
inflation,  and  pulling  down  real  interest  rates.  Under  these  conditions,  the  functioning  of 
monetary policy  is impaired, with fiscal policy becoming a more efficient tool.3 Others have 
also  pointed  to  the  potential  limits  on  policy  divergence  resulting  from  common  external 
shocks or trends that cause economic conditions to be synchronized across economies, or 
from  the  transmission  of  foreign  shocks  across  borders  through  exchange  rate  and  other 
financial channels.4 
Notwithstanding the above, with the US economy showing a strong labor market, an increase 
in some measures of inflation, resilience to external shocks, and the perspective of both a 
gradual strengthening of economic activity and an upturn of inflation, the predominant view, 
shared in general although with some differences by analysts, markets, and Fed officials, is 
that  interest  rates  in  this  country  will  continue  to  follow  an  upward  trend  in  coming  years. 
While  secular stagnation  cannot  be  discarded, the  counterarguments  to  this  possibility  are 
well known.5 It is also worth noting that even if the above mentioned limits on divergence as a 
                                                
2 International Monetary Fund, Regional Economic Outlook, Western Hemisphere, October 2015. 
3 See Summers, Larry, The Age of Secular Stagnation, Foreign Affairs, February 2016. 
4 See Brainard, Lael, What Happened to the Great Divergence?, US Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 
2016. 
5  See  Bernanke,  Ben,  Why  are  Interest  Rates  so  Low?,  part  2:  Secular  Stagnation,  Brookings  Institution,  31 
March 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  result of external factors became operative, the continuation and even increase in this trend 
would not be necessarily precluded. With far more serious economic difficulties in the euro 
area  and  Japan  than  in  the  US,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  closer  synchronicity  of  their 
monetary  policies  in  the  foreseeable  future.  In  view  of  the  above,  I  concur  that  policy 
divergence  among  advanced  economies  is  likely  to  remain  a  central  feature  of  the  world 
economy  still  for  a  significant  period.  In  any  case,  from  an  emerging  market  country 
perspective, it is far better to assume this will be the case and prepare accordingly.  
What should be the proper response to this scenario? 
I think this has at least two dimensions. 
The first one is of course the reaction at the country level. Policy divergence in the advanced 
economies  will  continue  to  give  rise  to  challenges  for  both  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  in  emerging  market  economies.  Taking  into  account  the  integration  of  financial 
markets worldwide, and the characteristics of the world economy mentioned above, this may 
affect  even  those  countries  with  sound  economic  fundamentals.  The  key  then,  is  how  to 
ensure that any adverse impact from divergence is not long-lasting or, in other words, how to 
differentiate from weak economies.  
While the proper framework must consider the particular characteristics of each country, the 
general  recommendations  are  well  known.  Emerging  market  economies  should  implement 
cautious fiscal and monetary policies, focused on the assuagement of any macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities. Exchange rate flexibility should play a major role in the absorption of external 
shocks,  although  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  may  be  needed  to  face 
problems of a temporary nature and to ensure an orderly market functioning. Proper macro 
and microprudential policies will be key for financial stability. In particular, given the systemic 
importance  of  some  key  players  for  domestic  financial  systems,  a  careful  and  thorough 
monitoring  of  specific  banks, firms,  and market  sectors  is  called for. The  above  should  be 
supplemented  by  measures  of  structural  reform,  aimed  at  increasing  productivity  and  the 
potential for growth. 
Reality,  however,  is  more  complicated  than  theory.  While  policy  recommendations  seem 
straightforward,  their  implementation  is  far  more  troublesome.  Recent  experience  in  a 
number  of  emerging  (and  in  fact  also  advanced)  economies  clearly  show  that  proper 
macroeconomic  diagnoses  cannot  be  taken  for  granted.  Furthermore,  policymakers 
frequently  face  political  restrictions  to  set  in  motion  the  required  measures.  The  need  to 
ensure  a  proper  coordination  of  different  policy  tools  will  often  result  in  additional 
implementation  challenges.  One  should  also  consider  that  the  adequate  timing  of  policy 
action  is  not  always  clear-cut.  For  instance,  in the face  of macroeconomic  risks, monetary 
policy  may  need  to  respond  even  under  the  presence  of  a  low  inflation  rate  and  stable 
inflation  expectations.  Determining 
in 
circumstances like these. 
The causes of divergence and the magnitude of the challenges it originates, suggest that a 
response  based  solely  on  domestic  policy  efforts  may  be  both  insufficient  and  unfair. This 
leads  me  to  the  second  dimension  of  the  strategy,  namely,  the  need  for  efforts  at  the 
international level. The crucial element here is what can be done regarding the most relevant 
form of divergence, i.e. monetary policies in advanced economies. As the experience during 
the initial stages of the global financial crisis shows, coordination may play a key role in some 
circumstances.  However,  it  is  also  true  that  this  may  face  significant  obstacles.  Different 
economic cycles, at the heart of the current policy divergence in advanced economies, is a 
case in point, and there are also hurdles of a political and institutional nature.  
However, it is also clear that the scope for more and better cooperation in this field is wide. 
Indeed,  it  is  imperative  that  advanced  economies  take  proper  consideration  of  the 
international repercussions of their monetary policy actions. Moreover, there is widespread 
agreement that our understanding of monetary policy spillovers is modest, but it is far from 
clear that sufficient efforts are underway to change the status quo. I am also of the view that 
the  specific  moment 
is  not  easy 
for  action 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  some proposals that have been put forward recently to agree on mutually acceptable rules 
for  responsible  monetary  policy  behavior  deserve  to  be  analyzed  and  discussed  more 
thoroughly. Finally, recent experience with the “taper tantrum”, on the negative side, and with 
the first increase in the federal funds rate in the US after seven years virtually at zero, on the 
positive one, underlines the crucial role of proper communication efforts to avoid surprises 
and unpleasant market reactions. 
Allow me to make a final reflection. Paradoxically, a major source of divergence for emerging 
market  economies  in  general  and  for  Latin  America  in  particular,  derives  from  some 
convergence in the rates of growth of the two main economies in the world. While as I noted 
above the US economy is expected in general to proceed with a gradual recovery in coming 
years, the deceleration of the Chinese economy is projected to continue, due to its ongoing 
rebalancing  from  investment  to  consumption,  and  from  industry  to  services.  Naturally,  this 
has different implications for emerging economies, with those with closer economic links to 
China  and  with  exports  more  concentrated  on  primary  commodities  facing  the  most  acute 
challenges. On the other hand, it is also true that a successful transition in China to lower but 
more  sustainable rates of  economic  expansion  should  at the  end be  a net  positive for  the 
world economy. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
