  Mario Draghi: How central banks meet the challenge of low inflation 
Text of the Marjolin lecture delivered by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central 
Bank, at the SUERF-Deutsche Bundesbank-IMFS Conference on “SSM at 1”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 4 February 2016. 
 Robert Marjolin was a pivotal figure in the birth of Economic and Monetary Union. When the 
Treaty  of  Rome  was  signed  in  1956,  the  aims  of  European  Economic  Community  were 
largely limited to creating a customs union and a common agricultural market. Neither was 
perceived  to  require  monetary  integration.  It  was  only  with  the  launch  of  the  so-called 
“Marjolin  Memorandum”  in  1962  that  the  recognition  surfaced  that  a  single  market  and  a 
single money were linked and that a serious discussion on European monetary integration 
began. 
Today, more than 60 years on, monetary integration in the euro area is both complete and 
secure. But monetary policy faces many challenges. Those challenges have not changed our 
mandate. But they have altered the way in which we deliver it. 
To  understand  how  we  have  responded  to  those  challenges,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish 
between two types. 
First,  there  are  challenges  that  are  common  to  all  central  banks  in  advanced  economies, 
which are linked to a global low inflation environment. 
Second, there are challenges that are special to us in the euro area, which are linked to our 
particular institutional context. 
What is common for all 
The  most  fundamental  question  facing  all  major  central  banks  today  is  this:  can  our  price 
stability mandates still be delivered? Across advanced economies inflation is low, and has 
been low for some time. And in several of those economies, long-term inflation expectations, 
based on market prices, remain below our numerical definitions of price stability. That has 
led  some  to  question  whether  it  makes  sense  for  central  banks  to  pursue  expansionary 
policies  to  meet  their  inflation  objectives.  Are  they  fighting  a  futile  battle  against  forces 
beyond their control? 
There are essentially three lines of argument in favour of monetary policy not reacting to the 
low inflation we see today. 
The causes of too low inflation 
The  first  line  of  argument  is  that  low  inflation  is  increasingly  being  caused  by  structural 
factors in the global economy that cannot be addressed through domestic monetary stimulus. 
As  a  result,  it  is  said,  previous  notions  of  what  we  considered  low  and  stable  inflation  – 
inflation  rates  around  2%  –  are  no  longer  realistic.  Central  banks  should  adjust  their 
objectives downwards accordingly. 
If  this  argument  were  accurate,  it  would  constitute  a  very  fundamental  criticism  of  central 
banks’ mandates. After all, the decision to grant central banks price stability objectives, and 
to give them independence to deliver those objectives, was based on the understanding that 
inflation is always, ultimately, a monetary phenomenon. It could thus always be controlled in 
the medium-term by a committed monetary authority. 
So is it true that structural changes we see today are having a permanent impact on long-
term inflation levels? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  One  such  change  that  is  often  mentioned  in  this  respect  is  demographic  change.  This 
certainly heralds important economic shifts, but its impact on inflation is ex ante unclear. It 
might  put  downward  pressure  on  prices  if  aggregate  demand  falls  more  than  aggregate 
supply.  But  it  might  equally  create  upward  price  pressures:  according  to  the  life-cycle 
hypothesis,  an  ageing  population  implies  that  the  elderly  eventually  dissave  and  consume 
more.1 
Which effect dominates will depend on a range of factors. In any event, it seems unlikely that 
demography  can  explain  why  inflation  is  low  today  across  advanced  economies  that  have 
very different demographic profiles. 
Moreover, even if ageing were to lead to a period of disinflation, for example through savings 
and investment imbalances, there is no reason why that should imply a permanently lower 
inflation rate. An excess of savings would simply mean that the equilibrium real interest rate 
required to deliver price stability would be lower, and the central bank would have to factor 
that into its monetary policy. Put another way, the effects of ageing would call for us to adjust 
our instruments, but not our objectives. 
Other structural shifts are also seen by some as having a long-term impact on inflation. One 
is the fact that the long-term cycle in commodity prices is now going into reverse. Another is 
technological  change,  especially  e-commerce,  which  increases  price  transparency  and 
intensifies competition between suppliers and retailers, which may keep prices low. A third is 
globalisation, which may increase the importance of global prices relative to domestic prices, 
making it harder for advanced economies to avoid importing disinflation from abroad.2 
Each of these changes might have an influence on the inflation rate. We cannot deny that. 
But there is nothing about them which suggests these effects are permanent. For example, 
permanent changes in the supply of energy are likely to have a permanent effect on the price 
level. But at some point energy price disinflation must reverse, if only due to base effects. 
Similarly, the price-containing impact of e-commerce, if any, will last only until the diffusion of 
e-commerce  has  stabilised.  And  lower  imported  inflation  thanks  to  globalisation  should 
eventually lead to higher prices elsewhere, as disposable income increases and the levels of 
wages and other costs equalise across countries. 
So  there  is  no reason why  any  of  these  structural  changes  should make  our current  price 
stability  objectives  unobtainable.  They  may  create  global  disinflationary  forces,  but  those 
forces are transitory in nature. What can affect our objective, however, is if those forces have 
a  persistent  impact  on  inflation  –  which  is  to  say,  if  they  become  embedded  in  inflation 
dynamics  and  inflation  expectations.  But  that  is  not  a  structural  issue;  it  is  about  the 
credibility of monetary policy in anchoring inflation expectations. 
This brings me to the second line of argument against active monetary policy. 
                                                
1  Most empirical results that find ageing is disinflationary have focused on Japan, as its transition from aging 
society to aged society is one of the fastest (see, for example, Jong-Won Yoon, Jinill Kim & Jungjin Lee, 2014. 
“Impact  of  Demographic  Changes  on  Inflation  and  the  Macroeconomy”,  IMF  Working  Papers  14/210, 
International Monetary Fund). However, a recent BIS working paper by Juselius and Takats (2015) contradicts 
the prevailing view: looking at low-frequency correlations, they find that a larger share of young or old cohorts 
is associated with higher inflation, while a larger share of working-age cohorts is correlated with lower inflation. 
This highlights how difficult it is to quantify the impact of this structural factor on inflation. See Mikael Juselius 
& Elod Takats, 2015. “Can demography affect inflation and monetary policy?”, BIS Working Papers 485, Bank 
for International Settlements. 
Inflation as a global phenomenon has been documented e.g. by Matteo Ciccarelli and Benoit Mojon, 2010. 
“Global Inflation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:524–535. 
2 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The response to too low inflation 
There  are  some  who  argue  that,  so  long  as  we  are  experiencing  mainly  positive  global 
supply shocks, there is no need for central banks to be overly responsive. We can simply 
redefine  the  medium-term  horizon  over  which  price  stability  is  maintained  and  “wait  it  out” 
until  inflation  returns  to  our  objective.  Indeed,  the  reason  central  banks  do  not  define  the 
medium-term  as  a  period  of  calendar  time  is  that  the  horizon  for  action  depends  on  the 
nature of the shock. 
This viewpoint is correct, as far as it goes. Central banks do typically refrain from reacting to 
supply shocks that have opposing effects on output and inflation, so as not to overreact and 
reinforce  the  effect  on  growth,  in  either  direction.  And  that  might  even  be  the  case  when 
faced  with  a  succession  of  supply  shocks,  such  as  the  steep  falls  in  oil  prices  we  have 
experienced recently. Each shock should in principle have a short duration and should not 
have a persistent effect on inflation. 
However, since there is always a backward-looking component in inflation developments, the 
longer inflation stays too low, the greater the risk that inflation does not return automatically 
to target. Specifically, if agents start to look at the track record of recent inflation, rather than 
the inflation objective, it affects their benchmarks for wage and price setting decisions. What 
happens then is that low inflation feeds into inflation expectations and creates second-round 
effects. 
In  that  situation,  even  what  began  as  a  positive  supply  shock  can  turn  into  a  negative 
demand shock. As inflation expectations fall, it pushes up real interest rates, producing an 
unwarranted monetary tightening. And the unexpected low inflation raises real debt burdens, 
which  has  a  negative  effect  on  aggregate  demand  due  to  the  different  propensities  to 
consume and invest of borrowers and lenders. Output and inflation, then move again in the 
same direction – but this time downwards. 
For that reason, in a context of prolonged low inflation, monetary policy cannot be relaxed 
about  a  succession  of  supply  shocks.  Adopting  a  wait-and-see  attitude  and  extending  the 
policy horizon brings with it risks: namely a lasting de-anchoring of expectations leading to 
persistently  weaker  inflation.  And  if  that  were  to  happen,  we  would  need  a  much  more 
accommodative monetary policy to reverse it. Seen from that perspective, the risks of acting 
too late outweigh the risks of acting too early. 
In  sum,  even  when  faced  with  protracted  global  shocks,  it  is  still  monetary  policy  that 
determines  medium-term  price  stability.  If  we  do  not  “surrender”  to  low  inflation  –  and  we 
certainly do not – in the steady state it will return to levels consistent with our objective. If on 
the other hand we capitulate to “inexorable disinflationary forces”, or invoke long periods of 
transition for inflation to come down, we will in fact only perpetuate disinflation. 
This is the clear lesson of monetary history, especially the experience of the 1970s. At that 
time,  many  policymakers  argued  that  persistently  high  inflation  was  structural  and  central 
bankers  could  do  little  to  reduce  it.  For  example,  in  May  1971,  when  Arthur  Burns  was 
Chairman, the official staff presentation to the FOMC declared – like some of our critics today 
–  that  “the  question  is  whether  monetary  policy  could  or  should  do  anything  to  combat  a 
persisting residual rate of inflation … the answer, I think, is negative … it seems to me that 
we  should  regard  continuing  cost  increases  as  a  structural  problem  not  amenable  to 
macroeconomic measures”.3 
Similarly,  Fed  Chairman William  Miller  observed  in  his  first  FOMC  meeting  in  March  1978 
that, “inflation is going to be left to the Federal Reserve and that’s going to be bad news. An 
effective program to reduce the rate of inflation has to extend beyond monetary policy and 
                                                
3  Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Memorandum of Discussion, 11 May 1971. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  needs  to  be  complemented  by  programs  designed  to  enhance  competition  and  to  correct 
structural  problems”.4  It  was  only  when  Paul  Volcker  arrived  as  Chairman  in  1979  and 
shortened  the  policy  horizon  that  the  Fed  took  ownership  for  controlling  inflation.  Inflation, 
which peaked at around 15% in March 1980, fell below 3% by 1983. 
Some  argue  that  today  the  situation  is  different;  that  whereas  Volcker  could  raise  rates  to 
20% to tame inflation, central banks fighting disinflation are inhibited by the lower bound on 
interest  rates.  The  Japanese  experience  after  the  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  in  early 
1990s is often presented as evidence. 
But  the  Japanese  case  in  fact  only  reinforces  the  importance  of  full  commitment  from 
policymakers.  As  long  as  the  commitment  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  a  low  positive  inflation 
number was not clear, actual inflation and inflation expectations stayed in deflationary zone. 
Since the Bank of Japan has signaled its commitment to reach 2% inflation, however, core 
inflation has risen from less than –0.5% in 2012 to close to 1% today. This is still short of the 
2%  objective,  to  be  sure,  but  downward  price  shocks  are  also  hitting  Japan  like  all  other 
advanced economies. 
We now have plenty of evidence that, if we have the will to meet our objective, we have the 
instruments.  As  the  ECB  and  others  have  demonstrated, the  lower  bound for  policy  rates, 
wherever it might be, is not at zero. And we have also shown how non-standard tools can be 
used  to  deliver  monetary  stimulus  even  without  altering  much  the  overnight  rate,  and 
produce  equivalent  effects.  For  example,  the  non-standard  measures  the  ECB  has  taken 
since summer 2014 have produced a pass-through equivalent to a 100 basis point rate cut in 
“normal” conditions. 
So there is no reason for central banks to resign their mandates simply because we are all 
being  affected  by  global  disinflation. In fact,  if  all  central  banks  submit to  that  logic then  it 
becomes self-fulfilling. If, on the other hand, we all act to deliver our mandates, then global 
disinflationary forces can eventually be tamed. 
The costs of fighting too low inflation 
Still,  there  are  some  that  argue  that  even  if  central  banks  can  lean  against  global 
disinflationary forces, in doing so they do more harm than good. In particular, expansionary 
monetary  policies  at  home  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  excessive  foreign  currency  debt  or 
asset  price  bubbles  abroad,  especially  in  emerging  markets.  And  when  these  financial 
imbalances eventually unwind, it weakens global growth and only adds to global disinflation. 
This is the third line of argument. 
But  I  ask,  what  would  be  the  alternative?  Would  it  help  emerging  markets  if  advanced 
economy central banks failed on their mandates? Would that be more likely to contribute to 
global  growth?  Clearly,  the  answer  is  no.  The  stability  of  large  economies  is  vital  to  their 
trading  partners  and  to the  global  economy,  and  diverting  monetary  policy  away  from  that 
aim when our economies are still fragile would not be in their interest. In the euro area that is 
especially true for our neighbouring economies, which export around 50% of their goods and 
services to the euro area. 
In  fact,  when  central  banks  have  pursued  the  alternative  course  –  i.e.  an  unduly  tight 
monetary  policy  in  a  nascent  recovery  –  the  track  record  has  not  been  encouraging. 
Famously, the Fed began raising reserve requirements in 1936–37, partially due to fear of a 
renewed stock bubble, but had to reverse course the next year as the economy fell back into 
recession. That has also been the experience of some central banks in recent years: raising 
rates to  offset financial stability  risks  has  undermined  the  primary  mandate,  and  ultimately 
required rates to stay lower for longer. 
                                                
4  Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Transcript, 21 March 1978. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  suggests  that  the  so-called  “assignment  problem”  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability at the domestic level should also apply at the global level. Monetary policy 
should  not  try  to  balance  opposing  objectives:  it  is  optimal  for  all  parties  if  it  delivers  its 
mandate. And if that creates financial stability concerns, they need to be addressed by other 
policies more suited to the task. And in fact there are several policy levers available. 
Countries  can  improve  their  financial  regulation  and  supervision  to  make  their  financial 
systems  more  resilient  to  external  shocks.  They  can  adjust  their  fiscal  policies.  They  can 
adopt  macro-prudential  measures.  The  evidence  suggests  that  such  policies  can  be 
effective: emerging market countries differ significantly in their sensitivity to global financial 
developments  on  account  of  their  policy  frameworks.5  We  also  have  some  anecdotal 
evidence  that  macro-prudential  measures  are  working  in  Asian  economies,  especially  in 
cooling off the real estate sector. 
Finally, these general considerations aside, it is worth questioning whether such arguments 
about monetary policy spillovers actually hold for the euro area. For example, if we look at 
spillovers into asset prices, there is no evidence that the announcement of the APP induced 
a  surge  in  portfolio  flows  into  emerging  market  economies.  In  fact,  empirical  evidence 
suggests that global investors rebalanced out of emerging market bond and equity markets 
into bond markets of advanced economies, in particular in the euro area, in response to the 
APP launch.6 
And  if  we  look  at  foreign  currency  debt,  while  low  euro  area  interest  rates  have  led  to 
significant increases in euro-denominated debt security issuance outside the euro area in the 
past two years, issues in euro still only account for about one-quarter of international bond 
issuance,  while  issues  in  dollar  account  for  two-thirds.  What  is  more,  recent  foreign  bond 
issuance in euro is dominated by investment grade US corporates, and among the emerging 
markets,  highly-rated  issuers.  The  evidence  of  unhealthy  spillovers  and  financial  stability 
risks therefore seems limited. 
What is special to us 
So even in the face of common global shocks, central banks have the ability to deliver their 
mandates. But in the euro area, that requires a different monetary policy response than for 
others. That is because we also face a second set of challenges that are largely specific to 
us. They result from our institutional structure: conducting monetary policy in a segmented 
banking and capital market, and without a single area-wide fiscal authority as a counterpart. 
There are two types of challenges in particular that emerge from this. 
Transmitting the stance 
The  first  relates  to  monetary  policy  transmission.  Many  central  banks  have  faced 
impairments in the transmission process during the crisis – that is why, for example, the Fed 
began  intervening  in  markets  for  mortgage-backed  securities,  or  the  Bank  of  England 
launched its funding-for-lending programme. But it is clear that those impairments have been 
more severe in the euro area. And moreover, they have had a distinct regional dimension 
that was not visible in other jurisdictions. 
                                                
5  See Ben Bernanke, 2015. “Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context”, paper presented at the 16th 
Jacques  Polak  Annual  Research  Conference  Hosted  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  November  5–6, 
2015. 
6  See Johannes Gräb & Georgios Georgiadis, 2015. “Global Financial Market Impact of the Announcement of 
the  ECB’s  Extended  Asset  Purchase  Programme”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  Globalization  and 
Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 232, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Our specific challenge arises from having an incomplete banking and capital market, which 
leads  to  lower  sharing  of  risks.  Relative  to  a  fully  integrated  market,  portfolios  of  private 
assets in the euro area are less geographically diversified, concentrating the effect of local 
economic slumps. Credit markets are less integrated, making it harder for agents to borrow 
from  other  parts  of the union  to  smooth  out  such  shocks.  And  institutions for  cross-border 
public risk-sharing are less developed, placing the full burden of dealing with the after-effects 
on individual sovereigns. 
This has two consequences for monetary transmission. First, it means that some of the main 
transmission channels – namely the bank lending channel and the balance sheet channel – 
are more likely to be disrupted in the event of major shocks. And second, since private risk 
and sovereign risk are linked at the national level, it means that financial fragmentation takes 
place along national lines. That hampers the traction of monetary policy in the regions where 
monetary stimulus is most needed. 
None of this means we cannot fulfill our mandate. But it does mean we have to design our 
instruments to compensate for it. That is why, for large parts of the crisis, our measures were 
also geared towards addressing impairments in the smooth transmission of our policy. 
Early  on  in  the  crisis,  this  meant  substituting  for  the  drying  up  of  the  interbank  market, 
including at longer maturities, to ensure the flow of cross-border liquidity. Later, we took out 
unwarranted redenomination risks from sovereign debt markets, helping attenuate the bank-
sovereign  nexus.  More  recently,  we  have  launched  a  credit  easing  package  which  aims, 
among other things, to ensure that bank deleveraging does not produce excessive dispersion 
in lending rates across countries. The evidence suggests that each of these measures has 
been successful.7 
Still, it is clear that fragmentation risks can only be definitively removed by addressing their 
institutional  drivers.  That  is  why  the  creation  of  Banking  Union,  which  is  the  topic  of  our 
conference today, was such a fundamental addition to monetary union. 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  provides  a  framework  for  a  more  integrated  banking 
market,  which  would  be  less  likely  to  fragment  under  stress.  The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism facilitates greater risk-sharing across borders. And the commitment to develop a 
Capital Markets Union is the first step towards greater geographical diversification, especially 
in cross-border holdings of equity. 
What  is  still  missing,  however,  is  agreement  on  the  third  leg  of  Banking  Union  –  deposit 
insurance  –  which  is  an  essential  part  of  a  genuinely  single  money.  For  this  reason,  the 
Commission’s proposal to establish a European Deposit Insurance Scheme is welcome. On 
the one hand, it sets out the ambitious objective of establishing a truly European system of 
depositors’  protection.  That  will  support  the  creation  of  an  internal  market  for  deposits  in 
which  the  fungibility  of  deposits  is  assured  independently  of  jurisdictions,  and  trust  in 
deposits is equalised. 
On the other, it is realistic in its design and provides a number of safeguards against moral 
hazard,  so  that  risk-sharing  does  not  become  risk-shedding.  “Risk  reduction”  and  “risk-
sharing” measures are two sides of the same coin and should be pursued in parallel: they 
are  both  essential  to  protect  the  stability  of  the  European  banking  sector  and  ensure  a 
homogenous transmission of our monetary policy. 
                                                
7  For evidence on the effectiveness of the ECB’s measures since summer 2014 see speech by Mario Draghi at 
the  European  Banking  Congress:  Monetary  Policy:  Past,  Present  and  Future,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
20 November 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Expanding the stance 
The second, specific challenge we have faced in the euro area has come when we needed 
to  expand  our  monetary  stance  –  specifically,  when  we  shifted  from  interest  rates  as  the 
main instrument of monetary policy to asset purchases via the APP. 
In part, large-scale asset purchases aim at reducing the risk-free rate by taking out duration 
from  the  market for  sovereign  bonds. In  the  euro  area,  however,  we  do  not  have  a  single 
risk-free rate since we do not have a single fiscal issuer that acts as a benchmark. And there 
is no national market which could act as a substitute, not only due to volume constraints, but 
also because no government security in the euro area is truly risk-free. The prohibition on 
monetary financing means that every sovereign bond carries a degree of credit risk. 
In  this  context,  asset  purchases  of  the  size  we  deemed  appropriate  must  inevitably  be 
implemented  in  multiple  markets.  And  that  means  monetary  policy  operations  may 
unwittingly  impact  on  credit  allocation  across  regions  and  types  of  borrowers.  That  is  not 
unusual – all monetary policy has allocative consequences. Nor does it create a limit on us 
fulfilling our mandate. But it does require that we aim to mitigate those consequences, under 
the constraint that we achieve our price stability objective. That can be done in two ways. 
The first is by designing our monetary policy instruments in a way that minimises distortions. 
We did this under the APP by intervening mainly in the most “commoditised” asset classes, 
i.e.  the  government  bond  markets  in  each  country,  and  by  spreading  our  interventions 
proportionally  across  jurisdictions.  That  effectively  constructs  a  diversified  pan-euro  area 
portfolio. 
Second, allocative effects can also be reduced by further integrating the markets in which we 
intervene,  in  particular government  bonds. To  that  end,  a robust fiscal framework  which  is 
enforced credibly would reduce the risk inherent in individual government bonds in the euro 
area,  which  would  in  turn  make  the  impact  of  interventions  in  different  markets  more 
homogenous. 
Still, there can be no doubt that if we needed to adopt a more expansionary policy, the risk of 
side effects would not stand in our way. We always aim to limit the distortions caused by our 
policy,  but  what  comes  first  is  the  price  stability  objective.  That  is  the  implication  of  the 
principle  of  monetary  dominance,  which  is  embedded  in  the  Treaty  and  which  lends 
monetary policy its credibility. 
Monetary  dominance  means  that  we  can  –  indeed  we  should  –  acknowledge  and  draw 
attention to all the consequences, intended or unintended, of our monetary policy operations. 
But it also means that we should never fail to deliver on our mandate solely on account of 
those  consequences.  Doing  so  would  be  tantamount  to  redrafting  our  mandate  under  the 
law, something we are not at liberty to do. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise. 
There  are  forces  in  the  global  economy  today  that  are  conspiring  to  hold  inflation  down. 
Those  forces  might  cause  inflation  to  return  more  slowly  to  our  objective.  But  there  is  no 
reason why they should lead to a permanently lower inflation rate. 
What matters is that central banks act within their mandates to fulfill their mandates. In the 
euro area, that might create different challenges than it does in other jurisdictions. But those 
challenges can be mitigated. They do not justify inaction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
