   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Launch of the Investment Account Platform in Malaysia 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the Launch of the Investment Account Platform (IAP), Sasana Kijang, 
Kuala Lumpur, 17 February 2016. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  for  the  launch  of  the  Investment  Account 
Platform (IAP), a centralised multi-bank platform that is likely to have significant implications 
on the role of financial intermediation in the Islamic financial system. This platform is more than 
just  a  new  and  innovative  medium  for  Shariah-compliant  investments  and  fund  raising 
initiatives.  It  signifies  a  fundamental  shift  towards  providing  solutions  that  addresses  the 
prevailing gap in the current risk-transfer financial regime to one that now allows for financial 
institutions to include a wider range of investment intermediation activities that emphasises 
risk-sharing and thus facilitate a stronger linkage of finance and the real economy.  
Islamic finance in Malaysia has journeyed through different phases of development and has 
now  evolved  into  a  complete  Islamic  financial  ecosystem  that  operates  alongside  the 
conventional  financial  system.  Underpinning  its  growth  has  been  the  infrastructure  and 
institutional development, product development that is reinforced by increased competition, 
and supported by a robust Shariah, legal and regulatory framework. Its development has also 
been strongly anchored by the investment in human capital development. The industry has 
now not only achieved a market share beyond the target of 20 percent by the year 2010 as 
was  envisioned  in  the  Financial  Sector  Masterplan,  but  it  has  also met  the  increasing  and 
differentiated  demands  of  the  economy  through  the  range  of  financial  product  offerings  in 
Islamic banking, takaful and Islamic capital market segments.  
The  initiatives  taken  to  develop  the  Islamic  financial  system  has  aimed  to  build  a 
comprehensive financial sector that operates at the highest efficiency and with an outreach 
that  would  extend  beyond  domestic  and  regional  markets  and  thus  facilitate  greater  cross 
border  economic  linkages.  In  advancing  to  the  next  level  of  growth  and  development,  the 
Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 (IFSA) now provides the industry with the foundation to 
transition into its next stage of development. The Act takes into account the specificities of 
Islamic  finance  while  ensuring  a  robust  governance  of  an  end-to-end  Shariah  compliant 
regulatory framework. It also provides an enabling environment for Islamic banks to diversify 
their business through the offering of investment accounts as an alternative means of raising 
funds from the public. With this, Islamic banks are allowed to pursue their role as investment 
intermediaries in which the alternative modes of risk-sharing contracts can be applied for the 
investment account.  
This new categorisation of deposits under the new Act has now been fully observed since mid-
2015  with  the  effective  reclassification  of  deposits  to  either  being  Islamic  deposits  or 
investment accounts. Following this exercise, the proportion of investment accounts to total 
funding for Islamic banks has increased from 7 percent in August to 10 percent as at December 
2015, indicating a positive response towards this new product offering. This platform for the 
investment account is an evolutionary breakthrough that is uniquely designed for and driven 
by  the  industry.  It  will  become  a  means  by  which  both  investors  and  enterprenenurs  can 
experience  and  benefit  from  the  new  risk-rewards  concepts  embedded  in  the  investment 
account.  As  an  internet  based  investment  platform,  the  IAP  provides  convenience  and 
facilitates greater access thus allowing for the efficient channelling of funds from investors to 
viable economic ventures and business activities.  
Its robust risk management infrastructure, with a high degree of transparency and disclosure 
differentiates  the  IAP  from  other  technology-based  fund-raising  platforms.  Islamic  banks  in 
performing their intermediation role in the operationalisation of the investment accounts that 
are  being  offered  on  this  platform,  would  rigorously  undertake  the  credit  assessment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   screening of the listed ventures. The IAP would also require ratings on the listed ventures by 
rating agencies reinforced by the requirement for such ventures to comply to the disclosure 
standards thus enabling investors to make informed decisions. Integral to the platform is a 
mechanism  for  regular  monitoring  of  the  progress  of  the  ventures,  thus  allowing  for 
assessments to be undertaken by the sponsoring banks of any emerging risks associated with 
the ventures. 
The value proposition and benefits of the IAP are multi-fold. It has the potential to spur the 
generation  of  new  economic  strengths  through  the  promotion  of  entrepreneurship  and  job 
creation  while  also  promoting  greater  financial  inclusion  and  thus  enhanced  prospects  for 
balanced growth. The IAP enables investors to directly finance a broad range of economic 
activity  of  their  choice,  therefore  diversifying  their  investment  portfolio  with  exposures  to 
various  types  of  projects  and  industries  that  yield  potential  returns  that  are  based  on  the 
performance  of  the  underlying  chosen  ventures.  For  businesses,  the  IAP  provides  a  new 
source of funding for activities, with more competitive financing terms in a range of financing 
structures. Ventures and entities of varying types, size and industries, including SMEs, listed 
firms and multinational companies can raise funds on this platform. Given its greater visibility, 
the IAP will also provide access to a broader range of individuals and institutional investors.  
For  Islamic  banks,  the  IAP  creates  a  differentiated  product  that  presents  a  new  source  of 
income and funding profile. There is also the potential for institutions with specific mandates 
including Government agencies to strategically collaborate with the IAP and Islamic banks to 
form public-private partnerships to facilitate the efficient channelling of grants or funding and 
to facilitate financing opportunities for identified strategic ventures. 
The role of the IAP that is launched today is envisaged to transcend beyond our domestic 
borders  to  become  an  effective  channel  to  further  enhance  financial  interlinkages  in  the 
regional and global economy. It can also be enhanced to become a multi-currency investment 
platform to provide a marketplace for local and international investors to invest in real economic 
activity  and  projects  denominated  in  various  currencies  and  financed  by  Islamic  banking 
institutions from different jurisdictions. This will be a first of its kind shared global platform for 
Islamic finance. In facilitating cross-border transactions, the IAP will also contribute towards 
drawing new foreign investors while also allowing for participation in the financing of projects 
outside the country. 
The IAP, together with the existing components of financial intermediation will form a more 
complete, and yet mutually complementary financial ecosystem. To ensure its success, there 
has  to  be  greater  awareness  and  understanding  on  the  key  features  of  the  IAP  and  its 
embedded mechanisms by all the stakeholders. Of importance is for Islamic banks, investors 
and entrepreneurs to have a clear understanding on the risk and return relationships that are 
embedded in the variations of Shariah contracts used in such investment account products. 
Expectations  need  to  be  aligned  with  the  various  approaches  adopted  to  managing  these 
relationships according to the contractual and operational requirements.  
It is also paramount for Islamic banks to uphold the best practices in the conduct of discharging 
their fiduciary duties and in performing its administration. Of importance is the required due 
diligence, performance monitoring, suitability assessment and investment management. This 
would ensure that the IAP is always a trusted medium of investment that is transparent and 
competitive in providing a seamless experience for investors. This would address the concerns 
of investors on the risks associated with the asymmetry of information. Such features would 
contribute towards strengthening the ability of the IAP to attract a wider range of investors, 
therefore  enabling  the  platform  to  cater  for  different  types  of  risk  profiles  of  the  different 
ventures. 
This  shared  infrastructure  for  advancing  the  delivery  of  the  investment  account  product 
offerings  represents  an  important  platform  to  take  this  proposition  forward.  I  wish  to 
congratulate the six financial institutions that include four Islamic banks and two development 
financial  institutions  on  their  collective  effort  to  initiate  this  platform.  I  understand  there  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   interest  from  other  Islamic  banks  to  take  part  in  this  platform.  This  platform  will  have  the 
potential to create a more extensive network of sponsoring banks to meet the more diversified 
demands of investors and ventures. This would further enhance the potential for the value 
proposition of the IAP as a Shariah compliant investment vehicle and a fund raising avenue 
that would bring benefits to the economy. 
On that note, it is my great pleasure to officially launch the IAP. I wish it every success. Thank 
you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
