    
Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy in the euro area’s neighbouring 
countries 
Text of the SAFE Policy Lecture by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the SAFE Policy Center, Frankfurt am Main, 23 February 2016. 
 The author would like to thank Oliver Sigrist for his valuable support in preparing this speech. He also thanks Simone 
Auer,  Petra  Gerlach  and  Carlos  Lenz  for  their  helpful  comments,  the  SNB’s  Communications  and  Language 
Services units, and Francesca Boucard for compiling the data. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  at  the  invitation  by  the  SAFE  Policy  Center  to  give  this  presentation  in  the 
“capital” of the euro area. While most of my European colleagues attend ECB council meetings 
here every few weeks, I have somewhat less occasion to visit Frankfurt. Since Switzerland is 
not a member of the euro area, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) naturally has no right to take 
part  in  or  influence  the  decision-making  process  here.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  decisions  on 
European monetary policy are of utmost interest to us, since they strongly affect the SNB and 
Switzerland. 
This  being  the  case,  I  would  like  to  speak  today  about  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area’s 
neighbouring  countries.  I  will  focus  not  just  on  Switzerland,  but  also  on  other  small  open 
economies, and in doing so, illustrate our experiences – both shared and divergent – since the 
onset of the financial crisis in 2008. 
Besides Switzerland, I will also be looking at the Czech Republic, Sweden and – a special 
case – Denmark (cf. chart 1). These are all small open economies with strong trade links to 
the euro area. With the exception of Denmark, these countries chose to continue pursuing an 
independent monetary policy even after the introduction of the euro. Furthermore, the central 
banks of all these countries have in recent years implemented unconventional monetary policy 
measures. I will return to this point in more detail later. 
Two questions stand at the centre of my speech today. First, can countries bordering a major 
currency area pursue an independent monetary policy – and have events since the onset of 
the  financial  crisis  in  2008  affected  the  answer?  And  second,  how  have  unconventional 
measures helped these countries in the implementation of an independent monetary policy? I 
will argue that the first question – whether countries bordering the euro area can pursue an 
independent monetary policy – can essentially be answered with a yes. However, for these 
countries, managing monetary conditions arising from interest and exchange rate levels has 
become significantly more difficult in recent years. Regarding the second question – how have 
unconventional measures helped these countries in implementing an independent monetary 
policy  –  I  will  argue  that  negative  interest,  foreign  exchange  market  interventions  and 
quantitative easing programmes – instruments each tailored to suit a country’s specific needs 
– have helped these central banks to regain a certain room for manoeuvre. But I will also assert 
that, when major disruptions occur, central banks cannot always keep inflation and growth 
stable within a targeted range. This, in turn, is not a new insight per se, in that it adheres to the 
central banking consensus that monetary policy should be geared to the medium term, and 
that, depending on the environment, certain short-term fluctuations in output and inflation are 
unavoidable.  
Allow me to begin by providing a definition of what is meant by an independent monetary policy. 
A country with free movement of capital has two means of achieving monetary policy goals like 
price stability. First, it can peg the exchange rate of its currency to a foreign currency, thereby 
adopting the other country’s monetary policy. If the two economies move in parallel and the 
monetary  policy  of  the  other  country  is  sufficiently  stability-oriented,  price  stability  can  be 
imported  by  this  means.  Or,  second,  a  central  bank  can  pursue  a  monetary  policy  that  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1
    
explicitly tailored to suit the specific needs of that country. The monetary policy trilemma is 
that,  given  free  capital  movement,  such  a  tailored,  independent  monetary  policy  is  only 
possible with a floating exchange rate. 
Of course, as a small open economy pursuing an independent monetary policy, Switzerland is 
also exposed to global influences, and particularly to those from within Europe. First, trade 
relations are of central importance; fluctuations in consumer demand within the euro area are 
reflected  in  the  exports  of  neighbouring  countries,  and  influence  their  economies.  Second, 
changes in the monetary policy of the euro area have repercussions. Interest rate cuts by the 
ECB usually lead to an appreciation of currencies in neighbouring countries. This dampens 
growth and lowers inflation. Third, uncertainty during the euro crisis precipitated capital flight 
towards  neighbouring  countries,  thereby  placing  exceptional  upward  pressure  on  their 
currencies  and  thus  rapidly  changing  their  monetary  conditions.  The  monetary  policy  of 
neighbouring countries must take into account the influences via these channels on domestic 
economic developments. 
The most significant advantage of conducting an independent monetary policy is that it allows 
the central bank to address the specific needs of its own economy. Countries which join a 
currency union relinquish this ability to control and stabilise in favour of other advantages – for 
example, by joining a currency union, a country may take on a more credible and therefore 
more successful monetary policy than its previous one. For Switzerland, however, the ability 
to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  has  clearly  paid  off.  The  structure  of the  Swiss 
economy  is  a  singular  combination  of,  first,  a  strong  manufacturing  sector  specialised  in 
producing high-quality, research-intensive goods (think of pharmaceuticals and watchmaking, 
but  also  the  specialised  machinery  industry),  and  second,  a  major  financial  centre  which, 
notwithstanding certain setbacks due to the financial crisis, has retained its global reach. Given 
this structure, the drivers of economic development in Switzerland are therefore often different 
to those of other European countries, so it makes sense to have an independent monetary 
policy. 
Developments  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008,  however,  have  served  as  a 
reminder that monetary policy cannot always keep inflation and growth stable within a targeted 
range. This is true of both large and small currency areas. One reason is that the scale of the 
disruptions and distortions of recent years has been unusually large. Furthermore, the situation 
has been exacerbated by the fact that conventional interest rate policy has reached its limits. 
By  introducing  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  central  banks  have  regained  a 
certain room for manoeuvre. However, these unconventional measures cannot be deployed 
endlessly  to  achieve  desirable  monetary  conditions.  Interest  rates,  for  example,  cannot 
continue to be lowered into negative territory without at some point precipitating a flight to cash. 
Foreign exchange market interventions and quantitative easing programmes carry with them 
the increasing risk that a central bank’s ability to conduct monetary policy may be compromised 
in the long term. Furthermore, our practical experience of calibrating unconventional measures 
and of gauging their effects is still limited compared to that of the conventional interest rate 
instrument. In light of these reservations, unconventional measures must be used with caution, 
and their long-term consequences taken into consideration. They must also be continuously 
reassessed. 
Allow me now to illustrate how countries neighbouring the euro area have implemented their 
monetary policy since the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, using Switzerland, the Czech 
Republic, Denmark and Sweden as examples. The primary goal of an independent monetary 
policy in the Czech Republic, Sweden and Switzerland is price stability. Denmark bases the 
maintenance of its price stability on ECB policy, as Danmarks Nationalbank keeps the krone 
in a narrow fluctuation band to the euro. The Danish experience of recent years, in particular, 
provides interesting insights into unconventional monetary policy measures. 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    
Three phases of monetary policy in Europe since 2008 
The period between 2008 and today can be divided into three phases. The first phase, from 
2008  to  2011,  has  the  global  slump  in  demand  at  its  centre.  During  this  period,  primarily 
conventional  monetary  policy  measures  were  deployed.  The  second  phase,  from  2011  to 
2014, is shaped by growing fears about the future of the euro area and, in the event of its 
collapse, potential consequences for neighbouring countries. This period sees the introduction 
of unconventional measures. In the third phase, from mid-2014 to the present, the emphasis 
lies on quantitative easing in the euro area and its effects on neighbouring countries. During 
this period, unconventional measures are adjusted and their deployment is stepped up. 
For each phase, I will illustrate the most important economic developments and how central 
banks  reacted  to  them,  and  provide  a  brief  interim  conclusion.  Finally,  I  will  place  these 
observations on monetary policy in a broader context, before summing up. 
Demand slump following the onset of the financial crisis (2008–2011) 
The  key  event  following  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  was  the  collapse  of  the  Lehman 
Brothers  investment  bank  in  September  2008.  The  subsequent  weeks  and  months  saw  a 
sudden, substantial slump in demand for goods and services. Between 2008 and 2009, global 
imports and exports fell by some 25% in nominal terms, the sharpest decline since records 
began in 1948. 
The  euro  area,  and  the  neighbouring  countries  examined  here,  slipped  into  recession 
(cf. chart 2). GDP in the euro area plunged by around 5% in 2008 and 2009, at the height of 
the crisis. The drop in the neighbouring countries ranged from 3.4% in Switzerland to 7.2% in 
Denmark,  whose  economy  had  experienced  a  phase  of  overheating  in  pre-crisis  years. 
Inflation rates fell sharply due to lower demand and falling oil prices (cf. chart 3).1 Inflation in 
the euro area declined to −0.6% in the course of 2009. The lowest inflation recorded during 
this period was −1% in Switzerland. In the Czech Republic, too, inflation was negative for a 
short period in 2009. In Denmark and Sweden, it remained in positive territory. 
Central  banks  reacted  to  the  global  slump  in  demand  with  drastic  interest  rate  cuts  –  the 
conventional monetary policy instrument (cf. chart 4).2 In addition, markets were provided with 
large amounts of liquidity. In the Czech Republic, Denmark and the euro area, there was still 
leeway for further steps even after these interest rate cuts. Sweden’s Riksbank and the SNB, 
however,  lowered  their reference  interest  rates almost  to  the  0%  bound,3  thereby  de  facto 
exhausting their room for manoeuvre using conventional monetary policy measures. 
Movements  in  nominal  exchange  rates  in  Europe,  which  will  play  an  important  role  in  the 
second and third phases, varied from one country to another during this first phase. There was 
already upward pressure on the Swiss franc (cf. chart 5), due to the currency’s traditional role 
as  a  safe  haven.  In  times  of  substantial  global  uncertainty,  investors  take  refuge  in  such 
currencies, which subjects them to upward pressure. 
                                                 
1   Chart 3 shows consumer price indices in the Czech Republic, Denmark, the euro area and Switzerland. For 
Sweden, the CPIF, of relevance for the Riksbank, is shown; this is a consumer price index that assumes fixed 
mortgage  rates  and  thereby  excludes  the  effects  that  interest  rate  changes  have  on  households  servicing 
mortgage debts. In this chart and those that follow, data is shown only until the end of 2015. 
2   Chart 4 shows the following reference interest rates: for Switzerland, the middle of the target range for the three-
month  Libor;  for  Denmark,  the  central  bank’s  lending  rate;  and  for  the  Czech  Republic,  the  euro  area  and 
Sweden, the repo rate for monetary policy operations. 
In Sweden, the overnight deposit rate was lowered into negative territory in 2009. This facility, however, was 
and is almost never used – rather, the intraday deposit facility is used, and its rate remained positive in 2009. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3
    
In the course of 2009, the neighbouring countries under review showed signs of emerging from 
the trough of the global economic crisis. Economies returned to growth, and inflation rates rose 
once  more.  Due  to  the  favourable  economic  developments  and  the  expected  increase  in 
inflationary pressure, interest rates were raised, first in Sweden and later in the euro area – 
and thus in Denmark too (cf. chart 6). 
As an interim conclusion, we can state that in the first phase following the onset of the financial 
crisis, conventional monetary policy helped to cushion the effects of the slump in demand. 
However, in Switzerland and Sweden, shortly after the onset of the crisis, interest rates were 
lowered to almost 0% – which at the time was regarded as the lower bound. Conventional 
monetary policy had thus already reached its limits in these two countries. 
The euro crisis and fears about the future of the euro area (2011–2014) 
We come now to the second phase, namely the euro crisis and fears about the future of the 
euro area. 
In 2011, it became clear that the global economic recovery had lost a great deal of momentum. 
In this phase, international financial markets were unsettled by discussions in the US about 
the debt ceiling. At the same time, euro area activity weakened markedly, and high levels of 
government debt became a source of concern. In the second half of 2011, yields on various 
government bonds in the euro area began to diverge rapidly (cf. chart 7). 
Before the onset of the global financial crisis, the euro area was regarded by financial markets 
as a more or less homogeneous unit. Hardly any distinction was made between country risk 
within the euro area. This was reflected in the fact that the government bond interest rates of 
most  member  countries  were  practically  the  same  as  those  of  the  country  with  the  lowest 
yields, namely Germany. During the course of the financial crisis, concerns over the stability 
of the euro area led to increasingly large divergences between the sovereign yields of the large 
member  countries.  Yields  rose  not  just  on  Italian  and  Spanish  bonds,  but  also  on  French 
sovereigns.  In  this  environment,  the  growth  and  inflation  outlook  for  the  euro  area  again 
deteriorated. At the end of 2011, the ECB therefore reversed two of its interest rate hikes, 
those of April and July 2011. 
Market uncertainty resulted in renewed inflows to the Swiss franc, causing it to appreciate 
against a broad range of currencies (cf. chart 8). In 2007, one euro cost CHF 1.65 – by August 
2011, the exchange rate had fallen to almost parity. The Swiss franc also gained markedly 
against the US dollar, which at the time was not regarded as safe haven due to discussions 
about the debt ceiling. In 2007, a dollar cost CHF 1.25 – in autumn 2011, it temporarily fell to 
75 centimes. A rapid and substantial appreciation was also taking place against the other major 
currencies, with no end in sight. The Swiss franc was overvalued against a broad range of 
currencies,  resulting  in  a  severe  deterioration  in  the  economic  and  inflation  outlook  for 
Switzerland, threatening severe consequences for the real economy. 
To turn this dramatic tide of events, at first the SNB increased its liquidity – in August 2011 
alone, liquidity expansion amounted to CHF 170 billion. This measure, however, did not have 
a sustained effect. Finally, in September 2011, the SNB introduced a minimum exchange rate 
of CHF 1.20 per euro as a temporary, exceptional measure (cf. chart 9). The SNB was thereby 
prepared to use its balance sheet to purchase foreign currency in order to stop the spread of 
panic. While this policy measure corrected the exceptional strength of the Swiss franc, the 
currency remained substantially overvalued. Nevertheless, the stabilisation of the euro/Swiss 
franc  exchange  rate  allowed  the  Swiss  economy  to  adjust  to  the  new  currency  reality.  In 
addition, the inflation outlook, which had worsened due to the strong Swiss franc, brightened 
again. 
The euro crisis impacted not just the economy in Switzerland, but also the economies and 
exchange  rates  of  the  other  neighbouring  countries  under  review.  They,  too,  eased  their 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    
monetary policies. In Sweden, from the end of 2011 to the end of 2013, interest rates were 
lowered in successive steps to 1%; between 2010 and 2011, they had been raised to 2% on 
the back of robust economic growth. The Riksbank was thereby able to slow the economic 
downturn  and  simultaneously  prevent  a  further  appreciation  of  the  krona  and  a  decline  in 
inflation expectations (cf. chart 10). 
Interest rates in the Czech Republic touched 0% at the end of 2012, and the Czech National 
Bank (CNB) announced its intention to intervene on the foreign exchange market if necessary. 
At the end  of 2013, the CNB intervened to weaken the Czech koruna and ease monetary 
conditions (cf. chart 11). Thus, like the SNB, the CNB also decided to use the exchange rate 
as an instrument for easing monetary conditions. 
The Danish krone, explicitly pegged to the euro since the inception of the currency union, also 
suddenly found itself having to contend with upward pressure. This reflected concerns about 
the future of the euro, and market assumptions that Denmark could become a member of a 
Nordic euro should the euro area split. At the end of 2011, Danmarks Nationalbank reacted by 
cutting its reference rate to below that of the ECB, and continued to lower it in successive steps 
thereafter. At the same time, it intervened on the foreign exchange market. In mid-2012, when 
the ECB once again lowered its rates, Danmarks Nationalbank lowered its deposit rate into 
negative territory in order to keep pace with the ECB’s monetary policy easing (cf. chart 12).4 
The negative interest rate affected the entire banking system, and Danmarks Nationalbank 
found itself in uncharted monetary policy terrain.5 
The  introduction  of  negative  interest  in  Denmark  showed  that  moderately  negative  deposit 
rates  are  a  viable  monetary  policy  instrument.  Concerns  that  lowering  interest  rates  into 
negative territory could potentially precipitate a flight to cash had previously dissuaded central 
banks from using this measure. When interest must be paid on bank deposits or money market 
instruments, holding cash in a vault may appear more advantageous. However, this too entails 
high  risk,  and,  in  the case  of  large  sums,  sizeable  costs  in  terms  of  logistics,  storage  and 
insurance. Such costs can outweigh those of moderately negative interest rates; in Denmark, 
a flight to cash did not take place.  
What is my interim conclusion for this second phase? Once the interest rate instrument had 
come up against its limits, the euro crisis forced central banks in neighbouring countries to 
deploy unconventional measures. In doing so, these central banks were able to regain a certain 
room for manoeuvre in influencing monetary conditions. At the same time, they had crossed 
into  uncharted  monetary  policy  terrain,  since  practical  experience  of  calibrating  these 
unconventional measures and of gauging their effects was still limited in comparison to that of 
the conventional interest rate instrument. 
This second phase shows that unconventional measures can have a role to play in influencing 
monetary conditions. Distortions in a currency’s valuation, in particular, can justify interventions 
on foreign exchange markets – even in an environment of floating exchange rates. With regard 
to  the  interest  rate  instrument,  it  has  become  apparent  that  the  room  for  manoeuvre  in 
monetary policy is larger than previously assumed, and that interest rates can be lowered into 
negative territory. The fear that the introduction of negative interest will precipitate a flight to 
cash has thus far proved unfounded. 
                                                 
4   Chart 12 shows the deposit rates of Switzerland, Denmark and the euro area. For the Czech Republic, the 
discount rate is used, and for Sweden, the repo rate minus 10 basis points. In Sweden, this interest rate is 
available to the banking system within the context of fine-tuning operations by the Riksbank. 
In Switzerland, the Federal Council introduced negative interest for foreign account holders in the 1970s. For 
details, cf. Bernholz, Peter (2007), From 1945 to 1982: the transition from inward exchange controls to money 
supply management under floating exchange rates, The Swiss National Bank 1907–2007. 
5  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5
    
Further monetary policy expansion in the euro area (from mid-2014) 
Now we come to the third phase, shaped by quantitative easing in the euro area. 
Economic recovery in the euro area was slow, although the ECB’s promise in July 2012 to do 
everything  necessary  to  preserve  the  euro  greatly  reduced  market  uncertainty.  While  the 
economy was tentatively getting back on its feet, inflation in the euro area dipped below 2% at 
the end of 2013 and continued to fall from there. At the beginning of 2015, it slid into negative 
territory, giving rise to concerns about whether inflation expectations were well anchored (cf. 
chart 13). 
In June 2014, the ECB lowered its main refinancing rate to 0.15% and its deposit rate to below 
zero.  Today,  they  are  at  0.05%  and  –0.3%  respectively.  In  lowering  the  interest  rate  into 
negative  territory,  the  ECB  followed  the  example  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  which  had 
already introduced negative deposit rates for banks in 2012. The primary goal of the ECB was, 
however, not the same as that of Denmark (which was to reduce capital inflows); instead, it 
sought to increase inflation by stimulating lending.6 
From mid-2014, the ECB sent ever clearer signals that it would be substantially easing its 
monetary policy. At the same time, there were increasing signs that the US Federal Reserve 
would  be  exiting  its  zero  interest  rate  policy.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  euro  began  to 
depreciate considerably not only against the US dollar, but also against the pound sterling. 
Between mid-2014 and the beginning of 2015, the euro lost almost 15% against the pound 
and more than 20% against the US dollar (cf. chart 14). A phase of general euro weakness set 
in. 
Finally, on 22 January 2015, the ECB announced a quantitative easing programme going well 
beyond  market  expectations  in  terms  of  length,  target  volumes  and  the  wide  range  of  the 
securities eligible for purchase. The euro lost even more ground against the US dollar and the 
pound sterling. 
For its neighbours, the ECB’s monetary policy easing had both positive and negative effects. 
On the one hand, the measures promised to support economic recovery in the euro area, 
which, thanks to real economic linkages, would also benefit neighbouring states. On the other 
hand, as with the US dollar and the pound, it led to increased upward pressure on the euro 
area’s neighbour currencies. 
Switzerland’s monetary policy situation saw a fundamental shift. Let me explain this situation 
by means of interest rate differentials on call money (cf. chart 15).7 The call money rates enable 
the best comparison of monetary policy restrictiveness. In a positive interest rate environment, 
they  reflect  movements  in  the  main  refinancing  rate,  and  in  a  negative  interest  rate 
environment, they follow central bank deposit rates. In the phase leading up to the crisis, the 
interest  rate  differentials  between  the  euro  area  and  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark  and 
Sweden were close to 0%. 
In contrast, Swiss interest rates have historically been below the euro area’s interest rates. 
This interest rate differential reflects Switzerland’s status as a safe haven. In exchange for the 
greater security of Swiss investments, investors accept lower interest rates than they would 
receive abroad. During the course of the crisis, this interest rate differential was continually 
eroded as the SNB quickly reached the zero lower bound and the ECB continued to ease its 
monetary policy. When the SNB introduced its minimum exchange rate in September 2011, 
                                                 
6   To  attain  this  goal,  the  ECB  introduced  a  number  of  additional  measures,  including  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations. 
7   Chart 15 shows interbank offered rates for Switzerland, the Czech Republic and Sweden, and transaction-based 
interbank rates for Denmark and the euro area. 
6 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    
the interest rate differential between Switzerland and the euro area was already smaller than 
it had been before the crisis. It was, however, still significant. 
The ECB’s monetary policy easing from mid-2014 had a much greater impact on Switzerland 
than on the other neighbouring countries, as it led to the interest rate differential disappearing 
completely. This had dropped to almost zero by the end of 2014 (cf. chart 16).8 For the other 
neighbouring countries, the interest rate differential to the euro area was within its normal range 
at the end of 2014. The reason for this was, of course, that these countries had similarly high 
interest  rates  as  the  euro  area  at  the  start  of  the  crisis,  and  that  their  central  banks  were 
therefore able to lower rates to the same extent as the ECB. As the interest rate differential 
had hardly changed, and these countries’ currencies were less sought after as safe havens 
than the Swiss franc, they were subjected to considerably less upward pressure against the 
euro than the Swiss currency. 
The situation in Switzerland was made even more difficult by the fact that, as a result of the 
minimum exchange rate, both the Swiss franc and the euro lost value against the US dollar 
and the pound sterling. This put the broad overvaluation of the Swiss franc that had led to the 
introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  into  perspective.  Both  of  these  factors,  i.e.  the 
disappearance of the interest rate differential and the reduction of the overvaluation, finally led 
to rapidly increasing pressure on the minimum exchange rate. 
At the beginning of 2015, it became clear that the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per 
euro was no longer sustainable from a monetary policy perspective, and would require ever-
larger foreign currency purchases to enforce it. If the SNB had ignored the changing reality 
and attempted to maintain the minimum exchange rate, the extensive interventions would have 
led  to  the  bank  losing  control  over  its  balance  sheet  and  thus  over  longer-term  monetary 
conditions in Switzerland. Putting this decision off would also not have helped the economy. 
The  minimum  exchange  rate  was  introduced  as  an  instrument  against  widespread  and 
extremely pronounced Swiss franc strength. In this new phase of general euro weakness, it 
was no longer the right tool. The conditions which existed when it was introduced in 2011 had 
fundamentally changed. 
On 15 January 2015, the SNB therefore decided to discontinue the minimum exchange rate 
and to impose an interest rate of –0.75% on sight deposits held by banks at the SNB. With this 
negative  interest  rate,  the  interest  rate  differential  to  the  euro  area  was  at  least  partially 
restored. At the same time, the SNB announced that it would continue to intervene on the 
foreign exchange market if necessary. By implementing both of these measures, the SNB’s 
aim was and remains to reduce the upward pressure on the Swiss franc. Immediately after the 
minimum exchange rate was discontinued, the Swiss franc appreciated abruptly against the 
euro before weakening again somewhat. The Swiss franc saw the same appreciation that the 
US dollar and the pound sterling had already experienced. Due to Switzerland’s close trade 
links with the euro area, this appreciation presented the Swiss economy with major challenges. 
The euro area’s neighbours reacted to the ECB’s monetary policy measures in varying ways. 
Denmark lowered its deposit rate to –0.75% in January 2015 and intervened in the foreign 
exchange market.9 Sweden introduced a negative interest rate in February 2015, although the 
relevant deposit rate currently stands at –0.60%. The Riksbank also began its own quantitative 
easing programme and announced that it would intervene on the foreign exchange market if 
necessary.  The  Czech  National  Bank  reacted  with  more  foreign  exchange  market 
interventions, but decided not to implement negative interest.  
                                                 
8   The table shows values for November 2014, since the SNB’s announcement in December of a rate of –0.25% 
on sight deposits with effect from January 2015 immediately impacted market interest rates. 
9   By January 2016, the situation had eased enough for Danmarks Nationalbank to raise the interest rate to 
–0.65%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
7
    
By discontinuing the minimum exchange rate, the SNB regained some of its ability to conduct 
monetary policy. The new monetary policy stance is beginning to have an impact. Since the 
minimum exchange rate was discontinued, there have been periods of great uncertainty on 
the  financial  markets  in  connection  with  Greece,  but  also  with  China  and  other  emerging 
economies. This would normally have caused the Swiss franc to appreciate, whereas the franc 
has actually weakened slightly over the last 12 months. Nonetheless, the Swiss franc remains 
considerably overvalued against the euro in real terms. 
I draw the following conclusion for the third phase: unconventional monetary policy measures 
are  now  widespread  in  Europe  and  have  given  central  banks  slightly  more  room  for 
manoeuvre. The Riksbank and the ECB are operating quantitative easing programmes. The 
central  banks  of  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Sweden  and  Switzerland  are  prepared  to 
intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary. And finally, Danmarks Nationalbank, 
the ECB, the Riksbank and the SNB have all introduced negative interest rates.10 
What kind of impact have negative rates had from a monetary policy perspective? As hoped, 
they have contributed to reducing upward pressure in the neighbouring countries of the euro 
area. However, corporate financing conditions have not significantly improved, unlike with a 
conventional reduction in interest rates, and mortgage rates have even risen in some cases. 
The  cost/benefit  ratio  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  instruments  must  be  continually 
reassessed. If an instrument is no longer having the desired effect after a change in prevailing 
conditions,  monetary  policy  should  be  adjusted  accordingly.  In  this  regard,  it  is  of  central 
importance that not only the short-term costs and benefits are analysed, but also the long-term 
consequences. 
Overall,  those  euro  area  neighbours  with  an  independent  monetary  policy  have  thus  far 
emerged  from  the  crisis  in  reasonably  good  shape  (cf.  chart  17).  GDP  in  Switzerland  and 
Sweden is currently about 12% higher than the pre-crisis level at the beginning of 2007, while 
in the Czech Republic it is more than 9% higher. Having the ability to react to the situation at 
home with an independent monetary policy appears to have paid off, despite all the challenges. 
Inflation  in  the  euro  area’s  neighbouring  countries  is,  however,  lower  than  targeted  –  as, 
indeed, it is in the euro area member states themselves. In the case of Switzerland, where 
inflation has historically been lower than in these countries, inflation is currently even negative. 
This is part of a short-term adjustment process, since negative inflation contributes to reducing 
the real appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
Conclusion 
I will now place my observations on monetary policy in a broader context and formulate three 
key messages. 
But  before  doing  so,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  decision  to  adopt  an  independent 
monetary policy is not a purely economic one. Central banks act within the framework that is 
laid down for them by the legislature and, ultimately, the sovereign power. The culture and 
history of a country play an important role in selecting the national monetary order. 
And now I come to my three key messages. 
My first message is that it is possible for small open economies bordering a large currency 
area  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy.  It  allows  the  central  bank  to  react  to 
disruptions specific to its own country and to ensure price stability in the medium term. For 
example,  following  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  central  banks  in  Europe  lowered  their 
                                                 
10   The first central bank outside Europe to introduce negative interest rates was the Bank of Japan, at the end of 
January 2016. 
8 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    
interest rates at different points in time and to varying degrees to cushion the effects of the 
demand slump. Both conventional and unconventional monetary policy measures helped to 
absorb the shocks of the euro crisis and the ECB’s substantial monetary policy easing from 
March 2014. 
My second message is that in times of crisis, monetary policy’s usual room for manoeuvre can 
be quickly exhausted, making unconventional measures necessary. This is true of both large 
and small currency areas. In smaller currency areas, an increase in exchange rate volatility 
can present monetary policy with additional, substantial challenges. In both the neighbouring 
countries of the euro area and the member states themselves, negative deposit rates and 
quantitative  easing  programmes  have  therefore  been  implemented  to  influence  monetary 
conditions.  Furthermore,  the  central  banks  of  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Sweden  and 
Switzerland are prepared to intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary. This range 
of unconventional measures has extended the monetary policy options for the various central 
banks. 
My final message is that, despite the expanded set of monetary policy instruments available, 
the options are not unlimited. First, the effects of monetary policy measures can wane with 
duration and dosage. This is particularly the case if the solution to structural problems requires 
adjustments  to  economic  policy.  Monetary  policy  is  no  replacement  for  such  adjustments. 
Second, the benefits of unconventional monetary policy measures always come at a potential 
cost. These costs must be continually evaluated and monetary policy adjusted if the long-term 
costs  outweigh  the  short-term  benefits.  Third  and  finally,  for  small  open  economies  in 
particular, monetary policy cannot cushion the impact of every negative development in the 
global economy or the international financial markets. Favourable conditions for the economy 
and a high degree of adaptability among companies play a key role in a country’s ability to 
overcome crises and disruptions.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
9
  Chart 1 
 
 
Chart 2 
 
   Sources:Datastream, SNB 
10 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 3 
 
 
Chart 4 
  Sources:OECD, Riksbank, SNB, Statistics Denmark, Statistics Sweden 
Sources: CNB, Danmarks Nationalbank, ECB, Riksbank, SNB 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
11
  Chart 5 
 
 
Chart 6 
 
  Sources: Eurostat, SNB 
Sources:CNB, Danmarks Nationalbank, ECB, Riksbank, SNB  
12 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 7 
 
 
Chart 8 
 
  Sources: Bloomberg, SNB 
Sources: Eurostat, SNB 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
13
  Chart 9 
 
 
Chart 10 
 
  Sources: Eurostat, SNB 
Sources: Eurostat, SNB 
14 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 11 
 
 
Chart 12 
 
  Sources: Eurostat, SNB 
Sources: CNB, Danmarks Nationalbank, ECB, Riksbank, SNB  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
15
  Sources: OECD, Riksbank, SNB, Statistics Denmark, Statistics Sweden 
  Chart 13 
 
 
Chart 14 
 
Sources: BIS, SNB 
16 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 15 
 
  
Chart 16 
 
  Sources: Bloomberg, Danmarks Nationalbank, Riksbank, SNB 
Sources: Bloomberg, Danmarks Nationalbank, Riksbank, SNB 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
17
  Chart 17 
 
   18 
  
  Sources: Datastream, SNB  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
