   S S Mundra: Banking sector reforms – a journey, not a destination 
Special address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the India 
Banking Reforms Conclave 2016, organized by Governance Now, Mumbai, 24 August 2016. 
 Dignitaries on the dais; colleagues from the banking and financial sector; members of the print 
and  electronic  media;  ladies  and  gentlemen!  At  the  outset  I  thank  the  Management  of  the 
Governance  Now,  one  of  the  country’s  leading  publications  shaping  the  public  opinion  on 
governance  and  public  policy,  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  inaugural  address  at  this  India 
Banking Reforms Conclave 2016. I feel this conclave comes at a very important juncture for 
the economy and more particularly, for the banking sector. 
The title of my speech today is “Banking Sector Reforms: A Journey, Not A Destination.” Why 
do I say so? It would be relevant here to peep into some history. Though some of the issues 
cut across the banking industry, the emphasis here is predominantly on public sector banks 
(PSBs). 
PSBs came into existence with nationalization in the year 1969/1980. How was the banking 
scenario in the next couple of decades? 
• 
Highly regulated credit flow (selective credit control, credit authorization scheme, no 
consumption credit & so on) 
Militant unionized atmosphere- resistance to technology 
Stiff  branch  authorization  norms,  loan  melas,  opaque  income  recognition  &  asset 
classification (IRAC) norms ….Just to name a few. 
 Deregulation of credit processes and interest rate structures 
Introduction of prudential IRAC norms 
Licensing of banks in the private sector/part divestment in PSBs 
Migration to CBS 
VRS(year 2001) 
Gradual reduction in pre-emptions 
Post-reform years (after 1991) saw several far-reaching reforms in banking industry also. A 
few of these include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Resultantly by the year 2008, banks’ balance sheets were much stronger/growth was strong/ 
NPAs had come down from the peak of around 12% to slightly over 2% 
Then two developments took place: 
• 
• 
Banks  were  enthusiastic,  rather  major  partners,  in  this  newly  opened  field  supported  by 
accommodative fiscal and easy monetary policies. However, the process got plagued by: 
• 
• 
Weak governance, lax underwriting, high corporate leverage, several policy logjams 
Resultant consequences are well known 
Global Financial Crisis 
Introduction of PPP model in Infrastructure building 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    to  be 
in  private  sector  banks  have 
 
To be fair to the sector, some of the events were external & hence, not in control of the Bank 
management. But the important lesson is unambiguous: 
 
“In absence of strong structural and Governance reforms, consistency of the 
performance would always remain susceptible to such events” 
reforms 
Such 
incentives/compensations 
Agenda for PSBs is much larger, however, the immediate and overriding priority is to complete 
the clean-up of the banks’ balance sheets which is underway 
Resultant  provisioning  needs  coupled  with  meeting  Basel  III  norms/migration  to  IFRS  &  to 
capture  due  market  share  in  growth  funding  would  entail  recapitalisation  of  most  of  these 
banks. Seeking this capital externally at this stage may be difficult as also value eroding for 
the majority owner. 
Simultaneously process has to continue to bestow greater “Governance Autonomy” to these 
banks.  My  sense  is  that  the Government  ownership  of these  banks  has  resulted  in  crucial 
stability  and  resilience  in  trying  times.  Immediate  roadmap  should,  therefore,  be  towards 
complete  “managerial  autonomy”.  If  Government  remains  the  largest  shareholder,  not 
necessarily  majority  shareholder,  it  still  serves  the  intended  purpose.  At  the  same  time,  it 
releases these banks from multi-institutional oversights and overlapping controls. 
focussed  on  misaligned 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   HR  autonomy  would  naturally  flow from the  above.  Banks  would  be  able  to move towards 
competitive compensation, flexible hiring and move away from the “collective bargaining”-just 
to quote a few from many possible outcomes. 
There  could  be  a  reasonable  apprehension  that  such  measures  can  adversely  impact  the 
objectives  of  inclusive  growth  being  attempted  through  several  national  missions  and 
schemes. I would argue that advent of several new institutions (as recently licensed by RBI), 
new processes, digital advancements & competition would ensure that these objectives are 
well supported. 
Similarly, some of the reforms are driven by a global reform structure. These pertain to capital, 
liquidity and disclosure standards under the Basel III package. Some such other measures are 
TLAC, SIBs, Misconduct rules, etc. Few other measures are currently under discussion, such 
as, imposing risk weight on sovereign exposure and new standardised approach for credit and 
operational risk. 
Having dealt with the framework of macro reforms, let me now briefly touch upon nuts 
and bolts of the reform process. 
Governance in banks 
• 
Some action already taken- Setting up of BBB, post of CMD split into a non-executive 
Chairman and a CEO, Selection process made more objective 
Going forward, BBB should also cover selection of other Board members 
Continuity of Top Management is crucial, hence reasonably longer tenure for CEO 
(say 5 years) is necessary. Initial appointment could be for 3 years with certain set 
milestones, which if achieved , should earn automatic extension for next 2 years 
An orderly succession plan is crucial to ensure no abrupt changes in key direction of 
the organization 
Apart  from  the  whole  gamut  of  credit  risk,  which  is  already  discussed  extensively 
several  times  and  at  several  places,  the  following  are  the  other  areas  needing  prior 
attention of the Boards. 
Operational risks 
• 
Fraud  cases  –  Recurrent  failure  of  internal  control  machinery  noticed,  Delayed 
Recognition and laxity in follow up leads to cold trails, Need to bring fraudsters as also 
errant valuers, accountants , lawyers to book to stop them from duping the system in 
future 
Fraud Registry and a Quick Response Team set up at RBI to facilitate information –
sharing and for closely tracking high-value fraud cases 
KYC/AML  Compliance  failures  –  Stricter  enforcement  action  a  global  norm  now, 
Strong Centralized processing and surveillance needed as branches do not have the 
capability to handle such areas effectively. 
Customer service 
• 
Charter  of  customer  Rights-  RBI’s  Observance  period  now  over,  Implementation 
monitoring a priority 
Mis-selling- Risk of silent customer simply moving away as account number portability 
is now a real possibility 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Technology: cyber/digital 
• 
• 
Digitization/ Fintech driving new possibilities in the field of finance 
Technology, a double edged sword - instances of cyber-attacks, identity thefts, ATM 
frauds etc. Bangladesh Bank case and other near-misses 
Hence, bank boards would do well to focus on the following governance issues: 
• 
• 
Strategy and Risk Management are two most important and least focussed items 
Boards should set the “ Risk Appetite” and ensure adherence- Importance of 3 lines 
of  defence-  Business  verticals  themselves/  Risk  Management  Department  and 
Compliance / Internal Audit 
Hiring/Grooming/Retention of frontline staff... e-learning for capacity building 
Instil Organisational Culture (what you do when no one is watching) 
Put an enabling mechanism to ensure that voice of middle/lower level functionaries 
reaches the Top quickly (G-30 Report) 
Bad news should travel faster 
  Conclusion 
• 
 Thanks! 
Reform measures especially on Governance have achieved traction and attained a 
certain degree of maturity. Need now is to accelerate this process on the lines as 
covered in various preceding points. 
Thank the Governance Now management for inviting me to this event and providing 
me an opportunity to share my thoughts with this intelligent audience. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
