   R Gandhi: Financial stability – issues and concerns: are we barking up 
all right trees? 
Inaugural  speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
6th Annual  Great  Lakes  –  Union  Bank  Financial  Conference,  Great  Lakes  Institute  of 
Management, Chennai, 5 February 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri R Gurumurthy is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. It’s indeed a pleasure to inaugurate this Conference on ‘Financial stability, credit distress 
and Economic Growth: The way forward’ organized under the aegis of the Union Bank – Great 
Lakes  Center  for  Excellence  in  Banking  and  Finance.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  this  is  a 
collaborative effort by banking and academic and research institutions. As I will explain, the 
selected topic of the conference is not just on an apt and very contemporary issue, it also 
needs theoretical explanation, well researched solutions for practical use by banks. Hence, 
coming together of the three types of entities is very welcome. 
2.  Financial  stability  objective  is,  as  widely  recognised  and  by  very  nature,  fraught  with 
complexity  and  challenges  in  terms  of  precision  in  definition,  measurement,  tools  and 
achievement.  Though  an  often  quoted  and  widely  used  phrase,  financial  stability  has,  in 
contrast  to  price  stability,  been  difficult  to  define  or  measure.  From  a  macroprudential 
perspective,  financial  stability  could  be  defined  as  a  situation  in  which  the  financial  sector 
provides critical services to the real economy without any discontinuity. However, this cannot 
be quantified for measurement purposes. 
3.  As regulators  we  are  expected  to  indicate  and  also  address the  important systemic  risk 
areas,  preferably  before  they  materialise,  and  in  a  world  environment  defined  by  an  ever 
increasing degree of uncertainty, this task continues to get more arduous. While it is important 
to ‘bark up’ (or shout from the rooftops) about the systemic risks which, in the opinion of the 
regulators, are the most significant and more probable, at a given point in time, the regulators 
cannot afford to miss the woods for the trees. Effective regulation thus aims at understanding 
and guarding against the big risks, going beyond mere compliance with increasingly detailed 
and complex rules. 
4. With this short introduction to the topic, let me set the tone for a post lecture brainstorming 
amongst you with a few broad themes that I think, underlie the ultimate purpose of my speech. 
Financial stability: a dynamic stability 
5. The first one is to revisit the very purpose of the financial system amidst an existential angst 
(anxiety).  The  global  financial  crisis  had  brought  in  paradigm  shifts  in  many  areas  viz., 
regulation,  governance  and  mind-set,  amongst  others…all  in  pursuance  of  a  sustainable 
financial  system  and  a  system  that  should  be  sub-serving  the  real  sector  rather  than  self-
serving.  I  am  not  sure  whether  we  are  done  with  the  post  crisis  learning  curve  or  are  still 
somewhere on it. 
6. The second issue that comes to my mind is the need to bring a perspective to the concept 
of stability – stability which is dynamic and not static. One may wonder if ‘dynamic stability’ is 
an oxymoron, but a peep into the heavens would tell us that it is not, as our own solar system 
and the planets are in a state of dynamic stability. On the other hand, the reason why I bring 
the concept of dynamic stability into the discussion is that we should not tend to view financial 
stability as an issue of importance only in post crisis periods; instead it should be imbibed as 
a discipline by itself. Besides, we can’t ignore Minsky’s famous words of wisdom – “stability 
creates its own instability”. The best evidence for this comes from the days of great moderation, 
during which period, growth and inflation in the developed world became less volatile, interest 
rates were low resulting in search for yield and development of structured financial products 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   starting  with  securitisation  -  without  concern  for  financial  stability;  at  least  it  appears  so  in 
hindsight. 
Regulation vs innovation 
7. The global financial crisis also brought into the fore the conflicts between regulation and 
innovation. The reason why we, the regulators, faced the flak for the crisis was that we were 
perceived to be too inadequate to understand and address the excesses committed by an 
industry in the name of innovation. While it is necessary to align the policy environment and 
innovation strategies with the available regulatory capacity, the latter needs to be upgraded to 
match the natural course of economic development. Sometimes necessary innovations won’t 
even take off due to the policy making process getting influenced by paradoxes of innovative 
endeavours such as “success failure paradox” and/or “feedback rigidity paradox”. Financial 
market innovations commensurate with the economic development and the needs of the real 
sector, if ignored, can push crucial markets outside the system and hence away from the reach 
of domestic regulations. Innovation also will not take off in the absence of a supportive culture, 
understanding and adequate resources to carry it forward. While regulation can provide an 
enabling environment, it is for the market participants to exploit the opportunities provided, but 
they have to play the game as per the rules. 
Bank capital regulations – the efficiency-redundancy paradigm 
8. Let me now turn to some specifics. Being a banking regulator and also given the fact that 
our financial system is a bank dominated one, my focus will be largely on the banking sector, 
barring some generalisations panning the entire financial system. The evolving bank capital 
regulations have been more guided by the fact that financial institutions in the developed world 
ventured into risky innovations with the help of excessive leverage and an ex-ante insufficient 
capital. The process of re-regulation went through the global standards setting mechanisms, 
primarily under the Basel Committee and Financial Stability Board. The result is that we got 
into an ‘efficiency-redundancy trade-off’ debate which is all the more relevant to jurisdictions 
that  are  much  less  complex  and  are  wanting financial  inclusion  and  deepening. While  it  is 
important for the Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs) to learn from the 
mistakes of others, we probably need much simpler regulatory approaches given our not so 
complex financial systems and also in view of the need to expand and extend the coverage 
and reach of financial services, given our much underpenetrated financial services industry. 
9.  Moving  ahead  to  other  pertinent  issues  in  this  regard,  if  we  are  dealing  with  a  capital 
intensive industry that is overburdened with compliance, there is a danger of unwittingly setting 
strong  entry  barriers,  encouraging  misallocation  of  resources  and  distorting  incentive 
structures as well as pricing of financial products. 
10. Closer on the heels of efficiency-redundancy trade-off, we have the safety-efficiency trade-
off, the manifestation of which can be seen in the public-private sector bank paradigm in India. 
In  terms  of  public  perception,  the  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  with  the  implicit  government 
support, are considered to be relatively immune to destabilising impacts. However, the same 
sense  of  safety  evades  PSBs  when  it  comes  to  their  valuations.  This  has  an  efficiency 
imperative - when judged by their returns on asset or capital employed. 
11. With the Indian government thinking of new performance based norms for capital infusion, 
this  disconnect  is  sought  to  be  addressed.  There  may  be  a  notion,  albeit  incorrect  and 
incomplete, that, with the government deciding on performance based parameters for deciding 
upon which bank deserves fiscal support. The move to link budgetary capital allocation with 
performance needs to be seen as a serious attempt to convey the right signals to all banks to 
introspect and, if necessary, redefine their business strategies. In other words, in the long run, 
the new norms will be value enhancing for the public sector banks. One caveat though…that 
the frictions  that  hinder the  performance  PSBs need  to  be  completely  eliminated  and  they 
should be allowed to work on commercial principles even as the costs of social banking have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   to be provided for separately. If that is through budgetary support the government may be more 
than compensated through increased revenues from and valuations of PSBs. 
Semantics of shadow banking 
12. The role of the ‘shadow banking system’, defined as ‘credit intermediation involving entities 
and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system’,  as  a  source  of  systemic  risk  was  an 
important learning outcome of the global financial crisis. Its importance stemmed not only from 
its  direct  role  in  supplying  credit  or  liquidity  to  the  economy  but  also  due  to  its 
interconnectedness with the more closely regulated banking system. 
13.  The  motivation  for  regulatory  reforms  in  the  shadow  banking  space  in  developed 
economies, especially in the US, emanated from certain dilemmas that, on the one hand, there 
was a need to de-risk the overgrown complex banking industry which inevitably needs the 
presence of shadow banking entities to absorb those risks and the concerns over the role of 
shadow banking entities in consummating the financial crisis, on the other. For developing 
markets like India these concerns may not be fully valid, given the low penetration of banking 
services, much less complex financial markets and level of regulatory oversight exercised over 
non-banking financial companies (NBFCs). The Indian shadow banking system is relatively 
small and less complex. Besides, the question is how intense the regulatory stance can get, 
so as to keep the costs of regulation commensurate with the systemic impact that these entities 
can  cause  and  to  ensure  that  certain  financial  market  activities  do  not  move  out  of  the 
regulatory perimeter. 
14. However, according to the FSB methodology and classification, the size of the shadow 
banking sector in India is estimated to be around USD 190 billion, which is the 15th largest in 
the world. Among the BRICS, India has the third largest shadow banking sector. This may at 
once be discomforting but it must be understood that the shades of shadow banking in India’s 
relatively underdeveloped financial markets are different, and unlike other major jurisdictions, 
the  concerns  in  this  regard  mainly  relate  to  a  large  pool  of  unregulated  small  entities  with 
varying activity profiles. Thus for us, it is more of a consumer protection issue rather than a 
systemic stability issue and we have been tackling the same. 
Asset quality in banks 
15. Is the current emphasis on asset quality of banks a little overstretched undermining other 
concerns? Asset quality is one of the parameters, that define the strength and resilience of the 
sector; other factors are soundness (capital adequacy), liquidity (liquid assets to total assets), 
profitability and efficiency (cost to income). 
16. While administering the regulatory medicine, we must be discerning in dealing with asset 
quality deterioration that is caused by economic / business cycles and for reasons beyond the 
control  of  borrowers  /  entrepreneurs  to  service  their  loans  from  those  arising  out  of  wilful 
delinquencies  or  over-leveraging.  When  we  are  not  able  to  recognise  this  distinction,  the 
sanctity of official / regulatory ‘forbearance’ is undermined by analysts and investors. 
17. In our own case, such forbearance in the form of restructured standard advances was 
granted to ameliorate the impact of worsening economic conditions. What must be appreciated 
is the fact that restructured advances were disclosed transparently, though we later understood 
that there is an uncertainty in the markets in reading through these numbers and arriving at 
what exactly is the quantum of ‘bad apples’ in the banking sector basket. It is to put an end to 
such  speculation  about  the  asset  quality  issues,  good  governance  required  us  to  take  the 
‘asset quality review’ on a priority basis so that all stakeholders can clearly see the strength of 
the banks’ balance sheets. 
18. Resolving asset quality issues in PSBs also has become little urgent ahead of plans for 
capital  augmentation  under  the  new  dispensation,  if  we  take  into  account  the  behavioural 
dimension, as both lenders and borrowers tend to be drawn towards taking extreme positions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   between  ‘total  risk  aversion’  and  ‘the  temptation  to  take  bigger  gambles’  in  the  face  of 
potentially weaker balance sheets. 
Issues beyond asset quality 
19. We  need  also  to  look  at  issues  other  than  the  quality  of  assets  in  banks,  that  include 
autonomy to take commercial decisions to governance structures, especially where the board 
level  responsibilities  should  go  beyond  ‘box-ticking’  and  that  the  so  called  ‘grey’  or 
‘independent’ directors are truly ‘independent’. 
20.  How  to  improve  the  liquidity  of  banks’  assets  –  both  loans  and  investments?  For  the 
securitisation markets to develop we need to improve the quality of loan origination, which 
solely depends upon ‘ownership of decisions’ relating to loan origination. Directed lending in 
whatever form and outsourcing the loan appraisal function dilutes the concept of owning up 
this crucial decision and hence impacts effective monitoring and asset quality while those who 
have outsourced the loan appraisal have no commitment to the quality of the loan. Coming to 
investments, how do we convert a ‘directed investment’ portfolio of government securities into 
a  liquid  and  desirable  part  of  the  asset  portfolio  aligning  the  same  with  the  new  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR) norms while making way for an effective yield curve off which corporate 
bonds and loans can be priced out and also aiding better monetary policy transmission. 
Debt overhang 
21. Let me turn to the issue of debt and financial leverage in general and in particular the 
corporate leverage in the post crisis context. Businesses all over the world were impacted in 
general due to demand slump. Indian companies too have been hit given the fact that they 
went ahead with their expansion plans before the crisis, unaware of what was unfolding. In the 
developed economies, the ultra-easy monetary policy measures, which also had a quasi-fiscal 
side to them, provided an outlet for the liquidity of the corporate bonds – either directly through 
purchase of corporate paper or through the massive purchases of government and agency 
bonds in turn providing liquidity to the corporate bonds thanks to ‘search for yield’ strategies. 
This  was  besides  the  corporate  bailouts,  like  the  auto  industry  in  the  US.  Leverage  in  its 
extension can be debt overhang. Interesting though is the larger issue that jurisdictions where 
interest  rates  are  negative  or  close  to  zero,  the  concept  of  “debt  overhang”  becomes 
meaningless,  rendering  high  debt-to-GDP  economies  and  their  highly  leveraged  corporate 
solvent, which otherwise are not. We do however recognise the risks that reckless corporate 
leverage poses to the financial system and the systemic stability, but the issue needs to be 
tackled with solutions and timelines that are non-disruptive. 
Looking for the triggers 
22. That brings us to the point that the triggers of financial instability can lie outside the financial 
system and our illustrative list of “macro prudential factors and tools” can still be insufficient. 
Working for financial stability is all about capturing “uncertainty”. While financial models and 
stress testing methodologies are some of the tools that help us in dealing with the issue, they 
are based on observable market parameters. Oftentimes, the problem arises through the so 
called  “illusion  of  knowledge”  (Barber  and  Odean  /  2001)  –  tendency  to  make  stronger 
inference than warranted by the data. The difficulty comes when we have to overlay qualitative 
factors  that  have  a  bearing  on  financial  stability.  For  instance  we  cannot  always  insist  on 
empirical evidence to act upon an early warning. Even when early warning indicators are based 
on data, such indicators may be contradicting other financial indicators. If we can go back to 
the domino theory – We are dealing with a similar situation in financial markets. Triggers for 
the  domino  effect,  latent  in  normal  times  become  potentially  destructive  during  crisis.  The 
challenge is to search for the possible triggers which can initiate a damaging chain reaction. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Communication challenges and financial stability 
23.  The  role  of  communication  becomes  even  more  challenging  in  the  context  of  financial 
stability. There could be occasions, once in a while, when we may have to deal with certain 
non-events – non-events for the financial stability or otherwise. In our own case, even as we 
plan  to  move  over  to  the  IFRS,  there  could  be  changes  in  the  capital  requirements  to 
provisions, though nothing might have changed apparently on the ground. Announcing the 
results of stress tests of financial institutions, while desirable for the sake of greater degree of 
transparency, is fraught with the risks of wrong interpretation and inference. For example, a 
revision in methodology or shift to a revised series of GDP numbers or a shift in the policy 
stance to look at CPI instead of WPI, can throw up differences in the stress test results. The 
individual  impacts  of  “announcement  effects”  may  have  separate  ways  of  dealing  with. 
Sometimes, it would become difficult to convince the public in general, having decided to place 
the  stress  test  results  in  the  public  domain  that  they  talk  about  extreme  events  and  not 
something that is going to happen tomorrow or to comfort the public that stress test results are 
not meant to be predictive. 
Concluding remarks 
24.  Having  spoken  my  own  mind  on  certain  issues  and  concern  in  the  pursuit  of  financial 
stability, let me conclude on a cautious note. The best of the macro prudential policies may fall 
short when it comes to addressing a serious crisis. Future crisis may still evade all our efforts 
to foresee it. Future crises also may not replicate any of the past ones, hence history might not 
always be of help. Complacency may slowly set in even as our memories of the bad times are 
gradually fading away. But, the challenge is how do we establish an implementable framework 
to deal with the emerging systemic risks at their incipient stages? I hope at the end of this 
Conference you may come out with refined solutions to some of the challenges that lie ahead 
of us. 
25. Thank you all for your patient attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
