  Janet L Yellen: The Federal Reserve’s monetary policy toolkit – past, 
present, and future 
Speech  by  Ms  Janet  L  Yellen,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium  “Designing 
resilient  monetary  policy  frameworks  for  the  future”,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  26  August 
2016. 
 The Global Financial Crisis and Great Recession posed daunting new challenges for central 
banks  around  the  world  and  spurred  innovations  in  the  design,  implementation,  and 
communication  of  monetary  policy.  With  the  U.S.  economy  now  nearing  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  statutory  goals  of  maximum  employment  and  price  stability,  this  conference 
provides a timely opportunity to consider how the lessons we learned are likely to influence 
the conduct of monetary policy in the future. 
The  theme  of  the  conference,  “Designing  Resilient  Monetary  Policy  Frameworks  for  the 
Future,”  encompasses  many  aspects  of  monetary  policy,  from  the  nitty-gritty  details  of 
implementing policy in financial markets to broader questions about how policy affects the 
economy.  Within  the  operational  realm,  key  choices  include  the  selection  of  policy 
instruments,  the  specific  markets  in  which  the  central  bank  participates,  and  the  size  and 
structure  of  the  central bank’s balance  sheet. These  topics  are  of  great  importance to  the 
Federal Reserve. As noted in the minutes of last month’s Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC)  meeting,  we  are  studying  many  issues  related  to  policy  implementation, research 
which ultimately will inform the FOMC’s views on how to most effectively conduct monetary 
policy  in  the  years  ahead.  I  expect  that  the  work  discussed  at  this  conference  will  make 
valuable contributions to the understanding of many of these important issues. 
My focus today will be the policy tools that are needed to ensure that we have a resilient 
monetary  policy  framework.  In  particular,  I  will  focus  on  whether  our  existing  tools  are 
adequate  to  respond  to  future  economic  downturns.  As  I  will  argue,  one  lesson  from  the 
crisis  is  that  our  pre-crisis  toolkit  was  inadequate  to  address  the  range  of  economic 
circumstances  that  we  faced.  Looking  ahead,  we  will  likely  need  to  retain  many  of  the 
monetary policy tools that were developed to promote recovery from the crisis. In addition, 
policymakers  inside  and  outside  the  Fed  may  wish  at  some  point  to  consider  additional 
options  to  secure  a  strong  and  resilient  economy.  But  before  I  turn  to  these  longer-run 
issues, I would like to offer a few remarks on the near-term outlook for the U.S. economy and 
the potential implications for monetary policy. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
U.S. economic activity continues to expand, led by solid growth in household spending. But 
business investment remains soft and subdued foreign demand and the appreciation of the 
dollar  since  mid-2014  continue  to  restrain  exports.  While  economic  growth  has  not  been 
rapid, it has been sufficient to generate further improvement in the labor market. Smoothing 
through the monthly ups and downs, job gains averaged 190,000 per month over the past 
three  months.  Although  the  unemployment  rate has  remained  fairly  steady  this  year,  near 
5 percent, broader measures of labor utilization have improved. Inflation has continued to run 
below  the  FOMC’s  objective  of  2  percent,  reflecting  in  part  the  transitory  effects  of  earlier 
declines in energy and import prices. 
Looking ahead, the FOMC expects moderate growth in real gross domestic product (GDP), 
additional strengthening in the labor market, and inflation rising to 2 percent over the next 
few years. Based on this economic outlook, the FOMC continues to anticipate that gradual 
increases  in  the  federal  funds  rate  will  be  appropriate  over  time  to  achieve  and  sustain 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
employment and inflation near our statutory objectives. Indeed, in light of the continued solid 
performance of the labor market and our outlook for economic activity and inflation, I believe 
the  case  for  an  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate  has  strengthened  in  recent  months.  Of 
course,  our  decisions  always  depend  on  the  degree  to  which  incoming  data  continues  to 
confirm the Committee’s outlook. 
And, as ever, the economic outlook is uncertain, and so monetary policy is not on a preset 
course. Our ability to predict how the federal funds rate will evolve over time is quite limited 
because  monetary  policy  will  need  to  respond  to  whatever  disturbances  may  buffet  the 
economy. In addition, the level of short-term interest rates consistent with the dual mandate 
varies over time in response to shifts in underlying economic conditions that are often evident 
only in hindsight. For these reasons, the range of reasonably likely outcomes for the federal 
funds rate is quite wide – a point illustrated by figure 1 in your handout. The line in the center 
is the median path for the federal funds rate based on the FOMC’s Summary of Economic 
Projections in June.1 The shaded region, which is based on the historical accuracy of private 
and government forecasters, shows a 70 percent probability that the federal funds rate will 
be between 0 and 3-1/4 percent at the end of next year and between 0 and 4-1/2 percent at 
the end of 2018.2 The reason for the wide range is that the economy is frequently buffeted by 
shocks and thus rarely evolves as predicted. When shocks occur and the economic outlook 
changes, monetary policy needs to adjust. What we do know, however, is that we want a 
policy toolkit that will allow us to respond to a wide range of possible conditions. 
The pre-crisis toolkit 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy  toolkit  was  simple  but 
effective in the circumstances that then prevailed. Our main tool consisted of open market 
operations  to  manage  the  amount  of  reserve  balances  available  to  the  banking  sector.3 
These  operations,  in  turn,  influenced  the  interest  rate  in  the  federal  funds  market,  where 
banks experiencing reserve shortfalls could borrow from banks with excess reserves. Before 
the onset of the crisis, the volume of reserves was generally small – only about $45 billion or 
so.4 Thus, even small open market operations could have a significant effect on the federal 
funds rate. Changes in the federal funds rate would then be transmitted to other short-term 
interest rates, affecting longer-term interest rates and overall financial conditions and hence 
inflation and economic activity. This simple, light-touch system allowed the Federal Reserve 
to operate with a relatively small balance sheet – less than $1 trillion before the crisis – the 
                                                
1   The  June  2016  Summary  of  Economic  Projections  (SEP)  is  an  addendum  to  the  minutes  of  the  
at 
June 
on 
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20160615.pdf. 
available 
meeting 
website 
Board’s 
FOMC 
2016 
and 
the 
is 
2   The confidence interval equals (subject to a lower bound of 12.5 basis points) the median SEP path for the 
federal funds rate plus or minus average root mean squared prediction errors (RMSPEs) of the three-month 
Treasury bill rate, for horizons from zero to nine quarters ahead, based on forecast errors made over the past 
20 years. Average RMSPEs are calculated as the mean of the RMSPEs of the following forecasters, subject 
to  availability  for  the  horizon  in  question:  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  staff  (Greenbook/Tealbook),  the 
Administration,  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  the  Blue  Chip  consensus  forecast,  and  the  Survey  of 
Professional  Forecasters.  Differences  in  predictive  accuracy  among  these  forecasters  are  not  statistically 
significant.  For  more  information  on  the  general  methodology  used  to  construct  confidence  intervals  using 
historical forecasting errors, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the 
Economic  Outlook  from  Historical  Forecasting  Errors  (PDF),”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series 
2007–60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 
3   Open market operations at the time were primarily repurchase agreements based on Treasury securities, with 
primary dealers as counterparties. 
4   Reserves of depository institutions include vault cash and balances maintained with Federal Reserve Banks. 
Excess reserves are the reserves held over and above required reserves. See the Board’s webpage “Reserve 
Requirements” at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/reservereq.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
size of which was largely determined by the need to supply enough U.S. currency to meet 
demand.5  
The global financial crisis revealed two main shortcomings of this simple toolkit. The first was 
an inability to control the federal funds rate once reserves were no longer relatively scarce. 
Starting in late 2007, faced with acute financial market distress, the Federal Reserve created 
programs to keep credit flowing to households and businesses.6 The loans extended under 
those programs helped stabilize the financial system. But the additional reserves created by 
these programs, if left unchecked, would have pushed down the federal funds rate, driving it 
well  below  the  FOMC’s  target.  To  prevent  such  an  outcome,  the  Federal  Reserve  took 
several  steps  to  offset  (or  sterilize)  the  effect  of  its  liquidity  and  credit  operations  on 
reserves.7  By  the  fall  of  2008,  however,  the  reserve  effects  of  our  liquidity  and  credit 
programs threatened to become too large to sterilize via asset sales and other existing tools. 
Without sufficient sterilization capacity, the quantity of reserves increased to a point that the 
Federal Reserve had difficulty maintaining effective control over the federal funds rate. 
Of course, by the end of 2008, stabilizing the federal funds rate at a level materially above 
zero  was not an  immediate concern because the economy clearly needed very low short-
term  interest  rates.  Faced  with  a  steep  rise  in  unemployment  and  declining  inflation,  the 
FOMC  lowered  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  to  near  zero,  a  reduction  of  roughly 
5 percentage  points  over  the  previous  year  and  a  half.  Nonetheless,  a  variety  of  policy 
benchmarks would, at least in hindsight, have called for pushing the federal funds rate well 
below  zero  during  the  economic  downturn.8  That  doing  so  was  impossible  highlights  the 
second serious limitation of our pre-crisis policy toolkit: its inability to generate substantially 
more accommodation than could be provided by a near-zero federal funds rate. 
                                                
5   Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  size  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  was  about  $900  billion.  Assets  consisted 
almost  entirely  of  Treasury  securities.  Liabilities  included  currency  held  by  the  public  and  a  relatively  
small 
see 
on 
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedsbalancesheet.htm. 
For  more 
balances. 
balance 
reserve 
volume 
sheet, 
Fed’s 
the 
of 
6   For information on the Federal Reserve’s credit and liquidity programs that were implemented in response to 
the  financial  crisis,  see  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_crisisresponse.htm  on  the  Board’s 
website. 
7   Reserves were initially taken out of the banking system by not reinvesting principal payments from maturing 
securities  and  later  by  selling  portions  of  securities  holdings.  In  September  2008,  the  Department  of  the 
Treasury announced the temporary Supplementary Financing Program, in which the proceeds of a series of 
Treasury  bill  auctions,  separate  from  Treasury’s  routine  borrowing,  were  maintained  in  an  account  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  The  funds  in  this  account  served  to  drain  reserves  from  the  banking 
system. 
8   Consider the following policy rule: R(t) = R* + p(t) + 0.5[p(t)-p*]-2.0[U(t)-U*], where R is the federal funds rate, 
R* is the longer-run normal value of the federal funds rate adjusted for inflation, p is the four-quarter moving 
average of core PCE inflation, p* is the FOMC’s target for inflation (2 percent), U is the unemployment rate, 
and U* is the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Based on the medians of FOMC participants’ latest 
longer-run  projections,  R*  is  approximately  1  percent  and  U*  is  about  4.8  percent.  Accordingly,  with  the 
unemployment rate climbing to 10 percent and core PCE inflation falling to 1 percent in 2009, this rule would 
have prescribed lowering the federal funds rate to minus 9 percent at the depths of the recession. In contrast, 
the  standard  Taylor  rule,  which  is  half  as  responsive  to  movements  in  resource  utilization,  would  have 
prescribed lowering the federal funds rate to minus 3-3/4 percent using the same estimates for R* and U*. The 
more aggressive rule does a reasonably good job of accounting for movements in the federal funds rate in the 
decade prior to its falling to its effective lower bound in late 2008, see David Reifschneider (2016), “Gauging 
the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2016–068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). For more information 
on the standard Taylor rule, see John B. Taylor (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Our expanded toolkit 
To address the challenges posed by the financial crisis and the subsequent severe recession 
and slow recovery, the Federal Reserve significantly expanded its monetary policy toolkit. In 
2006, the Congress had approved plans to allow the Fed, beginning in 2011, to pay interest 
on banks’ reserve balances.9 In the fall of 2008, the Congress moved up the effective date of 
this  authority  to  October  2008.  That  authority  was  essential.  Paying  interest  on  reserve 
balances enables the Fed to break the strong link between the quantity of reserves and the 
level of the federal funds rate and, in turn, allows the Federal Reserve to control short-term 
interest rates when reserves are plentiful. In particular, once economic conditions warrant a 
higher level for market interest rates, the Federal Reserve could raise the interest rate paid 
on  excess  reserves  –  the  IOER  rate.  A  higher  IOER  rate  encourages  banks  to  raise  the 
interest rates they charge, putting upward pressure on market interest rates regardless of the 
level of reserves in the banking sector. 
While  adjusting  the  IOER  rate  is  an  effective  way  to  move  market  interest  rates  when 
reserves  are  plentiful,  federal  funds  have  generally  traded  below  this  rate.  This  relative 
softness of the federal funds rate reflects, in part, the fact that only depository institutions can 
earn the IOER rate. To put a more effective floor under short-term interest rates, the Federal 
Reserve  created  supplementary  tools  to  be  used  as  needed.  For  instance,  the  overnight 
reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility is available to a variety of counterparties, 
including  eligible  money  market  funds,  government-sponsored  enterprises,  broker-dealers, 
and depository institutions. Through it, eligible counterparties may invest funds overnight with 
the Federal Reserve at a rate determined by the FOMC. Similar to the payment of IOER, the 
ON  RRP  facility  discourages  participating  institutions  from  lending  at  a  rate  substantially 
below that offered by the Fed.10  
Our  current  toolkit  proved  effective  last  December.  In  an  environment  of  superabundant 
reserves, the FOMC raised the effective federal funds rate – that is, the weighted average 
rate on federal funds transactions among participants in that market – by the desired amount, 
and we have since maintained the federal funds rate in its target range. 
Two  other  major  additions  to  the  Fed’s  toolkit  were  large-scale  asset  purchases  and 
increasingly  explicit  forward  guidance.11  Both  were  used  to  provide  additional  monetary 
policy  accommodation  after  short-term  interest  rates  fell  close  to  zero.  Our  purchases  of 
Treasury  and  mortgage-related  securities  in  the  open  market  pushed  down  longer-term 
borrowing  rates  for  millions  of  American  families  and  businesses.  Extended  forward  rate 
guidance – announcing that we intended to keep short-term interest rates lower for longer 
than  might  have  otherwise  been  expected  –  also  put  significant  downward  pressure  on 
longer-term  borrowing  rates,  as  did  guidance  regarding  the  size  and  scope  of  our  asset 
purchases. 
In light of the slowness of the economic recovery, some have questioned the effectiveness of 
asset purchases and extended forward rate guidance. But this criticism fails to consider the 
unusual  headwinds  the  economy  faced  after  the  crisis.  Those  headwinds  included 
substantial household and business deleveraging, unfavorable demand shocks from abroad, 
a  period  of  contractionary  fiscal  policy,  and  unusually  tight  credit,  especially  for  housing. 
Studies  have  found  that  our  asset  purchases  and  extended  forward  rate  guidance  put 
appreciable  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates  and,  as  a  result,  helped  spur 
                                                
9   Paying interest on reserves is a tool commonly used by central banks, including the Bank of England, the 
Bank of Japan, and the European Central Bank. 
10   Other tools that could help strengthen the floor under short-term interest rates but are not currently in use 
include the Term Deposit Facility and term reverse repurchase agreements. 
11   Prior to the crisis, the Fed occasionally used forward guidance pertaining to the likely future path of interest 
rates, but that guidance was usually confined to a relatively short time frame. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
growth  in  demand  for  goods  and  services,  lower  the  unemployment  rate,  and  prevent 
inflation from falling further below our 2 percent objective.12  
Two of the Fed’s most important new tools – our authority to pay interest on excess reserves 
and  our  asset  purchases  –  interacted  importantly.  Without  IOER  authority,  the  Federal 
Reserve would have been reluctant to buy as many assets as it did because of the longer-
run implications for controlling the stance of monetary policy. While we were buying assets 
aggressively to help bring the U.S. economy out of a severe recession, we also had to keep 
in mind whether and how we would be able to remove monetary policy accommodation when 
appropriate.  That  issue  was  particularly  relevant  because  we  fund  our  asset  purchases 
through  the  creation  of  reserves,  and  those  additional  reserves  would  have  made  it  ever 
more difficult for the pre-crisis toolkit to raise short-term interest rates when needed. 
The  FOMC  considered  removing  accommodation  by  first  reducing  our  asset  holdings 
(including through asset sales) and raising the federal funds rate only after our balance sheet 
had  contracted  substantially.  But  we  decided  against  this  approach  because  our  ability  to 
predict  the  effects  of  changes  in  the  balance  sheet  on  the  economy  is  less  than  that 
associated  with  changes  in  the  federal  funds  rate.  Excessive  inflationary  pressures  could 
arise if assets were sold too slowly. Conversely, financial markets and the economy could 
potentially be destabilized if assets were sold too aggressively. Indeed, the so-called taper 
tantrum  of  2013  illustrates  the  difficulty  of  predicting  financial  market  reactions  to 
announcements  about  the  balance  sheet.  Given  the  uncertainty  and  potential  costs 
associated  with  large-scale  asset  sales,  the  FOMC  instead  decided  to  begin  removing 
monetary policy accommodation primarily by adjusting short-term interest rates rather than 
by  actively  managing  its  asset  holdings.13  That  strategy  –  raising  short-term  interest  rates 
once  the  recovery  was  sufficiently  advanced  while  maintaining  a  relatively  large  balance 
sheet  and  plentiful  bank  reserves  –  depended  on  our  ability  to  pay  interest  on  excess 
reserves. 
Where do we go from here? 
What  does  the future  hold  for the  Fed’s  toolkit?  For  starters,  our  ability  to  use  interest  on 
reserves is likely to play a key role for years to come. In part, this reflects the outlook for our 
balance sheet over the next few years. As the FOMC has noted in its recent statements, at 
some point after the process of raising the federal funds rate is well under way, we will cease 
or phase out reinvesting repayments of principal from our securities holdings. Once we stop 
reinvestment,  it  should take  several  years for  our  asset  holdings  –  and  the  bank reserves 
used to finance them – to passively decline to a more normal level. But even after the volume 
of reserves falls substantially, IOER will still be important as a contingency tool, because we 
                                                
12   See, for instance, Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), “The Financial 
Market  Effects  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases,”  International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking, vol. 7 (March), pp. 3–43; and Stefania D’Amico, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward 
Nelson  (2012),  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchase  Programmes:  Rationale  and  Effects,” 
Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415–46. Moreover, the Federal Reserve’s forward guidance and 
asset purchase policies have been estimated to have helped lower unemployment and boost inflation; see 
Eric  M.  Engen,  Thomas  Laubach,  and  David  Reifschneider  (2015),  “The  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  the 
Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–005 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). 
13   The  FOMC’s  “Policy  Normalization  Principles and  Plans”  call  for  reducing  the  Federal  Reserve’s  securities 
holdings  in  a  “gradual  and  predictable  manner  primarily  by  ceasing  to  reinvest  repayments  of  principal  on 
securities held in the [System Open Market Account]” (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2014),  “Federal  Reserve  Issues  FOMC  Statement  on  Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans,”  press 
release,  September  17,  second  bullet).  Consistent  with  those  plans,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
anticipates that it will maintain its current reinvestment strategy “until normalization of the level of the federal 
funds rate is well under way” (for instance, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), 
“Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, December 16, paragraph 5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
may need to purchase assets during future recessions to supplement conventional interest 
rate reductions.14 Forecasts now show the federal funds rate settling at about 3 percent in 
the longer run.15 In contrast, the federal funds rate averaged more than 7 percent between 
1965 and 2000. Thus, we expect to have less scope for interest rate cuts than we have had 
historically. 
In part, current expectations for a low future federal funds rate reflect the FOMC’s success in 
stabilizing inflation at around 2 percent – a rate much lower than rates that prevailed during 
the 1970s and 1980s. Another key factor is the marked decline over the past decade, both 
here and abroad, in the long-run neutral real rate of interest – that is, the inflation-adjusted 
short-term interest rate consistent with keeping output at its potential on average over time.16 
Several  developments  could  have  contributed  to  this  apparent  decline,  including  slower 
growth  in  the  working-age  populations  of many  countries, smaller  productivity  gains  in  the 
advanced economies, a decreased propensity to spend in the wake of the financial crises 
around the world since the late 1990s, and perhaps a paucity of attractive capital projects 
worldwide.17 Although these factors may help explain  why bond  yields have fallen to such 
low levels here and abroad, our understanding of the forces driving long-run trends in interest 
rates is nevertheless limited, and thus all predictions in this area are highly uncertain.18  
Would  an  average  federal  funds  rate  of  about  3  percent  impair  the  Fed’s  ability  to  fight 
recessions? Based on the FOMC’s behavior in past recessions, one might think that such a 
                                                
14   If the FOMC were to again increase the size of the balance sheet markedly in response to a future recession, 
then  the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves could  be  critical  during  the  subsequent  recovery  period  to help 
control short-term interest rates while the balance sheet remains elevated. Beyond this motivation for retaining 
IOER, the ability to pay interest on reserves could also be important to the operation of any special liquidity 
and credit facilities that might be created to deal with systemic disruptions to the financial system during a 
future emergency. In particular, such facilities could significantly expand the supply of reserves, which would 
be problematic if the FOMC wished to keep short-term interest rates from falling to zero. 
the 
level  of 
15   In  the  Blue  Chip  Financial  Indicators  survey  released  on  June  1,  2016,  the  consensus  forecast  for  the  
in  June  2016  
longer-run 
federal 
individual  
their 
generally  anticipated  a  slightly 
forecasts  was 
at 
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20160615ep.htm). The latest long-run forecast from the 
Administration  (www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2016/assets/16msr.pdf)  is  also  close  to 
3 percent,  as  was  the  projection  made  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  earlier  in  the  year  (see 
www.cbo.gov/about/products/budget_economic_data). 
funds  rate  was  3.2  percent.  FOMC  participants 
the  median  of 
lower 
(see 
2016  SEP, 
longer-run 
table 
1 
that 
June 
level, 
of 
available 
percent 
in 
the 
3 
16   Updated estimates from the model developed by Laubach and Williams (2003) indicate that the real long-run 
neutral or “equilibrium” short-term interest rate in the United States is currently about 2–1/2 percentage points 
lower than it was on average in the 1980s and 1990s (see Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), 
“Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest,”  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  vol.  85  (November),  
pp.  1063–70;  updated  estimates  are  available  at  www.frbsf.org/economic-research/economists/john-
williams/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx.). In addition, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016) find 
significant  but  somewhat  smaller  declines  in  equilibrium  rates  for  the  euro  area,  Canada,  and  the  United 
Kingdom (see Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate 
of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,” Working Paper 2016–11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco, June), www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2016–11.pdf). 
17   For a discussion of the possible role played by these factors in explaining the current low level of interest rates 
in  the  United  States  and  other  advanced  economies,  see  Lawrence  H.  Summers  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic 
Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), 
pp.  65–73;  Robert  J.  Gordon  (2014),  “The  Demise  of  U.S.  Economic  Growth:  Restatement,  Rebuttal,  and 
Reflections,”  NBER  Working  Paper  19895  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
February); and Ben S. Bernanke (2015), “Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 2: Secular Stagnation,” Ben 
Bernanke’s Blog, blog post (Washington: Brookings Institution, March 31). 
18   For  example,  see  James  D.  Hamilton,  Ethan  S.  Harris,  Jan  Hatzius,  and  Kenneth  D.  West  (2015),  “The 
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,” NBER Working Paper 21476 (Cambridge, Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, August); and Olivier Blanchard (2016), “Three Remarks on the U.S. 
Treasury  Yield  Curve,”  Realtime  Economic  Issues  Watch  (Washington:  Peterson  Institute  for  International 
Economics, June 22). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
low interest rate could substantially impair policy effectiveness. As shown in the first column 
of the table in the handout, during the past nine recessions, the FOMC cut the federal funds 
rate by amounts ranging from about 3 percentage points to more than 10 percentage points. 
On  average, the  FOMC  reduced rates  by  about  5–1/2  percentage  points,  which  seems to 
suggest that the FOMC would face a shortfall of about 2–1/2 percentage points for dealing 
with an average-sized recession. But this simple comparison exaggerates the limitations on 
policy created by the zero lower bound. As shown in the second column, the federal funds 
rate at the start of the past seven recessions was appreciably above the level consistent with 
the economy operating at potential in the longer run. In most cases, this tighter-than-normal 
stance of policy before the recession appears to have reflected some combination of initially 
higher-than-normal  labor  utilization  and  elevated  inflation  pressures.  As  a  result,  a  large 
portion of the rate cuts that subsequently occurred during these recessions represented the 
undoing of the earlier tight stance of monetary policy. Of course, this situation could occur 
again in the future. But if it did, the federal funds rate at the onset of the recession would be 
well above its normal level, and the FOMC would be able to cut short-term interest rates by 
substantially more than 3 percentage points. 
A  recent  paper  takes  a  different  approach  to  assessing  the  FOMC’s  ability  to  respond  to 
future  recessions  by  using  simulations  of  the  FRB/US  model.19  This  analysis  begins  by 
asking how the economy would respond to a set of highly adverse shocks if policymakers 
followed a fairly aggressive policy rule, hypothetically assuming that they can cut the federal 
funds  rate  without  limit.20  It  then  imposes  the  zero  lower  bound  and  asks  whether  some 
combination  of  forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases  would  be  sufficient  to  generate 
economic  conditions  at  least  as  good  as  those  that  occur  under  the  hypothetical 
unconstrained policy. In general, the study concludes that, even if the average level of the 
federal funds rate in the future is only 3 percent, these new tools should be sufficient unless 
the recession were to be unusually severe and persistent. 
Figure 2 in your handout illustrates this point. It shows simulated paths for interest rates, the 
unemployment  rate,  and  inflation  under  three  different  monetary  policy  responses  –  the 
aggressive  rule  in  the  absence  of  the  zero  lower  bound  constraint,  the  constrained 
aggressive  rule,  and  the  constrained  aggressive  rule  combined  with  $2  trillion  in  asset 
purchases and guidance that the federal funds rate will depart from the rule by staying lower 
for longer.21  As the blue dashed line shows, the federal funds rate would fall far below zero if 
                                                
19   FRB/US model simulations have several advantages for analyzing this issue. For one, the model’s structure 
allows  the  public’s  expectations  for  interest  rates,  inflation,  and  other  factors  to  take  full  account  of  the 
implications  of  the  effective  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates,  changes  in  future  monetary  policy  as 
signaled  by  forward  guidance,  and  asset  purchases.  In  addition,  the  model  incorporates  the  low 
responsiveness of inflation to movements in resource utilization seen in recent years as well as the effects of 
asset purchases on term premiums, and thus a variety of longer-term interest rates, equity prices, and the 
foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar.  For  a  further  discussion  about  the  advantages  (and  possible 
disadvantages) of using the FRB/US model to study this issue, see Reifschneider, “Gauging the Ability of the 
FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions,” in note 8. 
20   The aggressive rule is R(t) = 1.0 + p(t) + 0.5 [p(t)-2] – 2.0 [4.8 – U(t)], where R is the federal funds rate, p is 
the four-quarter moving average of core PCE inflation, and U is the unemployment rate. Note that baseline 
values of the equilibrium real rate, the natural rate of unemployment, and the target rate of inflation used in the 
simulation analysis – 1.0 percent, 4.8 percent, and 2.0 percent, respectively – are consistent with the medians 
of  the  latest  long-run  projections  of  individual  FOMC  participants.  As  discussed  by  Taylor  (1999),  this  rule 
appears to do a good job in stabilizing real activity and inflation in a wide range of economic models (see John 
B. Taylor (1999), “Introduction,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press), pp. 1–14). 
21   The forward guidance is provided at the start of the recession and has three components. First, the federal 
funds rate will be lowered to zero more quickly than prescribed by the rule. Second, the federal funds rate will 
remain at zero as long as the unemployment rate is greater than 5 percent. And, finally, that after the initial 
increase in the federal funds rate, policymakers will proceed gradually in returning to the prescriptions of the 
policy rule. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
policy  were  unconstrained,  thereby  causing  long-term  interest  rates  to  fall  sharply.  But 
despite the lower bound, asset purchases and forward guidance can push long-term interest 
rates even lower on average than in the unconstrained case (especially when adjusted for 
inflation) by reducing term premiums and increasing the downward pressure on the expected 
average value of future short-term interest rates. Thus, the use of such tools could result in 
even better outcomes for unemployment and inflation on average. 
Of  course,  this  analysis  could  be  too  optimistic.  For  one,  the  FRB/US  simulations  may 
overstate  the  effectiveness  of  forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases,  particularly  in  an 
environment where long-term interest rates are also likely to be unusually low.22 In addition, 
policymakers  could  have  less  ability  to  cut  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  future  than  the 
simulations  assume.  By  some  calculations,  the real  neutral  rate  is  currently  close  to  zero, 
and it could remain at this low level if we were to continue to see slow productivity growth 
and high global saving.23 If so, then the average level of the nominal federal funds rate down 
the  road  might  turn  out  to  be  only  2  percent,  implying  that  asset  purchases  and  forward 
guidance  might  have  to  be  pushed  to  extremes  to  compensate.24  Moreover,  relying  too 
heavily on these nontraditional tools could have unintended consequences. For example, if 
future policymakers responded to a severe recession by announcing their intention to keep 
the  federal  funds  rate  near  zero  for  a  very  long  time  after  the  economy  had  substantially 
recovered and followed through on that guidance, then they might inadvertently encourage 
excessive risk-taking and so undermine financial stability. 
Finally, the simulation analysis certainly overstates the FOMC’s current ability to respond to a 
recession, given that there is little scope to cut the federal funds rate at the moment. But that 
does  not  mean  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  be  unable  to  provide  appreciable 
accommodation should the ongoing expansion falter in the near term. In addition to taking 
the federal funds rate back down to nearly zero, the FOMC could resume asset purchases 
and  announce  its  intention  to keep  the federal funds  rate  at  this  level  until  conditions  had 
improved  markedly  –  although  with  long-term  interest  rates  already  quite  low,  the  net 
stimulus that would result might be somewhat reduced. 
Despite  these  caveats,  I  expect  that  forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases  will  remain 
important  components  of  the  Fed’s  policy  toolkit.  In  addition,  it  is  critical  that  the  Federal 
Reserve and other supervisory agencies continue to do all they can to ensure a strong and 
resilient financial system. That said, these tools are not a panacea, and future policymakers 
could find that they are not adequate to deal with deep and prolonged economic downturns. 
                                                
22   As shown in figure 2, the 10-year Treasury yield in the simulation starts out at just over 4 percent, well below 
its level pre-crisis, suggesting that there may be less room to push down long-term interest rates in the future 
than in the past. Another potential source of overstatement could be the FRB/US assumption that changes in 
long-term interest rates, whether driven by shifts in term premiums or shifts in the expected path of short-term 
interest rates, have the same influence on real activity, as there is some empirical evidence that the estimated 
sensitivity of spending to movements in term premiums alone may be relatively small; see Michael T. Kiley 
(2014),  “The  Aggregate  Demand  Effects  of  Short-  and  Long-Term  Interest  Rates,”  International  Journal  of 
Central Banking, vol. 10 (December), pp. 69–104. On the other hand, the effectiveness of forward guidance in 
the  FRB/US model is materially  less  than  it is in some  other  models, implying  that the FRB/US  simulation 
results could potentially understate the stimulus provided by the announcement of a lower-for-longer policy. 
See  Hess  Chung  (2015),  “The  Effects  of  Forward  Guidance  in  Three  Macro  Models,”  FEDS  Notes 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 26). 
23   In principle, the federal funds rate in the longer run could also turn out to be lower than currently predicted if 
inflation were to remain persistently below 2 percent. However, because a higher rate of inflation can arguably 
be  achieved  over  time  through  a  sufficiently  tight  labor  market,  this  risk  seems  low  to  me  as  long  as  the 
Federal Reserve is committed to achieving its inflation objective. 
24   In  the  simulations  reported  by  Reifschneider,  “Gauging  the  Ability  of  the  FOMC  to  Respond  to  Future 
Recessions,”  in  note  8,  overcoming  the  effects  of  the  zero  lower  bound  during  a  severe  recession  would 
require about $4 trillion in asset purchases and pledging to stay low for even longer if the average future level 
of the federal funds rate is only 2 percent. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For these reasons, policymakers and society more broadly may want to explore additional 
options for helping to foster a strong economy. 
On the monetary policy side, future policymakers might choose to consider some additional 
tools  that  have  been  employed  by  other  central  banks,  though  adding  them  to  our  toolkit 
would require a very careful weighing of costs and benefits and, in some cases, could require 
legislation.  For  example,  future  policymakers  may  wish  to  explore  the  possibility  of 
purchasing a broader range of assets. Beyond that, some observers have suggested raising 
the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective or implementing policy through alternative monetary 
policy frameworks, such as price-level or nominal GDP targeting. I should stress, however, 
that  the  FOMC  is  not  actively  considering  these  additional  tools  and  policy  frameworks, 
although they are important subjects for research. 
Beyond monetary policy, fiscal policy has traditionally played an important role in dealing with 
severe  economic  downturns.  A  wide  range  of  possible  fiscal  policy  tools  and  approaches 
could enhance the cyclical stability of the economy.25 For example, steps could be taken to 
increase the effectiveness of the automatic stabilizers, and some economists have proposed 
that greater fiscal support could be usefully provided to state and local governments during 
recessions. As always, it would be important to ensure that any fiscal policy changes did not 
compromise long-run fiscal sustainability. 
Finally,  and  most  ambitiously,  as  a  society  we  should  explore  ways  to  raise  productivity 
growth. Stronger productivity growth would tend to raise the average level of interest rates 
and therefore would provide the Federal Reserve with greater scope to ease monetary policy 
in  the  event  of  a  recession.  But  more  importantly,  stronger  productivity  growth  would 
enhance  Americans’  living  standards.  Though  outside  the  narrow  field  of  monetary  policy, 
many  possibilities  in  this  arena  are  worth  considering,  including  improving  our  educational 
system  and  investing  more  in  worker  training;  promoting  capital  investment  and  research 
spending, both private and public; and looking for ways to reduce regulatory burdens while 
protecting important economic, financial, and social goals. 
Conclusion 
Although fiscal policies and structural reforms can play an important role in strengthening the 
U.S. economy, my primary message today is that I expect monetary policy will continue to 
play a vital part in promoting a stable and healthy economy. New policy tools, which helped 
the Federal Reserve respond to the financial crisis and Great Recession, are likely to remain 
useful  in  dealing  with  future  downturns.  Additional  tools  may  be  needed  and  will  be  the 
subject of research and debate. But even if average interest rates remain lower than in the 
past,  I  believe  that  monetary  policy  will,  under  most  conditions,  be  able  to  respond 
effectively. 
 
                                                 
25   For further discussion of ways to enhance the effectiveness of fiscal policy in stabilizing the economy, see 
Xavier  Debrun  and  Radhicka  Kapoor  (2010),  “Fiscal  Policy  and  Macroeconomic  Stability:  Automatic 
Stabilizers Work, Always and Everywhere (PDF),” IMF Working Paper WP/10/111 (Washington: International 
Monetary  Fund,  May);  Antonio  Fatás  and  Ilian  Mihov  (2012),  “Fiscal  Policy  as  a  Stabilization  Tool,”  B.E. 
Journal  of  Macroeconomics,  vol.  12  (October),  pp.  1–66;  International  Monetary  Fund  (2015),  “Can  Fiscal 
Policy Stabilize Output? (PDF)“ chapter 2 in Fiscal Monitor (Washington: IMF, April), pp. 21–48; and Alisdair 
McKay  and  Ricardo  Reis  (2016),  “The  Role  of  Automatic  Stabilizers  in  the  U.S.  Business  Cycle,” 
Econometrica, vol. 84 (January), pp. 141–94. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
