   Mario Draghi: On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our 
economic potential 
Text of the 5th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, President of 
the European Central Bank, at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
 The Footnotes can be found at the end of the text. 
In a speech in Vienna last week, I explained why monetary policy could deliver the appropriate 
level  of  stimulus  to  the  economy,  even  in  a  setting  where  interest  rates  are  close  to  their 
effective lower bound.[1] As inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, a committed central 
bank  can  always  fulfil  its  mandate.  And  that  is  true  independently  of  the  stance  of  other 
macroeconomic policies. 
But  monetary  policy  does  not  exist  in  a  vacuum.  The  situation  of  central  banks  is  better 
described as independence in interdependence, since other policies matter a great deal. They 
can buttress or dilute the effects of our policy. They can slow down or speed up the return to 
stability.  And  they  can  determine  whether  stability  is  accompanied  by  prosperity,  which  is 
directly relevant to the social cohesion of the euro area. 
It is these interactions, and why they matter, that I would like to talk about today. 
Policy interactions in stabilising the economy 
The objective of the ECB is defined as delivering a rate of inflation below but close to 2% over 
the medium term. But the medium term is not a fixed period of time. When faced with adverse 
shocks, the pace at which monetary policy can bring inflation back to the objective depends 
on  two  factors:  the  nature  of  the  shock  itself,  and  the  conditions  in  which  monetary  policy 
operates. 
Some types of disturbance will inevitably depress inflation for longer than others and make the 
return to the objective slower. The recent succession of global oil supply shocks is a prime 
example. In that context, the job of monetary policy is not to fight short-term shocks to prices, 
but to prevent them from feeding into longer-term inflation dynamics – or put another way, it is 
to make sure that the effect of shocks on inflation is no more persistent than it needs to be. So 
when we talk about returning inflation to our objective without undue delay, this is what we 
mean. The return to price stability should take no longer than implied by the nature of the 
shocks we are facing. 
But this is not entirely dependent on our actions, due to the second factor – the conditions in 
which we operate. Monetary policy can act decisively to support demand, to stabilise inflation 
expectations and to avert second round effects on wages and prices, which is exactly what the 
ECB has done over the past two years.[2] But the orientation of other policies also influences 
the  speed  with  which  output  returns  to  potential.  So  if  other  policies  are  not  aligned  with 
monetary policy, inflation risks returning to our objective at a slower pace. 
There are a number of policy areas that matter in this regard. 
First,  for  monetary  policy  to  stoke  demand  and  inflation,  it  matters  crucially  whether  the 
financial system is able to relay our policy impulses efficiently to the economy. In the euro area 
that transmission mechanism has been impeded repeatedly in the past, initially by rising risk 
premia linked to unwarranted fears about the survival of the euro area, and later by widespread 
bank  deleveraging.[3] That  has  diluted the  effectiveness  of  our  stimulus  and  lengthened the 
“long and variable” lags over which monetary policy works. 
We have compensated for this by designing our measures to remove transmission blockages, 
as well as including an asset quality review in the comprehensive assessment of bank balance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   sheets that we launched in 2013. Both measures have helped ease financing conditions, as 
we can see in our bank lending surveys. But bank balance sheets have not yet been fully 
repaired, as illustrated by the high stock of non-performing loans in some parts of the euro 
area.  So  more  work-out  of  these  non-performing  assets  will  have  to  take  place,  and  the 
conditions for that will have to be put in place by the right policies and authorities. 
Second, it matters for monetary policy whether fiscal policy is steering aggregate demand in 
the same direction, and how strongly. Fiscal policy was contractionary for several years in the 
euro area following the loss of confidence in sovereign credit in 2010, and the negative effect 
on growth was exacerbated by the fact that consolidation in some countries was implemented 
mainly through tax rises rather than current spending cuts.[4] 
This placed the full burden of macroeconomic stabilisation on monetary policy. And in a context 
of disrupted transmission, that has led to a slower return of output to potential than if fiscal 
policy had been more supportive. 
This  is  why  the  ECB  has  said  many  times  that  fiscal  policy  should  work  with  not  against 
monetary policy, and the aggregate fiscal stance in the euro area is now slightly expansionary. 
But supporting demand is not just a question of the budget balance, but also of its composition, 
especially the tax burden and the share of public investment. So we should not see fiscal policy 
as solely a macroeconomic tool, which is only available to countries with strong public finances. 
We should also see it as a microeconomic policy tool that can enhance growth even when 
public finances need to be consolidated. 
Third, it matters for monetary policy whether the right structural policies are in place. Structural 
reforms can help limit the depth and duration of shocks, which in turn supports the anchoring 
of inflation expectations and keeps real interest rates low.[5] Such reforms can also reduce the 
transmission lag of our measures, since a more flexible, more responsive economy is likely to 
transmit monetary policy impulses faster.[6] And they produce higher potential growth, which 
leads to higher investment and hence a higher equilibrium real rate. That creates the conditions 
for the central bank to return to conventional interest rate policy as the means to deliver price 
stability. 
In  the  euro  area,  many  structural  reforms  have  been  implemented  in  recent  years,  and 
especially in those countries worst-hit by the crisis. The benefits can now be seen. But there 
are many more benefits still to aim for, and so much more needs to be done. 
Finally, uncertainty over the institutional stability of the euro area also matters for monetary 
policy, since it too can slow down the transmission of monetary policy. Firms that lack sufficient 
visibility over their operating environment over the years to come may understandably choose 
to deter or even abandon investment plans. That is especially so when the return on those 
investments depends strongly on the size and openness of the market provided by the euro 
area and the European Union. This has been clear in the past when the future of the euro area 
has been called into question. 
And that sort of uncertainty not only impacts on firms that borrow to finance real investment. It 
can also affect the saving rate of firms and households, as the perception of higher risk can 
call for higher precautionary savings. This would obviously run against the efforts of monetary 
policy to stimulate higher investment and consumption. 
So  I  will  only  note  once  more  the  critical  need  to  restore  clarity  and  confidence  on  the 
institutional setup of the euro area. We know that the current setup is incomplete. There is a 
large degree of agreement on what its shortcomings are, and many proposals have been put 
forward on how to overcome them. Progress in this field is necessary for the long-term, but it 
is also relevant for the short-term because of its effect on investment. Indeed, perhaps the best 
way  to  raise  output  today  is  to  remove  the  drag  on  confidence  that  results  from  such 
uncertainties. 
Summing up, there is a large degree of interaction between monetary policy and other policies 
that may in principle be geared towards different objectives. Such interactions do not prevent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   a determined central bank from achieving its objective. But they do affect the time frame over 
which we can do so. What this implies is that, for stabilisation to occur no more slowly than is 
strictly necessary, all policy areas have a role to play. 
And in fact, all policymakers should have a strong motivation to do so, because time matters. 
A too-slow return of output to potential is far from innocuous. On the contrary, it has lasting 
economic consequences, since it can ultimately lead to potential being eroded as well. 
It is well-documented for instance that workers who remain unemployed for too long may suffer 
the effects throughout their life, in the form of reduced employability, reduced productivity and 
reduced income – so-called hysteresis.[7] That is particularly true for younger workers who are 
unemployed  during  the  all-important  formative  years  of  their  careers  and  may  suffer  from 
labour market “scarring”.[8] In the euro area structural unemployment is estimated to have risen 
during the crisis, while youth employment remains high.[9] 
There  is  also  emerging  evidence  that  growing  below  potential  for  too  long  can  erode  that 
potential through its effect on productivity growth. When uncertainty is high, a “wait-and-see” 
attitude can cause the most productive firms not to expand as much as they would otherwise, 
and the least productive firms not to contract as much as they should.[10] In other words – and 
contrary to what is often claimed – too-weak demand can slow down “creative destruction”, 
whereas stronger demand can accelerate it. And there are signs of such effects in the euro 
area, too.[11] 
The cost of delay, then, is that labour and productivity suffer, and the output gap closes in the 
“wrong way” – instead of output rising towards potential, it is potential that falls towards current 
output. 
So it is in fact in everybody’s interest to act without undue delay. For the ECB, this means that 
we do not let inflation undershoot our objective for longer than is avoidable given the nature of 
the  shocks  we  face.  For  others,  it  means  devoting  every  effort  to  ensuring  that  output  is 
returned to potential before subpar growth causes lasting damage. And given the harm that 
has already occurred to potential growth during the crisis, it also means acting decisively to 
raise potential. 
While keeping output close to potential is about the right policy mix, raising potential is above 
all  about  structural  reforms.  This  ultimately  comes  down  to  two  factors  –  employment  and 
productivity. And in both areas there is considerable scope for the euro area to raise output 
with determined reform efforts. 
Raising potential growth 
In  terms  of  employment,  we  know  that  the  euro  area  faces  a  long-term  drag  from  its 
unfavourable demographics. But even accounting for that, I see substantial leeway to lift output 
in the euro area by exploiting the other margins which determine employment: first, by reducing 
the  trend  unemployment  rate,  which  remains  too  high  in  many  countries;  and  second,  by 
raising participation rates, which are still short of international norms in several jurisdictions. 
Reducing trend  unemployment  is  in  part  about  reversing the  hysteresis effects  I  described 
above. But it is important to remember that the crisis only added to an already troubling picture: 
structural unemployment in the euro area was estimated at around 9% even going into the 
crisis, compared with just 5% in the US. This is a consequence of structural features of euro 
area labour markets which have been “ratcheting up” unemployment over successive cycles.[12] 
And it implies that there is a large, latent potential in the euro area labour force which can be 
unleashed with appropriate labour market and activation policies – and more so than in other 
advanced economies. 
Experience  during  the  crisis  has  demonstrated  how  such  reforms  can  work.  Reforms 
implemented by Portugal under its adjustment programme are estimated to have reduced the 
unemployment rate by around 3 percentage points over the 2011–2014 period.[13] Likewise, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Spanish labour market reform in 2012 has been a factor supporting employment growth since 
then.[14] This should give encouragement to reforming countries to continue their efforts – and 
in particular those where high unemployment has persisted for so long that it has been allowed 
to become a social norm. 
But the challenge is not just moving people from unemployment into employment, it is also 
raising the size of the workforce – which is where participation comes in. Though the euro area 
fares quite well in international comparisons, participation rates in some Member States remain 
relatively  low,  with  a  roughly  15  percentage  point  difference  between  the  best  and  worst 
performers. This implies that there is also a latent potential to raise employment on this margin 
with the right structural policies. For example, we have seen participation rates of older workers 
grow  strongly  during  the  crisis,  due  in  part  to  pension  reforms  adopted  in  many  euro  area 
countries.[15] 
Still, despite this untapped reserve for accelerating employment growth, we cannot avoid the 
fact  that,  over  time,  the  inherent  speed  limits  resulting  from  the  euro  area’s  unfavourable 
demographics will start to bite. The euro area’s working age population is projected to start 
gradually decreasing in the next decade. In that context, employment growth is likely to start 
decelerating in the not-too-distant future, even with determined structural reforms, as a higher 
share of people in work will no longer be able to offset the fall in working age population. Even 
higher expected migration is unlikely to be able to fully offset this natural population decline.[16] 
Public policy can certainly help temper these effects through its role in receiving and integrating 
migrants. But since policy cannot do much to alter long run demographic trends, the implication 
is that raising long-term growth will require a complement – namely, raising productivity. 
Raising productivity is difficult. It requires a broader set of reforms, and those reforms typically 
encounter greater resistance from vested interests. That is why many countries have found it 
easier to reform the labour market than other areas during the crisis, and indeed repeated 
attempts since the turn of century to make the Europe “the most competitive and dynamic 
knowledge-based economy in the world” have produced only meagre results.[17] Given the weak 
outlook for euro area growth, however, tackling the productivity challenge can no longer be 
delayed. 
Broadly  speaking,  productivity  growth  comes  through  two  channels.  The  first  is  within-firm 
growth, which depends on the generation and diffusion of new innovations and management 
techniques. The second is across-firm growth, which depends on the movement of resources 
from the least to the most productive firms. The euro area’s comparatively weak performance 
derives from both. 
Indicators on research and development suggest that the euro area is lagging behind in terms 
of  innovative  capacity,  and  particularly  in  the  services  sector.  Indeed,  the  diffusion  of 
information and communication technology appears to have contributed much less to services 
productivity  growth  than  in  the  US,  and  this  accounts  for  much  of  the  weaker  productivity 
performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s.[18] 
At the same time, employment in euro area is undergoing a secular shift from manufacturing 
to  services,  and  this  has  only  been  exacerbated  by  the  patterns  of  job  creation  since  the 
crisis.[19]  Such  shifts  are  of  course  taking  place  in  all  advanced  economies.  But  since 
productivity  growth  in  the  services  sector  is  often  lower  in  the  euro  area,  it  constrains  our 
aggregate productivity more. 
Yet this picture is not necessarily a cause for pessimism. 
For a start, it suggests that there is quite some scope for productivity catch-up through adopting 
digital  technologies.  So  the  debate  that  is  currently  raging  among  US  economists  about 
whether the great waves of technological innovation are now over is, for the time being, less 
relevant.[20] For the euro area the key question is how to create the conditions for more firms to 
move towards the productivity frontier. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What is more, the secular shift from manufacturing to services can be consistent with higher 
productivity if resources are well allocated. In fact, there are very large differences between 
the most and least productive firms within each sector, even more so than across sectors.[21] 
This  implies  that,  even  in  a  services-oriented  economy,  aggregate  productivity  can  still  be 
improved. 
So  the  euro  area  faces  a  twin  policy  challenge:  to  get  more  firms  in  each  sector  to  the 
productivity frontier, and to get more labour and capital to those productive firms. And crucially, 
this would not only boost output, but also employment and wage equality, since labour would 
be concentrating in firms that are both growing and demanding higher value skills. 
To achieve this there are, in my view, three policy priorities. 
First is addressing the structural barriers to knowledge diffusion within Europe. This has many 
facets, but critical are policies that increase trade openness and facilitate firms’ participation in 
value  chains,  as  well  as  a  competitive  business  environment  that  favours  the  adoption  of 
superior managerial practices and organisational structures.[22] The most powerful “quick win” 
we could make here would be to complete the single market, especially in services, since that 
would automatically accelerate diffusion from the European frontier where we already have 
many world leading industries.[23] 
For firms to integrate effectively into the single market, however, they need to be able to scale, 
which is why the second priority is to create the conditions for the most productive firms to 
expand quickly and attract resources. This depends on well-functioning product and labour 
markets, a financial system that channels capital to dynamic firms, and policies that prevent 
resources from becoming trapped in unproductive firms, such as efficient judicial systems and 
bankruptcy laws. Change of that nature creates opportunities, but it can also be perceived as 
threatening for individual workers. So adequate social safety nets have to be in place, too. 
That is also why the third priority is improving human capital. This would benefit workers who 
would gain higher pay due to better-matched skills. And it would benefit productive firms by 
reducing the skill mismatch that constrains their growth.[24] Making progress in this area comes 
down primarily to education, but labour market reforms, such as lifelong learning schemes and 
removing labour market dualities, could also make an important contribution – for instance, by 
providing greater opportunities for both younger and mature workers to gain experience and 
access training, both of which help raise their individual productivity. 
Ultimately, investing in human capital is the key ingredient in making growth both stronger and 
more inclusive. And over time such investment would help the euro area not just to converge 
to the productivity frontier, but also to shift it out. 
Each country of course has its own challenges. But few euro area countries are displaying high 
productivity growth, so there is little doubt that progress could be made almost everywhere. 
That  is  one  reason  why  the  recent  Five  Presidents’  Report  called  for  a  new  convergence 
process among euro area countries, which would move all countries towards best practices on 
structural reforms.[25] What is now crucial is that we move towards a common consensus on 
what the necessary reforms are, how countries should implement them, and then, that the 
process starts. 
Conclusion 
There are many understandable political reasons to delay structural reform, but there are few 
good economic ones. The cost of delay is simply too high. 
Given the interactions between policies that I have described, it is in everyone’s interest that 
the various strands of policy buttress each other – if only because that would shorten the time 
it takes for each to produce its effects. And that would mean that we can bring growth back to 
potential before potential itself becomes damaged. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Of all the ways to accelerate the realisation of our economic potential, perhaps the simplest is 
to remove the uncertainties that hamper long-term decisions and hold back investment. And 
speaking  here  in  Brussels, I  can  only  underline  in  this  context  the  costs of  postponing the 
reform of EU and euro area governance that all agree is necessary, and by the same token, 
the boost to prosperity and stability that would result from removing those uncertainties, without 
undue delay. 
 1  Draghi, M. (2016), “Delivering a symmetric mandate with asymmetric tools: monetary policy in a context of low 
the  Oesterreichische 
the  200th  anniversary  of 
the  ceremony 
to  mark 
interest  rates”,  speech  at 
Nationalbank, Vienna, 2 June 2016. 
2  For a fuller explanation of this point see Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB's fight against low inflation: reasons and 
consequences”, speech by at LUISS School of European Political Economy, Rome, 4 April 2016. 
3  For  evidence  on  disruptions  in  monetary  transmission  see  Ciccarelli,  M., Maddaloni,  A.,  and  Peydró,  J.-L. 
(2013),  “Heterogeneous  transmission  mechanism:  monetary  policy  and  financial  fragility  in  the  Eurozone”, 
Economic Policy vol. 28, issue 75, July 2013. 
4  For evidence on the impact of the composition of fiscal adjustment on output see Alesina, A., Favero, C., and 
Giavazzi,  F.  (2014),  “The  output  effect  of  fiscal  consolidation  plans”,  Journal  of  International  Economics, 
forthcoming. 
5  For an elaboration of this argument see Cœuré, B. (2014), “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from 
the crisis”, speech at the Bank of Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
6  For more on this point see Draghi, M. (2015), “Structural reforms, inflation, and monetary policy”, introductory 
speech at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, 22 May 2015. 
7  For more on this phenomenon see Ball, L. (2009), “Hysteresis in unemployment: old and new evidence”, NBER 
working paper 14818, March 2009. 
8  See for example Arulampalam, W., Gregg, P., and Gregory M. (2001), “Unemployment scarring”, The Economic 
Journal, vol. 111, November 2001. 
9  The European Commission estimates euro area structural unemployment to be 9.7% in 2016. 
10  See for example Riley, R., Rosazza-Bondibene, C. and Young, G. (2015), “The UK productivity puzzle 2008–
13: evidence from British businesses”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper 531. See also Bloom, N., Floetotto, 
M.,  Jaimovich,  N.,  Saporta-Eksten  I.,  and  Terry,  S.J.  (2014)  “Really  Uncertain  Business  Cycles”,  Stanford 
University mimeo. 
11  Gamberoni E., Giordano, C., and Lopez-Garcia, P. (2016), “Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro area: 
some stylised facts and possible determinants”, mimeo, ECB. 
12  See  Anderton,  B.  et  al  (2015),  “Comparisons  and  contrasts  of  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  euro  area  labour 
markets”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No. 159, February 2015. This phenomenon had already been noted 
in Blanchard, Olivier, and Justin Wolfers (1999), “The role of shocks and institutions in the rise of European 
unemployment: the aggregate evidence”, NBER Working Paper 7282. 
13  Vansteenkiste, I. (2016), “Did the Crisis permanently Scar the Portuguese Labour Market?: Evidence from a 
Markov-Switching Beveridge Curve Analysis”, forthcoming. 
14  OECD (2013), “The 2012 Labour Market Reform in Spain: A Preliminary Assessment”. 
15  See Anderton, B. et al (2015), ibid. 
16  European Commission (2015), The 2015 Ageing Report. 
17  Lisbon European Council, 23–24 March 2000, Presidency Conclusions. 
18  Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012), “Americans do IT better”, American Economic Review, 102,1. 
19  ECB (2015), “What is behind the recent rebound in euro area employment?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8/2015. 
20  See for example Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since 
the Civil War”, Princeton U.P. 
21  Syverson, C., (2011), "What Determines Productivity?", Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2): 326–65. 
22  OECD (2015), The Future of Productivity. 
23  Cœuré, B. (2014), ibid. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   24  Anderton, B. et al (2015), ibid. 
25  Juncker, J.-C. et al, “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
