   Stanley Fischer: Reflections on macroeconomics then and now 
Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  at  the  “Policy  Challenges  in  an  Interconnected  World”  32nd  Annual  National 
Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Washington DC, 7 March 
2016. 
 The chart can be found at the Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System’s website 
I am grateful to David Lopez-Salido, Andrea Ajello, Elmar Mertens, Stacey Tevlin, and Bill English of the Federal 
Reserve  Board  for  their  assistance.  Views  expressed  are  mine,  and  are  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
I am grateful to the National Association for Business Economics (NABE) for conferring the 
fourth annual NABE Paul A. Volcker Lifetime Achievement Award for Economic Policy on me, 
thereby  allowing  me  the  honor  of  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Paul  Volcker,  Jean-Claude 
Trichet, and Alice Rivlin. The honor of receiving the award is enhanced by its bearing the name 
of Paul Volcker, a model citizen and public servant, and a giant in every sense among central 
bankers.  
One thinks of many things on an occasion such as this one. My mind goes back first to growing 
up in a very small town in Zambia, then Northern Rhodesia, and to the surprise and delight my 
parents would have felt at seeing me standing where I am now. They would have been even 
more delighted that my girlfriend, Rhoda, whom I met when my parents moved to a bigger 
town in Zimbabwe, and I have been happily married for 50 years. But that is not the story I will 
tell today. Rather, I want to talk about our field, macroeconomics, and some of the lessons we 
have learned in the course of the last 55 years – and I say 55 years, because in 1961, at the 
end of my school years, on the advice of a friend, I read Keynes’s General Theory for the first 
time. 
Did I understand it? Certainly not. Was I captivated by it? Certainly, though “captured” is a 
more appropriate word than “captivated.” Does it remain relevant? Certainly. Just a week ago 
I took it off the bookshelf to read parts of chapter 23, “Notes on Mercantilism, the Usury Laws, 
Stamped Money and Theories of Under-Consumption.” Today that chapter would be headed 
“Protectionism, the Zero Lower Bound, and Secular Stagnation,” with the importance of usury 
laws having diminished since 1936. 
There is an old joke about our field – not the one about the one-handed economist, nor the 
one about “assume you have a can opener,” nor the one that ends, “If I were you, I wouldn’t 
start from here.” Rather it’s the one about the Ph.D. economist who returns to his university for 
his class’s 50th reunion. He asks if he can see the most recent Ph.D. generals exam. After a 
while it is brought to him. He reads it carefully, looking perplexed, and then says, “But this is 
exactly the same as the exam I wrote over 50 years ago.” “Ah yes,” says the professor. “It is 
the same, but all the answers are different.” 
Is that really the case? Not really, though it is true to some extent in the realm of policy. To 
discuss  the  question  of  whether  the  answers  to  the  questions  of  how  to  deal  with 
macroeconomic policy problems have changed markedly over the past half-century or so, I will 
start by briefly sketching the structure of a basic macro model. The building blocks of this model 
are similar to those used in many macro models, including FRB/US, the Fed staff’s large-scale 
model, and a variety of DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) models used at the 
Fed and other central banks and by academic researchers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The structure of the model starts with the standard textbook equation for aggregate demand 
for domestically produced goods, namely:1  
1. 
2. 
 Next is the wage-price block, which is based on a wage or price Phillips curve. Okun’s 
law is included to make the transition between output and employment; 
Monetary policy is described by a money supply or interest rate rule; 
The credit markets and financial intermediation are built off links between the policy 
interest rate and the rates of return on, and/or demand and supply functions for, other 
assets; 
The  balance  of  payments  and  the  exchange  rate  enter  through  the  balance  of 
payments  identity,  namely  that  the  current  account  surplus  must  be  equal  to  the 
capital account deficit, corrected for official intervention; 
Dynamics of stocks: There are dynamic equations for the capital stock, the stock of 
government debt, and the external debt. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
When I was an undergraduate at the London School of Economics (LSE) between 1962 and 
1965, we learned the IS-LM model, which combined the aggregate demand equation (1) with 
the money market equilibrium condition set out in (3). That was the basic understanding of the 
Keynesian model as crystallized by John Hicks, Franco Modigliani, and others, in which it was 
easy to add detail to the demand functions for private-sector consumption, C; for investment, 
I; for government spending, G; and for net exports. The Keynesian emphasis on aggregate 
demand and its determinants is one of the basic innovations of the Keynesian revolution, and 
one that makes it far easier to understand and explain what factors are determining output and 
employment. 
Continuing  down  the  list,  on  price  and  wage  dynamics,  the  Phillips  curve  has  flattened 
somewhat  since  the  1950s  and  1960s.2  Further,  the  role  of  expectations  of  inflation  in  the 
Phillips curve has been developed far beyond what was understood when A.W. Phillips – who 
was  a  New  Zealander,  an  LSE  faculty  member,  and  a  statistician  and  former  engineer  – 
discovered what later became the Phillips curve. The difference between the short- and long-
run Phillips curves, which is now a staple of textbooks, was developed by Milton Friedman and 
Edmund  Phelps,  and  the  effect  of  making  expectations  rational  or  model  consistent  was 
emphasized by Robert Lucas, whose islands model provided an imperfect information reason 
for a nonvertical short-run Phillips curve. In Okun’s law, the Okun coefficient – the coefficient 
specifying how much a change in the unemployment rate affects output – appears to have 
declined over time. So has the trend rate of productivity growth, which is a critical determinant 
of future levels of per capita income. 
In  (3),  the  monetary  equilibrium  condition,  the  monetary  policy  decision  was  typically 
represented by the money stock at the LSE and perhaps also at the Massachusetts Institute 
of  Technology  (MIT)  after  the  Keynesian  revolution  (after  all,  “L”  represents  the  liquidity 
preference function and “M” the supply of money); now the money supply rule is replaced by 
an interest-rate setting rule, for instance a reaction function of some form, or by a calculated 
“optimal” policy based on a loss function. 
The development of the flexible inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy is one of the 
major  achievements  of  modern  macroeconomics.  Flexible  inflation  targeting  allows  for 
flexibility in the speed with which the monetary authority plans on returning to the target inflation 
rate, and is thereby close to the dual mandate that the law assigns to the Fed. 
                                                
1   A fuller description of the equations is contained in the appendix. 
2   See Blanchard (2016). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A great deal of progress has been made in developing the credit and financial intermediation 
block. As early as the 1960s, each of James Tobin, Milton Friedman, and Karl Brunner and 
Alan Meltzer wrote out models with more fully explicated financial sectors, based on demand 
functions for assets other than money. Later the demand functions were often replaced by 
pricing equations derived from the capital asset pricing model. Researchers at the Fed have 
been bold enough to add estimated term and risk premiums to the determination of the returns 
on some assets.3 They have concluded, inter alia, that the arguments we used to make about 
how easy it would be to measure expected inflation if the government would introduce inflation-
indexed bonds failed to take into account that returns on bonds are affected by liquidity and 
risk  premiums.  This  means  that  one  of  the  major  benefits  that  were  expected  from  the 
introduction  of  inflation-indexed  bonds  (Treasury  Inflation-Protected  Securities,  generally 
called  TIPS),  namely  that  they  would  provide  a  quick  and  reliable  measure  of  inflation 
expectations,  has  not  been  borne  out,  and  that  we  still  have  to  struggle  to get reasonable 
estimates of expected inflation. 
As students, we included NX, net exports, in the aggregate demand equation, but we did not 
generally solve for the exchange rate, possibly because the exchange rate was typically fixed. 
Later, in 1976, Rudi Dornbusch inaugurated modern international macroeconomics – and here 
I’m quoting from a speech by Ken Rogoff – in his famous overshooting model.4 As globalization 
of both goods and asset markets intensified over the next 40 years, the international aspects 
of  trade  in  goods  and  assets  occupied  an  increasingly  important  role  in  the  economies  of 
virtually all countries, not least the United States, and in macroeconomics. 
At  the  LSE,  we  took  a  course  on  the  British  economy  from  Frank  Paish,  whose  lectures 
consisted of a series of charts, accompanied by narrative from the professor. He made a strong 
impression on me in a lecture in 1963, in which he said, “You see, it (the balance of payments 
deficit) goes  up  and  it goes  down,  and  it  is  clear  that  we  are  moving  toward  a  balance  of 
payments crisis in 1964.” I waited and I watched, and the crisis appeared on schedule, as 
predicted.  But  Paish  also  warned  us  that forecasting  was  difficult,  and gave  us  the  advice 
“Never look back at your forecasts – you may lose your nerve.” I pass that wisdom on to those 
of you who need it. 
I remember  also my  excitement  at  being told  by  a friend  in  a more  senior  class  about the 
existence  of  econometric  models  of  the  entire  economy.  It  was  a  wonderful  moment.  I 
understood that economic policy would from then on be easy: All that was necessary was to 
feed  the  data  into  the  model  and  work  out  at  what  level  to  set  the  policy  parameters. 
Unfortunately, it hasn’t worked out that way. On the use of econometric models, I think often 
of  something  Paul  Samuelson  once  said:  “I’d  rather  have  Bob  Solow’s  views  than  the 
predictions of a model. But I’d rather have Solow with a model than without one.” 
We learned a lot at the LSE. But wonderful as it was to be in London, and to meet people from 
all over the world for the first time, and to be able to travel to Europe and even to the Soviet 
Union with a student group, and to ski for the first time in my life in Austria, it gradually became 
clear to me that the center of the academic economics profession was not in London or Oxford 
or Cambridge, but in the United States. 
There  was  then  the  delicate  business  of  applying  to  graduate  school.  There  was  a  strong 
Chicago tendency among many of the lecturers at the LSE, but I wanted to go to MIT. When 
asked why, I gave a simple answer: “Samuelson and Solow.” Fortunately, I got into MIT and 
had the opportunity of getting to know Samuelson and Solow and other great professors. And 
I also met the many outstanding students who were there at the time, among them Robert 
Merton. I took courses from Samuelson and Solow and other MIT stars, and I wrote my thesis 
                                                
3   See D’Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014). 
4   See Dornbusch (1976) and Rogoff (2001). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   under the guidance of Paul Samuelson and Frank Fisher. From there, my first job was at the 
University of Chicago – and I understood that I was very lucky to have been able to learn from 
the great economists at both MIT and Chicago. Among the many things I learned at Chicago 
was a Milton Friedman saying: “Man may not be rational, but he’s a great rationalizer,” which 
is a quote that often comes to mind when listening to stock market analysts. 
After four years at Chicago, I returned to the MIT Department of Economics, and thought that 
I would never leave – even more so when MIT succeeded in persuading Rudi Dornbusch, 
whom I had met when he was a student at Chicago, to move to MIT – thus giving him too the 
benefit of having learned his economics at both Chicago and MIT, and giving MIT the pleasure 
and benefit of having added a superb economist and human being to the collection of such 
people already present. 
MIT was still heavily involved in developing growth theory at the time I was a Ph.D. student 
there, from 1966 to 1969. We students were made aware of Kaldor’s stylized facts about the 
process of growth, presented in his 1957 article “A Model of Economic Growth.” They were: 
1. 
The shares of national income received by labor and capital are roughly constant over 
long periods of time. 
The rate of growth of the capital stock per worker is roughly constant over long periods 
of time. 
The rate of growth of output per worker is roughly constant over long periods of time. 
The capital/output ratio is roughly constant over long periods of time. 
The rate of return on investment is roughly constant over long periods of time. 
The real wage grows over time. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Well, that  was then,  and many  of the  problems  we face  in  our  economy  now  relate to  the 
changes in the stylized facts about the behavior of the economy: Every one of Kaldor’s stylized 
facts is no longer true, and unfortunately the changes are mostly in a direction that complicates 
the formulation of economic policy.5  
While the basic approach outlined so far remains valid, and can be used to address many 
macroeconomic policy issues, I would like briefly to take up several topics in more detail. Some 
of them are issues that have remained central to the macroeconomic agenda over the past 50 
years, some have to my regret fallen off the agenda, and others are new to the agenda. 
1. 
2. 
Inflation and unemployment: Estimated Phillips curves appear to be flatter than they 
were estimated to be many  years ago – in terms of the textbooks, Phillips curves 
appear to be closer to what used to be called the Keynesian case (flat Phillips curve) 
than to the classical case (vertical Phillips curve). Since the U.S. economy is now 
below our 2 percent inflation target, and since unemployment is in the vicinity of full 
employment, it is sometimes argued that the link between unemployment and inflation 
must  have  been  broken.  I  don’t  believe  that.  Rather the  link  has  never  been  very 
strong, but it exists, and we may well at present be seeing the first stirrings of an 
increase in the inflation rate – something that we would like to happen. 
Productivity and growth: The rate of productivity growth in the United States and in 
much  of  the  world  has  fallen  dramatically  in  the  past  20  years.  The  table  shows 
calculated rates of annual productivity growth for the United States over three periods: 
1952 to 1973; 1974 to 2007; and the most recent period, 2008 to 2015. After having 
been 3 percent and 2.1 percent in the first two periods, the annual rate of productivity 
2. 
                                                
5   See Jones and Romer (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3. 
4. 
  growth has fallen to 1.2 percent in the period since the start of the global financial 
crisis.  
The right guide to thinking in this case is given by a famous Herbert Stein line: “The 
difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and 2 percent is 100 percent.” Why? 
Productivity growth is a major determinant of long-term growth. At a 1 percent growth 
rate, it takes income 70 years to double. At a 2 percent growth rate, it takes 35 years 
to double. That is to say, that with a growth rate of 1 percent per capita, it takes two 
generations for per capita income to double; at a 2 percent per capita growth rate, it 
takes one generation for per capita income to double. That is a massive difference, 
one  that  would  very  likely  have  severe  consequences  for  the  national  mood,  and 
possibly for economic policy. That is to say, there are few issues more important for 
the  future  of  our  economy,  and  those  of  every  other  country,  than  the  rate  of 
productivity growth. 
At this stage, we simply do not know what will happen to productivity growth. Robert 
Gordon of Northwestern University has just published an extremely interesting and 
pessimistic book that argues we will have to accept the fact that productivity will not 
grow in future at anything like the rates of the period before 1973. Others look around 
and see impressive changes in technology and cannot believe that productivity growth 
will not move back closer to the higher levels of yesteryear.6 A great deal of work is 
taking place to evaluate the data, but so far there is little evidence that data difficulties 
account for a significant part of the decline in productivity growth as calculated by the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics.7  
The  ZLB  and  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy:  From  December  2008  to 
December  2015,  the federal funds  rate  target set  by  the  Fed  was  a range  of 0  to 
¼ percent,  a  range  of  rates  that  was  described  as  the  ZLB  (zero  lower  bound).8 
Between December 2008 and December 2014, the Fed engaged in QE – quantitative 
easing – through a variety of programs. Empirical work done at the Fed and elsewhere 
suggests that QE worked in the sense that it reduced interest rates other than the 
federal funds rate, and particularly seems to have succeeded in driving down longer-
term rates, which are the rates most relevant to spending decisions.  
Critics have argued that QE has gradually become less effective over the years, 
and should no longer be used. It is extremely difficult to appraise the effectiveness 
of a program all of whose parameters have been announced at the beginning of the 
program. But I regard it as significant with respect to the effectiveness of QE that the 
taper tantrum in 2013, apparently caused by a belief that the Fed was going to wind 
down its purchases sooner than expected, had a major effect on interest rates. 
More recently, critics have argued that QE, together with negative interest rates, 
is no longer effective in either Japan or in the euro zone. That case has not yet 
been  empirically  established,  and  I  believe  that  central  banks  still  have  the 
capacity through QE and other measures to run expansionary monetary policies, 
even at the zero lower bound. 
The monetary-fiscal policy mix: There was once a great deal of work on the optimal 
monetary-fiscal  policy  mix.  The  topic  was  interesting  and  the  analysis  persuasive. 
Nonetheless the subject seems to be disappearing from the public dialogue; perhaps 
in ascendance is the notion that – except in extremis, as in 2009 – activist fiscal policy 
                                                
6   See, for instance, Mokyr, Vickers, and Ziebarth (2015). 
7   See Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (forthcoming). 
8  
Inside the Fed, the range of 0 to 1/4 percent is generally called the ELB, the effective lower bound. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 5. 
6. 
7. 
  should not be used at all. Certainly, it is easier for a central bank to change its policies 
than for a Treasury or Finance Ministry to do so, but it remains a pity that the fiscal 
lever seems to have been disabled.  
The  financial  sector:  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Ken  Rogoff’s  book,  This  Time  Is 
Different, must have been written largely before the start of the great financial crisis. 
I find their evidence that a recession accompanied by a financial crisis is likely to be 
much  more  serious  than  an  ordinary  recession  persuasive,  but  the  point  remains 
contentious.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  Great  Recession,  it  is  possible  that  the  U.S. 
recession got a second wind when the euro-zone crisis worsened in 2011. But no one 
should forget the immensity of the financial crisis that the U.S. economy and the world 
went through following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers – and no one should forget 
that such things could happen again. 
The subsequent tightening of the financial regulatory system under the Dodd-Frank 
Act  was  essential,  and  the  complaints  about  excessive  regulation  and  excessive 
demands for banks to hold capital betray at best a very short memory. We, the official 
sector  and  particularly  the  regulatory  authorities,  do  have  an  obligation  to  try  to 
minimize the regulatory and other burdens placed on the private sector by the official 
sector – but we have a no less important obligation to try to prevent another financial 
crisis.  And  we  should  also  remember  that  the  shadow  banking  system  played  an 
important role in the propagation of the financial crisis, and endeavor to reduce the 
riskiness of that system.  
The economy and the price of oil: For some time, at least since the United States 
became an oil importer, it has been believed that a low price of oil is good for the 
economy. So when the price of oil began its descent below $100 a barrel, we kept 
looking for an oil-price-cut dividend. But that dividend has been hard to discern in the 
macroeconomic data. Part of the reason is that as a result of the rapid expansion of 
the production of oil from shale, total U.S. oil production had risen rapidly, and so a 
larger part of the economy was adversely affected by the decline in the price of oil. 
Another part is that investment in the equipment and structures needed for shale oil 
production had become an important component of aggregate U.S. investment, and 
that component began a rapid decline. For these reasons, although the United States 
has remained an oil importer, the decrease in the world price of oil had a mixed effect 
on U.S. gross domestic product. There is reason to believe that when the price of oil 
stabilizes, and U.S. shale oil production reaches its new equilibrium, the overall effect 
of the decline in the price of oil will be seen to have had a positive effect on aggregate 
demand in the United States, since lower energy prices are providing a noticeable 
boost to the real incomes of households.  
Secular  stagnation:  During  World  War  II  in  the  United  States,  many  economists 
feared that at the end of the war, the economy would return to high pre-war levels of 
unemployment – because with the end of the war, demobilization, and the massive 
reduction that would take place in the defense budget, there would not be enough 
demand to maintain full employment.  
Thus  was  born  or  renewed  the  concept  of  secular  stagnation  –  the  view  that  the 
economy  could  find  itself  permanently  in  a  situation  of  low  demand,  less  than  full 
employment, and low growth.9 That is not what happened after World War II, and the 
                                                
9  
I am distinguishing in this section between secular stagnation as being caused by a deficiency of aggregate 
demand and another view, that output growth will be very slow in future because productivity growth will be very 
low. The view that future productivity growth will be very low has already been discussed, with the conclusion 
that we do not have a good basis for predictions of its future level, and that we simply do not know whether 
future productivity growth will be extremely low or higher than it has been recently. There is no shortage of views 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   thought of secular stagnation was correspondingly laid aside, in part because of the 
growing confidence that intelligent economic policies – fiscal and monetary – could 
be relied on to help keep the economy at full employment with a reasonable growth 
rate. 
Recently, Larry Summers has forcefully restated the secular stagnation hypothesis, 
and argued that it accounts for the current slowness of economic growth in the United 
States  and  the  rest  of  the  industrialized  world.  The  theoretical  case  for  secular 
stagnation in the sense of a shortage of demand is tied to the question of the level of 
the interest rate that would be needed to generate a situation of full employment. If 
the equilibrium interest rate is negative, or very small, the economy is likely to find 
itself growing slowly, and frequently encountering the zero lower bound on the interest 
rate. 
Research has shown a declining trend in estimates of the equilibrium interest rate. 
That  finding  has  become  more  firmly  established  since  the  start  of  the  Great 
Recession  and  the  global  financial  crisis.10  Moreover,  the  level  of  the  equilibrium 
interest rate seems likely to rise only gradually to a longer-run level that would still be 
quite low by historical standards. 
What factors determine the equilibrium interest rate? Fundamentally, the balance of 
saving and investment demands. Several trends have been cited as possible factors 
contributing  to  a  decline  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  real  rate.  One  likely  factor  is 
persistent  weakness  in  aggregate  demand.  Among  the  many  reasons  for  that,  as 
Larry Summers has noted, is that the amount of physical capital that the revolutionary 
information  technology  firms  with  high  stock  market  valuations  have  needed  is 
remarkably small. The slowdown of productivity growth, which as already mentioned 
has been a prominent and deeply concerning feature of the past six years, is another 
important factor.11 Others have pointed to demographic trends resulting in there being 
a larger share of the population in age cohorts with high saving rates.12 Some have 
also pointed to high saving rates in many emerging market countries, coupled with a 
lack  of  suitable  domestic  investment  opportunities  in  those  countries,  as  putting 
downward  pressure  on  rates  in  advanced  economies  –  the  global  savings  glut 
hypothesis advanced by Ben Bernanke and others at the Fed about a decade ago.13  
Whatever the cause, other things being equal, a lower level of the long-run equilibrium 
real  rate  suggests  that  the  frequency  and  duration  of  future  episodes  in  which 
monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB will be higher than in the past. Prior to the 
crisis,  some  research  suggested  that  such  episodes  were  likely  to  be  relatively 
infrequent and generally short lived.14 The past several years certainly require us to 
 on this issue among economists, but the views to some extent appear to depend on whether the economist 
making the prediction is an optimist or a pessimist. 
10   This research includes recent work by Johannsen and Mertens (2015) and Kiley (2015) that uses extensions of 
the original Laubach and Williams (2003) framework. An international perspective on medium-to-long-run real 
interest rates is provided by U.S. Executive Office of the President (2015). Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Hall 
(2014) discuss the long-lived effects of financial crises on economic performance. See also Hamilton and others 
(2015). I have, in addition, drawn on Fischer (forthcoming). 
11   It is also a major factor explaining the phenomenon of the economy’s impressive performance on the jobs front 
during a period of historically slow growth. 
12   See, for instance, Gordon (2014, 2016). 
13   See Bernanke (2005). See also the recent work by Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008); and Mendoza, 
Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009). 
14   See, for instance, Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Blanchard and Simon (2001), and Stock and Watson 
(2003). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   reconsider that basic assumption. Moreover, recent experience in the United States 
and other countries has taught us that conducting monetary policy at the effective 
lower bound is challenging.15 And while unconventional policy tools such as forward 
guidance and asset purchases have been extremely helpful and effective, all central 
banks would prefer a situation with positive interest rates, restoring their ability to use 
the more traditional interest rate tool of monetary policy.16  
The answer to the question “Will the equilibrium interest rate remain at today’s low 
levels permanently?” is also that we do not know. Many of the factors that determine 
the equilibrium interest rate, particularly productivity growth, are extremely difficult to 
forecast. At present, it looks likely that the equilibrium interest rate will remain low for 
the policy-relevant future, but there have in the past been both long swings and short-
term changes in what can be thought of as equilibrium real rates. 
Eventually, history will give us the answer. But it is critical to emphasize that history’s 
answer  will  depend  also  on  future  policies,  monetary  and  other,  notably  including 
fiscal policy. 
Concluding remarks 
Well, are the answers all different than they were 50 years ago? No. The basic framework we 
learned a half-century ago remains extremely useful. But also yes: Some of the answers are 
different because they were not on previous exams because the problems they deal with were 
not evident fifty years ago. So the advice to potential policymakers is simple: Learn as much 
as you can, for most of it will come in useful at some stage of your career; but never forget that 
identifying what is happening in the economy is essential to your ability to do your job, and for 
that you need to keep your eyes, your ears, and your mind open, and with regard to your mouth 
– to use it with caution. 
Many thanks again for this award and this opportunity to speak with you. 
References 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005).  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit,” 
speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. 
Blanchard, Olivier (2014). “Where Danger Lurks: The Recent Financial Crisis Has Taught Us 
to Pay Attention to Dark Corners, Where the Economy Can Malfunction Badly,” Finance and 
Development, vol. 51 (September), pp. 28–31. 
 –    –    –    –    (2016).  “The  U.S.  Phillips  Curve:  Back  to  the  60s?  (PDF)“ Policy  Brief  16-1. 
Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). “Inflation and Activity – 
Two  Explorations  and  Their  Monetary  Policy  Implications  (PDF),”  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  and  John  Simon  (2001).  “The  Long  and  Large  Decline  in  U.S.  Output 
Volatility (PDF),” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135–74. 
Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1972). “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,” Journal of 
Political Economy, vol. 80 (September-October), pp.951–77. 
                                                
15   For a discussion of various issues reviewed by the Federal Open Market Committee in late 2008 and 2009 
regarding the complications of unconventional monetary policy at the ZLB, see the set of staff memos on 
the Board’s 
16   See Williams (2013). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall Reinsdorf (forthcoming). “Does the United 
States  Have  a  Productivity  Problem  or  a  Measurement  Problem?”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity. 
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). “An Equilibrium 
Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, vol. 98 
(1), pp. 358–93. 
Daly,  Mary  C.,  John  G.  Fernald,  Òscar  Jordà,  and  Fernanda  Nechio  (2014).  “Output  and 
Unemployment  Dynamics  (PDF),” Working  Paper  Series  2013–32.  San Francisco:  Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November. 
 –  –  –  –  (2014). “Interpreting Deviations from Okun’s Law,” FRBSF Economic Letter 2014-12. 
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
D’Amico,  Stefania,  Don  H.  Kim,  and  Min  Wei  (2014).  “Tips  from  TIPS:  The  Informational 
Content  of  Treasury  Inflation-Protected  Security  Prices  (PDF),”  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion Series 2014–24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
January. 
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976). “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 84 (December), pp. 1161–76. 
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Richard Startz (2014). Macroeconomics, 12th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill Education. 
Fischer,  Stanley  (forthcoming).  “Monetary  Policy,  Financial  Stability,  and  the  Zero  Lower 
Bound,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings). 
Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, vol. 58 
(March), pp. 1–17. 
Gordon, Robert J. (2014). “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and 
Reflections,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  19895.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, February. 
 –  –  –  –  (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since 
the Civil War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
Hall, Robert E. (2014). “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial 
Crisis,” in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, 
vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Hamilton,  James  D.,  Ethan  S.  Harris,  Jan  Hatzius,  and  Kenneth  D.  West  (2015).  “The 
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” NBER Working Paper Series 21476. 
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. 
Hicks,  John  R.  (1937).  “Mr.  Keynes  and  the  ‘Classics’:  A  Suggested  Interpretation,” 
Econometrica, vol. 5 (April), pp. 147–59. 
Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the 
Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes. Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. 
Jones,  Charles  I.,  and  Paul  M.  Romer  (2010).  “The  New  Kaldor  Facts:  Ideas,  Institutions, 
Population,  and  Human  Capital,”  American  Economic  Journal:  Macroeconomics,  vol.  2 
(January), pp. 224–45. 
Kaldor,  Nicholas  (1957).  “A  Model  of  Economic  Growth,”  Economic  Journal,  vol.  67 
(December), pp. 591–624. 
Keynes,  John  Maynard  (1936).  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money. 
London: Macmillan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   Kiley, Michael T. (2015). “What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? 
(PDF)“  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2015–077.  Washington:  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. 
Knotek, Edward S., II (2007). “How Useful Is Okun’s Law? (PDF)“ Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, Economic Review, Fourth Quarter, pp. 73–103. 
Laubach,  Thomas,  and  John  C. Williams  (2003).  “Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest,” 
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–70. 
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic 
Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103–24. 
Mendoza,  Enrique  G.,  Vincenzo  Quadrini,  and  José-Víctor  Ríos-Rull  (2009).  “Financial 
Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 
117 (3), pp. 371–416. 
Modigliani,  Franco  (1944).  “Liquidity  Preference  and  the  Theory  of  Interest  and  Money,” 
Econometrica, vol. 12 (January), pp. 45–88. 
Mokyr,  Joel,  Chris  Vickers,  and  Nicolas  L.  Ziebarth  (2015).  “The  History  of Techonological 
Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, vol. 29 (Summer), pp. 31–50. 
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (1996). Foundations of International Macroeconomics. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Okun, Arthur M. (1962). “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,” Proceedings of 
the Business and Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association, pp. 98–
104. 
Phelps,  Edmund  S.  (1967).  “Phillips  Curves,  Expectations  of  Inflation  and  Optimal 
Unemployment over Time,” Economica, vol. 34 (August), pp. 254–81. 
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a 
Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2001). “Dornbusch’s Overshooting Model after Twenty-Five Years (PDF),” 
speech  delivered  at  the  Mundell-Fleming  Lecture,  Second  Annual  Research  Conference, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 30 (revised January 22, 2002). 
Solow, Robert M. (2004). “Introduction: The Tobin Approach to Monetary Economics,” Journal 
of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 36 (August), pp. 657–63. 
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, vol. 17 (January). 
Tobin, James (1969). “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory (PDF),” Journal of 
Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 1 (February), pp. 15–29. 
U.S.  Executive  Office  of  the  President,  Council  of  Economic  Advisors  (2015).  Long-Term 
Interest Rates: A Survey (PDF). Washington: EOP. 
Williams, John C. (2013). “A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy (PDF),” Working Paper 
Series 2013–15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, July. 
Woodford, Michael (2010). “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, vol. 24 (Fall), pp. 21–44. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Appendix  
The following model includes a number of elements that play a central role in the analysis of 
economic fluctuations and in larger policy models as I have encountered them at the Federal 
Reserve and other institutions. 
An  aggregate  demand  relationship,  in  the  form  of  the  investment-saving  (or  IS)  curve, 
characterizes the negative dependence of economic activity on the real borrowing rate,     
     , and the positive dependence on expected output,       ; government spending, 
net exports, 
  , as a function of the exchange rate,    , and foreign output,       : 
  ; and 
       (1) 
 The Phillips curve describes a relationship between inflation and labor market slack. Inflation 
responds negatively to the level of the unemployment gap,       , and to changes in aggregate 
   (including  shocks  to  commodity  prices).  Current  inflation  also  responds 
productivity, 
     , and to the level of the borrowing rate and of the 
positively to expected future inflation, 
exchange rate, 
   
  (cost - push shocks): 
  . (Phillips curve) (2) 
   Current issues regarding the role of expectations, the size of the slope, and the pass-through 
from  exchange  rate  movements  to  domestic  prices  and  wages  can  be  addressed  in  this 
context. Recent discussions can be found in Blanchard’s (2016) reference to the back-to-the-
1960s  thinking  about  the  Phillips  curve  and  in  Blanchard,  Cerutti,  and  Summers’s  (2015) 
thoughts on hysteresis mechanisms underlying the inflation and unemployment dynamic. 
To connect cyclical fluctuations in the level of aggregate activity with changes in employment, 
Okun’s law has been proved useful as an empirical description of the relationship between the 
output gap and the unemployment gap,     
          (see Knotek (2007); and Daly, Fernald, 
Jordà, and Nechio (2013, 2014)): 
      . (Okun’s law) (3) 
To characterize monetary policy, it is nowadays useful to consider how the central bank affects 
the level of interest rates by setting the federal funds rate,    , in response to deviations of 
expected inflation from its target,     
     (inflation gap), and percent deviations of output 
from its potential level,     
      . (4) 
          (output gap): 
   To capture the role of credit and financial intermediation in the economy, consider a loan market 
equation, where the demand on the left-hand side depends negatively on the borrowing rate, 
     , and the level of economic activity (higher income implies lower financing needs). The 
supply of loans depends negatively on the level of interest rates,    , and positively on the level 
  (to the extent that higher aggregate income 
of intermediation spreads, 
increases deposits and banks’ capitalization and hence the supplies of intermediated funds). 
This equation pins down the equilibrium level of the intermediation spread, 
  , and income, 
       . (5) 
The borrowing rate,       , is then equal to the sum of the risk-free rate set by the central bank, 
  , and the spread, 
  . (6) 
   This analysis is in the spirit of James Tobin’s approach to monetary economics as was recently 
described by Solow (2004) and extended by Woodford (2010) to describe the role for financial 
intermediation shocks. It also captures the work by B. Friedman, B. Bernanke, and A. Blinder 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   in thinking about the role of credit and credit spreads in the transmission of monetary policy 
impulses. 
Open economy aspects are captured by the following equations: The balance of payment is in 
equilibrium when net exports are compensated by capital flows of opposite sign. Capital flows 
depend on the difference between the domestic interest rate and the foreign rate adjusted for 
depreciation: 
     (7) 
 Furthermore, the uncovered interest rate parity equates the rate of return on domestic assets,    , 
to the rate of return on foreign assets,       , plus future expected changes in the exchange 
rate, 
   , and a residual risk premium component, 
     . (8) 
For a detailed description of these relationships, see Dornbusch, Fischer, and Startz (2014); 
and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996). 
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
