   Sabine Lautenschläger: Caught in the middle? Small and medium-sized 
banks and European banking supervision 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the Banking Evening of the Deutsche Bundesbank Regional Office in Baden-Württemberg, 
Stuttgart, 22 February 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here in Stuttgart this evening. On the one hand, because I can honour the 
promise I gave to the President of the Bundesbank’s Regional Office, Mr Sibold, when I was 
still Vice-President of the Bundesbank. 
On the other hand, because I am looking forward to the opportunity of a discussion with you 
after I have given my speech. I hope it will be a lively discussion of what you expect from 
European banking supervision. 
I also hope to be able to answer some questions and clear up misunderstandings – regarding, 
for example, which tasks European banking supervision, the SSM, does perform and does not 
perform in supervising small and medium-sized institutions, as well as those tasks it does not 
wish to perform. 
Let me start by clearing up one misunderstanding.  
Yes, the SSM supervises small and medium-sized institutions only indirectly – and we have 
absolutely no desire to directly supervise these institutions. If an individual small or medium-
sized institution fails, it does not generally jeopardise the stability of either the national or the 
European financial market; so it does not need to be subject to European banking supervision.  
Let  me  briefly  put  the  role  of  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  in  the  euro  area  into 
perspective, before I deal with the greatest challenges facing this group of institutions.  
There are roughly 3,300 banking groups in the euro area, 129 of which are directly supervised 
by the ECB. We will leave these few banks out of the picture this evening and devote our time 
to the remaining 3,200 or so groups of institutions instead.  
And  let  me  start  by  going  straight  to  the  trickiest  part:  the  correct  description  of  these 
institutions. The official term for them is “less significant institutions”. 
This  is  because,  although  they  are  clearly  in  the  majority,  their  balance  sheet  total  is 
comparatively small. If we  look at the overall balance sheet total of the euro area banking 
system, scarcely 18% can be attributed to the “less significant institutions”.  
Does this mean that small and medium-sized institutions and their services are completely 
unimportant and so do not require good supervision? Not at all! 
This  18%  of the  balance  sheet  total for the  entire  euro  area  banking  system  is  not  evenly 
spread across all countries, but is essentially concentrated in three: Germany, Austria and 
Italy.  
These  three  countries  alone  are  home  to  four-fifths  of  all  the  supposedly  “less  significant” 
institutions, whose balance sheet total amounts to 80% of annual economic output in Austria 
and Germany.  
And in Germany, it is precisely these institutions that provide funding to small and medium-
sized  enterprises,  which,  in  turn,  form  the  bedrock  of  the  economy.  All  in  all,  the  “less 
significant” institutions in Germany finance 70% of the regional economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   I’m therefore not going to discuss at this point whether or not these institutions are important 
for the real economy – everyone knows that they are. 
And everyone knows that the “less significant” institutions can indeed be significant for the 
stability of the banking system – not individually, but collectively as associations of savings 
banks and cooperative banks.  
That is particularly true when you consider that many small and medium-sized institutions in 
the euro area belong to institutional protection schemes and are hence closely interlinked – 
and often they are also in protection schemes with large, systemically relevant banks. I’ll come 
back to this topic later on.  
Ladies and gentlemen, at this point, I’m going to have to disappoint one or two of you: I do not 
think  it  is  a  good  idea  to  leave  the  “less  significant”  banks  to  regulate  themselves  or  to 
encourage a form of supervision that is more akin to gravedigging than supervising, focusing 
solely on resolvability. 
And, the type of supervision being advocated by some, whereby supervision is exercised over 
the association rather than over the individual institution, is also no solution as long as there is 
no legal basis or tools for the appropriate, effective and efficient supervision of associations. 
For all the reasons I have just mentioned, and I could give many more, the supervision of “less 
significant” institutions, which tend to have a regional focus, needs to take into account national 
particularities on the one hand and meet high quality standards on the other hand. 
After  all,  the  aim  is  to  have  a  functioning  banking  sector  over  the  medium  and  long  term, 
providing the real economy with the services that it requires – and it is precisely small and 
medium-sized institutions that make for a functioning banking sector, as clearly highlighted by 
the financial crisis. 
Given the experience of the past year, I believe that indirect supervision, as is being carried 
out by the ECB, can be of great benefit – to banks, to their customers, to the stability of national 
financial centres and to the real economy. But I will come back to that later too. 
Now, going back to finding a name for the “less significant” institutions. How should we refer 
to these 3,200 banks?  
As  you’ve  probably  noticed  by  now,  I’ve  opted  for  the  term  “small  and  medium-sized 
institutions” – and this decision was preceded by a lengthy discussion. 
For those of you who represent a small or medium-sized bank, I hope that you are happy with 
this description; it will see us through the rest of the evening.  
Having now resolved the naming problem, we can turn our attention to some slightly more 
straightforward issues. I will address two topics this evening. 
• 
• 
First, the challenges now facing small and medium-sized banks; and  
Second, the cooperation between the ECB and the national authorities in supervising 
small and medium-sized banks.  
The challenges – weak profitability and low interest rates 
Whether national or European, supervisors are always interested in banks’ stability. And the 
most important components of a stable bank are capital, liquidity and profitability.  
Capital serves as a buffer for losses – the higher it is, the more losses a bank can absorb 
before it collapses. If we want to assess a bank’s stability, we should first look at its capital.  
The capital ratios of small and medium-sized institutions in the euro area are gratifying. The 
average Tier 1 capital ratio is 15.2%.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In Germany, the Tier 1 capital ratio of this group of institutions is slightly below average at 14%, 
but  is  still  significantly  above  the  regulatory  requirements,  which,  as  a  supervisor,  I  find 
reassuring! 
And if we now look at how Tier 1 capital ratios have developed recently, we can see another 
welcome development. They are stable.  
In the first instance, that is somewhat surprising, given that the balance sheet total of small 
and medium-sized banks has increased slightly, while capital has marginally declined. In fact, 
Tier 1 capital ratios could reasonably have been expected to fall too.  
The fact that they remained stable can be explained by the reduction in the riskiness of banks’ 
balance sheets – because this is the basis for calculating Tier 1 capital ratios. That is also 
something I like to see as a supervisor. 
As far as the liquidity of small and medium-sized institutions in Germany is concerned, there 
isn’t really a lot I can say. Instead of there being too little liquidity, there is too much liquidity in 
Germany. And this liquidity is searching for yield. 
First and foremost, high capital and liquidity ratios are sound preconditions for the stability of 
small  and  medium-sized  institutions.  They  are  good  preconditions  for  the  banking  system 
being able to withstand unfavourable market conditions or unexpected shocks – even over a 
prolonged period. 
It is important that these preconditions are met, because small and medium-sized institutions 
are facing a series of risks and challenges. 
The greatest of these challenges is the banks’ business models and earnings performance.  
It’s nothing new that some banks in the euro area are suffering from weak profitability. And 
that’s not just since the period of low interest rates began. It was also the case before that – 
including for some small and medium-sized institutions.  
In some countries, competition among banks for customers is rife – and it is an unhealthy form 
of competition if risks and collateral are not priced in correctly. In 2014 banks’ return on equity 
was just over 3%, considerably lower than what market participants would deem sustainable. 
However, it is not just a question, for example, of whether there is sufficient business among 
small and medium-sized enterprises and retail customers for the roughly 1,650 banking groups 
in Germany.  
It goes without saying that the prolonged period of very low interest rates is not helping to 
remedy this weak profitability – on the contrary. The vast majority of small and medium-sized 
institutions operate a traditional business model that is heavily reliant on interest rates – and 
consequently they are often harder hit than larger banks.  
At  the  same time,  those  institutions that  mainly  extend  credit  to  retail  customers  are  more 
severely affected by low interest rates. It should come as no surprise that banks that primarily 
issue fixed-rate loans have thus far coped with the low interest rates comparatively well.  
However, I don’t need to tell you that, as soon as loans and investments with high and fixed 
interest rates expire and have to be replaced with lower-yielding assets, these banks incur 
burdens. Moreover, these banks will suffer from the effects of the low interest rates for longer 
than banks that mainly grant variable-rate loans – the latter see the benefits more quickly when 
interest rates go up again. 
In  order  to  safeguard  earnings  performance,  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  need  to 
assess the efficiency of their business model – and better sooner than later.  
I will not give any detailed advice on business policy here – supervisors are not the better 
bankers. Fundamentally, though, banks have two options: they either raise their earnings or 
lower their costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Let’s look at the earnings side first. It makes sense to create new sources of earnings that are 
less dependent on interest rates – such as fees and commissions.  
A  survey  of  German  institutions  conducted  by  the  German  Federal  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority  (BaFin)  and  the  Bundesbank  has  indeed  revealed  that  more  than  half  of  the 
respondents  have  already  expanded  the  share  of  fees  and  commissions  income  in  their 
earnings.  
On  the  costs  side,  precisely  German  institutions  have  potential  for  savings.  By  European 
standards, their cost efficiency is relatively low. For every euro of earnings, they bear costs of 
almost 70 cent – compared with just 50 cent in other countries. 
However, the solution does not necessarily lie in merging small institutions to ultimately create 
a large, systemically relevant institution.  
On the contrary: “small is beautiful” is a good, if not better, alternative – provided that “small” 
is sustainable in the long term. 
In order to realise scale effects, banks could also centralise certain areas – such as reporting, 
transaction settlement or some elements of risk management. The German savings banks and 
cooperative banks in particular already have experience in this regard.  
Whatever way the institutions choose, it’s crucial that they keep proper control of the risks they 
have taken on.  
Banks are obviously not having an easy time right now. They are obliged to increase earnings 
in times of low interest rates and tough competition, but at the same time must not take any 
excessive risks when doing so.  
Many  would  liken  this  to  trying  to  square  the  circle.  I  think  it’s  more  like  a  system  of 
mathematical equations with many unknowns – complicated, but nevertheless resolvable. 
There are always ways to revive your own business – even without incurring excessive risks. 
Digitalisation,  for  example,  is  opening  new  paths,  which  some  alert  managers  are  already 
exploring – be it to develop new sources of income or distribution channels, or to reduce costs.  
Cases in point are online banking through smartphones or advisory services for customers by 
video  conference.  Digitalisation  also  offers  opportunities  for  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions. For these institutions, the trick will be to innovate, without losing sight of their roots.  
Ladies and gentlemen, business models and earnings performance are currently the biggest 
challenges facing the banking sector – but they are not the only ones.  
For example, the activities of small and medium-sized institutions are often very concentrated 
–  on  certain  sectors  or  regions.  While  that  is  in  the  nature  of  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions with a regional focus, it also creates a dependency which makes them vulnerable.  
So  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  take  this  concentration  risk  into  consideration  in  risk 
management – particularly with regard to its qualitative elements. If there is no way to avoid 
concentration risks, the principle of “know your customer” gradually becomes more critical.  
And that is exactly where the strength of small and medium-sized institutions lies. They know 
the risk profile of the individual borrowers as well as the value of their collateral. And they know 
the regional markets and their potential.  
All  this  needs  to  be  used  by  banks  in  the  context  of  their  risk  management  and  must 
continuously be taken into account in their decision-making in order to ensure their success 
and survival. 
It will come as no surprise to you that for me, as a representative of the SSM, it is not just about 
business models, earnings performance and the concentration of risks when it comes to small 
and medium-sized institutions. As the SSM, we are always having to ask ourselves how we 
can support our colleagues at the national supervisors. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Supervision – division of roles between the ECB and national supervisors 
Now let’s move on to the division of roles that has been in place since November 2014 for the 
supervision of small and medium-sized institutions in the euro area. 
As you know, within European banking supervision, the national supervisors are responsible 
for  supervising  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  –  so  in  Germany,  it’s  BaFin  and  the 
Bundesbank.  
The ECB only plays an indirect role in respect of supervising small and medium-sized banks – 
the point of contact is not the institutions themselves, but rather the national supervisors. Direct 
contact between the ECB and the institutions only occurs in exceptional cases – for example 
with regard to the granting or withdrawal of banking licences.  
This indirect approach reflects two major principles underlying European banking supervision: 
subsidiarity and proportionality. Most small and medium-sized institutions have relatively low-
risk business models that are tailored to their region – direct European supervision is generally 
not required here.  
But what is the SSM’s contribution, what is the contribution of European banking supervision? 
It is up to the SSM to give background support to the national supervisors. 
Together with the national supervisors, we are developing high quality, flexible standards and 
tools for risk-oriented supervision, which can take into account regional aspects such as the 
size, business and risk profile of the institution. 
This  indirect  supervisory  approach  involves,  for  example,  agreeing  with  the  national 
supervisors on the key components of a recovery plan for small and medium-sized institutions. 
It also involves obtaining an overview of whether on-site inspections and discussions are also 
taking place at these institutions; of whether the level of supervision is tailored to the risk profile 
of  the  individual  bank;  and  of  whether  the  national  supervisors  take  macroeconomic 
developments into account when conducting their risk analyses. 
Let me make one thing clear, however: it is not our intention to remove all particularities and 
replace national supervisory approaches with a European approach. Instead, we are trying to 
ensure that the key elements of supervision meet certain minimum requirements.  
This  will  enable  national  particularities  to  be  taken  into  account  –  only,  however,  if  these 
particularities are justifiable in terms of risk. Something we all agree on, I’m sure. 
Taking this approach for the indirect supervision of small and medium-sized institutions also 
ensures two things. 
• 
First, it ensures that the principle of the supervision being tailored to the risk profile 
and size of the institution is safeguarded.  
Second, it ensures that the principle of proportionality is fully upheld, as it is up to 
each  individual  supervisor  to  use  the  supervisory  tools  in  a  risk-oriented  and 
proportional manner.  
 Small and medium-sized institutions fall indirectly under European banking supervision. But 
they benefit directly from it nonetheless. 
After all, the objective of indirect supervision is to contribute to the stability of national financial 
markets and in so doing reflect the importance and particularities of small and medium-sized 
institutions. 
European banking supervision has a much wider overview than national supervisors. The ECB 
can look at all countries in the euro area and it shares its insights with the national supervisors. 
It may well be that a number of national supervisors have already decided to intensify their 
supervision of certain institutions owing to the increase in information. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Conversely, the ECB gains important insights into small and medium-sized enterprises from 
the national supervisors. The past few months, in particular, have shown that considerable 
contagion effects can arise within a banking system. 
Against this background, it is very important that the ECB covers and understands a banking 
system  as  a  whole.  This  is  also  of  benefit  to  the  supervision  of  large,  directly  supervised 
institutions. 
For those exact reasons, European banking supervision can better prevent future crises and 
that also helps small and medium-sized institutions. 
After all, financial crises always damage the real economy too – and the real economy is crucial 
for small and medium-sized institutions. 
For the reasons I have mentioned, European banking supervision will also boost the trust that 
customers and investors have in the banking sector. 
And that too is of benefit to small and medium-sized institutions. After all, trust is the foundation 
of banking – whatever the size of the bank. 
The future – open issues relating to the supervision of small and medium-sized 
institutions 
Ladies and gentlemen, European banking supervision is barely one-and-a-half years’ old. In 
that  time,  we  have  also  made  some  headway  with  regard  to  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions.  
In close  collaboration  with the  national supervisors,  we  have  established  a  set  of common 
standards and methods – and, in many cases, the national supervisors have at their disposal 
a range of methods and standards that they can choose from.  
We have therefore come a lot closer to achieving our goal of creating a more stable banking 
system. Nevertheless, there are still a number of open issues. 
One of those is reporting requirements that provide a minimum amount of data. In general, 
reporting is a controversial topic right now – and not just because of AnaCredit. There are still 
a number of misunderstandings that could be cleared up in this regard. 
In the wake of the financial crisis, the information needs of banking supervisors have increased 
significantly – that’s for sure. The crisis quite clearly highlighted that the German reporting 
system did not even fulfil the necessary minimum.  
For  example,  the  reports  that  had  to  be  submitted  on  a  regular  basis  did  not  contain  any 
information on country risks – for example to what extent the institutions depended on what 
was happening in Greece or the United States.  
Subsequent ad hoc requests then had to be made, which were expensive – for the banks and 
for the supervisors. 
Sound  risk  analysis  and  effective  supervision  are  only  possible  if  the  appropriate  data  are 
available.  The  increasing  need  for  data  obviously  also  affects  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions.  
Of  course,  it’s  important  to  weigh  up  the  costs  and  benefits  when  collecting  data.  That  is 
required under the principle of proportionality.  
In order to analyse the risks of a small or medium-sized bank, supervisors need and ask for 
less data; in order to analyse the risks of a large, international bank, they need and ask for 
more.  
Accordingly, the reporting requirements are tailored to, among other things, the size of the 
institutions.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For  example,  in  anticipation  of  future  reporting  requirements,  we  asked  the  national 
supervisors last year, for the first time ever, to provide us with supervisory data on all small 
and medium-sized banks. They were asked to submit 37 separate data points, including the 
balance sheet total, the level of customer deposits or the trading book portfolio – so nothing 
complex at all.  
By contrast, the banks that are directly supervised by the ECB are asked to give more than 
8,000 data points – and these have to be submitted not annually but quarterly.  
Our requests for information of course comply with the guidelines of the European Banking 
Authority. 
For indirect supervision, however, it is not a question of more reports. It is much more about 
using the experience collected within the SSM for the supervision of small and medium-sized 
banks.  
For example, we are currently working on a concept for the Supervisory Review and Evaluation 
Process,  or  SREP.  The  SREP  is  the  most  important  tool  of  banking  supervision.  The 
supervisors analyse each institution’s business model and governance, as well as its capital 
and  liquidity  risks.  On  this  basis,  national  supervisors  determine  how  much  capital  each 
individual institution is required to hold.  
Last year, for the first time ever, the SREP for the large banks in the euro area was conducted 
in accordance with a common methodology – an important step towards genuine European 
banking supervision. From 2018 it is likely that, for small and medium-sized institutions, the 
national supervisors will use a simplified methodology that covers the key aspects. 
Another thing that also plays an important role for small and medium-sized institutions is the 
system of institutional protection schemes. More than half of all euro area banks belong to an 
institutional protection scheme – large banks along with small and medium-sized institutions.  
In Germany, four out of five institutions belong to such a protection scheme – measured by 
balance sheet size, that represents 40% of the German banking system. Institutional protection 
schemes are therefore highly relevant for the stability of the banking system.  
But  they  are  also  important  to  supervisors  for  another  reason.  Under  European  law,  more 
specifically  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  (CRR),  banks  may  be  granted  certain 
privileges if they belong to a protection scheme. 
For example, institutions need not necessarily hold capital against exposures to members of 
the same protection scheme. The decision whether to grant such a privilege is taken by the 
competent supervisor – for small and medium-sized institutions, the national supervisors; for 
large banks, the ECB.  
There is therefore much to be said for granting these privileges in accordance with uniform 
criteria – both across countries and across institutions.  
I’d like to be clear about one thing, however: the aim is not to call into question the protection 
schemes in general. The objective is to harmonise the supervisory treatment of the systems. 
We  have  therefore  defined  the  relevant  criteria  and  are  currently  conducting  a  public 
consultation that will run until the middle of April.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I began my speech with the conclusion that the term “less significant” institutions is not justified 
for the group of small and medium-sized banks. 
In view of the importance and particularities of this banking sector, I believe indirect European 
banking supervision to be necessary and appropriate. I also believe that the division of roles 
that has been in place since November 2014 is clear and unambiguous.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Small and medium-sized institutions basically fulfil the ideal function of the financial system: 
they finance the real economy. However, this traditional business model is being challenged – 
at the moment also by sluggish economic growth, weak investment and the prolonged period 
of low interest rates. 
In  some  countries,  many  banks  have  also  for  a  long  time  been  plagued  by  relentless 
competition for too few customers for a large number of banks. 
The German institutions, in particular, indeed have considerable reserves, their customers are 
generally  solvent  and  liquid,  and  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  is  accordingly  low. 
Therefore, as a supervisor, I’m not immediately concerned.  
Nonetheless, even these institutions should not try to just hold their breath until they surface 
from the low interest rate phase. They could rapidly run out of air.  
The  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  will  not  be  able  to  avoid  assessing  (in  detail)  the 
efficiency of their business model – and better sooner than later.  
Small  and  medium-sized  institutions  are  subject  to  national  supervision.  Nonetheless, 
European supervision still plays an important part, but indirectly through cooperation with the 
national authorities.  
These institutions benefit directly from European supervision, however; trust in the banking 
sector is increasing, the information base for supervision is becoming wider, the likelihood of 
crises is decreasing and competition is becoming fairer. 
After one-and-a-half years of European supervision, much has changed for small and medium-
sized institutions too. Reporting requirements are higher, the SREP is being harmonised and 
the supervisory treatment of institutional protection schemes is being standardised.  
The ECB and the national supervisors are working together on implementing these changes.  
The  objective  is  to  exercise  the  best  possible  supervision,  which  follows  the  principle  of 
proportionality, takes appropriate account of national particularities and reflects the particular 
importance of this banking sector for the stability of national financial markets.  
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
