  Yves Mersch: Policy needs, knowns and unknowns in the aftermath of 
the crisis 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at UBS, Zurich, 4 February 2016. 
 I would like to thank Valerie Jarvis for her assistance in preparing this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank Valerie Jarvis for her assistance in preparing this speech. 
Coming out of a crisis, one of the biggest challenges that policymakers face is uncertainty 
about  the  state  of the  economy. We  can  respond  to  this,  of  course,  by  looking  at  stylised 
indicators, such as inflation or employment. But for a forward-looking monetary policy, that’s 
not sufficient. We need to know the strength of the inflation pressures building up over the 
medium-term – that is, whether the economy is over-heating or under-cooking relative to its 
underlying potential. 
It is for that reason that central banks have traditionally used the concept of potential output – 
the level of output consistent with price stability – to gauge inflationary pressures.1 If actual 
output is above potential output, there is a positive “output gap” and we can expect upward 
pressures on inflation. And if actual output is below potential, the opposite will be the case 
and disinflation will follow. 
In  general  terms,  I  see  nothing  wrong  with  this  way  of  thinking.  The  economy  is  vastly 
complex  and  we  need  simplifying  frameworks  for  assessing  “how  it’s  doing”  overall.  In 
particular, it’s self-evident that central bankers need some way of judging the degree of slack 
in  the  economy  and  its  effect  on  prices.  If  there  are  either  ample  underused  resources  or 
binding capacity constraints, monetary policy may need to respond pre-emptively. 
But the concept of the output gap becomes less useful, in my view, if it morphs from being a 
broad signpost for policy into a de facto intermediate target for policy. If policymakers start to 
believe that they can steer the output gap towards zero – effectively, to “fine-tune” policy in 
order  to  achieve  that  – they  are  liable  to  come  unstuck.  And  our  recent  experience  in  the 
euro area, coupled with my assessment of how the economy is evolving, only reinforces that 
view. There are three main reasons why I say this. 
The  first  is  that  estimating  the  output  gap  in  real  time  is  fraught  with  uncertainty,  and  the 
misleading signals this can give to policymakers have been painfully exposed by the crisis. 
In  2007,  real  time  estimates  from  a  range  of  international  institutions  –  the  European 
Commission, the IMF, the OECD – envisaged the euro area output gap at that time to be in 
the range of minus 0.6% to minus –0.2%. According to the most recent estimates, however, 
we now think that the euro area output gap in 2007 was in the range of plus 2.6% to 3.3%. 
This shows how wrong real-time estimates can be. Not only was the size of the output gap 
significantly  mis-measured  –  with  real-time  estimates  subsequently  revised  up  by  some  
3–4 percentage points – but, more importantly, even the sign of the gap was wrong. 
This example is not just an aberration: large errors are inherent in the concept of the output 
gap. And worse still, at the critical moments when policymakers need to understand what’s 
                                                
1  See Potential Output from a euro area perspective (ECB Occasional Paper series No 156, November 2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  happening in the economy – in the build-up to and aftermath of crises – measures of output 
gap are often at their least dependable.2 
So that poor track record in the run up to the crisis is one reason why I’m sceptical of fine-
tuning.  But  there’s  also  a  second  one:  such  difficulties  are  only  likely  to  increase  given 
current trends in the economy and society – and not just in estimating potential output, but in 
measuring actual output too.3 
We’re  living  through  an  era  where  the  nature  of  production  and  consumption  is  changing 
rapidly. And that has profound implications for our ability to understand the economy – or, at 
least, our ability to adequately measure what is actually being produced and how efficiently 
this is achieved. 
Consider, for example, the difficulties that the digital economy creates for measuring labour 
input.  As  highlighted  in  a  recent  statistical  study,  the  growth  of  the  “sharing  economy”  is 
creating new opportunities for self-employment: people who work on a shift pattern in a retail 
store might spend their off-days driving an Uber taxi. This kind of “micro” activity might be 
less simple to measure than the services of traditional taxi firms, as it may be less likely to 
show up in earnings data.4 
Measuring investment in a digital economy is equally tricky, as much of it concerns intangible 
capital. We have now started classifying R&D as investment, which is welcome, but it’s only 
the  most  tangible  part,  i.e.  technological  innovation,  which  is  typically  recorded.  Business 
model innovation is excluded. What’s more, investment in organisational capital and human 
capital  are  not  recorded  in  national  accounts,  even  though  this  will  become  ever  more 
important part of capital growth as more jobs become automated and skill premia rise. 
Even more complex is how to measure the value of digital innovations in terms of, say, the 
time  they  save  for  consumers  or  for  national  output.  How  should  we  value  the  ability  to 
conduct banking via a smart phone? Or get directions through Google maps?5 
This isn’t just a question of the so-called “consumer surplus”, which is about welfare. It’s a 
question  of  whether  improvements  in  quality  are  being  properly  valued.  And  as  more  and 
more  services  are  provided  in  this  intangible  way,  the  likelihood  of  significant  mis-
measurement of the full value of goods and services in our economies rises. 
The flipside of digital services is that more activities that were previously part of the market 
economy  can  now  be  produced  at  home.  A  person  wanting  to  arrange  a  holiday,  for 
example, no longer needs to visit or phone a travel agent, but can research and book the 
whole trip herself online. The sales of hotels and flights still contribute to GDP. But the work 
formerly  done  by  the  travel  agent,  which  has  now  effectively  been  outsourced  to  the 
consumer, disappears. This also raises questions for how we measure productive activity. 
These examples highlight the difficulties of understanding how the economy is developing – 
let  alone  estimating  its  potential  growth  rate.  To  be  sure,  we  should  aim  to  rise  to  that 
challenge and update our statistics to capture such changes. But clearly, as policymakers, 
we also have to be humble about what can know. And in that context, imagining that we can 
reliably hold the output gap around zero is simply hubris. 
                                                
2  See: Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti and Lawrence Summers, Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and 
their Monetary Policy Implications”, IMF Working Paper WP/15/230 (November 2015). 
3  See: Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of Brilliant Technologies (W. W. Norton & Company, 2014), especially Chapter 8. 
4  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/481452/ 
Bean_review__Interim_Report_web.pdf. 
5  See Erik Brynjolfsson and Joo Hee Oh, “The Attention Economy: Measuring the Value of Free Digital Services 
on the Internet”, Thirty Third International Conference on Information Systems (Orlando: 2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, the fine-tuning mindset is not only a problem because we don’t know exactly the 
size of the output gap. It’s also a problem because it sustains huge expectations about the 
ability of monetary policy to steer the economy wherever it wants. And such expectations, in 
my view, are becoming less and less appropriate given the environment we will likely face 
coming out of the crisis.6 
This is the third reason for my scepticism. 
We may well be entering a world where established macroeconomic relationships no longer 
hold  with  the  regularity  we  once  thought.  We  face  an  outlook  of  ageing  populations,  high 
savings,  persisting  weak  investment,  increasingly  interlinked  economies  at  the  global  level 
and,  potentially,  lower  real  equilibrium  interest  rates.  In  that  environment,  monetary  policy 
transmission may become less predictable, and monetary policy itself might end up stuck at 
lower bound more often.7 
Some  go  as  far  as  pretending  that  unconventional  policies  might  even  end  up  becoming 
conventional. 
All this wouldn’t necessarily make monetary policy ineffective. But it would make the way in 
which  it  works  less regular.  And  in  that  context, sustaining  the  belief that  we  can  hold the 
economy on a string – that if we introduce X amount of stimulus it will affect economic growth 
by Y% and lead to Z% inflation – would likely backfire and damage our credibility. It would be 
preferable,  in  my  view,  for  policymakers  to  admit  the  uncertainties  they  face  in  this  new 
environment and be humble about what they can achieve within it. 
The productivity challenge 
Even  if  the  economy  is  changing  in  ways  that  we  do  not  yet  fully  grasp,  there  are  certain 
facts that remain immutable. Most importantly, we know that what ultimately matters for long-
term prosperity – and increases in standards of living – is productivity. That’s the case in any 
economy  with  limited  resources.  But  it’s  even  more  important  in  an  economy  with 
demographic  challenges,  where  a  shrinking  workforce  has  to  support  a  growing  retired 
population. And that is, of course, the case in the euro area today. 
It’s well documented that productivity growth in the euro area has long been lacklustre in an 
international context. Since the early 1990s euro area labour productivity growth per person 
employed  has  been  falling  behind  the  US,  and  that  has  continued  during  the  crisis.  Since 
2008, euro area productivity has averaged only 0.2% per year, while US it has increased by 
around 1.0% a year over the same period.8 
In the US this is also seen as a low figure, and recently it’s been debated there whether the 
productivity slowdown seen in the US over recent years isn’t simply the outcome of the mis-
measurement  I  highlighted  earlier.  This  is  based  on  the  observation  that  the  productivity 
slowdown has been associated with marked declines in employment, whereas typically the 
latter would tend to raise productivity.9 
                                                
6  Similar arguments are made by Marvin Goodfriend Mervyn King in their Review of the Riksbank’s Monetary 
Policy 2010–2015, (Stockholm: 2015). 
7  Claudio Borio, Magdalena Erdem, Andrew Filardo and Boris Hofmann, “The costs of deflations: a historical 
perspective,” BIS Quarterly Review, March 2015, pp. 31–54. 
8  See  the  box  entitled  “A  tale  of  two  crises:  recent  developments  in  euro  area  and  US  employment,”  in  the 
December  2015  issue  of  the  ECB  Economic  Bulletin,  and,  for  a  longer  term  analysis,  the  article  entitled, 
“Productivity developments and monetary policy,” in the January 2008 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
9  Lawrence Summers, “Reflections on the Productivity Slowdown,” Keynote Address to the Conference: Making 
Sense  of  the  Productivity  Slowdown,  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics  (Washington,  D.C.”: 
16 November, 2015): http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/transcript-20151116keynote.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  There may well be some truth in this. After all, it’s well-known that the national accounts often 
take  a  long  time  to  fully  count  the  effects  of  innovations  in  technology.  For  example,  US 
national  accounts  did  not  reflect  the  output  from  automobiles  for  nearly  15  years  after  the 
Ford Model T was available.10 
But even if we are mis-measuring productivity, we still need to raise it: the euro area is still 
lagging  considerably  behind  others.  And  worse  still,  we  only  seem  to  be  able  to  achieve 
productivity growth if it’s traded-off against employment. 
In recent years, much of the (meagre) productivity growth seen in the euro area has come 
through labour shedding rather than from strong value added growth. And if those displaced 
don’t have the right skills to find another job, structural unemployment is likely to increase 
further,  or  they  will  be  forced  to  consider  low  productivity  sectors,  and  then  aggregate 
productivity growth will stagnate once more. Neither scenario is desirable or sustainable. 
So our aim must be to achieve high productivity growth at full employment. But how can that 
be achieved? Essentially, there are two channels towards higher productivity growth, and to 
combine productivity growth with full employment we need to employ both. 
The  first  is  within-firm  productivity  growth,  which  is  about  investing  in  or  adopting  new 
technology. There’s quite some debate, led by scholars like Robert Gordon, as to whether 
the great waves of technological innovation are now behind us.11 
But whether or not that’s the case, I don’t see it as a barrier to productivity growth in the euro 
area. In fact, we still have a long way to go to capitalise on the last wave of innovation – the 
ICT revolution – which many firms have not yet incorporated into their business models. 
Indeed, a large part of the difference in productivity performance between the US and the 
euro area can be attributed to the fact that US firms have invested more in ICT capital, and 
crucially, in the human and organisational capital necessary to full reap the benefits of it.12 
There’s  a  lot  of  scope  for  European  firms  to  catch-up  in  terms  of  improving  management 
quality, to make the organisational changes required by new technologies, and in terms of 
improving ICT skills, so that workers can operate those technologies effectively.13 
But looking further ahead, it’s clear we need to reflect on what types of skills will be needed 
for the next phase of the ICT revolution: the replacement of routine service occupations by 
robotics.14 
There will obviously have to be larger human capital investment in people  who  will design 
robots. But greater upskilling and professional polyvalence will also be needed in the people 
who use them: those who work in automated warehouses, for example, may have to have 
                                                
10  http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2016/01/13/090224b08405ea05/ 
2_0/Rendered/PDF/World0developm0000digital0dividends.pdf.  Similarly,  Diane  Coyle  notes  that  the  UK’s 
Statistical Abstract for 1871–85 – in retrospect, the height of the industrial revolution – devoted just 12 of the 
200  pages  on  the  economy’s  output  and  trade  to  manufacturing  and  transport  “Commentary:  Modernising 
Economic Statistics: Why It Matters,” National Institute Economic Review, No. 234 (November 2015). 
11  Robert J. Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth (Princeton UP; 2016). See also: Juan F. Jimeno, 
Frank  Smets  and  Jonathan  Yiangou,  “Secular  stagnation:  A  view  from  the  Eurozone,”  Secular  Stagnation: 
Facts, Causes and Cures, ed . Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin (CEPR, 2014). 
12  Bart van Ark, Mary O’Mahony and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Productivity Gap between Europe and the United 
States: Trends and Causes”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Winter, 2008), pp. 25–44. 
13  Carol  Corrado,  Jonathan  Haskel,  Cecilia  Jona-Lasinio and Massi  miliano  Iommi  ,  Innovation  and  intangible 
investment  in  Europe,  Japan,  and  the  United  States,  Oxford  Review  of  Economic  Policy,  Vol:  29  (Oxford, 
2012), pp. 261–6. 
14  Carl  Frey  and  Michael  Osborne,  The  Future of  Employment:  How  susceptible  are  jobs to  computerisation? 
(Oxford, September 2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  skills  in  logistics,  (re-)programming,  and  routine  or  basic  maintenance.  Are  our  education 
systems ready for that challenge? 
Moreover, what will happen to those who are displaced by new technologies? 
Economic theory tells us that technological gains raise disposable income and hence create 
new demand somewhere in the economy. But as the literature on “hollowing out” has shown, 
technological advances may lead to a polarisation of jobs – at the expense of the middle-
skilled.15 
And this seems to be evident also in recent employment growth seen in the euro area, with 
the  bulk  of  the  recent  employment  growth  seen  concentrated  in  the  lower  productivity 
sectors.16 So the risk is that the one effect offsets the other: technological advances in some 
sectors are neutralised by gains in employment in other, lower productivity ones. That might 
be damaging for social cohesion. 
This is why the second channel is crucial: across-firm productivity growth.17 
To combine productivity growth with full employment, it’s essential that labour can flow to the 
most  productive  firms,  rather  than  being  bottled  up  in  the  least  productive.  That  in  turn 
requires that the most productive firms are able to grow and create new jobs. And it requires 
that workers have the incentives, skills and means to move to them. In an average mature 
economy, around 50% of productivity growth comes from such reallocation. 
When people think about reallocation, they tend to think in terms of people moving across 
sectors. But typically, that only accounts for a small share of productivity growth.18 
What’s  more  important  for  mature  economies  is  within-sector  reallocation,  which  means 
shifting  resources  towards  the  most  productive  firms  within  each  sector  of  the  economy. 
That’s encouraging because expecting, say, steel workers to become bankers is not realistic. 
But expecting them to move to better firms within their sector is. 
For this to happen, however, the structural conditions have to be right. Product markets have 
to allow market entry, to challenge unproductive firms; they have to support firm growth, so 
that  the  most  productive  can  reach  their  optimal  size;  and  they  have  to  facilitate  quick 
bankruptcy,  so  that  the  weakest  firms  can  exit.  Similarly,  labour  markets  have  to  set 
incentives for mobility; support retraining and upskilling where needed; and allow wages to 
match productivity at the firm level, creating proper market signals. 
Clearly,  for  firms  to  prosper  in  this  environment,  they  need  to  be  agile.  Increased  agility 
would  enable  firms  to  switch  production  towards  the  higher  quality,  distinctive,  more 
customised  goods  and  services  increasingly  demanded  by  ever  more  sophisticated 
customers, which has long been the strategy of Europe’s leading exporters.19 And since such 
goods and services typically command a price premium in the market, that would in turn lift 
the value of output, raise national income and secure and expand employment. 
                                                
15  David  Autor  and  David  Dorn,  The  Growth  of  Low-Skill  Service  Jobs  and  the  Polarization  of  the  US  Labor 
Market, American Economic Review, 2013, 103(5): 1553–1597. 
16  See  the  article  entitled,  “What  is  behind  the  recent  rebound  in  euro  area  employment?”,  ECB  Economic 
Bulletin, No. 8 (December 2015). 
17  Ulf Lewrickb, Lukas Mohlera and Rolf Weder, When firms and industries matter: understanding the sources of 
productivity growth, BIS Working Papers No 469 (October 2014). 
18  Among several other papers, see e.g. Krizan, C.J., Foster, L. and Haltiwanger, J.C. (2006), “Market selection, 
Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s”, The Review of Economics and 
Statistics, MIT Press, Vol. 88(4), pp. 748–758, November. 
19  Valerie Jarvis and S.J. Prais, “The Quality of Manufactured Products in Britain and Germany,” International 
Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 11:3 (1997), 421–438. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Indeed, even with the technological advances at our disposal, advanced economies such as 
the euro area cannot afford to try to out-compete the lower cost producers on price – not if 
we  want  to  maintain  the  benefits  of  our  welfare  states  and  less  precarious  patterns  of 
employment. Competing against lower cost producers would require either wages having to 
fall to the levels of the least-cost producers or some substitution of higher-cost labour with 
capital. Both effects would have adverse consequences for euro area workers. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  cost  containment  is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  competitiveness. 
Rather  it  is  saying  that  cost  considerations  should  not  be  the  only  element  on  which  we 
should aim to rebuild our economy in the aftermath of a severe crisis. All this raises many 
questions for policy makers: what kinds of investments do we need for future growth? What 
are 
the  degree  of 
entrepreneurship to realise innovative activity? 
At  the  same  time,  policymakers  cannot  lose  sight  of  the  social  consequences  of  such 
changes. A world where jobs are being created and destroyed with ever greater speed, and 
where people are expected to move regularly between them, is a world of greater insecurity. 
So we need also to consider the readiness of our societies to cope with these changes, and 
ask what type of new social models we will need to adapt to them. And crucially, so as not to 
lose more time, we need to start today. 
for  workforce  skills?  How  can  we 
implications 
increase 
the 
Conclusion 
We are experiencing a period a transition. 
Economically, we haven’t recovered fully from the after-pains of the crisis. 
Technologically,  the  jury  is  still  out  on  whether  the  IT-driven  transformation  of  work  has 
ended or will continue, and what this means in terms of productivity. What is clear however is 
that  we  have  to  overhaul  our  traditional  ways  of  measuring,  assessing  and  reacting  to 
productivity and welfare indicators. 
Socially,  uncertainty  will  weigh  heavily  on  people’s  shoulders  in  the  years  to  come  amid 
these structural changes. 
How  should  policymakers  react?  The  fact  that  our  established  gauges  have  lost  their 
assumed precision does not mean that we have become clueless. In spite of the elevated 
uncertainty, it is still possible to grasp the obvious. 
Potential output may not the most reliable benchmark in the current environment. Moreover, 
perhaps it misses the broader structural changes, which are of paramount importance in the 
longer run pursuit of improvements in standards of living. 
So it is crucial that policy makers pay heed to broad and thorough analyses, coupled with an 
understanding  of  the  limitations  to  our  understanding  we  face  at  this  time.  In  this  way, 
modest  judgment  and  prudent  action  will  provide  the  indispensable  preconditions  for 
policymakers to live up to their responsibilities. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
