   Agus D W Martowardojo: Managing stability and growth under economic 
and monetary divergence 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bank 
Indonesia-Federal Reserve Bank of New York Joint International Seminar “Managing Stability 
and Growth under Economic and Monetary Divergence”, Bali, 1 August 2016. 
 Your Excellencies:  
Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  Financial  Services  Authorities  of  the  EMEAP 
Jurisdiction,  
Mr. Boediono, Former Vice President of the Republic of Indonesia and also Former Governor 
of Bank Indonesia  
Mr. Mitsuhiro Furusawa, Deputy Managing Director, IMF  
Mr. William C. Dudley, President of Federal Reserve Bank of New York  
Mr. Raghuram Rajan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India  
Mr. Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Swiss National Bank  
Mrs. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Former Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning and warm welcome to all of you.  
It is such a privilege for Bank Indonesia and Federal Reserve Bank of New York to welcome 
you  all  in  this  international  seminar.  Together  with  President William  C.  Dudley  of  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, I am very grateful to host this event here in Bali, Indonesia, where 
we can mix some meaningful discussions with the beauty of nature and culture of this island 
of Gods.  
Today we have an excellent line of speakers, who will be deliberating a current and important 
issue in the global economy: an increasingly divergent global recovery paths in growth and 
policies, particularly from central bank perspectives. In particular, I would like to welcome Mr. 
Boediono, a former Vice President of the Republic of Indonesia who is also a former Governor 
of Bank Indonesia, for taking time to join us in this seminar. Later we will have an honor to 
learn from his vast experience and wisdom by listening to his luncheon speech.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
This is a timely seminar given that we all acknowledge that the global economy is still in high 
uncertainty which influences its growth prospect. The divergence in economic recovery and 
monetary policy among major economies are still the focus of global issues. Normalization in 
US monetary policy has been underway, while the Euro area and Japan have been proceeding 
with monetary easing. At the same time, the development in China has seen gradual slowdown 
as a consequence of its economic rebalancing. Some countries have adopted negative interest 
rate policies, with some jurisdictions going even more negative.  
The most recent UK’s decision to leave the European Union adds another complication to the 
already bleak global economic outlook. Moreover, Brexit, which some said has produced a 
seismic  political  shock,  has  shifted  the  nature  of  global  concerns  from  heightened 
vulnerabilities towards a new era of political uncertainty.  
The  previous  episode  of  heightened  vulnerabilities  were  characterized  by  rising  risk  of 
weakening growth, unresolved legacy issues in banks from Advanced Economies, leveraged 
and  increasingly  fragile  corporates  from  Emerging  Markets,  and  the  existence  of  systemic 
liquidity. All of these urgently require more balanced and potent policy mix.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Now,  in  the  new  era  of political  uncertainty, there  seems  to  a  strong  link  between  political 
uncertainty and market confidence. A political shock results in economic and financial fallout, 
and has tremendous financial stability implication. Therefore, in this new episode, apart from 
addressing vulnerability, we need also to strengthen the foundations of global financial system.  
Otherwise, there is a likelihood that we will be trapped in a vicious circle, in a way that the 
policy uncertainty undermining confidence will instill slower and stagnant growth, which will 
erode political cohesion, making the crisis legacy challenges harder to resolve, which will later 
induce further increase in policy uncertainty.  
Such new dynamics and concerns have given rise to a new set of policy challenges, not only 
on how to simultaneously maintain stability and revive growth, but also on how to strengthen 
the  foundations  of  global  financial  system.  Against  this  backdrop,  Bank  Indonesia  and  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York have decided to co-host a seminar that will look deeper 
and expand the boundaries of thinking, nurturing, and offering new insights pertaining to these 
challenges, with the spirit of putting both East and West perspectives on the table.  
In our opinion, the boundaries would encapsulate three areas. First, pursuing growth objectives 
after the crisis, where factors impeding the global economy will be discussed, and initiatives to 
balance  structural  reform  and  support  for  growth  will  be  deliberated.  Topics  surrounding 
challenges that are unique to small open economies, along with strategies to achieve sustained 
economic growth, hopefully will make this seminar very relevant and interesting.  
Second, monetary policy tradeoffs in the open economy, where challenges stemming from 
divergent  monetary  policies,  linkages  between  economic  and  financial  cycles,  dealing  with 
capital  flow  reversal  risks,  and  new  roles  of  exchange  rate  in  external  adjustment,  will  be 
discussed.  
Third, achieving financial stability in periods of monetary policy divergence, in which important 
issues  such  as  policy  responses  to  promote  financial  stability,  tradeoffs  between  financial 
sector  reform  and  growth,  and  country  experiences  with  macroprudential  tools,  will  be 
deliberated.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Recent global development has tested the creativity and innovation of central banks to the 
limit.  A  number  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  were  put forward. Acting  boldly  in  the 
midst  of  a  massive  crisis,  central  banks  have  moved  forward  to  prevent  the  world  from  a 
depression that would have far outreaching negative effect.  
It turns out that such creativity and innovation did not stop with the success of central banks in 
calming  a  financial  crisis  that  had  brought  the  global  economy  to  a  virtual  standstill. 
Subsequently,  central  banks  have  assumed  the  tasks  to  continue  with  the  next  stage  of 
recovering the economy and maintaining its stability.  
However,  the  challenges  for  central  banks  remain.  The  concern  should  not  be  about  an 
upcoming  inflation  fueled  by  the  expansion  of  central  bank  balance  sheets  and  enormous 
liquidity injections. Instead, the real concern should be about stimulating economic momentum, 
unemployment  and  capacity,  along  with  excessive 
taking,  resource 
misallocations, and threats to the stability of markets. Moreover, in a new normal world today, 
central banks have not been able to completely resort to reliable insights and information from 
historical precedents, analytical models, or past policy experiences.  
Courageously  but  prudently,  central  banks  took  the  helmets  on  unprecedentedly  large 
responsibilities for the economy as a whole. Central banks felt a moral and ethical obligation 
to expand their policy toolkits in responding to such challenges. In my opinion, there has come 
a time for central banks to move forward, by taking the role of institutional leadership, on top 
of the policy excellence they have always delivered.  
 
financial  risk 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Looking from a central banker perspective, to stay relevant, resilient, and agile, I agree that 
policy makers should be more inventive in tackling global challenges. The prime challenge has 
been how to nurture the sustainability of growth while keeping monetary and financial stability 
in check, including mitigating the risk of capital reversals.  
Naturally, stability should serve as the basic foundation for growth to flourish. Having said that, 
focusing too much on stability could trade off the economic expansion, which in turn could risk 
a negative spillback through financial channel and hence the stability itself. In other words, we 
need to balance the long term objective of strong, sustainable and inclusive economic growth 
with the short term concerns of stability, in its many facets.  
The  situation  truly  explains  many  countries’  challenges  including  Indonesia.  In  this  regard, 
Bank Indonesia cannot solely rely on the policy rate as a single monetary policy instrument. In 
fact, we employ a variety of policy instruments which we call “the policy mix.”  
The “policy mix” consists of (a) policy rate to anchor inflation expectation complemented by (b) 
exchange rate flexibility to lessen pressure on external sector, (c) capital flows management 
to  mitigate  short-term  excessive  volatility,  (d)  macroprudential  measures  to  manage  pro-
cyclicality, and (e) we also continue to strengthen policy coordination with the Government and 
ensure good communication to the public.  
This year the policy mix focuses on maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability, 
while  stimulating  economic  momentum.  In  the  monetary  sector,  gradual  monetary  easing 
remains consistent with efforts to maintain macroeconomic and financial system stability. Such 
policy is supported by measures to maintain exchange rates in line with economic fundamental, 
strengthen the position of reserve assets and manage flows of foreign capital. Bank Indonesia 
also maintains accommodative macroprudential policy, while continuing the effort of financial 
market deepening.  
In  terms  of  macroprudential  policy,  Bank  Indonesia  has  been  implementing  a  number  of 
regulations, namely, the loan to deposits ratio (LDR) linked to the reserves requirement (RR) 
and  loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio  on  property  loans  and  automotive  loans.  We  adjust  the  rate 
according to the need of real sector.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In the midst  of continuing global  challenges,  Bank  Indonesia always  strives  to  advance  its 
central  banking  practices,  particularly  its  policy  frameworks.  In  order  to  improve  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy transmission, Bank Indonesia has reformulated the policy rate 
from the BI Rate into the 7-day (Reverse) Repo Rate, which will become effective on August 
19,  2016.  Such  enhancement  does  not  imply  a  change  in  the  prevailing  monetary  policy 
stance.  
During the transition period prior to August 19, 2016, the BI Rate remains as Bank Indonesia’s 
policy rate. Within that timeframe, BI has started to announce BI 7-day Repo Rate as part of 
the term structure. The enhancement of monetary operation framework has three objectives. 
First, to improve the policy signaling of policy rate as primary reference for interest rates in the 
financial  market.  Second,  to  strengthen  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  transmission 
through its stronger impact on short term money market rates and bank rates. Third, to support 
financial market deepening, especially in encouraging transactions and developing interbank 
rate structure for 3 month to 12 month terms.  
In line with the enhancement, Bank Indonesia also accelerates the implementation of financial 
market deepening program by pursuing the following steps: (i) strengthening the role of Jakarta 
Interbank Offered Rate (JIBOR) in shaping the interest rate structure of the money market 
across tenors from overnight to 12 months; (ii) accelerating the Repo transactions in the money 
market by promoting banks participation in General Master Repo Agreement (GMRA); and (iii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   the  market’s  transaction  capacity  by 
alleviating  market  segmentation  and  boosting 
encouraging banks to open more access to counterparty.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It seems that under the current global dynamics, the only certainty is the uncertainty itself. And 
therefore  the  focus  of  central  banks  should  be  on  nurturing  the  economic  growth,  while 
maintaining stability. Across the globe, central banks are pressured to continuously pull a rabbit 
from  a  hat,  offering  a  formula  to  tackle  the  important  issues  of  economic  slowdown. 
Nonetheless, we should be mindful that in an era of new normal with political uncertainty, all 
of us should relentlessly and collectively strengthen the foundations of global financial system.  
In this spirit, we are bringing all the relevant stakeholders to the table to continue the policy 
dialogue. Hence, I am pleased to have the presence of the participants from east and west: 
central  bankers,  financial  regulators,  global  policy  makers,  and  market  players.  I  sincerely 
believe  that  sharing  perspectives  and  experiences  among  stakeholders  will  equip  us  with 
additional  significant  insights  to  enhance  mutual  understanding  between  authorities  and 
industries towards sound policy responses and implementations. Moreover, the presence of 
all  distinguished  participants  would  strengthen  communication  and  collective  action 
commitments in facing the challenges of economic and monetary divergence.  
Finally, once again I would like to express my appreciation to Honorable Governors, Heads of 
Financial Supervision Authorities, distinguished speakers and all guests for your participation 
in  the  seminar,  and  wish  you  an  enjoyable  and fruitful  deliberation. I  also  hope that  in  the 
middle of the seminar’s tight schedule, some of you are able to enjoy Bali and experience its 
picturesque view and unique cultural identity. After all, this is the place where the movie “Eat, 
Pray and Love” was taken. So please make your time.  
Thank you.   
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
