  Yves Mersch: Distributed ledger technology – panacea or flash in the 
pan? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Deutsche Bank Transaction Bankers’ Forum 2016, Frankfurt am Main, 25 April 2016. 
 Is distributed ledger technology (DLT) a hype in need of demystifying? Is it a panacea that 
can heal the ailments of the financial industry, or it is a flash in the pan that will be forgotten 
in a few years? In my view, as it is often the case, the truth may lie somewhere in the middle. 
One of the main reasons why DLT has been capturing so much interest is because it could 
be  a  game  changer  in  the  market.  The  possibility  for  financial  intermediaries  and  market 
infrastructures  to  share  a  distributed  ledger  –  i.e.  a  decentralised  common  database  –  is 
something unprecedented. It has the potential to advantage some actors, by lowering back-
office  costs  and  collateral  or  capital  requirements.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  possibly 
disintermediate  or  even  make  redundant  some  market  actors  that  do  not  provide  core 
functions. 
Today, I would like to approach the discussion of DLT from a central bank perspective. First, 
as an operator, we have to ensure that we offer the right, i.e. efficient and safe services in 
our  market  infrastructure  for  the  settlement  of  payments  and  securities.  On  that  basis  we 
need to assess the different technical solutions available. Focusing only on DLT might be a 
too  narrow  approach.  According  to  Maslow,  if  the  only  tool  you  have  is  a  hammer,  it  is 
tempting to treat everything as if it were a nail. 
Second,  even  if,  ultimately,  we  were  sure  that DLT  hits the  right  nail  on  the  head,  we  will 
have to reflect on the wider implications of the use of this technology for the central bank. In 
particular, we will have to reflect to what extent it affects our role as the trusted third party for 
the settlement of payments and securities in central bank money, or as the issuer of risk free 
base money as anchor of monetary policy. 
Third,  in  our  role  as  catalyst,  we  facilitate  market  actors’  work  on  standardisation  and 
interoperability to avoid that such initiatives lose momentum due to co-ordination failures and 
to counter the risk of silos and proprietary solutions. Last but not least, the Eurosystem also 
acts as overseer of market infrastructures and supervisor of financial institutions. Here, we 
need  to  arrive  at  a  common  understanding  on  how  the  adoption  of  DLT  could  potentially 
affect the overseen and supervised entities and their business models, and on how reporting 
and accounting could be affected. 
Part 1: The development and operation of the Eurosystem’s financial market 
infrastructure 
Let me start with our reflections on how to go forward with the Eurosystem’s financial market 
infrastructure  for  payments  and  securities.  The  Eurosystem  is  the  owner  and  operator  of 
TARGET2, the real-time gross settlement system for the euro, and of TARGET2-Securities 
(T2S),  the  integrated  platform  which  processes  the  real-time  settlement  of  securities 
transactions  against  central  bank  money  across  Europe.  To  address  the  need  for  these 
financial  market  infrastructures  to  continuously  evolve  and  keep  pace  with  market 
developments and technological progress, the Eurosystem has defined four key action points 
it will work on in the run up to 2020 and beyond. 
The  first  is  to  explore  synergies  between  TARGET2  and  T2S,  with  the  goal  of  offering  a 
single gateway to the two platforms and enabling TARGET2, a system of the 90s, to benefit 
from some state-of-the-art features currently available for T2S, a system of the last ten years. 
What will be the design and the needs of a system for the next decade? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  second  is  the  provision  of  new  TARGET2  services.  We  have  recently  conducted  a 
market  consultation  on  functional  and  business  opportunities  of  our  future  real  time  gross 
settlement (RTGS) system. In this consultation, openness to new technologies was one of 
key  components  in  the  investigation  of  technological  opportunities.  The  replies  to  the 
consultation are currently being analysed. 
The  third  is  to  prepare  for  the  enhancement  of  TARGET2  services  with  instant  retail 
payments, at least in the settlement layer taking into account the clearing layer solution. In 
2014,  the  Euro  Retail  Payments  Board  (ERPB)  identified  the  need  for  at  least  one  pan-
European instant payment solution for euro that is open to any payment service provider in 
the  European  Union.  By  November  2017,  end-user  solutions  for  instant  payments  in  euro 
should be made available at the pan-European level by the payment service providers. The 
present  efforts  focus  on  P  to  P  schemes.  But  they  would  lay  the  foundation  for  more 
ambitious B to B instant payment solutions. 
The  fourth  action  point  sets  out  to  review  the  harmonisation  of  Eurosystem  arrangements 
and  procedures  for  collateralisation.  Further  progress  is  needed  in  this  area  before  the 
business  case 
for  a  common  Eurosystem  collateral  management  system  can  be 
reconsidered. 
At present, we are in the design phase of our project, where we define the services required 
for each of the four action points. When it comes to assessing possible technical solutions for 
the envisaged developments, we consider DLT as one of several possibilities and analyse 
whether  at  this  stage  the  use  of  DLT  could  lead  to  lower  costs  and  a  more  resilient  and 
legally  sound  market  infrastructure.  But  even  if,  ultimately,  DLT  emerged  as  technically 
superior  in  terms  of  safety  and  efficiency,  we  will  also  have  to  reflect  on  the  wider 
implications of the use of this technology for the role of central bank money. 
Part 2: Implications of the use of DLT as financial market infrastructure for the central 
bank 
Let’s assume for a moment that the Eurosystem’s market infrastructure, i.e. T2 and T2S, is 
moved  to  DLT. The key  question  that  would  result from  such  a  move  is  how  central  bank 
money is put into the ledger or, more specifically, which entities can access the central bank 
money on the ledger. Remember the discussion on the interface model, when it was argued 
that central bank accounts cannot be outsourced. 
Access to the ledger for payments and securities settlement could be restricted to banks, or 
to banks and market infrastructure providers such as central securities depositories (CSDs), 
maybe extended to central counterparties (CCPs) and automated clearing houses (ACHs). 
Consequently, these would be the only entities that have access to the central bank digital 
currency on the ledger. But why stop here? 
What if this concept is broadened? What if PSP or even individuals could access the central 
bank digital currency on the ledger via their bank accounts? This scenario would preserve 
the  current  relationship  model  of  banks  with  central  banks  and  to  some  extent  also  the 
existing organisational structure of the financial ecosystem. 
Even more far-reaching, we could envision a third scenario of the central bank offering a DLT 
network that is open to all citizens. Citizens would have the choice to hold commercial bank 
deposits  with  banks  or  digital  currency  at  the  central  bank.  What  functions  would  be 
embedded in a central bank deposit account? How would this affect the bank’s ability to give 
loans? How will the monetary transmission mechanism work and the economy at large if the 
basic business model of many banks could be impaired? 
But not only banks might be impacted. 
What  is  the  impact  of  central  bank  digital  currency  on  physical  cash?  What  would  be  the 
impact on central bank seigniorage? How would market participants change their investment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  strategies  and  business  models? Would  there  be  any  implication  on  the  integration  of  the 
European capital market, financial inclusion, and economic growth? 
I  will  certainly  not  attempt  to  answer  today  this  list  of  questions,  which  could  be  further 
continued. I just want to show that the narrow issue of a move of the Eurosystem’s market 
infrastructure  for  the  settlement  of  payments  and  securities  would  involve  far  more  issues 
than an assessment of the technical capabilities of DLT. We have a lot of more thinking to 
do.  Within  the  ECB,  I  will  steer  an  organisational  structure  for  analytical  work  on 
technological innovation in the financial sector. It will range from practical aspects, such as 
the possible usage of DLT for our Eurosystem market infrastructure, to more research driven 
activities like the implications of the issuance of central bank digital money. In this context, 
we publish today two papers on the impact of DLT on securities post trading. I dare say that 
there  is  a  big  demand  for  research  into  the  DLT  related  questions  and  their  policy 
implications. Contributions in this field are highly welcome. 
Part 3: Observations on DLT from the catalyst and oversight perspective 
Let me finish with some reflections from the Eurosystem’s catalyst and oversight perspective. 
We  strongly  believe  that  the  creation  of  an  integrated  European  market  for  payments  and 
securities  brings  improvements  in  efficiency  and  contributes  to  economic  growth.  In  its 
catalyst role, the Eurosystem aims to ensure that technological innovation does not lead to a 
disruption or re-fragmentation in the market. As a facilitator, the Eurosystem stands ready to 
help the industry co-ordinate its efforts to work on standardisation and interoperability both in 
the payments and in the post-trade domain. 
Standardisation and interoperability are also key issues for DLT. It would seem almost ironic 
to look at a consensus technology from a proprietary perspective and to create silos. On the 
other  hand,  is  a  permission-less  world  without  a  trusted  third  party  or  a  supervised 
gatekeeper a utopian approach that flies in the face of human history? It is a positive signal 
that there are collaborative initiatives between FinTech companies and banks and between 
banks,  market  infrastructures  and  technology  companies.  In  the  post-trade  domain,  we 
recently  had  a  workshop  which  came  to  the  understanding  that  the  involvement  of  the 
Eurosystem in the industry’s discussion regarding the usage of DLT would be welcome. 
After all, we should not forget that financial markets are a network industry. We need to make 
sure that useful innovations, i.e. innovations that are proven to improve safety and efficiency, 
do not lose momentum because market participants fail to coordinate their efforts. 
Moreover, as an overseer, the Eurosystem needs to arrive at a common understanding how 
the adoption of DLT could potentially affect the overseen entities and their business models. 
The emergence of new market actors requires reflection on issues such as how to ensure a 
level  playing  field  for  newcomers  and  long-established  players,  as  well  as  an  appropriate 
level  of  protection  for  the  users.  Last  but  not  least,  the  effects  of  digitalisation  and  new 
technologies such as DLT also need to be studied in the context of cyber resilience. 
On the asset side, access to the DLT network for the central bank’s oversight or supervisory 
function could be used to cover the data requirements of the overseer and ease the reporting 
burden of the overseen entity. It goes without saying that when accessing the DLT network, 
the right level of access and data protection requirements have to be respected. 
Overall, for the Eurosystem, the main objective continues to be the proper transmission of 
monetary policy and the support to financial stability. Safe and efficient market infrastructures 
are key in this respect. 
Conclusion 
DLT has a disruptive potential in the financial market. Like the hammer that shatters glass 
yet can forge steel, it may bring advantages to some actors and disintermediate others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  From a central bank perspective, in the context of our strategic reflections on the future of 
Eurosystem’s  market  infrastructures,  we  are  certainly  open  to  new  technologies  and,  like 
many market players, have launched some experimental work with DLT. 
Bringing our Eurosystem market infrastructures on DLT automatically means bringing central 
bank  money  on  DLT.  This  may  have  implications  on  the  central  bank  functions  which  go 
beyond  the  operational  and  technical  sphere.  It  is  therefore  important  to  structure  the 
discussion along the lines of who could access the central bank ledger. 
We very much welcome the industry’s efforts to work on standardisation and interoperability 
both in the payments and in the post-trade domain. 
It is clear that we have a lot of more thinking to do on DLT-related questions and their policy 
implications. Before wielding the hammer we have to make sure that we have a strong anvil. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
