  Boris Vujčić: The role of central banks and how to insure their 
independence 
Speech by Mr Boris Vujčić, Governor of the Croatian National Bank, at the Symposium on 
“Central Banking in Central and Eastern Europe: Policy Making, Investment and Low Yields”, 
organized  by  the  Czech  National  Bank  and  OMFIF  (Official  Monetary  and  Financial 
Institutions Forum), Prague, 10 June 2016. 
 I would like to thank Katja Gattin Turkalj and Vedran Šošić for their help in preparing the speech and Relja Martić 
and Tomáš Holub for their useful comments and insights. The opinions expressed in the text are entirely mine. 
Dear colleagues, 
Dear Mirek, Dear David, 
Thank  you for the  invitation.  I  stand  here  in front  of  you  with  a  bit  of mixed  feelings. I  am 
always happy to be with you, always happy to be in the wonderful Prague, at the CNB, but at 
the same time it is not easy to bid farewell to a fellow Governor and a friend. 
The idea for me to say a few words on this occasion about central bank independence was 
not  mine,  but  I  endorsed  it  immediately.  No  central  banker  would  refuse  to  talk  about  the 
central bank independence. This topic was not chosen by coincidence.  The role of central 
banks  has  greatly  changed  from  before  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  and  central  bank 
independence is today being challenged from many directions. As David already mentioned 
today, central banks seem to have been the only game in town for quite some time now. Why 
is that so? There is an old joke about a guy who comes to visit a friend in the evening and 
sees him kneeling on the grass in his yard and searching for something. He asks him what 
happened. A friend replies: “I lost my keys.” He asks him: “Did you lose them here?” “No,” 
the friend replies – “on the opposite side of the yard.” “So, why are you searching for them 
here?” Because this is where the light is.” This may be the best answers to the question why 
there has been so much focus on monetary policy over the last seven years. 
What did central bankers banks get into a situation where they have to worry again 
about  the  independence  of  monetary  policies?  There  are  at  least  three  reasons.  First, 
prior  to  the  crisis,  there  was  a  large  build-up  of  private  debt,  and  during  the  crisis  also  of 
public debt. Second, the existing monetary policy instruments are now put in use for a much 
broader  scope  than  before,  with  marked  redistributive  consequences.  Third,  central  banks 
were  given  new  mandates,  primarily  in  the  area  of  financial  stability,  making  them  policy 
makers  of  last  resort.  As  a  consequence,  central  banking  has  entered  a  new,  challenging 
and, I dare say, even perilous period. 
Let me briefly elaborate on each of these points. 
The role of central banks today has greatly changed from before the Great Financial 
Crisis. The sources of challenges faced by central banks can be provisionally divided into 
those idiosyncratic to monetary policy (e.g., it is harder to conduct monetary policy with low 
interest  rates),  those  that  are  “secular”,  due  to  an  altered  economic  reality  (e.g.,  a  high 
leverage in a short to medium term, or unfavourable demographic trends in a longer term) 
and to their interactions. 
Central  banks  today  operate  in  an  environment  of  extremely  low  interest  rates  and 
high  indebtedness  of  both  the  private  sector  and  sovereigns,  which  narrows  their 
maneuvering space. Yet they are expected to shoulder ever-increasing policy burdens, which 
is referred to as “mandate creep” (Gürkaynak & Davig, 2015). 
First,  over  the  last  couple  of  decades  central  banks  have  stewarded  the  world 
economy  through  a  period  of  rapid  private  debt  build-up,  which  in  many  emerging 
markets  continued  during  the  crisis,  followed  by  a  rise  in  public  debt  during  the  crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Indebtedness  is  at  historically  high  levels.  Such  an  environment  of  high  public  and  private 
indebtedness  has  a  two-way  relation  with  monetary  policy:  ex  ante,  monetary  policy, 
generally, might have been too lax before the crisis and contributed to excessive leveraging, 
while  it  is  nowadays,  ex  post,  considered  as  a  key  for  debt  sustainability.  Nonetheless, 
central  banks  will  not  run  out  of  ammo  as  long  as  they  command  the  printing  press.  But, 
more importantly, regardless of the amount of ammo used, central banks may still fall short 
of reaching their objectives (Shin, 2016). 
Second, the existing instruments are put in use for a much broader scope than before, 
with marked redistributive consequences. Previously, prior to the Great Financial Crisis, 
redistributive  consequences  had  been  annulled  over  the  cycle  i.e.  affected  only  the 
intertemporal choices of a representative agent. In contrast, in today’s protracted era of low 
interest rates, monetary policy has strong and direct distributional consequences. No wonder 
then  that  there  is  so  much  discussion  on  monetary  policy  and  inequality  these  days 
(Bernanke,  2015;  Bullard,  2014;  Coibion,  Gorodnichenko,  Kueng,  &  Silvia,  2012;  Mersch, 
2014; Yellen, 2014). 
Furthermore, the ideas which have been recently pushed forward, such as the “QE for 
the people”, centre around growing inequalities and the (perceived) failure of the QE 
to jumpstart the economy. Such initiatives promote ideas such as “helicopter money”, but 
also “infrastructure investment” and alike. One of the characteristics of these initiatives is 
their quasi-fiscal nature,  as such  policies  would  have  direct redistributive  consequences. 
This is unlike low or negative interest rates, or indeed the QE itself, which do not have 
first order redistribution effects. Which, of course, is not to say that they do not have any 
redistributive consequences. “As long as assets are unevenly spread across the population, 
shifts  in  their  prices  will  have  redistributive  effects...”  (Broadbent,  2014).  However,  it  is  a 
very different world in which non-elected technocrats would have a mandate to do an 
outright  redistribution  implied  by  such  initiatives.  It  seems  that  it  has  become  a 
communicational challenge to convey that central banks simply do not have a mandate to do 
so. 
Third, central banks have been given a new mandate, primarily in the area of financial 
stability.  This  mandate  is  far  broader  than  the  “lender  of  last  resort”.  Some  of  the 
new/old  macroprudential  instruments  indirectly  affect  depositors  and  debtors  (e.  g.  higher 
capital or liquidity requirements), while others have a more direct effect by affecting the credit 
alocation (for instance, loan-to-value or debtservicing ratios). Moreover, the degree to which 
the goal of financial stability is fulfilled is very hard to objectively measure and quantify. The 
distributional impact of financial stability policy is often more central to its effectiveness than 
is  the  case  with  monetary  policy.  Macroprudential  tools  have  distributional  effects  that  are 
central to their success. In recent times, after the global financial crisis (GFC), and after the 
realization  that  prudential  policies  were  often  not  where  they  should  have  been  before  the 
crisis, we have seen a reversal of the trend of extracting supervision outside of central banks, 
and the trend of returning it back to central banks. That was a useful lesson. In the case of 
the  Czech  National  Bank,  as  with  most  Central  and  East  European  central  banks, 
supervision has always been within the central bank. Moreover, in 2006, the CNB started to 
supervise  the  whole  financial  system,  including  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and 
investment funds (after a merger with the Security Exchange Commission and a supervision 
office  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance).  It  was  under  Governor  Tůma’s  mandate  and  Mr.  Singer 
was Vice-Governor at that time. And it seems that nobody should have any complaints with 
regard to this, as today the Czech financial system is both efficient and stable. 
Central  bank  independence,  of  course,  has  been  a  controversial  concept  for  much 
longer than the current discussion. It requires the delegation of powerful authority to a 
group  of  unelected  officials,  in  order  to  prevent  the  redistributive  consequences  of 
inflation. More techically, an independent central bank is a device to overcome the problem 
of time consistency: the concern that policymakers will in future renege on a policy promise 
made  today.  These  consequences,  especially  in  the  case  of  hyperinflation,  can  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  devastating  for  the  economy,  and  can  also  have  a  deep  political  impact,  as  we  have 
witnessed  in  the  past.  Now,  with  the  financial  crisis,  an  earlier  rationale  for  central  bank 
independence has also re-emerged: the need to prevent or limit panics. 
Consequently,  there  is  an  unavoidable  conflict  between  the  goals  of  democratic 
legitimacy and policy effectiveness (Cecchetti & Schoenholtz, 2015). In other words, the 
“anomaly”  of  powerful  authority  being  in  the  hands  of  unelected  officials  naturally  raises 
questions of legitimacy and fears of the concentration of power in the hands of a select few. 
All of these can trigger a popular discontent as has recently been experienced. 
Issues  on  democratic  legitimacy  arise  primarily  within  the  redistributive  realm  of 
monetary policy, i.e. when monetary policy does somebody else’s job. Ironically, had 
there  not  been  for  the  expansion  in  both  the  mandates  (formal  as  well  as  informal)  and 
expectations of central bank policies, the issues of independence and democratic legitimacy 
would not have surfaced with such intensity. 
Further challenges arise from the lack of ability to quantify numerically the resilience 
of the financial system in the same way as inflation is quantified as a monetary policy 
goal. This  is  especially  true  if  judging the  state of financial  stability  requires  knowledge  of 
privileged information about individual institutions that a financial supervisor cannot disclose. 
As a result, outside observers will find it difficult to assess objectively the progress toward 
financial stability. Most of the observers find the monetary policy goal – price stability – easier 
to interpret, no matter how complex measuring price stability and understanding the impact 
of interest rate changes may be. To make an independent central bank work, political leaders 
must  delegate  the  necessary  powers  and  establish  an  oversight  regime  that  ensures 
accountability  without  undermining  the  institution’s  policy  effectiveness  (Cecchetti  & 
Schoenholtz, 2015). 
Central to the issue of price stability as a monetary policy goal is the real impact of 
low inflation on the economy, which, it seems to me, we still do not know much about. 
There is little or no evidence that low inflation, or small deflation, hurts growth. Nor do we 
know  much  about  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  affect  the  inflation  rate  in  a  globalized 
world  in  which,  on  the  one  hand,  we  have  a  global  pool  of  liquidity,  and,  on  the  other, 
competitive pressures arising from all corners of the world, based on significantly improved 
global allocations of capital and labour and differential productivity growth rates. 
New  economic  circumstances  and  new  instruments  and  mandates  create  new 
challenges  with  implications  for  central  banks’  independence,  particularly  within 
multinational  currency  zones/monetary  communities.  But  distribution  conflicts  spill  over  to 
monetary policy even within a single country. For example, due to strong pre-crisis borrowing 
(some) households got heavily leveraged prior to the crisis. The subsequent fall in real estate 
prices led to a part of households getting “under water”. Given that financial assets are far 
more  concentrated  than  loans,  the  two  groups  of  households  would  prefer  different,  if  not 
completely opposite monetary policy stances. 
When it comes to financial stability issues, a recent set of government interventions in 
Central and East Europe in issues bearing repercussions on financial stability marks 
another challenge. The Hungarian conversion of CHF loans, followed by the Croatian one, 
the  Romanian  introduction  of  “limited  liability”  (non-recourse)  mortgage  loans  with  a 
retroactive effect or a recent discussion in Poland on bank taxes and the conversion of CHF 
loans.  Such  a  political  economy  might  challenge  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and 
supervision, where the main objective is the stability of the banking system and, indeed, a 
prevention of public funds being spent on insured savings. 
Is  it  possible that  central  banks will  try  to  “optimize”  independence  by  making  new 
circumstances  endogenous?  For  example,  they  might  start  treating  inflation  target  more 
flexibly,  while  simultaneously  trying  to  achieve  other,  not  legally  mandated  goals,  such  as 
debt reduction. The reduction of an aggregate debt overhang could be fast, although painful 
in  the  short-term,  through  some  form  of  debt  restructuring.  Alternatively,  the  slow  method 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  entails that the borrowers’ income growth exceeds the rate of interest, while the debt stock is 
kept fixed. This is colloquially termed “growing out of debt”. 
This “new reality of lost central bank independence” has already been voiced by many 
economists. They claim that if central banks do not adapt to new realities, the political 
paradigm  about  the  acceptable  model  of  central  bank  autonomy  may  change. 
Blancheton  (2016)  qualifies  this  as  “tacit  low-degree  independence”,  claiming  that  central 
banks have “endogenized the necessity of participating in the liquidation of public debt”, and 
points  to  the  history  of  central  banking,  “which  shows  that  the  balance  of  power  with 
governments  is,  under  such  circumstances,  inevitably  unfavourable”.  In  the  same  manner, 
Wren-Lewis (2016a, 2016b) attributes the loss of independence to central banks themselves, 
as they did not see a massive increase in financial sector leverage – “That should have rung 
alarm bells, but instead it produced at most muted notes of concern about attitudes to risk” – 
then  they  stood  by  during  the  premature  fiscal  consolidation  and  obsessive  austerity  and, 
finally, adjusted demand to the incorrectly perceived low level of supply. 
The competing view is that central banks have done a good job with monetary policy, 
in  extremely  challenging  circumstances,  and  have  even  managed  to  strengthen 
independence.  One  venue  for  that  is  within  institutional  arrangements  that  share  the 
responsibilities  for  supervision  and  macroprudential  policies,  be  it  national  or  international 
bodies  of  cooperation  that  have  strengthened  and  standardized  prudential  regulation,  thus 
making national capture, either political or coming from industry, less likely. 
In order not to jeopardize their independence, for example by being complicit when accepting 
to do somebody else’s job, central banks have to be cautious in expanding their mandates 
and  mindful  of  redistributive  effects  inherent  to  non-orthodox  monetary  policies,  negative 
interest  rates,  macroprudential  policy,  and  so  on.  The  moment  central  banks  consciously 
embark on that road, or “turn a blind eye” to redistributive effects in the name of higher goals, 
they risk losing their independence. 
Additionally,  transparency,  as  a  traditional  response  to  strengthen  central  bank 
independence,  might  not  be  sufficient.  The  blow  to  independence  only  partially  comes 
from ignorance, it is to a higher degree caused by strong economic interests. Nonetheless, 
central  banks  need  to  further  the  understanding  of  the  new  economic  realities  and 
circumstances. Intellectual capacities and knowledge are often the best defense mechanism 
of central banks. 
In the end, let me now say a few words about the CNB. 
The  Czech  National  Bank,  headed  by  Miroslav,  has  also  tested  the  limits  of 
independence  against  non-orthodox  views,  and  sometimes  against  the  mood  of  the 
Czech general public, which is traditionally very conservative in monetary matters. When the 
Czech  National  Bank  decided  to  establish  the  current  exchange  rate  commitment,  it  was 
exposed to quite a serious criticism at home. Fears immediately arose that everything would 
become  more  expensive  and  that  the  fragile  recovery  of  the  Czech  economy  would  be 
undermined. Some “expert” commentators, for example, claimed that foreign holidays of the 
Czech people would become 15% more expensive after a 5% currency depreciation, as they 
would need to pay 5% more to the travel agent, 5% more for swimming dresses and sun-
tanning creams, as well as 5% more for calamari and ice-cream at the beach. But as Mirek 
himself put it, that was a time when the Czech National Bank could actually make full use of 
its independence, which allowed it to do things that might be unpopular in the short term, but 
prove to be beneficial in the medium term. 
The  CNB  approached  all  its  battles,  either  in  the  area  of  monetary  policy,  or  regarding 
institutional issues, even when it looked as David vs Goliath – or Sparta Praha against Real 
Madrid – fearlesly, well prepared, armed with thorough research, underpinned by theory, with 
the assertivenes possessed only by those who strongly believe that the right is on their side. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  from 
So, this is not a farewell, but a new beginning. We are not losing one of our own, a fellow 
Governor and a friend who has been in the trenches with us. We are gaining a powerful ally 
in you, Mirek, whatever your next position is. 
Thank you and see you soon. 
References: 
@QE4People. (2016). QE for the People. Retrieved from https://twitter.com/QE4People. 
Bank of England. (May 2016). Risks associated with the referendum on UK membership of 
the EU Inflation Report: Projections of outside forecasters as of 28 April 2016. Retrieved from 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/may.pdf#page=
40. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2015,  2015–06–01).  Monetary  policy  and 
inequality.  Retrieved 
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/2015/06/01-monetary-policy-and-
inequality. 
Blancheton,  B.  (2016).  Towards  a  tacit  low-degree  independence  central  banking  model? 
Retrieved from  
http://www.e-axes.com/sites/default/files/central_bank_independence_gretha.pdf. 
Broadbent, B. (2014). Monetary policy, asset prices and distribution. Paper presented at the 
Society of Business Economiste Annual Conference. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech770.pdf. 
Bullard,  J.  (2014).  Income  Inequality  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Framework  with  Answers  to 
Three Questions. Retrieved from 
https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/Files/PDFs/Bullard/remarks/Bullard_CFR_26June2014_Fi
nal.pdf. 
Cecchetti,  S.,  and  Schoenholtz,  K.  (2015).  A  Primer  on  Central  Bank  Independence. 
Retrieved from http://www.e-axes.com/content/primer-central-bank-independence. 
Coibion,  O.,  Gorodnichenko,  Y.,  Kueng,  L.,  and  Silvia,  J.  (2012).  Innocent  Bystanders? 
from 
Monetary 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18170.pdf. 
FT.  (2016).  Draghi,  Schauble  and  the  high  cost  of  Germany’s  savings  culture.  Financial 
Times.  Retrieved  from  Gürkaynak,  R.  S.,  and  Davig,  T.  (2015).  Central  bankers  as 
last 
policymakers  of 
from  http://voxeu.org/article/central-bankers-
policymakers-last-resort. 
Krugman, P. (2016). Living with Monetary Impotence. 
Mersch, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp141017_1.en.html. 
Shin,  H.  S.  (2016,  2015/12/27)  Where’s  the  inflation,  Mr  Shin?  Frankfurter  Allgemeine 
Zeitung. 
Vlieghe, G. (2016). Debt, Demographics and the Distribution of Income: New challenges for 
fo  Economics. 
monetary 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech872.pdf. 
(2014).  Monetary  policy  and  economic 
inequality.  Retrieved 
resort.  Retrieved 
Londos  School 
policy.  Paper 
presented 
Retrieved 
Inequality 
Policy 
from 
U.S. 
and 
the 
the 
at 
in 
I. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Wren-Lewis,  S.  (2016a).  Can  central  banks  make  3  major  mistakes  in  a  row  and  stay 
independent?  Retrieved 
from  https://mainlymacro.blogspot.hr/2016/04/can-central-banks-
make-3-major-mistakes.html. 
Wren-Lewis,  S. 
https://mainlymacro.blogspot.hr/2016/03/the-strong-case-critically-examined.html. 
Yellen,  J.  (2014).  Perspectives  on  Ineqality  and  Opportunity  form  Survey  of  Consumer 
Finances 
from 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20141017a.htm. 
“strong  case”critically  examined.  Retrieved 
(2016b).  The 
Retrieved 
release]. 
[Press 
from 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
