François Groepe: Opportunities and challenges – the South African 
national payment system 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
PASA International Payments Conference, Sandton, 25 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
It  is  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  to  address  the  second  PASA  International  Payments 
Conference,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  the  invitation  to  open  the 
proceedings.  
The timing of this conference is highly appropriate as we are entering a new phase in the 
South  African  payment  and  financial  regulatory  environment,  coupled  with  significant 
changes to the international regulatory architecture and framework. Not only do we have to 
contend  with  challenges  in  our  domestic  environment,  but  we  need  to  be  cognisant  of  the 
challenges  facing  the  global  economy,  such  as  pedestrian  growth,  low  commodity  prices, 
increased geopolitical risks, and a high degree of market uncertainty and volatility. All these 
factors combined make the economic and financial environment very challenging and rapidly 
evolving.  
This morning, I will take a look at the current payment system landscape, highlighting some 
of the opportunities and challenges that we can expect to face in the near future and where 
we, the regulators, would like to see the national payment system in the next few years. 
 Legislation, regulation, governance, and the South African national payment system 
The  South  African  payment  system  has  not  escaped  the  fallout  of  the  most  recent  global 
financial  crisis.  Following  the  crisis,  global  regulators  increased  their  scrutiny  of  payment 
systems  and  of  financial  market  infrastructures  (or  FMIs).  This  has  resulted  in  numerous 
regulatory reforms, including legislation to strengthen the financial regulatory architecture.  
South Africa will have new, far-reaching and overarching, financial sector legislation by the 
end of 2016. From a payment system perspective, it will include the introduction of new and 
more comprehensive regulations as well as expanded oversight and supervision by various 
regulators.  
Furthermore, as you are aware, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (or 
CPMI)  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  as  well  as  the  International 
Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) 1 published new principles for FMIs in April 
2012.  
As  a  result  of  the  new  international  and  domestic  regulatory  requirements,  as  mentioned 
above, it has become necessary to re-evaluate the National Payment System Act 78 of 1998 
(NPS  Act).  The  factors  that  will  have  to  be  taken  into  account  include  access  and 
participation  criteria,  licensing  criteria  in  line  with  international  standards  for  FMIs,  the 
governance arrangements in the payment system, as well as the role of the payment system 
management body, including that of a self-regulatory organisation (SRO).  
                                                
1  The  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  is  an  association  of  organisations  that 
regulate the world’s securities and futures markets. For more information, please see https://www.iosco.org.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As part of this work, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) commissioned an assessment 
of  the  effectiveness  of  the  payment  system  management  body,  namely  the  Payments 
Association  of  South  Africa  (PASA).  The  purpose  of  the  review,  known  as  the  PASA 
Effectiveness Review, was to address any inadequacies in the regulation of the participants 
in the payment system and to evaluate the role of PASA in assisting the SARB in discharging 
its mandate. The SARB published the report last week. The recommendations of the PASA 
Effectiveness  Review  cover  four  themes,  namely  mandate  and  strategy,  the  governance 
framework, the regulatory model, and membership. I would like to highlight some of the main 
findings and recommendations contained in this report. 
The report found that the PASA mandate was too restrictive and that it disadvantaged non-
banks,  hence  it  proposes  that  the  PASA  mandate  be  clarified  and  that  it  be  expanded  to 
include  non-banks  such  as  card  networks,  card  associations,  retailers,  and  merchants. 
Regarding  the  governance  framework,  the  review  found  that  the  PASA  Council  was  not 
adequately representative of the rapidly changing payments environment and of the various 
categories  and  levels  of  participation  and  participants  in  the  national  payment  system.  In 
order to strengthen the governance framework, it is recommended that the PASA Council be 
composed  of  a  majority  of  independent  non-executive  councillors,  representative  of  all  the 
stakeholders 
in 
the  national  payment  system  and  better  reflecting  our  country’s 
demographics.  
As far as the regulatory framework is concerned, it was found that there were deficiencies 
relating  to  the  enforcement  framework  and  that  the  self-regulating  model  impacted  on  the 
objectivity  of the  payments  clearing  house  (or  PCH)  environment. In  order  to  enhance the 
credibility  of  our  regulatory  framework,  it  is  important  that  compliance  be  enforced  in  a 
consistent,  fair  and  transparent  manner,  hence  it  is  proposed  that  an  independent 
Compliance Enforcement Committee be established. This should result in compliance being 
enforced without fear, favour or prejudice, and should enhance the credibility and integrity of 
the  compliance  enforcement  process  within  the  national  payment  system.  We  further 
propose  that  a  thorough  review  of  the  SRO  model  be  undertaken  in  order  to  consider  its 
appropriateness and, if it is decided to retain this model, consideration should be lent to the 
changes required in order to ensure that any potential conflicts of interest are avoided. 
Finally, the review found that the current membership composition was not representative of 
the broader national payment system industry and that the level and quality of representation 
was  inadequate.  More  perturbing  were the  concerns  raised  pertaining to  the  poor meeting 
attendance.  In  response  to  these  findings,  it  is  proposed  that  PASA  membership  be 
expanded  to  include  non-bank  participants  in  the  national  payment  system  and  that 
arrangements be put in place to enhance the effectiveness of PASA. 
The  SARB  intends  to  continue  interacting  with  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  as  we  work 
alongside PASA towards further improving the functioning of the national payment system. 
Together,  we  also  aim  to  improve  the  levels  of  innovation  as  well  as  the  safety  and 
soundness of the national payment system and, going forward, also that of all systemically 
important FMIs. 
 The  SARB  also  embarked  on  a  consultation  process  to  consider  a  payment  system 
framework  and  strategy  up  to  2025.  As  with  previous  framework  documents,  the  SARB 
consulted widely – and it intends to publish its proposal by the end of 2016.  
The themes in the Vision 2025 document include the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
competition and collaboration in the national payment system;  
regulation and governance in the national payment system; 
standards, interoperability and innovation; 
cybersecurity; and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial inclusion. 
• 
As these topics indicate, the SARB will cover a rather broad scope. 
This brings me to another matter that I would like to raise with the executive management of 
our banks as well as with non-banks participating in the payment system. 
From the above, it is evident that payment system and related matters need to be elevated 
from the  back  office  to  the  boardroom. This  has  happened  at  the  SARB  and  other  central 
banks. Executives should no longer ignore the importance of the national payment system 
and its infrastructure, or the risks and threats (e.g. that of cybersecurity) in this environment. 
The national payment system is a critical and systemically important FMI, hence the SARB 
will  interact  with  all  participants  in  this  environment  to  ensure  that  the  necessary  attention 
and priority is given due to the important role that it plays within our financial system and the 
implications of any potential failure for financial stability. 
Innovation and cybersecurity  
Recent reports have highlighted several high-level cybersecurity breaches, not only in banks 
but in service providers and critical infrastructures in the financial and payment systems. 
In  June  2016,  the  CPMI  and  the  IOSCO  published  a  document  titled  Guidance  on  cyber-
resilience for financial market infrastructures.2 This document highlights the importance of the 
safe and efficient operation of FMIs in the maintenance and promotion of not only financial 
stability, but also economic growth. This publication intends to give guidance to industry to 
enhance  its  cyber-resilience,  and  hopes to  provide  regulators and  authorities  with  a  set  of 
internationally agreed guidelines to effectively support, oversee, and supervise FMIs.  
Regulators are encouraged to cultivate a culture of awareness and an understanding of the 
risks inherent in the cyber-environment. All participants should not only be aware of but also 
understand their role and the importance of improving their cyber-resilience position at every 
level within the organisation. In this regard, the SARB will host a conference on cybersecurity 
in  August  with  the  objective  of  creating  a  platform  for  various  role  players  in  the  financial 
sector to further strengthen their cyber-resilience.  
Globally,  there  has  been  a  wave  of  innovation  in  the  payment  environment,  ranging  from 
mobile payments to real-time low-value payments. Advances in technology and access to the 
Internet have facilitated innovation in various payment technologies. The financial technology 
(or FinTech) revolution has played a key role in the development of innovative and disruptive 
technology,  and  is  changing  the  way  in  which  we  look  at  financial,  payment,  banking  and 
mobile services, to name but a few.  
What we are witnessing at the moment is this: where inefficiencies are perceived within the 
system, savvy service providers find a technology solution to overcome the inefficiency and 
provide  the  service  in  a  cheaper  and  more  efficient  manner.  Such  innovation  is  especially 
prevalent  in  the  payment,  mobile,  remittance  and  online  environments,  such  as  online 
shopping and e-commerce.  
Although  FinTech  is  providing  many  exciting  opportunities,  it  should  be  balanced  by 
efficiency,  safety  and  financial  stability  considerations.  It  is  not  the  role  of  regulators  to 
hamper innovation, but the SARB is jointly responsible for financial stability, which includes 
aspects such as cybersecurity, infrastructures, and a safe and efficient financial system. We 
therefore  need  to  strive  towards  achieving  a  healthy  balance  when  we  respond  to  these 
developments. 
                                                
2 Available at http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d146.htm  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Recently, many central banks – including the Bank of England, the Reserve Bank of India, 
the Bank of Japan and the Singapore Monetary Authority – have launched FinTech working 
groups and/or collaboration.  
In June 2016, the Bank of England advised that it would collaborate with FinTech firms on 
measures that could support its ‘mission’ as a central bank. The Reserve Bank of India has 
appointed an inter-agency FinTech working group to ‘review and appropriately reorient the 
regulatory framework and respond to the dynamics of the rapidly evolving FinTech scenario’. 
Earlier this year, the Japanese and Singaporean authorities announced plans to develop a 
hub for technological development. These are but four examples of FinTech developments 
where  central  banks  are  adopting  a  proactive  position  in  collaborating  with  the  non-bank 
industry.  
The SARB acknowledges that FinTech companies have an important role to play within the 
financial  system.  I  believe  that  FinTech  can  play  an  important  role  in  the  country’s 
development and, through efficiency gains, can not only assist in reducing frictions within the 
payments  value  chain  and  the  broader  economy,  but  also  has  the  potential  to  stimulate 
growth  and  create  employment  opportunities.  The  SARB  is  currently  reflecting  on  its 
regulatory  approach  towards  certain  FinTech  developments  and  will  address  these 
endeavours in due course.  
Conclusion 
I  have  attempted  to  highlight  some  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges  facing  the  South 
African payment system, in the near future and over the longer term. To be successful, it is 
important that we achieve the right balance between safety, efficiency and risk – and that we 
continue with the collaborative approach started in 1995. 
The  first  framework  and  strategy  document  for  the  payment  system  was  published  in 
November  1995,  and  the  real-time  gross  settlement  system  (the  SAMOS  system.3  was 
introduced  in  March  1998.  It  is  with  pride  that  I  can  say  that  the  South  African  national 
payment system has been extremely successful and resilient in the past 20 years. 
However, the  world has changed. We have seen the worst global financial crisis  in recent 
history, and innovation and technology are changing the world at a pace never seen before.  
Although  we  have  been  successful  in  the  past,  the  time  has  come  to  look  to  the  future, 
embrace change, and continue on the path by providing clear and unambiguous direction of 
where  we  want  to  see  the  future  payment  system:  servicing  the  country  as  a  whole,  from 
wholesale real-time payments to real-time low-value payments – anytime, anywhere, safely, 
efficiently, and in a way that is affordable to all.    
Thank you. 
                                                
3 South African Multiple Option Settlement system 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
