  Sabine Lautenschläger: The euro – idea and reality 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the Europa Forum Luzern, Luzern, 2 May 2016. 
 President of the Confederation Schneider-Amman, 
President of the Government Wyss, 
Mayor Studer, 
Excellencies and parliamentary representatives, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
800 years ago, here in the Swiss Alps, a structure was built that was vital in bringing people 
together in Europe: the Devil’s Bridge over the river Reuss. It was because of this bridge that 
the  Gotthard  pass  become  one  of  Europe’s  main  routes,  “the  people’s  road”.  Lucerne  is 
located on this road and is thus an early witness of European integration. 
Today, in the 21st century, Europe is interconnected by much more than a pass. Europe has 
become  a  political  and  economic  community.  A  tangible  symbol  of  this  community  is  our 
single currency, the euro. 
The euro – do the idea and the reality clash? 
The idea of the euro was, and is, to support Europe’s internal market, and thus provide for 
economic growth and prosperity. But the name of the currency says it all: the euro should be 
more. The euro aims to be a single currency for a united Europe. It should deepen Europe’s 
cultural and political unity, dismantle borders and strengthen our feeling of togetherness. 
So  much  for  the  idea.  Some  people  –  perhaps  even  some  of  you  –  may  be  sensing  a 
different  reality:  financial  crisis,  economic  crisis,  unemployment  –  these  are  the  keywords 
currently dominating the discussions on monetary union. 
How much does the reality have to do  with the  actual idea of the euro? Is the euro still a 
symbol of what holds Europe together? Or has it become a symbol of what divides Europe? 
The growing appeal of anti-euro and anti-Europe parties is a sign that we need to make the 
incalculable  benefits  of  a  single  currency  easier  to  understand  for  the  people  of  the  euro 
area. 
And we should encourage people to look at the full reality and not just one facet. The euro is 
a fundamental part of the single market. More than 300 million people in 19 countries make 
payments  using  the  euro.  It’s  the  world’s  second  most  important  currency.  Over  20%  of 
global  currency  reserves  are  held  in  euro.  And  despite  all  the  euroscepticism,  recent 
surveys1 show that 70% of people in the euro area want the single currency. 
Obviously, in my view too, a united Europe with a single currency is the right idea; as Theo 
Waigel, former German Minister of Finance, once said, the euro is “ingenious”. And, for me, 
it’s  about  more  than  the  economic  advantages  brought  by  a  united  Europe  and  a  single 
currency. 
It’s also about a political reality. Not all the countries of Europe can live in “splendid isolation” 
– Europe’s voice in world affairs would fall silent. More than 60 years ago, Jean Monnet, one 
                                                
1  Standard Eurobarometer 84, November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of the founding fathers of the European Union, said: “Our countries have become too small 
for today’s world, at the level of modern techniques, at the measure of America and Russia 
today, China and India tomorrow”. 
The idea is therefore ingenious and the will of the people is clear. Together, this represents 
an appeal to policymakers to straighten out what is crooked, to reinforce the foundations of 
monetary union and once again reconcile the reality of the euro with the idea of the euro. 
The  consequences  of  the  recent  financial  and  economic  crisis  show  what  is  needed  to 
achieve this from an economic perspective. What we certainly need is a European crisis tool 
– a mechanism that works quickly, effectively and efficiently in an acute crisis. A first step 
was taken with the creation of the European Stability Mechanism. 
But what’s necessary above all are structural reforms at national level, including reforms of 
social  security  schemes,  labour  and  goods  markets  and  insolvency  laws.  Reforms  which 
ensure that the community of 19 countries grow together economically and move closer to 
the  highest  international  standards.  Such  a  convergence  is  important,  not  only  to  keep 
monetary union stable in the medium and long term, but also to safeguard economic growth 
and prosperity. 
Yet  even  after  successful  structural  reforms,  in  a  monetary  union  with  19  Member  States 
there  can  always  be  economic  shocks  which  affect  some  countries  more  than  others. 
Flexible  labour  markets  and  a  responsible  fiscal  policy  help  to  cushion  such  shocks  –  not 
only in a monetary union. In such a union however they play an even greater role, because 
the  countries  concerned  can  no  longer  react  by  way  of  the  exchange  rate  or  national 
monetary policy. 
But  if  the  shock  is  excessive  or  the  economic  structures too  rigid  and  the  national  budget 
under pressure, the Member State in question may be quickly overwhelmed. This is exactly 
what we have seen during the recent crisis. The costs of the crisis were borne in large part 
by the citizens in the crisis countries, but also shifted in part to the European level through 
mutual guarantees. Basically, the countries concerned resorted to a sort of implicit insurance 
that was not originally foreseen. 
This experience gives rise to two key questions: 
• 
First,  how  can  Member  States  better  absorb  external  shocks  –  even  without  an 
independent exchange rate and without a national monetary policy? 
Second,  how  can  risks  be  shared  at  European  level  without  a  transfer  of  risk 
occurring which distorts the incentives for the individual Member States? 
 A monetary union needs strong members... 
As for the first question, the euro area countries need economic structures which meet the 
requirements of a single currency. The crisis has made this abundantly clear. Many countries 
are  now  on  the  right  track.  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal, for  example,  have  implemented  a 
series of reforms; they have become more competitive and their economies are recovering. 
And yet, in some euro area countries, unemployment remains very high, especially among 
young people. In addition, many countries still have large public deficits and high levels of 
debt. So further reforms are necessary here. The same applies to goods markets and the 
general business environment. 
In  many  Member  States  bureaucratic  hurdles  have  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  start  a 
business, and not only in the crisis countries. Removing such administrative barriers is much 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  less  expensive  than  national  recovery  plans,  and  can  contribute  significantly  to  sustained 
growth and increasing prosperity.2 
It  is  all  the  more  worrying  that  the  OECD  in  its  recent  “Economic  Policy  Reforms”  report 
notes that particularly in the euro area countries the pace of reform is slowing. It would be 
disastrous  if  necessary  reforms  cannot  be  implemented  or,  if  implemented,  reforms  were 
even  to  be  withdrawn.  That  would  slow  down,  or  even  totally  impede,  the  necessary 
economic  upswing.  Central  banks  would  then  come  under  pressure  to  counteract  this  by 
pursuing an exceptionally loose monetary policy. 
A  stable  monetary  union  rests  on  the  shoulders  of  individual  Member  States.  Sound 
economic and responsible fiscal policies at national level are an essential basis for a stable 
monetary union. 
Against  this  background,  the  founders  of  the  monetary  union  put  in  place  a  rulebook  that 
seeks to ensure sound fiscal policy: the Stability and Growth Pact. We all know that these 
rules were not particularly effective. They have therefore been strengthened since the crisis 
and  complemented  by  a  better  control  of  macroeconomic  imbalances.  But  even  the  best 
rules only work if they are respected. And even the best rules may not prevent a country from 
experiencing economic shocks. 
... but union also means community 
For cases where these shocks are too big to be absorbed at national level, a monetary union 
needs mechanisms to spread the ensuing costs over more than one pair of shoulders. 
And  this  brings  me  to  the  second  question:  how  can  risks  be  shared  at  European  level 
without  a  transfer  of  risk  occurring  which  distorts  the  incentives  for  the  individual  Member 
States? 
I  mentioned  this  earlier:  during  the  crisis,  risks  were  shared  especially  by  way  of  mutual 
guarantees and thus via national budgets. However, such a sharing of fiscal risks can reduce 
the incentives to pursue sound fiscal policies. 
In order to counter this disincentive, both the risks and the monitoring would therefore have 
to be shared at European level. So the Presidents of the European institutions3 – including 
the ECB – are calling for stronger fiscal integration leading to a fiscal union. 
For the moment, I see little political will to create a European fiscal union. Fiscal risk-sharing, 
for the time being, therefore remains a problematic issue. 
As long as the basic willingness to share fiscal sovereignty is lacking, we could and should 
then agree that sovereignty will be relinquished if a Member State does not comply with the 
jointly agreed objectives, such as the deficit and debt limits. 
At the same time, it’s necessary to strengthen national ownership and private risk-sharing. 
From an economic perspective, it would seem obvious: if a state gets into financial difficulty, 
why shouldn’t the state’s creditors bear the losses? In reality however, this is not so easy to 
implement.  Bear  in  mind  how  long  it  took  to  arrange  that  for  the  resolution  of  banks  their 
creditors will also be liable in the future. 
Where does the problem lie? It lies in the possible contagion effects and in concerns about 
financial stability. The creditors of countries are in many cases the domestic banks. A state 
bankruptcy with a bail-in could therefore trigger a financial crisis. 
                                                
2  Masuch,  K.;  Moshammer,  E.;  Pierluigi,  Beatrice  (2016),  Institutions  and  Growth  in  Europe.  Centre  for 
European Policy Studies (CEPS Working Document No. 421). 
“Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, presented by J.-C. Juncker, in close cooperation with 
D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015. 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This problem is intensified by the fact that the regulation creates incentives for banks to hold 
government  bonds.  A  bank  neither  has  to  put  aside  capital  for  government  bonds  nor  is 
bound  by  an  upper  limit  on  how  much  it  can  be  indebted  vis-à-vis  an  individual  sovereign 
debtor.  On  the  one  hand,  government  bonds  are  treated  as  if  they  were  risk-free.  On  the 
other hand, banks may easily hold very many government bonds of a single issuer – and this 
is usually the home country. 
First, banks in this way increase their exposure to the financial problems of states. Because 
government bonds are not as risk-free as the regulation assumes. The crisis has shown this. 
Second, it becomes easier for an individual state to run a loose fiscal policy. It’s becoming 
more likely that systemic problems are emerging or intensifying: a state infects the national 
banking system, or vice versa, and the problems spread across borders. Such systemic risks 
can then only be kept in check by way of a fiscal risk-sharing. 
In  order  to  promote  ownership  and  private  risk-sharing,  we  must  revise  the  preferential 
regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  debt.  One  option  is  to  introduce  a  risk  weighting  for 
government  bonds  which  rises  along  with  the  concentration  risk.  The  more  government 
bonds held by a bank, the more capital the bank would have to hold against each of these 
bonds. In this  way,  the  capital  requirement  and upper  limit  would  be  combined  in  a  single 
rule. This would be an important step towards breaking the vicious circle between banks and 
sovereigns; and it would be a further step towards reinforcing the foundations of monetary 
union. 
Private risk-sharing does not have to be exclusively via the credit markets and not solely in 
relation to the public sector. Investors can also help to share risks via the equity markets. 
Take  a  German  company  as  an  example.  If  the  German  economy  is  hit  by  a  shock,  this 
company  will  probably  be  affected  too.  If  its  owners,  the  shareholders,  are  spread  across 
many countries, the company’s losses will be spread likewise. 
The more cross-border financing companies have, the less the national economy is affected 
by any shock and the faster it can recover. 
In the United States, for instance, this kind of risk-sharing works: studies show that integrated 
capital  markets  in  the  United  States  absorb  40%  of  the  cyclical  variations  between  the 
states.4 
This speaks in favour of the European capital markets union project. And also for, as part of 
this  project,  a  greater  harmonisation  of  equity  markets  in  particular.  I  admit  that  this  is  an 
ambitious goal as insolvency law and company law, for example, would need to be further 
harmonised. This step would remove a few barriers to a single European capital market. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the beginning of my speech I mentioned the Eurobarometer survey which indicated that 
70% of people in the euro area want the euro as the single currency. The problem is not the 
idea  of  the  euro.  It  is  much  more  about  repeatedly  reviving  citizens’  awareness  of  the 
benefits of a united Europe and a single currency. And about creating a solid and sustainable 
economic basis. 
I have shared with you some proposals on how monetary union could be designed so that it 
responds to people’s wishes and durably fulfils its objectives. Are these proposals new? No, 
these and other proposals for the further development of monetary union have been around 
                                                
4  Asdrubali,  P.,  Sørensen,  B.E.  Yosha,  O  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing: US 1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1081–1110. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for quite some time. This shows that we have no problem understanding, but we do have a 
problem implementing. 
It’s up to politicians to create a framework that is appropriate for the idea of a single currency 
– at national as well as at European level. The longer politicians stand still, the more people 
will  lose  faith  in  Europe.  One  sign  of  this  is  that  political  parties  which  want  to  move 
backwards have recently been gaining support. 
At the same time, the European Central Bank is being pushed into a role for which it was not 
created.  Monetary  policy  can  neither  solve  structural  problems  at  national  level  nor 
institutional  problems  at  European  level.  On  the  contrary,  the  more  that  is  expected  from 
monetary policy, the more likely it is to be overburdened. 
The ECB alone cannot create growth and prosperity for all. For that, structural reforms are 
necessary  –  at  national  and  European  level.  At  the  same  time,  structural  problems  are 
making monetary policy less effective in the euro area. 
In  this  context,  it  seems  very  odd  to  me  that  politicians  are  now  criticising  the  European 
Central Bank. This endangers our independence and undermines trust. 
I would like to see a political class that has the courage to lead public opinion. Politicians who 
have the confidence to explain to voters that a fully fledged European monetary union is not 
without an alternative, but that it is worthwhile – even if it’s proving difficult to get there. But 
once the idea and the reality of the euro are back in harmony, then Eurosceptic voices will 
not find many listeners. I am convinced of this. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
