  Daniel Mminele: The role of monetary policy in encouraging and 
supporting economic growth 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
University  of  KwaZulu-Natal  Business  Management  Conference  “Innovative  and  creative 
solutions for economic growth strategies and sustainable futures”, Durban, 26 August 2016. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen  
I  thank  the  University  of  KwaZulu-Natal,  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  4th  Business 
Management Conference. The theme of this conference is well-chosen and very relevant to 
our  current  context  as, eight  years  after  the global  financial  crisis,  strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth  remains  elusive,  and  policymakers  across  the  world,  including  in  South 
Africa,  are  indeed  grappling  with  finding  innovative  and  creative  solutions  for  generating 
growth.  
South  African  GDP1  growth  has  been  decelerating  since  2011,  registering  a  mere  1,3  per 
cent in 2015 following a similarly disappointing growth rate of 1,6 per cent in 2014. This is a 
far  cry  from  the  growth  rates  of  almost  6  per  cent  that  we  celebrated  prior  to  the  global 
financial crisis. A number of domestic and external factors have been responsible, including 
electricity supply constraints and one of the most severe droughts to affect the agricultural 
sector, the slowdown in China and lower commodity prices (adversely affecting mining and 
manufacturing production), as well as weak demand in both advanced and emerging market 
countries, including those in sub-Saharan Africa.  
According to the most recent forecasts of the South African Reserve Bank, released at the 
time  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  meeting  in  July,  growth  prospects  remain 
challenging, with the economy not expected to grow in 2016 and growth rising to 1,1 per cent 
next  year  and  to  1,5  per  cent  in  2018.  By  contrast,  our forecasts  show  inflation remaining 
above the target range in 2016, averaging 6,6 per cent this year before declining to 6 per 
cent and 5,5 per cent over the next two years respectively.  
In my remarks today, I will discuss the role of monetary policy in encouraging and supporting 
economic growth – a role complicated by the current context of structurally low growth.  
In an environment characterised by such weak expansion, there are two obvious questions 
for monetary policymakers. First, why is the MPC not doing more to support growth? Second, 
what  is  the  long-term  role  of  monetary  policy  in  encouraging  and  supporting  sustainable 
growth?  
Monetary policy and short-term growth  
Since  January  2014,  the  MPC  has  increased  the  repurchase  rate  –  or  repo  rate  –  by  a 
cumulative 200 basis points, to the current 7 per cent. While it may seem counterintuitive to 
increase  interest  rates  when  growth  is  weakening,  the  Bank  has  been  facing  a  policy 
dilemma in the face of this weaker growth being accompanied by rising inflation risks over 
this period, mainly in the form of rising food prices and currency depreciation.  
Core inflation, which measures underlying inflationary pressure, has continuously exceeded 
5 per cent since February 2013, indicating limited space for unfavourable shocks. In addition, 
inflation expectations remain at uncomfortably elevated levels.  
                                                
1  Gross Domestic Product. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  While  policy  decisions  need  to  appropriately  take  account  of  growth  dynamics,  monetary 
policy cannot influence growth outcomes in the long run – and there is broad consensus that 
South  Africa  needs  structural  reforms  to  increase  output.  The  MPC  has,  however,  shown 
caution  in  this  hiking  cycle  –  and  has  emphasised  the  importance  of  data  dependency  in 
making its decisions to ensure that the Bank’s response is calibrated to changing economic 
conditions. This approach has resulted in rates being hiked more gradually, and by a lower 
magnitude,  than  in  previous  hiking  cycles  in  South  Africa.  Consider  the  difference:  from 
January 2002 the MPC increased the repo rate by 400 basis points over 16 months, whereas 
in the past 31 months we have increased the rate by 200 basis points.  
As  a  small  open  economy,  South  Africa  is  highly  exposed  to  exogenous  shocks  that  can 
affect  inflation.  Often  –  with  the  recent  exception  of  falling  international  oil  prices  –  these 
shocks  are  inflationary,  such  as  the  continuous  currency  depreciation  since  2011.  The 
gradual hiking cycle has been a response to the concern that repeated shocks would drive 
inflation persistently above the target range, which could create a ‘new normal’ target of 6 per 
cent plus a supply shock in the public’s consciousness. If that were the case, then a shock 
pushing  headline  inflation  above  6  per  cent  could  in  turn  pull  inflation  expectations  and/or 
wage  growth  with  it,  causing  a  generalised,  economy-wide  increase  in  prices  via  these 
second-round effects. The shock would then embed itself permanently into prices instead of 
having only a temporary impact.  
This year, the disinflationary impetus from lower oil prices has dissipated while domestic food 
price inflation has increased above 10 per cent as a result of the severe regional drought I 
mentioned earlier. Food prices last rose this sharply in 2011 and, as with an even sharper 
upsurge in 2008, they were followed by spikes in wage inflation. The MPC is thus cognisant 
of the increased possibility of second-round effects if the shock is to food prices.  
Admittedly,  we  have  seen  some  encouraging  developments  recently,  mainly  as  a  result  of 
renewed  search-for-yield  strategies  based  on  changed  perceptions  about  the  pace  of  US 
policy normalisation and easing measures elsewhere. But the currency remains an important 
risk factor as recent trends can quickly reverse should global risk perceptions change. Even 
taking near-term improvements into account, the rand has depreciated 11,7 per cent against 
the  US  dollar  and,  on  a  trade-weighted  basis,  by  8,6  per  cent  over  the  past  year  – 
significantly in excess of inflation differentials with our major trading partners.2 
Between  May  and  July,  the  Bank  lowered  its  inflation  forecasts.  Yet  inflation  is  still 
anticipated to remain above the target range until the middle of 2017, peaking in the fourth 
quarter  of  this  year  at  7,1  per  cent.  At  its  July  meeting,  the  MPC  stated  that  recent 
developments  had  allowed  for  a  pause  in  the  hiking  cycle.  This  pause  is  evidence  of  the 
MPC’s  flexible  approach  to  inflation  targeting,  but  is  in  part  also  due  to  the  Bank  having 
increased interest rates earlier in response to inflation risks.  
Although  the  MPC  is  removing  accommodation  gradually,  monetary  policy  is  not  yet  tight. 
Our real interest rate is not high when compared to other emerging markets such as Chile, 
India and Mexico. Household credit growth is weak but this is very much linked to still-high 
household debt as a percentage of disposable income.3 Meanwhile, the credit extended to 
corporates has in fact accelerated since interest rates have risen, and averaged 13 per cent 
over the past year.4  
Such  indications  add  to  other  evidence  that  interest  rate  hikes  have  not  been  the  primary 
constraint  to  growth  outcomes  over  the  period.  Unusually  severe  shocks  –  including  the 
strikes in 2014, electricity shortages in 2015, and the drought in the past two years – have hit 
                                                
2  This is the change from June 2015 to July 2016. 
3  Household debt to disposable income measured 76,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2016. 
4  This is the average year-on-year growth from July 2015 to June 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  domestic  economy.  Our  cyclical  recovery  has  been  hampered  by  disappointingly  low 
global trade and world economic growth. More important, however, is the fact that domestic 
growth is also weak for structural reasons, as illustrated by the repeated downward revisions 
to our estimates of potential growth. This last problem requires structural reforms rather than 
a  monetary  policy  response.  Our  most  recent  estimates  show  potential  growth  remaining 
under  2  per  cent  into  2018;  this  is  well  below  the  rate  needed  for  meaningful  per  capita 
increases in income and faster job creation.  
Lately, there has been speculation about the end of the hiking cycle possibly having been 
reached. While the recent improvements to the inflation outlook are a positive development, 
the risks in the policy environment remain too numerous to be able to say definitively that the 
hiking cycle is over. We will continue to be guided by the evolving data and our collective 
understanding as the MPC of what any new data and information suggests for the inflation 
trajectory.  
Monetary policy and long-term growth  
This brings me to my second question, about the role of monetary policy in fostering long-
term economic growth.  
It is now widely accepted that the appropriate role of monetary policy is in focusing on price 
stability  in  the  medium  to  long  run.  It  can  also  assist  in  smoothing  short-term  growth 
fluctuations provided that this does not compromise price stability.  
Monetary policy helps to provide a stable, growth-friendly environment but it is most effective 
if the broader environment is similarly geared towards encouraging investment and unlocking 
growth  potential.  In  South  Africa,  we  have  made  progress  with  alleviating  infrastructure 
constraints over the past few years but now – as in the majority of emerging markets – we 
urgently require structural reforms. Without reforms, growth will not accelerate significantly – 
irrespective of the appropriateness of monetary policy settings.  
Structural reforms required refer to, for example, policies aimed at increasing competition in 
product  and  labour  markets.  Many  South  African  sectors  are  highly  concentrated  and  the 
barriers to entry for small or new firms are high in an environment dominated by a few long-
established firms. Small firms tend to be relatively more labour intensive than large firms, so 
if the barriers to entry were lowered and more small firms entered the sectors, employment 
would rise – and it would likely rise faster if this shift were accompanied by labour market 
reforms. Both these policies would not only improve the competitiveness of the economy but 
also make it more inclusive, providing opportunity for the unemployed, existing small firms 
and potential entrepreneurs, many of whom are currently locked out of the formal economy. 
The International Monetary Fund’s recent Article IV assessment of South Africa reiterates the 
need  for  these  reforms,  which  have  also  been  recommended  by  the  World  Bank  and  the 
OECD5.  
Fortunately, South Africa has a long-term growth and job creation strategy encapsulated by 
the National Development Plan that includes many of these policies. And although structural 
reforms  take  time  to  implement,  demonstrable  progress  with  regard  to  implementation  will 
likely  increase  business  confidence  from  its  current  low  level  and  thus  also  boost  the 
economy in the short term.  
The South African Reserve Bank also has a growth-supportive role to play, which I would like 
to  explain.  We  have  two  mandates,  namely  price  stability  (as  our  primary  mandate)  and 
financial stability. Financial stability, expressed in a more explicit manner, is a relatively new 
mandate, in line with international best practice following the global financial crisis.  
                                                
5  Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  By various measures – including currency liquidity6, stock market capitalisation7, and local-
currency  bond  demand8  –  South  Africa  has  exceptionally  deep  and  sophisticated  financial 
markets for a middle-income country. Indeed, the country is ranked 12th in the world in terms 
of financial market development, as measured by the World Economic Forum.9  
The finance sector has become an increasingly important contributor to growth, rising as a 
proportion of total real gross value added from 17 per cent in 2000 to 22 per cent in 2015. 
Stability in this sector is thus important to the South African economy as a whole – and also 
supports a more efficient transmission of monetary policy.  
Fortunately,  South  Africa  has  an  established  history  of  financial  stability.  In  a  recent 
comprehensive study of banking development, South Africa was identified as one of only four 
large countries that granted large amounts of domestic credit and had not experienced any 
banking  sector  crises  since  1970.10  This  combination  of  financial  stability  and  relatively 
adequate credit is rare, and the Bank has an important role in safeguarding it.  
Price  and  financial  stability  alone  cannot  create  growth.  Rather,  they  provide  a  platform 
enabling  medium-  and  long-run  growth.  Financial  stability  means  that  institutions  and 
markets  are  well  regulated,  which  ensures  adequate  capitalisation  and prevents  excessive 
risk-taking.  As  a  result,  the  economy  has  sufficient  access  to  credit  for  investment  and 
growth.  Price  stability  means  that  investors  are  assured  of  a  competitive  and  predictable 
inflation  environment,  leading  to  greater  certainty  over  future  business  conditions  and 
therefore lower long-term interest rates.  
In  South  Africa,  we  define  price  stability  as  meeting  our  continuous  3-6  per  cent  inflation 
target.  The  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  that  we  implement  relies  on  anchored 
inflation expectations, especially among price and wage setters. This framework has led to 
an improvement in our inflation performance. From 1970 to 2000, inflation averaged 11,2 per 
cent. Since 2002 – the first year in which we committed to a target – inflation has averaged 
5,9 per cent, despite two severe spikes in 2002 and 2008. That said, inflation targeting is still 
relatively young as a policy, and our inflation rate remains structurally high – higher, in fact, 
than in other emerging markets and in the countries of rival exporters.11 It is thus especially 
important to ensure that expectations in South Africa are appropriately anchored.  
Inflation  expectations  have  become  much  less  volatile  during  the  inflation-targeting  period, 
indicating  increased  trust  in  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  the  target.  However,  since  2008, 
when severe food and energy price increases hit South Africa, we have suffered exogenous 
price  shocks  that  have  repeatedly  driven  inflation  outside  the  target  range.  Inflation 
expectations have shifted upwards as a result. From an average of 5 per cent from 2004 to 
2007,  inflation  expectations12  rose  to  average  6,1  per  cent  between  2011  and  2013.  They 
have remained stable since then, but are unfortunately stable right at the top of the target 
                                                
6  The Bank for International Settlements conducts a triennial survey of global foreign exchange markets. It has 
found the rand to be the 18th most traded currency globally as of 2013. 
7  The  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  is  the  19th  largest  stock  exchange  in  the  world  by  this  measure.  See 
https://www.jse.co.za/about/history-company-overview. 
8  For example, only 10 per cent of national government debt is foreign currency-denominated. 
9  This is South Africa’s most recent ranking on the Global Competitiveness Index (2015/16). 
10  Calomiris, C W and Haber, S H. 2014. Fragile by design. New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 
11  The  comparison  with  other emerging markets  relies on  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF) World  Economic 
Outlook (WEO) data for 2001-2015. The inflation rate for rival exporters was calculated using IMF WEO and 
United Nations Comtrade data, with a  weighted inflation rate calculated for 2011-2015 using South Africa’s 
nine largest export categories (73 per cent of total) from 2012 to 2014. 
12  As measured (for two years ahead) by the Bureau for Economic Research. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  range. A situation where expectations are lower, and the target range is thus more resilient to 
shocks, provides more flexibility for accommodative monetary.  
Flexible  inflation  targeting  allows  us  to  look  through  once-off  shocks  to  prices  from 
exogenous sources, such as the petrol price increases that pushed inflation above 6 per cent 
in July and August 2013. However, this is possible only if second-round effects do not occur 
as a result of the shock. If they do occur, they can set off a chain of price increases in the 
economy  with  the  possibility  of  persistently  driving  inflation  higher.  In  such  a  context,  the 
MPC would need to act. Much of the current hiking cycle has been about preventing second-
round effects from manifesting, in turn preventing the need for steeper, more rapid interest 
rate increases later on.  
Second-round effects relate directly to central bank credibility. Simply put: if price makers in 
the economy trust the central bank to maintain medium-term inflation within the target range, 
then they expect exogenous shocks to be temporary and are less inclined to increase their 
prices in response. If, however, they do not trust the central bank’s intent or ability to contain 
inflation within the target range, then, rationally, they will react.  
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  worked  hard  to  build  credibility  with  the  public, 
especially with price and wage setters. Not long ago, central bankers had the reputation of 
being aloof and opaque; in fact, unpredictability  seemed central to the design of monetary 
policy.  We  have  shifted  our  framework,  but  also  our  public  engagement,  to  be  more 
transparent  and  accessible,  not  least  to  groups  who  do  not  always  agree  with  our  policy 
approach. In addition, our economic round tables include representatives from the public and 
private sectors as well as organised labour. We do national roadshows around our biannual 
policy publication, the Monetary Policy Review. We have press conferences after each MPC 
meeting and publish our growth and inflation forecasts, as well as key assumptions. And we 
publish all public engagements by policymakers, such as this speech, on our website.  
In our view, this kind of engagement is necessary to ensure that the public understands the 
goals  and  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  In  general,  though,  we  believe  it  is  good  public 
policy  to  encourage  broad  social  participation  in  policy  discourse.  Everyone  in  our  society 
should  be  committed  to  sustainable  growth,  lower  unemployment,  and  a  more  inclusive, 
high-growth  economy.  A  credible,  well-communicated  monetary  policy  is  one  of  our  most 
important contributions to those goals.  
Allow me to use this opportunity to clarify that our outreach programmes with stakeholders, 
particularly  in  the  media,  should  not  be  misconstrued  to  represent  formal  briefings  by  the 
MPC. These engagement by the Governor, Deputy Governors and senior officials are aimed 
at deepening the understanding of the work of the SARB with stakeholders, explaining what 
the  SARB  does,  what  decisions  it  makes,  and,  where  relevant,  how  such  decisions  were 
arrived  at.  In  keeping  with  our  commitment  to  transparency,  any  formal  interaction  or 
announcement by the MPC as a committee will be pre-announced.  
Conclusion  
The  economic  performance  of  South  Africa  has  been  weak  recently.  Monetary  policy  can 
mitigate cyclical downturns, provided that inflationary pressures are contained, but monetary 
policy is not effective in combating structural growth problems. Such problems can only be 
addressed by implementing structural reforms.  
The South African Reserve Bank remains focused on containing medium-term inflation. The 
best contribution that central banking can make to growth outcomes is to play a facilitative 
role  aimed  at  implementing  policies  that  provide  a  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial 
markets environment.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
