   
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: National Strategy for Financial Inclusion tactical 
plans – working together with the private sector 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the “National Strategy for Financial Inclusion Tactical Plans 
Exposure to the Private Sector” event, Manila, 11 April 2016. 
 In May last year, in this same hall, we consulted many of you on the National Strategy for 
Financial Inclusion (NSFI). In July, we eventually launched the NSFI, enriched with your inputs, 
in  the  presence  of  Her  Majesty  Queen  Maxima  of  the  Netherlands,  the  United  Nations 
Secretary  General’s  Special  Advocate  for  Inclusive  Finance  for  Development.  Those  who 
witnessed  the  Launch  may  remember  that  the  BSP  and  12  other  agencies  signed  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU),  signifying  our  commitment  to  implement  actions 
aligned with NSFI strategies.  
We  promised  to  continue  working  together  with  the  public  and  private  sectors  in  NSFI 
implementation. Today, we gather again to keep that promise. Financial inclusion is a multi-
dimensional objective that can be achieved only through our combined efforts. Thus in this 
event, we emphasize the significance of your role as NSFI partners and co-implementers.  
We have three objectives: (1) Update you on what transpired since the Launch, particularly the 
Tactical  Plans  prepared  by  NSFI  agencies;  (2)  Identify  possible  areas  for  collaboration, 
partnership, or support; and (3) Provide the venue for networking with like-minded advocates 
and workers in the financial inclusion space.  
Updates since the launch 
With  respect  to  our  first  objective,  we  are  pleased  to  share  that  after  the  Launch,  the 
Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) and Department of Science and Technology (DOST) 
decided  to  commit  as  NSFI  agencies. We  now  have  15  agencies  altogether,  including  the 
pioneers:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Department of Finance (DOF)  
Department of Education (Dep-Ed)  
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)  
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD)  
Department of Budget and Management (DBM)  
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)  
Insurance Commission (IC)  
Commission on Filipinos Overseas (CFO) - Sec. Nicolas is with us this morning and 
will address the audience  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)  
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA)  
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC)  
Cooperative Development Authority (CDA), and  
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   These agencies each crafted Tactical Plans, a set of specific, measurable, achievable, realistic 
and time-bound (SMART) actions that contribute to the achievement of NSFI objectives, in line 
with their mandates. These Plans, together with a proposed measurement framework, were 
submitted to the President in December 2015.  
In that submission, the NSFI agencies also proposed formalization of a Financial Inclusion 
Steering  Committee  to  provide  strategic  guidance,  strengthen  coordination  and  facilitate 
efficient implementation of initiatives enrolled under the NSFI. Some of you raised a similar 
suggestion during the NSFI consultations, with the intent to ensure sustainability of initiatives 
and  accountability  in  progress  monitoring.  The  proposed  Executive  Order  (EO)  is  with  the 
Office of the President for consideration.  
While we wait for – hopefully – some good news on the EO, we persist with the work already 
begun. In today’s program, co-chairs of the NSFI Inter-agency Working Groups (WGs) will 
present  a  thematic  overview  of  the Tactical  Plans. The  detailed  description  of  policies and 
programs  contained  in  the  Plans  were  earlier  provided  to  all  participants.  Each  initiative, 
classified under key focus areas of the NSFI – Policy and Regulation, Financial Inclusion and 
Consumer Protection, and Advocacy Programs – is described in detail. At a glance, you can 
see the objectives, target market, timeline, status of implementation, implementing partners, 
and measurable indicators of success. The inter-agency WGs worked on these Plans right 
after  the  Launch,  and  are  working  even  harder  to  implement  and  monitor  milestones.  We 
acknowledge the WG members who joined us today.  
Do  take  advantage  of  this  opportunity  to  engage  with  them.  The  WGs  are  open  to  your 
constructive feedback on ongoing measures, and bright ideas on future action plans that we 
can all work together under the NSFI “umbrella”. This brings me to the next objective. 
Identification of areas for collaboration, partnership or support 
We  hope  that  the  information  on  the  Plans  can  already  inspire  development  partners  and 
private sector representatives present today to contemplate possible ways of supporting the 
NSFI.  The  Plans  contain  measures  already  in  operation,  but  there  is  always  room  for 
convergence with private sector actions.  
This is not meant to pressure you, but let me share some examples of private-led programs 
categorically designed to support NSFI: 
(1) 
International  research  institutions  like  Ideas42  and  Innovations  for  Poverty  Action 
(IPA)  –  respectively  known  for  using  behavioral  sciences  and  randomized  control  trials  in 
financial inclusion research and program design – are helping us find pioneering solutions to 
increase access and usage of financial services by financially excluded markets.  
(2) 
PayMaya,  Inc.  (formerly  Smart  E-Money  Inc.,  a  BSP-licensed  e-money  issuer) 
launched the PayMaya Card with NSFI in mind. It is now working with Dep-Ed to find ways to 
encourage  savings  among  K-12  students.  Globe  Telco  is  also  currently  working  with  the 
Financial  Sector  Forum’s  Consumer  Protection  and  Education  Committee  to  facilitate 
information dissemination and enhance consumer protection.  
(3) 
Two weeks from now, BPI Foundation and ASKI Global Ltd. (non-profit engaged in 
entrepreneurship coaching for migrant workers) will conduct a financial inclusion summit on 
the role of remittances and migrant workers in inclusive growth.  
All these initiatives were coordinated with the BSP, and purposely linked with NSFI objectives, 
or facilitated thru the NSFI collaborative platform. 
We are also pleased to share that the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank 
(WB) have committed resources to support various NSFI elements. For example, ADB will 
focus  its  technical  assistance  on  strengthening microfinance  NGOs; deepening  agricultural 
value  chain 
financial  services  and 
microinsurance.  
financing;  and  promoting  e-payments,  digital 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Meanwhile, the WB will focus on SME finance, financial education, consumer protection, and 
data and measurement. In fact, the BSP and WB technical teams will meet this week to define 
a  practical  approach for monitoring  and measuring  progress  of NSFI  implementation.  Your 
inputs today in this particular area would be most helpful in that meeting. 
Aside from the afore-mentioned initiatives, a variety of private businesses and entities have 
reached out to BSP, wishing to determine how they can engage in NSFI implementation. These 
entities include technology providers, financial education program implementers, and even a 
consumer goods manufacturer. Their expression of interest to contribute to financial inclusion 
is clear proof of boundless possibilities for public and private sectors to work together. Thus, 
we designed this event with the third objective in mind. 
Networking opportunity 
This  is  a  networking  opportunity,  and  we  encourage  everyone  to  get  to  know  key  NSFI 
stakeholders and industry players. We have a good mix present – NSFI agencies, development 
partners and donors; bank and non-bank financial service providers and their associations; 
technology companies and other service providers.  
Among yourselves, there is a wealth of complementary experience, expertise and resources 
that  can  be  matched  to  generate  beneficial  alliances  that  can  result  in  greater  financial 
inclusion. The program designates lunch (of course you can stay on) for everyone to mingle 
and network, talk about common interests, and catalyze concepts for potential collaboration.  
This event is the first of many, and merely whets the appetite for greater engagement and 
collaboration  among  us.  We  plan  to  make  this  a  regular  activity  to  ensure  continuity  and 
synergy of public-private sector actions in financial inclusion. 
Conclusion 
The  success  of  NSFI  is  dependent  not  only  on  the  effectiveness  of  policy  and  program 
implementation by NSFI agencies. Success is also largely anchored on the private sector’s 
response to NSFI initiatives.  
With your support and commitment as NSFI co-implementers, we can be assured of future 
successes. The BSP remains committed to lead and support the NSFI process. On behalf of 
all NSFI agencies, we look forward to future productive partnerships. 
Thank you and good morning 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
