  Philip R Lane: “Multiple Reserve Currencies and the International 
Monetary System” 
Panel remarks by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Seventh 
High-Level  SNB-IMF  Conference  on  the  International  Monetary  System,  Zurich,  10  May 
2016. 
 The  world  is  in  an  important  transition  phase:  the  share  of  emerging  economies  in  global 
GDP is far higher now than a decade ago. Over time, these countries are adopting a more 
liberal  approach  to  international  financial  integration,  building  a  larger  set  of  domestic-
currency financial markets that facilitate participation from overseas investors and permitting 
greater outward flows from the domestic private sector. In turn, the asymmetric configuration 
of the global financial system that characterised the decade following the Asian crisis (large 
external surpluses, accumulation of foreign currency reserves, the acquisition of foreign debt 
assets but the issuance of foreign equity liabilities on the part of emerging economies) is due 
for replacement but the exact properties of the new configuration is not yet clear (Lane and 
Milesi-Ferretti 2008). 
In terms of the overall level of reserves, we know that traditional factors such as the level of 
trade openness and the exchange rate regime have been joined by financial factors, such as 
the  size  of  the  domestic  financial  system,  the  extent  of  capital  account  openness  and  the 
scale  of  foreign  currency  liabilities  in  determining  the  appropriate  level  of  reserves.  For 
instance, Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2010) were prescient in emphasising the size of 
domestic  financial  liabilities  that  could  potentially  be  converted  into  foreign  currency  as  a 
driver  of  reserves,  in  view  of  recent  developments  in  various  emerging  markets  and  the 
emphasis  in  the  April  2016  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  on  gross  capital  outflows  as  an 
increasingly important driver of the financial account for these economies. 
In related fashion, the empirical work on the composition of reserves identifies both trade and 
financial linkages as significant in explaining currency shares: all else equal, a country that 
trades  a  lot  with  the  euro  and  issues  a  lot  of  euro-denominated  debt  will  hold  more  euro 
reserves,  compared  to a  country  that  is  more  closely  linked  to  the  US  and  issues  a  lot  of 
dollar  liabilities.  Related  work  includes  Eichengreen  and  Mathieson  (2000),  Lane  and 
Shambaugh (2010) and Benetrix et al (2015). 
The rise of China as a share of global GDP and the internationalisation of the RMB means 
that  the  share  of  the  RMB  in  reserves  will  surely  rise  over  time,  especially  for  Asian 
economies. Still, the quantitative scale of this shift will depend on the success of the Chinese 
government  in  establishing  the  RMB  as  a  major  international  currency.  At  the  core,  RMB 
sovereign debt must be classified as a safe asset by global investors if the RMB is to play a 
substantial role as a reserve currency. 
While an outsized role for the US dollar in the international financial system is sure to persist 
due to an array of incumbency advantages, it is still useful to speculate about the properties 
of an international financial system with multiple reserve currencies. Given the importance of 
scale effects in building deep and liquid financial markets, it is likely that the number of major 
reserve  currencies  is  likely  to  remain  quite  small,  with  the  dollar,  the  euro  and  the  RMB 
playing  the  most  significant  roles.  An  additional  factor  in  limiting  the  number  of  reserve 
currencies is that a reserve-issuing bloc must be large enough and sufficiently anchored by 
domestic fundamentals to tolerate substantial exchange rate volatility. 
At one level, an expanded stock of global reserve assets promises significant benefits. For 
those  living  in  reserve-issuing  blocs,  the  enhanced  ability  to  issue  domestic-currency 
liabilities  to  foreign  investors  helps  to  underpin  financial  stability.  At  a  global  level,  to  the 
extent  that  a  world  of  multiple  reserve  currencies  is  also  a  world  of  multiple  funding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  currencies,  the  current  tension  between  trade-weighted  and  financially-weighted  exchange 
rates is mitigated. In similar fashion, we might expect to observe an increase in the popularity 
of basket pegs and basket reference benchmarks for managed float regimes. 
An  expanded  supply  of  reserve  assets  also  reduces  the  risk  of  over-valuation  of  these 
assets, which can distort resource allocation by suppressing term premia in reserve currency 
markets.  The  impact  of  a  high  level  of  foreign  purchases  on  long-term  rates  is  well 
documented  for  the  dollar  but  is  also  evident  in  the  market  for  euro-denominated  debt 
(Carvalho and Fidora 2015). 
A  wider  set  of  reserve  currencies  may  also  enhance  risk  management.  While  the 
appreciation of the dollar during the 2008 global financial crisis turned out to be an important 
stabilising factor for those holding dollar reserve assets, it is possible to imagine scenarios in 
which  the  dollar  depreciates  against  the  euro  or  the  RMB  during  a  period  of  international 
turmoil,  such  that  a  diversified  portfolio  of  reserve  currencies  may  provide  enhanced 
protection against a wider array of risk factors. 
At the same time, a system of multiple funding currencies may pose headaches for central 
banks.  If  there  is  a  mismatch  between  the  foreign  currency  liabilities  of  a  country  and  its 
foreign  currency  assets,  a  central  bank  may  need  access  to  swap  lines  among  the  major 
reserve currencies. If such swap lines are not available, then a country in distress may turn 
to  the  IMF  to  resolve  a  currency-specific  liquidity  crunch.  To  avoid  such  scenarios,  there 
needs  to  be  sufficient  cooperation  among  the  issuers  of  the  major  reserve  currencies 
together with the IMF in recognising the importance of reliable currency swap arrangements. 
The  availability  of  timely  and  comprehensive  data  on  the  foreign-currency  positions  of  the 
private sector is also essential for efficient reserve management in a multiple-currency world. 
A world of multiple reserve currencies is also a world in  which membership of a monetary 
union carries significant benefits. First, the ability to borrow and lend in a common currency 
and access to the liquidity facilities of a common central bank limits the need to accumulate 
foreign currency reserves. The provision of eurosystem liquidity provided an important buffer 
mechanism  in  coping  with  the  sudden  stops  of  private  capital  flows  during  2008–2012. 
Second, the depth of currency swap markets for the euro against other major currencies (and 
the  ECB  swap  lines  with  other  major  central  banks)  meant  that  non-euro  foreign  currency 
liabilities could also be managed effectively during the crisis. 
Finally, the role of the euro as a reserve currency would be enhanced by a widening in the 
pool of euro-denominated safe assets. To this end, the proposal for European Safe Bonds 
(or ESBies) that would consist of the senior tranche of a diversified portfolio of the sovereign 
debt of the member countries would be an important advance in constructing an area-wide 
safe asset. 
References 
Benetrix,  Agustin,  Philip  R.  Lane  and  Jay  C.  Shambaugh  (2015),  “International  Currrency 
Exposures,  Valuation  Effects  and  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,”  Journal  of  International 
Economics 96, 98–109. 
Carvalho,  Daniel  and  Michael  Fidora  (2015),  “Capital  Inflows  and  Euro  Area  Long-Term 
Interest Rates,” Journal of International Money and Finance 54(C), 186–204. 
Eichengreen,  Barry  and  Donald  Mathieson  (2000),“The  Currency  Composition  of  Foreign 
Exchange Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect,” IMF Working Paper No. 00/131. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2008),  “The  Drivers  of  Financial 
Globalization,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 98(2), 327–33. 
Lane, Philip R. and Jay C. Shambaugh (2010), “Financial Exchange Rates and International 
Currency Exposures,” American Economic Review 100(1), 518 – 540. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Milesi-Ferretti,  Gian  Maria  (2009),  “A  $2Trillion  Question,”  VOXEU  (January  28  2009). 
http://voxeu.org/article/2-trillion-question. 
Obstfeld,  Maurice,  Jay  C.  Shambaugh  and  Alan  M.  Taylor  (2010),  “Financial  Stability,  the 
Trilemma and International  Reserves,”  American  Economic Journal:  Macroeconomics  2(2), 
57–94. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
