  
 
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Mainstreaming financial inclusion as a strategic 
objective 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the BSP-BIS Research Conference of Financial Inclusion 
and Central Banks, Cebu, 3 June 2016. 
 Good morning everyone. On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I welcome all of you 
to Cebu. 
This conference, which the BSP is privileged to co-host with the BIS, is actually the result of 
a discussion in the Asian Consultative Council (ACC) of the BIS. It was early 2014 in Sydney, 
if I  am  not  mistaken,  when  BSP  suggested to  the  ACC  governors,  that  a  possible  area of 
research  for  the  BIS  Hongkong  Office  (under  the  ACC  process)  could  be  the  relationship 
between  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability.  In  particular,  we  suggested  that  the  BIS 
Hongkong Office investigate whether increased financial inclusion contributes to or detracts 
from  financial  stability.  Necessarily,  Dr.  Remolona  and  his  team  would  also  have  to 
determine the possible transmission mechanism for this linkage. 
That suggestion came at a time when revisions to the G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan 
(FIAP) were being undertaken during the Australian G20 Presidency. By that time also, the 
United  Nations  had  already  underpinned  the  importance  of  financial  inclusion  as  an 
imperative in the attainment of a wide range of targets under the Sustainable Development 
Goals.  The  UNSGSA,  Her  Majesty  Queen  Maxima  of  the  Netherlands,  had  also  by  then 
already conducted intensive meetings on financial inclusion with the Standard Setting Bodies 
that included the BCBS, CPMI, FATF, IADI and IAIS. 
Clearly, the once-peripheral issue was then becoming mainstreamed in the global discourse. 
The BSP Experience 
At that time, we were also trying to better understand this issue for our own policy work in the 
BSP. You see, by 2014, the BSP already had over a decade of experience with microfinance 
as a flagship program for poverty alleviation. 
Our  efforts  started  as  an  advocacy,  with  the  belief  that  creating  an  enabling  policy  and 
regulatory environment could catalyze market players to see microfinance as a sound and 
viable  undertaking. We endeavored  to  create  a  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework that 
recognized  the  peculiarities  of  microfinance  while  striving  to  maintain  alignment  with 
international  standards.  Such  balance  allowed  the  entry  of  banks  into  the  microfinance 
market by reducing barriers and providing incentives, while at the same time, ensuring that 
players act, and their operations conducted, in a safe and prudent manner. In particular, we 
put in place the needed measures that cover the full credit cycle of microfinance from loan 
application to full repayment. 
Following  the  principle  of  proportionality,  we  allowed  less  documentary  requirements  and 
enabled the use of group support or liability arrangements, cash flow based and character 
lending, and high frequency amortizations. We balanced that with demanding and timely loan 
review and loss provisioning. We also provided a mechanism for unregulated microfinance 
institutions to formalize themselves into banks. 
Regulations were likewise established to leverage off technology to more efficiently and cost-
effectively reach out to more microenterprises across our archipelago of 7,107 islands. And 
in 2007, we created a full-time unit in the BSP to look into financial inclusion issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This  approach  enabled over  170  banks  – mostly  our  rural  banks  –  to  deliver  microfinance 
services  to  nearly  1.5  million  microentrepreneurs.  The  outstanding  loans  to  these 
microentrepreneurs are at PhP 11.3 Billion, a 333% increase from the 2002 levels of PhP 2.6 
Billion. The banks have also enabled these clients to save for the first time in their lives. At 
present,  these  microentrepreneurs  have  accumulated  savings  of  around  PhP  4.5  Billion. 
Moreover, the generation of related new business opportunities that cater to the low income 
and the unbanked, e.g., micro-insurance, micro-housing loans and remittances, has enabled 
them to expand their markets and client base without compromising, in fact in some cases, 
even strengthening their institutional stability. 
While these numbers were encouraging, and as we were getting more microenterprises into 
the  formal  financial  sector,  we  also  knew  that  we  needed  to  better  appreciate  how  these 
newly on-boarded enterprises would affect (in the long run) the financial markets they were 
entering. 
Fortunately, the rest of the ACC governors went along with our suggestion in 2014, and so 
we are here today. But, as you can appreciate from the topics of our conference, the BIS has 
pushed the envelope further on that research agenda. For the next day and half, we will be 
covering the full mandate of central banking, not just financial stability but monetary policy 
and  the  growth  objective  as  well.  This  agenda  certainly  reflects  that  financial  inclusion  is 
multi-faceted. 
Implications of Financial Inclusion 
Indeed, financial inclusion cuts across multiple macroeconomic goals. Financial inclusion has 
been  seen  to  contribute  to  broad-based  economic  growth  and  development;  as  well  as 
complement  other  policy  objectives  such  as  reducing  inequality  and  promoting  financial 
stability  and  integrity.  Financial  inclusion  also  has  important  implications  for  monetary  and 
financial stability policy. 
These are bold claims, yet the work of many of you in this room have strengthened these 
convictions through your academic work in collecting and analysing evidence, some of which 
we will have the opportunity to discuss in this conference. (e.g., from Professor Beck’s early 
work  in  looking  at  financial  intermediation  and  growth  (2000)  and  more  recent  ones  on 
finance, inequality and the poor (2007) to Dr. Hannig’s discussion on financial inclusion and 
financial stability (2010) and Professor Karlan’s numerous work on looking at impact of credit 
(2007) or other financial services in households.) In no small measure therefore, you have 
contributed  to  what  could  be  likened  to  an  evolution:  a  gradual  –  yet  almost  natural  – 
advancement of financial inclusion as a widely-accepted policy objective. 
In this conference, we hope to further enrich the discourse through exchanges among central 
bankers and our select group of experts and see how we can pursue financial inclusion as a 
complement to our primary responsibilities as central bankers. 
A good way of achieving this is, to keep in mind that while financial inclusion has benefits, it 
also brings changes to the nature of the risks we face. Two that come top of mind are: 1) 
changes in the behavior of market participants; and 2) changes in the design and delivery of 
financial products. Related to these is a third, that is, the potential changes in the reaction 
function of policy makers. 
To  illustrate  the  first  kind  of  change  –  the  change  in  market  behaviour.  Newly-included 
agents may not necessarily behave in the same manner as those who are “already served” 
and “have been served” for some time now. Because banks are more familiar with the latter, 
the  melding  of  the  two  client  bases  may  create  new  operational  challenges  for  the  banks’ 
frontline staff. 
Change in agent behavior also affects monetary policy. Mehrotra and Yetman (2014) argue 
that  when  more  clients  are  able  to  smooth  consumption,  authorities  have  more  monetary 
policy  space  to  concentrate  on  fighting  inflation.  The  underlying  principle  is  that  smooth 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  consumption patterns help reduce the cost of output volatility. [I will leave this for James to 
further explain during his presentation tomorrow.] 
For the second type of change: on ways to design and deliver products to improve access to 
financial service. Financial product providers need to be mindful that, while most of the new 
entrants (generally the poor) have had to be savvy to deal with their unpredictable cashflows 
to  “survive”,  they  are  not  (necessarily)  as  capable  in  dealing  with  a  whole  array  of  new 
financial products. Moreover, banks must also be careful to extend certain types of credit to 
certain  clients.  This  could  just  expose  lenders  to  higher  risks  and  it  can  also  expose  ill-
informed borrowers to increased risk of debt distress. 
These  concerns  related  to  product  development  highlight  the  need  for  proportionate 
regulation  that  adequately  balances  the  need for flexibility  and  openness  to  innovation,  on 
one hand, with that of mechanisms to ensure that risks are properly managed, on the other. 
This will allow market contestability and the development of market-based solutions to serve 
markets that were traditionally unserved or underserved. 
We’ve  already  seen  innovative  market-based  approaches  to  improve  credit  access  for 
microfinance  borrowers.  We’ve  witnessed  the  move  from  brick-and-mortar  offices  to 
alternative Financial Service Providers such a micro banking offices and e-money issuers. 
Addressing Technological Innovation: Thru Financial Education, Consumer Protection 
and Proportionate Regulation 
Innovations, particularly through financial technology, can indeed be the catalyst for greater 
financial inclusion. Technological innovation has the potential to reduce costs and accelerate 
the on-boarding of currently excluded markets into the formal financial system. In addition, 
technology  solutions  promise  to  enhance  regulatory  capacity  and  tools  to  supervise  the 
market,  and  facilitate  regulatory  compliance  and  reporting  of  financial  institutions.  Some 
examples of these include: 
1. Big  data  analytics  and  algorithms that  can  be  used to  address  information  assymetry  in 
financial  service  provision  (e.g.,  analytics  of  social  media  behavior  can  predict  financial 
behavior of target clients); 
2. Crowdfunding platforms that may be utilized for generating funds for SMEs, start-ups and 
innovators. (e.g., peer-to-peer lending or equity crowdfunding) 
3. Digital  currencies.  (When  this  is  safely  managed,  this  may  facilitate  payments,  money 
transfers and e-commerce.) 
4. RegTech  or  using  technology  to  enhance  regulatory  capacity  and  enable  regulators  to 
analyze data to ensure timely supervision and intervention. 
As traditional players (such as banks) interconnect and engage new players (such as fin tech 
companies - which are often not within central bank supervision), there is a greater need to 
look at the entire chain of financial services being offered. The challenge for central banks 
and  regulators  here  is  to  stay  abreast  with  emerging  business  models  and  innovation,  to 
understand  the  inherent  risks  of  these  new  models,  and  to  know  how  to  proportionately 
manage the risks. This will require capacity to undertake the said functions. 
A number of central banks, including the BSP, have turned to the “test and learn” approach, 
more recently known as the “regulatory sandbox” to address this gap. 
The “sandbox” approach presupposes a dialogue and collaborative relationship between the 
central  bank  and the  industry  innovators. It  acknowledges  that financial  inclusion  solutions 
often  arise  from  these  innovators  because  the  latter  have  greater  flexibility  and  technical 
capacity to create products and generate systems to deliver them. 
Essentially,  the  sandbox  provides  an  opportunity  for  innovators  to  connect  to  banks  and 
other financial system players with clear authority from the regulators. Providing a sandox for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  these players gives the regulators a “ring side” seat that helps them assess potential risks to 
guide them in deciding when and how to regulate the new market, if needed. The ultimate 
objective is to be aware of the risks, employ mitigating actions as needed, but in a manner 
that also enables financial inclusion. 
While  we  need  to  allow  ample  space  for  the  market  to  create  cost-effective  solutions  that 
work for financial inclusion, prudence dictates that regulators must also be on the lookout for 
activities that impact financial integrity and consumer protection negatively. We need to have 
market conduct and consumer protection regulations that are infused with the philosophy that 
all financial consumers, including the less sophisticated and often low-income clients must be 
treated with dignity and respect, their consumer rights upheld and their financial well-being 
protected.  The  regulators  must  act  as  the  “honest  broker”  between  the  clients  and  the 
financial  institutions.  In  addition,  we  should  also  make  the  deliberate  decision  to  provide 
financial education to financial inclusion clients with the view of anticipated positive returns 
over the long-run. 
Finally,  the  changes  that  increased  financial  inclusion  brings  calls  for  greater  coordination 
among  regulators.  Coordination  could  positively  help  harmonize  regulations,  address 
regulatory gaps and level the playing field. 
Financial Inclusion as a Policy Priority 
Mindful therefore of these risks but also aware of the benefits that financial inclusion offers, 
can there be too much financial inclusion? Is financial inclusion a worthy policy objective to 
pursue? 
My response here would have to be – that as in all things, there must be balance. (Like in the 
fairy tale Goldilocks – not too hot, not too cold… not too big, not too small…. but just right!) 
To achieve such balance, there should only be financial inclusion, to the extent that there is 
sufficient quality capacity to supervise. There should only be financial inclusion to the extent 
that the players can be properly incentivized and are able to process financial information. 
There  should  only  be  financial  inclusion  to  the  extent  that  the  regulator  is  able  to  provide 
adequate financial consumer protection. When these conditions are present, we can say we 
have responsible financial inclusion. 
Clearly, this balance would have to be jurisdiction-specific. But a common framework and a 
set of working principles for implementation could be derived. The framework and principles 
could  then  be  the  bases  for  closer  dialogue  among  stakeholders,  including  central  banks, 
other regulators, the standard setting bodies and the private sector. 
Much  has  already  been  done  to  bring  us  closer  to  that  common  understanding  of  these 
things. But much remains. 
In  this  dynamic  and  ever  evolving  pursuit  of  financial  inclusion,  we  must  continue  to 
strengthen  our  evidence  base  to  inform  our  policies,  stay  abreast  with  developments  and 
ensure that our actions remain relevant, constantly challenge and question our positions if 
only to ascertain that they are the right ones. 
I believe this conference can largely contribute to this important exercise. 
The work of pushing forward responsible financial inclusion is huge. And it is important that 
the pursuit of financial inclusion would not be to the detriment of other policy objectives. 
Hopefully,  after  today,  we  have  more  clarity  in  what  we  need  to  do  as  central  bankers. 
Central  banks  who  believe  that  a  strong  and  stable  economy  and  financial  system  is  only 
truly relevant if it benefits the majority of our population. 
On that note, I look forward to our discussions in the next day and a half. Thank you for your 
attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
