  Mario Draghi: Participation of the President in the Portuguese Council of 
State 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Portuguese Council of State, Lisbon, 7 April 2016. 
 President of the Republic, 
President of the Assembly of the Republic, 
Prime Minister, 
President of the Constitutional Court, 
Honourable Members of the Council of State, 
I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss with you today the state of the euro area and the 
changes that still lie ahead of us and I would like to thank the President of the Republic for 
inviting me. 
On my way here I passed by the Tejo river and the tower of Belém. The place where five 
centuries ago the first maritime explorers set sail for often uncharted waters, looking for new 
opportunities. 
Portugal and its people have also been going through uncharted waters and facing important 
challenges  in  recent  years,  as  has  the  rest  of  Europe.  During  the  past  couple  of  years, 
economic headwinds have swept through Portugal and the euro area at large. However, we 
are seeing signs of recovery. 
Nevertheless, important challenges remain as the euro area continues to be weighed down 
by  low  potential  growth  and  high  structural  unemployment.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will 
consider the state of the euro area recovery, the role of monetary policy and finally the steps 
needed to strengthen the euro area and the EU. 
The state of the euro area 
The euro area recovery is currently proceeding at a moderate pace. It is supported by our 
monetary policy measures and their impact on financial market conditions, as well as by the 
low  price  of  energy.  Yet,  investment  across  the  continent  remains  weak,  as  heightened 
uncertainties  about  the  global  economy  and  broader  geopolitical  risks  are  weighing  on 
investor sentiment. 
The recovery is also taking hold in Portugal: its economy is currently growing at the same 
pace as the euro area as a whole and unemployment is on a clear downward trend. 
Yet,  the  signs  of  the  euro  area  and  Portuguese  economic  recovery  should  not  be  an 
indication that we can rest on our laurels. The euro area as a whole only just managed last 
year to return to the levels of economic activity seen before the crisis and some countries, 
among them Portugal, are still not there. And our economies are still marked by significant 
vulnerabilities  which  need  to  be  swiftly  addressed.  One  key  issue  in  this  respect  is  youth 
unemployment,  as  it  prevents  young  people  from  playing  a  full  and  meaningful  part  in 
society. Indeed, despite being the best-educated generation ever, today’s young are paying 
a high price for the crisis. In Portugal, still now, around one-third of the young workforce is 
without  job.  This  seriously  harms  the  economy,  because  these  people  who  are  willing  but 
unable  to  work  are  being  prevented  from  developing  their  skills.  To  avoid  creating  a  “lost 
generation” we need to act quickly. 
Issues such as this illustrate clearly that the current economic recovery needs to be further 
supported by policymakers taking decisive action. In this respect, all actors need to play their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  role and European institutions must do so as well by delivering on the objectives that have 
been assigned to them as part of their mandates. 
The ECB did not hesitate to act in this regard. To preserve price stability, we have adopted 
an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  without  precedent  and  the  ECB  has  and  will 
continue to do whatever is needed to comply with its mandate. We have solid evidence that 
the  monetary  policy  measures  that  we  have  taken  since  mid-2014  are  being  effective  in 
delivering  their  intended  impact.  We  are  finding  that  our  policy  measures  have  been 
instrumental in providing better financing conditions and addressing financial fragmentation 
across  euro  area  countries.  From  May  2014  to  February  2016,  interest  rates  on  loans 
declined significantly inside the euro area, when considering the average: by 92 basis points 
for  non-financial  corporations  and  by  72  basis  points  for  households.  The  effect  has  been 
even stronger in Portugal, with bank lending rates for non-financial firms falling by nearly 200 
basis points over the same horizon. For households rates came down by 125 basis points. 
The  improved funding  conditions for  both firms and  households  are supporting the  current 
recovery, facilitating job creation and affecting the inflation outlook. 
However, our decisions have also helped to maintain trust in the single currency in times of 
financial  instability  and  high  uncertainty,  as,  among  others,  public  confidence  shows. 
According  to  Eurobarometer  data,  trust  in  the  euro  is  virtually  unchanged  compared  to  its 
pre-crisis level. While doubts increased in Portugal at the beginning of the crisis, we even 
see a solid strengthening of trust in our common currency in the last couple of years, again 
suggesting that our monetary policy measures have been effective. 
The measures we announced on 10 March 2016 will further contribute to achieving our aim 
of price stability. Of course, it will take time for these latest measures to start working their 
way through the economy and delivering their full benefits. Nevertheless, they constitute a 
substantial package which gives priority to loans for households and businesses, thus further 
supporting economic activity in the euro area. They underline our determination to fulfil the 
mandate entrusted to us, namely to bring inflation back to below, but close to, 2%. These 
measures also show we have no shortage of tools available. 
However, the ECB cannot single-handedly create the conditions for a sustainable recovery in 
growth. Our policies can support a cyclical recovery, but they cannot by themselves remove 
structural impediments to growth. This requires a concerted effort in terms of economic and 
fiscal policies. In many countries of the euro area, current fiscal space to support growth is 
limited. We should avoid the fiscal rules being stretched to a point where they lose credibility. 
In the case of Portugal, we welcome the fact that the Commission found that the 2016 draft 
budgetary  plan  was  not  in  particularly  serious  non-compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. And we welcome the commitments of the Portuguese authorities 
to  prepare  additional  measures  which  could  be  implemented  when  needed  to  ensure 
compliance. 
There is however scope for all countries to step up the efforts to make the composition of 
their  tax  structure  and  spending  more  growth-friendly  and,  among  other  things,  to  redirect 
public spending towards investment, research and education. 
Regarding  economic  policies,  without  the  active  role  of  national  governments  and 
parliaments to steadily improve the competitiveness of the euro area economy, we will not be 
able to raise potential growth and reduce structural unemployment. And I would add that the 
conditions  in  recent  years  were  never  as  supportive  as  they  are  today  for  jump-starting 
structural  reforms  that  ease  the  way  firms  do  business,  improve  productivity  and  lay  the 
foundations for a more sustainable recovery. 
All  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  have  already  been  working  hard  to  reform  their 
economies  in  the  past  few  years.  Portugal’s  reform  efforts  were  in  this  regard  both 
remarkable and necessary. We now see clear signs that these remarkable efforts are paying 
off  here  and  elsewhere.  Just  to  name  a few  examples:  buoyant  employment growth  since 
2014  suggests  that  labour  market  reforms  are  making  the  economy  more  adaptable.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  improved conditions for doing business or the reduced port operating costs are two out of a 
long list of measures which have enhanced the competitiveness of this country. Moreover, 
educational  reforms  are  bearing  fruit  as  well,  with  the  rate  of  early  school  leavers  having 
almost  halved  since  2009.  However,  all  reforms  take  time  to  yield  results.  This  is  true  for 
Member States across the Union, large and small. 
There is no case for unravelling past reforms. In addition to upholding past achievements, 
further  reform  efforts  are  needed  across  the  euro  area,  as  outlined  in  the  2015  country-
specific  recommendations,  which  each  year  identify  key  objectives  in  tackling  remaining 
vulnerabilities and rigidities. It is only through such reforms that we can avoid a build-up of 
new  imbalances  and  bring  growth  rates  back  to  levels  that  ensure  prosperity  and  allow 
households and Member States to grow out of their debt. 
Improving  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market  remains  key  in  this  respect,  with  a  view  to 
ensuring a rapid adaptation to shocks or structural change. This area remains an important 
challenge  in  Portugal,  as  also  mentioned  in  the  2015  country-specific  recommendations. 
Taking  further  action  is  all  the  more  important,  with  high  unemployment,  according  to  the 
latest Eurobarometer, being considered the main concern to the people of Portugal. But we 
also  need  reforms  that encourage firms  to  invest. Investment raises  both  supply  tomorrow 
and  demand  today.  Such  reforms  include  measures  that  further  improve  the  business 
environment.  However,  investment  could  also  be  helped  by  addressing the  corporate debt 
overhang. For instance, increasing the efficiency of debt restructuring tools could disburden 
still viable companies and thereby facilitate their investment plans. 
The  European  Semester,  in  which  these  country-specific  recommendations  have  been 
issued, should be a good framework to push for such a new effort. However, the country-
specific reform recommendations, as just indicated by the Commission, have so far hardly or 
not at all been acted upon by Member States. Stepping up the reform momentum is therefore 
essential.  In  this  respect,  I  have  noted  with  great  interest  that  you  will  be  discussing  the 
National  Reform  Programme  later  today.  Indeed,  greater  ownership  not  only  by  national 
governments, but also by parliaments and bodies such as this one would be crucial for the 
European Semester to gain more traction and yield better results. 
Making economic and monetary union work in the long run 
These are efforts that should be undertaken by countries individually. But there is also work 
to  be  done  collectively.  Most  importantly,  governments  should  work  towards  completing 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). EMU remains an incomplete construction. And while 
steps have been taken to strengthen the economic governance framework and to make our 
financial  markets  safer,  this  incompleteness  amplified  the  effects  of  policy  mistakes  in  the 
run-up to the crisis and continues to leave EMU fragile and its Member States vulnerable to 
shocks. 
In  principle,  we  know  where  the  weak  spots  in  our  construction  are.  The  Five  Presidents’ 
Report provides a road map on how to correct them by way of risk reduction and risk sharing, 
both as regards the financial sector and as regards economic and fiscal policies. 
It is now up to political leaders to fill this road map with life. I am aware that at the moment 
much  of  the  political  attention  lies  elsewhere.  But  we  should  not  forget  that  a  stable  and 
sound economy is a vital precondition to be able to tackle challenges in all other policy areas; 
therefore, making EMU function in the long run is not a luxury – it is a necessity for Europe to 
flourish. 
Thank you for your attention; I am now looking forward to our debate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
