  Jacqueline Loh: Talent development in the financial sector 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of  Singapore,  at 
International  Women’s  Day 
Celebration, Singapore, 8 March 2016. 
the  Financial  Women’s  Association’s 
 Good afternoon. Thank you for the opportunity to celebrate International Women’s 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
Day with you. 
2. 
As  a  part  of  the  leadership  team  in  MAS  overseeing  manpower  issues  for  the 
financial sector, the topic of talent development and continuing professional development is 
something  that  is  close  to  my  heart.  I  am  very  heartened  by  the  Financial  Women’s 
Association’s cause to promote and advance the standard of professionalism, especially of 
women,  in  the  financial  services  industry.  Your  passion  in  the  work  that  you  do  is  truly 
inspiring, and I believe many women in the industry greatly appreciate the opportunity which 
FWA provides – like what your President Catherine Low said- “a platform that successfully 
educates,  edifies,  and  encourages,  allowing  members  to  not  only  “take”  but  also  “give”, 
through FWA’s mentorship programs and charity activities”. 
Gender parity 
3. 
McKinsey  Global  Institute’s  2015  study  on  “The  Power  of  Parity”  estimated  that 
advancing women’s equality can add $12 trillion USD to growth worldwide. Our region (East 
and  Southeast  Asia,  excluding  China)  alone  stands  to  gain  $900bn  in  incremental  GDP. 
Within this region, Singapore is the fastest improving country – we are notably closing the 
gender gap in labour participation at a rate of 1.1 percentage points a year. 
4. 
The  Singapore  Diversity  Action  Committee  found  that  the  SGX-listed  companies 
saw  10.2%  of  board  seats  held  by  women  in  2015,  a  notable  increase  from  7.6%  in  the 
previous  year;  with  large  companies  leading  the  growth.  However,  if  we  compare  to  other 
centres like the UK and Hong Kong, the women’s representation on boards is 26.1% and a 
slightly higher 11.5% respectively. 
5. 
The  FWA  Gender  Survey,  results  for  which  will  be  discussed  in  depth  later, 
corroborates these findings. While we are heartened that the women participation numbers 
are healthy at the lower levels, we need to remain focused on encouraging the contribution of 
women at all levels, and especially at the more senior positions. 
Singapore’s greatest asset is its people, and developing talent must be a top priority. 
6. 
In MAS, we place great emphasis on talent development, progression and retention in 
the  industry.  You  may  know  that  we  have  recently  formed  the  Financial  Sector  Tripartite 
Committee  (FSTC),  which  I  co-chair  with  Mr  Patrick  Tay,  Assistant  Secretary-General, 
National  Trades  Union  Congress  (NTUC).  FSTC  brings  together the  industry  associations, 
government and labour movement, to foster a financial sector workforce that is versatile and 
well-equipped  to  seize  the  opportunities  and  adapt  to  the  changing  needs  of  the  financial 
services industry. Our overall objective is to build a financial sector that not only reinforces 
Singapore’s position as a major international financial centre, but most importantly, one that 
provides good jobs for Singaporeans. 
7. 
8. 
potential. 
Allow me to elaborate on our approach. 
First, strengthening talent development for individuals to achieve their fullest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    MAS works in close partnership with the industry to provide training pathways and 
training opportunities for Singaporean finance professionals. The pursuit of continual 
learning  related  to  financial  sector  competencies  will  help  each  and  every  one  to 
attain mastery in their respective fields and achieve their fullest potential. 
MAS  has  a  range  of  schemes  to  support  the  learning  journey  at  all  levels,  from 
undergraduates and fresh graduates, to early/mid-career professionals, and to those 
in leadership positions. We have prepared a “SkillsFuture for the Financial Sector” 
infographic that you can find at your table which provides more information on these 
schemes. 
9. 
For  example,  under  the  Finance  Scholarship  Programme  (FSP),  MAS  supports 
early-mid  career  Singaporeans  in  developing  specialist  capabilities  through  post-graduate 
studies,  in  areas  such  as  risk  management,  speciality  insurance  and  quantitative  finance. 
The  recently  launched  Financial  Sector  SkillsFuture  Study  Award  will  also  provide  an 
additional  channel  of  support  to  enable  individuals  to  upgrade  their  skills  through  a  wider 
range of specialist programmes. 
and 
10. 
international exposure is a key ingredient in building up leaders. We want to ensure that 
there  are  Singaporean  professionals  taking  up  leadership  positions  in  the  key  financial 
institutions. So MAS works with many financial institutions to develop programmes for their 
Singaporean professionals, for example, by enabling them to take up cross-functional roles, 
such  as  via  finance  associate  management  programs,  or  to  take  international  postings  for 
better exposure1. Last year, we launched the Asian Financial Leaders Programme, aimed at 
equipping  senior  financial  sector  professionals  who  are  on  the  path  to  leading  financial 
institutions in a variety of sectors including banking, insurance, asset management, private 
equity  etc,  with  the  knowledge  and  capabilities  to  operate  effectively  across  diverse 
business, regulatory and legal environments. 
Third, retention of skilled and trained professionals in the industry. MAS has 
11. 
been working closely with financial institutions to ensure fair and equitable treatment for all 
employees. For example: 
• 
competency-based 
Second,  beyond 
cross-functional 
training, 
We  work  with  financial  institutions  to  ensure  HR  policies  are  non-discriminatory, 
regardless of gender, race, or age 
While we provide for specialist skills in areas of need, professionals will also need 
sufficient breadth of skills to be flexible and resilient in times of change. This means 
pre-emptively identifying the key jobs that are evolving, and developing structured 
training pathways. We must also identify new cross-functional competencies that are 
needed across different areas of finance, such as data analytics and digital banking. 
These  initiatives  will  help  to  facilitate  more  seamless  transitions  within  their 
organization.  With  these  structured  training  pathways  in  place,  professionals 
amongst  us,  particularly  females  who  may  need  to  take  time  out  from  work,  can 
reskill and re-enter the workforce more seamlessly. 
We also want to partner with financial institutions to create a working environment 
that is conducive to accommodate changes, be it in life-cycles or lifestyles, so that 
employees  can  manage  demands  better,  both  at  work  and  from  home.  It  is 
heartening  to  note  that  many  financial  institutions  are  offering  flexible  work 
arrangements, 
and 
teleconferencing, as well as mentors, who can lend a helping hand, providing that 
needed uplift and moral support. 
flexible  working 
telecommuting 
including 
hours, 
                                                  
1  These are done under the Finance Associate Management Scheme (FAMS) and the International Postings 
Programme (iPOST). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12. 
Our  collaborative  efforts  in  developing  talent  in  the  financial  sector  will  allow 
individuals  opportunities  to  continually  develop  themselves  and  chart  their  own  career 
progression, from students to mid-career professionals to leaders within the sector. 
Working hand-in-hand with FWA 
13. 
Our  efforts  will  be  more  effective  and  achieve  greater  success  with  the  help  of 
industry professionals like yourselves. Given the strong network FWA has established, you 
are well placed to play an important role in ensuring equal opportunity for all. I would like to 
touch  on  three  areas  in  which  I  see  tremendous  potential  to  harness  the  collective 
experience and wisdom of the FWA. 
14. 
My views are also shaped by personal experiences building my career in MAS, the 
challenges and trade-offs that I have had to strike in balancing family and career, reflecting 
on what would have been helpful for me then, and considering what can make a meaningful 
difference for the professionals in our sector today. 
15. 
Firstly,  in  encouraging  a  broadening  of  horizons  via  overseas  postings.  Over  the 
years, business leaders have consistently given feedback that our promising finance sector 
professionals lack regional and international experience and that Singaporeans, in particular, 
display greater resistance in taking on such assignments. In an international financial centre 
like Singapore, the exposure gleaned in this part of the learning journey is extremely useful 
and important for progression to the higher rungs of the corporate ladder. This is because 
overseas  exposure  provides  the  breadth  of  perspectives  expected  of  global  and  regional 
management roles. This dilemma unfortunately affects women to a greater extent, as many 
have  chosen  to  or  may  have  felt  the  need  to  turn  down  these  opportunities  due  to  family 
commitments, spouses’ careers, or children’s education needs. How can we encourage more 
to embrace these opportunities, and better balance competing priorities? 
It is never an easy decision – and that is where a support network such as FWA is 
16. 
valued. I do not know the percentages, but I would hazard a guess that many of you have 
had overseas stints, be in in the region or beyond. And for those who have, I am sure that it 
has been a rewarding and enriching experience. I myself had the wonderful opportunity to 
work  in  MAS’  NYO  for  about  4  years,  and  today,  I  strongly  urge  my  young  colleagues  to 
consider a posting overseas. 
17. 
In  your  own  capacities,  you  can  contribute  significantly  to  mentoring  and  advising 
professionals  in  the  financial  sector,  sharing  with  them  your  own  personal  experiences  of 
how  you  have  overcome  challenges,  and  flourished  from  such  opportunities.  Overseas 
postings need not be a daunting and alienating choice. It can be an enriching opportunity, not 
just for the professional, but his/ her loved ones and family. 
Another area where I see tremendous opportunity for FWA is in helping women in 
18. 
the financial sector better balance between career and family. It is not uncommon for women 
to take time off after having a baby, especially in the early childhood years. Increasingly, we 
have to also take longer periods of time off for caring of aged parents. Re-assimilation into 
the  workforce  will  be  an  increasing  challenge, given  the  fast  evolving  pace  of  the  industry 
and the winds of change brought on by technology. 
19. 
MAS,  together  with  NTUC,  ABS,  IBF,  the  Singapore  Workforce  Development 
Agency (WDA), will launch a Financial Industry Career Advisory Centre (FiCAC) in April that 
will provide guidance to those keen to join the financial industry as well as those looking to 
move to new jobs within the industry. FiCAC will also organise talks on job opportunities in 
the  financial  sector.  These  will  help  affected  professionals,  including  women  and  working 
mothers, to find jobs suitable for their skills. We believe that industry professionals such as 
yourselves will be able to make significant contributions towards this initiative, and we urge 
you to participate in any way that you can. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  20. 
As  leaders  in  your  respective  companies,  we  hope  that  you  will  be  welcoming  to 
those looking to rejoin the industry, and acknowledge the experience that these professionals 
bring to the table. 
21. 
Thirdly, given the challenging environment in financial services, it is more important 
than  ever  for  employees  to  take  charge  of  their  own  learning,  careers,  and  development. 
Each of you can do much to encourage and institute training initiatives in your company, and 
to allow more time for employees to pursue further education in their specialisations. We look 
to  FWA  to  continue  being  that  strong  influence  in  encouraging  professionals  to  pursue 
continual rejuvenation, both in terms of skills and mindsets. 
Celebrating successes 
22. 
I  am  glad  to  say  that  many  financial  institutions  are  with  us  in  the  journey  of 
developing talent in the sector. In fact, a number of them are institutional members of FWA, 
who not only are close partners with us in building a strong manpower pipeline, but are also 
especially supportive of nurturing female talents. 
23. 
For instance, Barclays, our host today, is the first bank in the world to join the United 
Nations  initiative,  HeForShe,  which  promotes  gender  parity  in  corporations.  Their  many 
initiatives  include  “Women  of  the  Year”  programmes  to  recognise  female  employees  for 
outstanding  success,  as  well  as  their  Women’s  Initiative  Network  (WIN)  which  provides  a 
supportive platform for sharing and engagement among Barclays employees worldwide. 
24. 
Amongst  us,  there  are  many  women  leaders  who  have  blazed  the  trail  in  the 
industry.  The  moderator  for  today’s  panel  discussion,  Deborah  Ho,  has  had  an  illustrious 
career with financial institutions in Asia and New York and is an IBF Fellow. Deborah serves 
on  the  committees  of  Barclays’  Global  Investment  Bank  Diversity  Council  and  Women’s 
Initiative Network. She is also Barclays’ representative on BoardAgender. 
25. 
way and for being a role model. 
The list goes on and thank you each and every one of you, for inspiring in your own 
Closing remarks 
26. 
It is critical for us to diversify our workforce, especially since it has been shown over 
and  over  again  that  the  best  performing  organisations  are  those  who  tap  on  all  of  their 
employees’  talents,  both  men  and  women  alike.  In  fact,  according  to  another  McKinsey 
report,  gender-diverse  companies  are  15%  more  likely  to  outperform  their  non-diverse 
counterparts.2 
27. 
We  must  do  more  in  our  own  capacity  to  promote  and  encourage  talent 
development in the financial sector, being an inspiration in our own way. Not simply for the 
benefit of employers, but to allow every individual an equal opportunity to pursue their goals 
and dreams, and strive for their best. For the modern woman, and indeed all of us present 
here, there is no reason why we cannot have it all. 
28. 
Thank you. 
I  look  forward  to  listening  to  everyone’s  views  during  the  panel  discussion  later. 
                                                
2  McKinsey Research, “Diversity Matters”. Released in February 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
