  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Pursuing financial stability thru innovations in 
cheque clearing and settlement 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of the Memorandum of Agreement between 
BSP  and  the  Philippine  Clearing  House  Corporation  (PCHC)  to  implement  the  Check 
Imaging Clearing System, Manila, 12 July 2016. 
  Introduction 
We gather this afternoon to formalize a milestone in Philippine banking. Many may think that 
clearing and settlement as a whole is a facet of market operations best left to specialists who 
think of floats, talk in timelines and manage queues. This is partially true since this field is 
indeed highly specialized. Except perhaps for the brave souls who took on the responsibility 
of  being  on  the  Inter-Agency  Committee  on  Check  Truncation–  the  very  same  set  of 
individuals  whom  we  thank  for  making  this  day  come  to  fruition  –  clearing  and  settlement 
risks are not the discussion one typically enjoys with one’s morning coffee, so to speak. 
Role of clearing and settlement in a dynamic market 
But  the  truth  is  the  rest  of  us  are  able  to  go  on  with  our  business  because  there  is  a 
functioning clearing and settlement process that operates quietly in the background. Whether 
we  talk  of  securities,  currencies  or  cheques,  the  ability  of  market  stakeholders  to  settle 
obligations and transfer funds invariably depends on an efficient payments and settlements 
system. 
The  essentiality  of  the  payments  and  settlement  infrastructure  is  well  recognized.  It  is 
particularly  identified  as  a  key  element  of  what  constitutes  financial  stability.  An  excellent 
example  of  this  thinking  is  the  second  principle  for  financial  stability  espoused  by  Garry 
Schinasi (2004) where he argues that:1 
“...  financial  stability  not  only  implies  that  finance  adequately  fulfills  its  role  in  allocating 
resources and risks, mobilizing savings, and facilitating wealth accumulation, development, 
and  growth;  it  should  also  imply  that  the  systems  of  payment  throughout  the  economy 
function smoothly (across official and private, retail and wholesale, and formal and informal 
payments mechanisms)”. 
It is therefore clear that the payments and settlement infrastructure plays a critical role in a 
dynamic  and  growing  economy.  Stakeholders  need  to  be  assured  that  their  payment 
instructions are faithfully carried out while recipients of the funds must believe that there is 
finality  in  the  transfer  of  such  funds.  This  is  a  pillar  of  business  operations  that  fuels  the 
network  of  transactions  in  the  real  economy.  Absent  this  pillar,  stakeholders  are  literally 
forced  into  bilateral  means  of  settlement  which  take  different  forms  across  different 
counterparties. 
Challenges in the Philippines 
From the BSP’s perspective, we have long recognized the importance of a viable payments 
and settlement system. Although a Payments Act has yet to be legislated in this country, we 
nonetheless  established  an  RTGS  system,  now  known  as  PHILPaSS,  at  the  turn  of  the 
                                                
1   Garry J. Schinasi. “Defining Financial Stability”. IMF Working Paper #187. October 2004. This paper heavily 
influenced the design of and approach for financial stability as applied in the BSP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  century  to  enable  efficient  settlement  of  payment  obligations  in  central  bank  money.  For 
nearly  four  decades  now,  we  have  also  been  collaborating  with  the  PCHC  in  operating  a 
cheque  payment  system,  allowing  both  retail  and  corporate  clients  the  ability  to  settle 
obligations thru a bill of exchange without the need for immediately providing physical cash. 
It is perhaps not common knowledge that PCHC processes about 700,000 cheques ever day 
with an average value of Php135 billion. Certainly, that is an unthinkable amount of cash to 
be carrying around for bilateral and physical settlement if a cheque clearing system was not 
in place. 
But volumes and values aside, our cheque clearing facility must face the unique challenge of 
operating  within  an  archipelagic  economy.2  Clearing  cheques  in  a  physical  manner 
necessitates a clearing cycle that is typically two to three days long. To complicate matters 
further, not every financial institution is a direct clearing participant and having conduits adds 
a  layer  of  time  inefficiencies,  if  not  outright  costs.  Actually,  our  payment  challenge  goes 
beyond  the  issues  associated  with  cheques.  We  should  note  that  in  a  2014  study  by  the 
Better  than  Cash  Alliance,  only  one  percent  of  monthly  retail  transactions  are  done  in 
electronic  form.  This  validates  our  heavy  reliance  on  cash  and  cheques  in  conducting  our 
business.  At  a  time  when  technology  has  become  scalable,  portable  and  affordable,  this 
apparent  reluctance  to  parlay  the  benefits  of  technology  can  only  translate  to  further 
inefficiencies via foregone opportunities. 
Milestone today 
Let  me  be  clear  that  the  BSP  recognizes  that  cheques  will  probably  continue  to  play  an 
important  role  in  the  country’s  payment  system  for  the  foreseeable  future.  But  it  needs  to 
evolve and leverage on technology to improve its efficiency as a payment instrument. 
In signing the Memorandum of Agreement with PCHC today, we are establishing the critical 
foundation for the adoption of check truncation technology. Simply put, we are moving from 
physical clearing of paper cheques to a system that digitizes those same paper checks to 
facilitate their electronic clearing. 
Through  the  Check  Image  Clearing  System  (CICS)  of  the  PCHC,  all  of  our  cheques  are 
targeted to be cleared in a fully electronic environment starting January 6, 2017. For those of 
us who really are not specialists in this area, if there is one take away from this development, 
it has to be the fact that funds will now be made available by next day at the latest. 
Cheques we issue to our family, friends and business partners in various parts of the country 
will now enjoy near real-time finality of payment. This will have a number of benefits. It will be 
good for those receiving funds. It will be good for managing the balances of those who issue 
the  cheques.  It  better  aligns  payments  data  with  money  supply  aggregates.  And  since 
cheque  data  are  transmitted  electronically,  we  necessarily  eliminate  transport  risks  on  the 
physical  cheques.  We  likewise  address  consumer  protection  issues  that  arise  when  our 
cheques are either pilfered and/or altered to benefit those with ill-motives. 
The Journey ahead. 
On  the  whole,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  what  we  formalize  today  is  a  win-win  for  all 
stakeholders.  It  is  an  important  step  in  that  we  strengthen  our  cheque  clearing  system  by 
leveraging on the advantages that technology can provide. In the process, there is uniform 
handling regardless of whether the issuer is in Metro Manila or other parts of the archipelago. 
                                                
2  
In the region, the only other jurisdiction in this situation is Indonesia. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The settlement leg of this development will certainly still go thru the BSP via PhilPaSS. On 
that front, you can expect that the BSP will continue to improve its real time gross settlement 
system. You can also expect other payment reforms that ensure financial stability. 
Beyond  an  efficient  cheque  clearing  system,  we  are  committed  to  promoting  the 
modernization  of  our  payment  system  through  projects  like  the  National  Retail  Payment 
System (NRPS) and other payments innovation projects to put in place secure, efficient, and 
affordable electronic payment platforms to drive  the growth of trade and commerce. If you 
think about it, we are embarking on an infrastructure initiative no less ambitious than building 
roads, bridges, airports, seaports, and telecommunications facilities. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we may not all be clearing and settlement specialists but we certainly 
are all stakeholders in a vibrant financial market that runs on efficient and secure payment 
systems.  With  this  latest  development,  maybe…  just  maybe…  we  are  on  the  road  to 
including payments and settlement issues in our morning coffee discussions. Congratulations 
to all. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
