  Yves Mersch: Monetary policy in the euro area – scope, principles and 
limits 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Natixis Meeting of Chief Economists, Paris, 23 June 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The past few years, not to speak of present days, have been challenging ones for central 
banks  worldwide,  and  the  euro  area  has  been  no  exception.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
decisions  have  come  under  greater  scrutiny  than  ever  before.  Some  commentators  have 
argued that the ECB does not have sufficient tools to counter deflationary pressures in the 
euro area. Others contend that by using a wider range of instruments than in normal times, 
the ECB has exceeded its remit. 
Neither  view  is  correct.  Our  Statute  allows  us  to  use  a  wide  range  of  tools  to  meet  our 
mandate, and those tools are sufficient for that purpose. 
But it is correct that there are limits on how far monetary policy can go. The ECB cannot, will 
not, and need not exceed these limits. Our framework requires that unconventional tools are 
used for  no  longer than  necessary,  and  no  more  intensively  than  necessary. Within these 
limits we independently decide on how best to comply with our price stability mandate. 
Today, all major central banks have clear price stability mandates and can discharge them 
with  a  large  measure  of  independence.  In  the  ECB’s  case,  our  price  stability  mandate  is 
enshrined  in  the  Treaty,1  and  we  have  been  given  “instrument”  independence  in  how  we 
carry it out. We cannot decide whether we achieve our objective – we have to obey the law – 
but we can decide how we do so. 
This position has been confirmed by the European Court of Justice, which ruled that the ECB 
can  deploy  any  available  instrument  which  is  explicitly  mentioned  in  the  Statute to  ensure 
price stability. But the discretion we have over how we use our instruments, though wide, is 
not unlimited “whatever it takes” is qualified by “within our mandate”. Independence must not 
be confused with arbitrariness. 
The  Treaties  also  set  out  a  number  of  restrictions  and  principles  that  guide  our  monetary 
policy. There are three in particular that stand out. 
First  is  the  prohibition  on  monetary  financing  laid  down  in  Article  123,  which  prevents  the 
central bank from taking actions which would directly finance government spending. 
We are prohibited from monetary financing for good reasons. If a central bank systematically 
finances government budgets, it can fall prey to so-called “fiscal dominance” and fail its price 
stability mandate. That is because, when inflation starts to rise, the central bank is in a lose-
lose situation: it can either continue financing the deficit and risk overshooting its objective, or 
it  can  refuse  to  finance  the  deficit  and  risk  a  deflationary  government  default.  But  if  the 
central bank is ex ante forbidden by law from monetary financing, the incentives are stronger 
for governments to run sound fiscal policies in the first place – and the independence of the 
central  bank  is  preserved.  “Monetary  dominance”  prevails  over  “fiscal  dominance”.  Fiscal 
soundness  is  an  essential  feature  of  a  monetary  union  with  a  single  monetary  policy  and 
national fiscal policies are necessary even if we were to achieve a fiscal union. 
What  is  more  –  and  this  is  specific  to  the  euro  area  –  monetary  financing  could  imply  a 
redistribution of wealth among Member States, thus undermining the spirit of the “no bailout 
                                                
1   Article 127.1, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
clause”  (Art.  125  TFEU).  If  the  central  bank  were  to  facilitate  a  regime  of  unsound  fiscal 
policies  and  inflationary  government  deficits,  it  would  inevitably  expose  itself  to  losses  – 
either  real  losses  through  the  inflation  tax,  or  nominal  losses  through  a  reduction  in  the 
principal amounts it was owed. That would be tantamount to deliberate fiscal redistribution 
between  different  sets  of  taxpayers  via  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet,  which  is  not 
permissible in a monetary union that is not a fiscal union. In other words, the prohibition of 
monetary financing is the monetary counterpart of the “no bailout clause”. 
Second  are  the  principles  of  judicial  control:  principle  of  conferral  and  principle  of 
proportionality laid down in Article 5, which requires that our actions are limited to what is 
essential to achieve the objectives of the Treaties. Specifically, this means that our measures 
need to be suitable, necessary and proportionate stricto sensu.2  
For an instrument to be suitable, it needs to be able to address the respective risk to price 
stability. For an instrument to be necessary, we must lack a viable alternative instrument. For 
an  instrument  to  be proportionate  stricto  sensu,  its  expected  benefits  should  outweigh  its 
costs. 
Third  is  the  requirement  to  act  according  to  the  principle  of  an  open  market  economy 
favouring an efficient allocation of resources.3 
All monetary policy measures have allocative and distributive effects. Cutting interest rates, 
for  example,  has  a  redistributive  impact  on  savers  and  borrowers,  since  it  encourages 
borrowing  and  discourages  saving.  Moreover,  in  certain  situations  –  for  instance  a  panic-
induced freeze in interbank markets – central bank intermediation may be critical to restore 
market functioning and support an efficient allocation of resources. But this must always be 
embedded in the understanding, which underpins the Treaty, that general markets distribute 
resources more efficiently than public authorities, and hence central bank actions should not 
blunt  price  signals  or  overwhelm  market forces. Indeed,  central  banks  should  be  marginal 
actors,  steering  marginal  decisions,  not  resource  allocation  mechanisms.  That  has  to  be 
reflected in the design and implementation of our monetary policy tools. 
In  the  pre-crisis  period,  when  we  used  conventional  measures,  i.e.  interest  rate  policy, 
nobody  had  doubts  that  it  was  straightforward  for  us  to  respect  these  three  operating 
principles set out in the Treaty: 
• 
By mainly implementing our policy through refinancing operations with commercial 
banks, we were not accused of monetary financing. 
Our  track  record  shows  that  raising  and  lowering  rates  was  effective  to  maintain 
price stability. 
And  though  all  monetary  policy,  including  interest  rate  policy,  has  allocative  and 
distributive effects, those effects were contained and predictable. 
  Our recent monetary policy measures respect the law 
Since the onset of the crisis, however, we have had to adopt new, unconventional tools to 
fulfil our mandate  – and this has naturally brought the question of the scope and limits of 
monetary policy more to the fore. Clearly, restricting ourselves only to the instruments used 
in  normal  times  would  have  been  a  breach  of  our  mandate.  It  could  have  had  disastrous 
consequences  for  the  euro  area  economy,  and  threatened  our  ability  to  achieve  price 
stability. But that does not imply the reverse  – i.e. that every  conceivable tool would have 
been justified. 
                                                
2   Article 5 (4), Treaty on European Union. 
3   Article 127.1, TFEU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In line with our mandate, we have used a broad range of our instrument independence to 
confront downside risks to inflation and achieve price stability. But equally, we have deployed 
only tools that are in line with our legal framework. And that has been possible because we 
have  specifically  designed  our  instruments  so  as  not  to  exceed  the  three  limits  I  outlined. 
Take our asset purchase programme (APP) – which includes both public and private sector 
bonds – as an example. 
First,  the  APP  respects  the  prohibition  on  monetary  financing,  since  we  have  placed  a 
number of safeguards on our interventions. 
We do not buy government bonds in the primary market, which is explicitly forbidden under 
Article  123.  And  neither  do  we  act  in  the  secondary  market  in  a  way  which  could  be 
perceived as equivalent to acting in the primary market. The Eurosystem has put in place a 
blackout  period,  and  so  does  not  buy  in  periods  around  the  date  of  a  new  issuance. 
Purchases are also subject to an issue share limit and an issuer limit. These limits ensure 
that we would not constitute a blocking minority for collective action clauses if such clauses 
were ever triggered. The European Court of Justice explicitly highlighted these limits when 
deciding upon the lawfulness of our actions. 
Second, it is proportionate, in the sense that it is both necessary and suitable to secure our 
price stability objective. 
As short-term interest rates move closer to their effective lower bound, it inevitably becomes 
harder for central banks to steer the economy by means of conventional policy. So if inflation 
is too low for too long – as is the risk in the euro area today – other tools become necessary. 
Two years ago, the Governing Council introduced several non-standard measures to unclog 
the transmission mechanism and avoid a credit crunch. We coined these measures “credit 
easing package”. 
In  January  last  year,  we  finally  opted  for  large-scale  asset  purchases  when  faced  with  a 
period of weak growth, when already low inflation rates were falling further and we saw risks 
of inflation expectations destabilising. Like our previous measures, these purchases belong 
to the category of credit easing. 
To fulfil our mandate we need to make use of all instruments at our disposal. The APP is a 
suitable  tool  because  it  acts  directly  on  financing  costs  in  the  real  economy.  Rather  than 
attempting to boost the economy only through the short end of the curve, it directly lowers 
yields at longer maturities, decreasing them by compressing the term premium, which in turn 
influences the cost of credit for firms and households. 
Third,  we  have  designed  the  programme  to  limit  distortions  in  relative  prices  which  might 
have unwanted allocative and distributional consequences. 
With  our  government  bond  purchases  we  “mirror  the  market”,  which  means  that  our 
interventions are spread across issuers from the various euro area countries on the basis of 
the ECB’s capital key.  Together with the issuer limits, this ensures breathing space within 
and across markets for efficient price discovery. Indeed, even though yields are very low for 
certain sovereign issuers, issuers have been able to place new securities in the market in 
large volumes, which suggests that liquidity has not been materially affected by our actions. 
Thus the most difficult part of our programme is our corporate bond purchases, since they 
extend  into  less  liquid  markets  and  increase  the  risk  of  distortions  in  relative  prices  –  in 
particular  between  larger  and  smaller  firms.  But  our  activities  cannot  be  evaluated  in 
separation; they must be judged in a holistic manner. Indeed, up to now the decline in bank 
lending  rates  for  small  loans  to  euro  area  companies  –  which  are  mainly  for  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  –  has  been  stronger  than  for  large  loans  to  bigger 
companies. This suggests that bank lending conditions have improved disproportionately for 
euro area SMEs since the announcement of our credit easing measures two years ago. As a 
result, fewer SMEs are reporting that credit has been a limiting factor for their businesses. 
This  should  only  continue  as  our  measures  are  fully  rolled  out  and  reach  their  maximum 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
impact. In other words, the APP, coupled with our other credit easing measures, has reduced 
distortions caused by market fragmentation in the euro area. 
Still, we know that the longer unconventional policy lasts, the greater the risk of distortions 
appearing  and  diminishing  its  effectiveness  over  time.  The  principle  of  proportionality  also 
implies that we should only use such measures for as short a time as is necessary to fulfil 
our mandate. That is why, when the economy improves and inflation returns to our objective, 
we  will  have  to  reassess,  adjust  and  ultimately  phase  out  our  purchase  programmes  and 
other non-standard measures. 
But the surest way to reach that point is to stay true to the course we are on now. If we were 
to change speed or direction too soon, it would only set back the recovery of inflation and 
delay  the  day  that  interest rate  normalisation  can  happen. We  will  decide  upon  this  in full 
independence,  in  the  interests  of  price  stability,  impervious  to  the  wishes  of  any  interest 
group with any partial agenda. 
Other policies can support the speed with which inflation returns to 2% 
Can other policies help in this endeavour? 
In the inflationary days of the 1970s, some central bankers were so hesitant about the scope 
of their responsibility that they let price stability depend on others. For example, in the late 
1970s the then Fed Chairman reported to the FOMC that “inflation is going to be left to the 
Federal Reserve and that’s going to be bad news. An effective program to reduce the rate of 
inflation has to extend beyond monetary policy and needs to be complemented by programs 
designed to enhance competition and to correct structural problems”.4 
But central banks have come a long way over the past half century. Today central banks take 
ownership of their mandates and we do not depend on others. For example, if we were to run 
into headwinds created by other policies, such as necessary fiscal consolidation, we could 
increase  our  policy  stimulus  to  compensate.  But  if  other  policies  undermined  the 
effectiveness  of  our  policy  by  disrupting  or  slowing  down  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism, responding to that scenario would be more difficult. In such a situation we can 
only repeat that the support of other policies would speed up the return of inflation to 2%. 
But this must not be seen as a call for an ex ante policy mix with a monetisation of public 
debt  or  mutualisation  of  debt  via  Eurobonds  under  the  present  Treaty.  This  would  mean 
giving up monetary dominance. 
Rather, economic and institutional policies can help accelerate the impact of our measures. 
Structural reforms can reduce the transmission lag of our policy, since a more flexible, more 
responsive economy is likely to transmit monetary impulses faster. And institutional reforms 
can  reduce  uncertainty  about  the  future  setup  of  the  euro  area,  which  weighs  on 
expectations  and  holds  back  investment.  Indeed,  as  we  can  see  increasingly  in  Europe 
today,  strengthening  confidence  in  the  future  trajectory  of  our  Union  is  perhaps  the  most 
decisive contribution we could make to growth. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The Eurosystem has broad discretion over the tools it can use to deliver its primary objective 
of price stability. That objective guides the decision on which tools to use, and when to use 
them, and defines the boundaries set out in our legal framework. 
                                                
4   Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Transcript, 21 March 1978. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The use of additional tools in recent times reflects the ECB’s commitment to delivering its 
mandate. Such tools have been suitable to achieve our objectives and have been necessary 
to combat deflationary headwinds. 
Still,  we  are  aware  that  –  while  justified  –  our  latest  non-standard  measures  are  on  a 
significant  scale.  This  is  why  our  non-standard  measures  cannot  last  forever.  They  are 
defined as unconventional and not designed for the long term. The goal of these measures is 
that they make themselves redundant. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
