   Vítor Constâncio: Challenges for the European banking industry 
Lecture (full text, delivered in abridged form) by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference  on  “European  Banking  Industry:  what’s  next?”, 
organised by the University of Navarra, Madrid, 7 July 2016. 
The charts can be found at the European Central Bank’s website. 
The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I warmly thank the organisers for inviting me again to this important event in Madrid, where I 
last spoke two years ago, also in the context of the Master in Banking and Financial Regulation 
of the University of Navarra.1 
The future of banking is certainly a very topical subject, particularly after the global financial 
crisis. The 2007–08 episode clearly demonstrated that financial crises, particularly when they 
involve the banking sector, can be enormously expensive both in terms of direct fiscal costs 
and  associated  costs  for  the  real  economy.  Over  the  period  2008–14  accumulated  gross 
financial sector assistance by euro area governments amounted to 8% of euro area GDP, of 
which,  so  far,  around  3%  has  been  recovered.2  Moreover,  the  crisis  induced  the  Great 
Recession and the costs of foregone output have been severe. At the aggregate level, the euro 
area output is now 20% below the level it would have achieved had the trend growth in the 
previous 15 years continued after 2007. Considering that the economy would grow from now 
on at that same trend, the accumulated loss of output until 2030, properly discounted, would 
represent  more  than  three  times  the  whole  output  of  2008.  The  crisis  left  a  permanent 
economic loss with broad scars in our societies. 
In light of these consequences, regulators embarked on an ambitious international regulatory 
reform  programme  after  the  crisis,  which  has  mostly  concentrated  on  making  the  banking 
system safer and more resilient. In this respect, significant progress has been made: in the 
euro area, banks have materially bolstered their capital positions, with the average common 
equity Tier 1 ratio of significant institutions rising to 13% by end-2015 from around 9% in 2012 
and 7% in 2008. 
To  a  large  extent,  challenges  and  transformations  in  the  banking  sector  are  of  a  global 
dimension, even if I will mostly illustrate it with European data. 
The  crisis  was  however  not  the  sole  product  of  banks’  behaviour  but  also  of  the  shadow 
banking sector that expanded rapidly in the run-up to the crisis, forming a new market-based 
credit  system.  There  are  unfortunately  different  concepts  of  shadow  banking  that  add  to 
confusion. One version relates to all credit intermediation done by non-banks; another, more 
relevant approach is not based on entities but encompasses all activities of the new market-
based credit system. This comprises a vast array of financial services, in which banks are also 
involved,  resulting  from  the  expansion  of  securitisation;  of  securities  financing  transactions 
(SFTs), i.e. securities lending and repurchase agreements (repos); of collateral management 
and intermediation; and finally, of risk transformation via transactions using derivative swaps , 
from credit default swaps to interest rate or forex swaps. Several of these activities can be 
conducted by regulated banks or by less regulated institutions. 
These activities became of extreme importance for two reasons.3 First, they contributed to the 
creation of a market-based lending system backed by secured short-term market funding. This 
is the proper concept of shadow banking or what is also called the new market-based credit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   system. Second, these activities originated types of liquidity instruments which are forms of 
money not usually counted in the regular monetary aggregates. 
Several  authors4, 5  designate  this  type  of  activity  as  shadow  banking.  Those  features, 
especially the expansion of credit assets funded with short term securities (e.g. repos or ABCP) 
led to a significant increase in the leverage of the entire finance activity and created chains of 
inside liquidity, including by means of re-use of “repo-ed” securities, phenomena which were 
at  the centre  of  the financial  crisis. The  markets for these  non-deposit short term financial 
liabilities became very large and were crucial for the excessive leverage and the illusion of 
abundant liquidity that led to the crisis. 
The origins of this new credit system are related to the emergence of very sizeable cash pools 
looking for safer places to keep that cash in the short-term than in the form of banks’ uninsured 
deposits.6  Secured  collateral  lending  and  repos  as  well  as  risk  transformation  via  swap 
derivatives (credit, interest rates and forex) were developed for that purpose. Securities lending 
for shorting and generating collateralised levered transactions for asset managers were also 
part of the new system. The activities of re-hypothecation and re-use of securities in the repo 
market  amplified  the  creation  of  chains  of  inside  liquidity  and  high  leverage  with  negative 
consequences  when  haircuts  increased  and  the  repo  market  turned  illiquid  as  the  crisis 
unfolded. 
The international financial regulatory reform has primarily focused on the banking system. It 
has not yet dealt with these new activities in an appropriate way.7  One could even say it has 
aggravated  what  Charles  Goodhart  called  the  “boundary  problem”8,  referring  to  the  gap 
created between the more regulated part of the system, arguably the banks, and other less 
regulated  financial  institutions.  As  he  argues  “If  regulation  is  effective  it  will  constrain  the 
regulated  from  achieving  their  preferred,  unrestricted  position,  often  by  lowering  their 
profitability.” 
A crucial rationale for bank regulation relates to the fact that when they concede credit, banks 
create money by creating a corresponding deposit. This activity that is at the centre or our 
credit-money system, involves a significant liquidity transformation as deposits are much more 
liquid than credits. In a recent book, Mervyn King called this property the “alchemy of banking”9 
and many reforms have been proposed to overcome the fragilities created by banking as we 
know it. I will examine some of them later. 
While not taking in deposits, non-bank entities forming the new financial sector should also be 
subject to some new regulations. There is a need to address vulnerabilities created by the 
expansion  of  leveraged  assets  funded  by  short-term  liabilities  that  play  the  same  role  as 
money. 
Chart 1 illustrates how banks have been decreasing their importance in the whole financial 
system in benefit of other institutions forming the new market-based credit system. In 2008, 
total assets of banks in the euro area stood at EUR 33 trillion and declined to EUR 28 trillion 
at  the  end  of  last  year.  Meanwhile,  assets  of  Money  Market  Funds  and  all  other  types  of 
Investment Funds have increased from EUR 5.6 trillion to 11.4 trillion in 2015, moving from 
17% to 40% of total bank assets. 
The expanded role of capital markets and the market-based credit system with the resulting 
shrinkage  of  the banking  sector  are  not  per se negative  developments. Diversification  and 
competition contribute to enhance efficiency and to lower transaction costs in the financing of 
the economy. Banks too have welcomed the embryonic initiatives of the EU Commission to 
develop a capital markets union in the future. As mentioned previously, banks also participate 
in the new forms of financing and the bigger ones are crucially involved in all the activities 
linked to capital markets, from the issuance to the distribution of securities and trading. On the 
other  hand,  existing  Investment  Funds  are  often  part  of banking groups.  However,  despite 
adjustments in business models, more traditional banks face accrued challenges. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Today, I will argue that banks are under siege but a successful adaptation to the challenges 
they face is key to revive their prospects and their effective contribution to credit intermediation. 
After  all,  one cannot  ignore  the  importance  of  a  stable,  profitable  and  competitive  banking 
sector for sustainable economic growth, even if it is bound to shrink. 
In this lecture, I will first dwell upon the main challenges that banking activity faces in the world 
at large. I will then discuss some proposals that aim at a deep reform of the financial system, 
in view of the future role of banking. Finally I will focus on the specific challenges confronting 
the euro area banking sector, from low profitability to excessive NPLs, overbanking and new 
regulations like TLAC and MREL. 
2.   Banks under siege: general challenges 
Beyond  increased  competition  from  non-banks,  the  banking  sector  faces  competition  from 
Financial Technology (FinTech) firms with other challenges relating to the low interest rate 
environment as well as the regulatory measures still to come. 
FinTech threat of unbundling banks 
2.1.  
There is a lot of hype around the emergence of new specialised start-up financial firms that 
take advantage of digitalisation and big data techniques aimed at unbundling the activities of 
banks. This is not foreseeable despite the current excitement. This is because banks will also 
adopt the new technologies and will defend their franchise. Furthermore, after crossing some 
thresholds,  the  new  forms  of  finance  will  eventually  start  to  be  regulated  due  to  the  same 
market  failures  and  externalities  (i.e.  asymmetry  of  information,  moral  hazard,  adverse 
selection and herd behaviour) that justify regulation in the banking sector. 
Having said that, payment services could indeed become a domain where banks may lose 
significant  market  share.  Other  activities  at  stake  comprise:  savings  and  investment 
management  over  the  internet,  with  robo-advisors  that  provide  algorithm-based  portfolio 
management  services  online  at  a  fraction  of  the  costs  associated  with  traditional  portfolio 
managers  and  investment  advisors;  crowdfunding  or  direct  equity  funding  of  projects  by 
investors  gathered  mostly  over  the  internet;  peer-to-peer  lending  (P2P)  whereby  online 
services match lenders and borrowers which can be individuals or small businesses; or online 
money management advice aggregating all bank and savings accounts of the clients. 
Hundreds, if not thousands of start-ups can be found in all of these domains. The whole sector 
is nevertheless still quite small. According to a recent study by McKinsey, USD 23 billion of 
venture capital and growth equity has been deployed to FinTechs in the five years to 2014, 
with around one-half of this total invested in 2014.10 A significant part of this investment was 
concentrated in the area of payment services, where banks are facing the biggest challenge 
from these new competitors. It is followed by P2P lending, which is the next most developed 
activity, funded by hedge funds, institutional investors and sometimes even banks. The first 
accidents with bad credits started to emerge recently as big data and smart algorithms can 
also fail. As the sector expands, many more episodes will likely occur. Furthermore, if it starts 
to cater for regular retail funding it will gradually become regulated as a banking activity. 
Nevertheless, intensified competition from FinTech companies represents a potential threat for 
banks. If they do not respond effectively to this challenge, this could lead to a loss of market 
share  and  significant  reduction  in  bank  revenue.  In  five  major  retail  banking-businesses 
(consumer  finance,  mortgages,  SME  lending,  retail  payments  and  wealth  management), 
according with McKinsey, 10 to 40% of revenues and between 20 and 60% of profits will be at 
risk  by  2025,  with  consumer  finance  identified  as  the  most  vulnerable.11  In  the  end,  new 
competitors will likely capture only a small portion of these businesses, with banks’ losses most 
likely coming from margin compression. 
The  new  technology  of  the  distributed  ledger  or  blockchain  is  of  a  different  nature  and 
represents an opportunity, mostly for banks that have financial capacity to invest in it, and can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   establish a wide network of secure, less expensive account transactions and settlements. Even 
that will not dispense with some central official role to ensure final settlement and validate the 
reputation and qualification of participant institutions in the network. Private money like Bitcoin, 
behind  the  blockchain  technology,  cannot  go  far  due  to  lack  of  confidence.  Like  many 
commercial banks, central banks are also actively studying possible developments in this area 
and attentive to their potential role in the future. 
Uncertainty in the finalisation of the regulatory agenda 
2.2.  
On the regulatory side, many of the measures deriving from the post-crisis agenda are already 
in place: capital requirements were increased, (fully-loaded Basel III requirements are already 
met by most banks), a leverage ratio was imposed, new liquidity rules were established. 
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) which was implemented in the EU in October 2015 aims 
to  ensure  that  banks  have  enough  liquid  assets  to  meet  liquidity  needs  over  the  following 
30 days. Moreover, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) which will enter into force at a later 
stage but is already complied with by most euro area banks will require banks to replace short-
term with longer term funding, which is generally more costly (because of term premia). The 
experience of the crisis has however demonstrated that some trade-off in profitability versus 
resilience is well justified. 
Importantly, a few remaining initiatives on the regulatory agenda for banks and the non-bank 
sector still need to be finalised and implemented. After the revision of capital requirements for 
the trading book and the final calibration of the Leverage Ratio, capital requirements will still 
be fine-tuned with a full revision of the Standardised Approach as well as some restrictions on 
the use of banks’ internal models in the Internal Ratings Based (IRB) approach. The Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  the  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision 
(GHOS) have nevertheless communicated that the overall bank capital requirements will not 
be significantly increased. A Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) is being conducted for the banks 
to  report  the  consequences  of  the  drafted  measures  and  a  final  decision  will  be  taken  in 
Autumn, only after these consequences are assessed. The commitment is that there will be 
no Basel IV and that Basel III will be concluded by year-end thus providing regulatory certainty 
for the future. 
Another ongoing discussion that has added to regulatory uncertainty concerns the treatment 
of  sovereign  exposures.  This  discussion  is  important  and  could  indeed  have  a  significant 
impact on the financial sector. Three principles form the ECB’s view on the matter: first, we 
agree with the rationale to change the present system, where sovereign exposures are treated 
as a risk-free asset; second, the revision should not create undue turbulence in markets, like 
the repo market or short-term money markets at large, where sovereign debt is widely used; 
third, the regulatory change should be at the level of the international standard, i.e., it should 
come out of the BCBS’ discussion. This latter principle is also in line with the Five Presidents' 
Report and the BCBS is working on the issue. 
Also at the international level, an agreement was reached at the end of last year on the Total 
Loss Absorbing Capacity, or TLAC, for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) with a 
view  to  overcoming  the  “too-big–to-fail”  issue  and  making  resolution  simpler  and  more 
predictable. TLAC still needs to be implemented in Europe, where the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  provides  for  a  similar  concept  designated  as  Minimum 
Requirement of Eligible Liabilities (MREL) applicable to all banks. 
The ongoing MREL regulatory preparations, in parallel with TLAC implementation, will be key 
to  ensure  a  consistent  approach  towards  loss  absorbing  capacity.  The  way  MREL  will  be 
calibrated by the Single Resolution Mechanism will also have an important impact on banks. 
The preliminary announcements to the industry and a possible interpretation of the Delegated 
Regulation recently published by the EU Commission, has led to estimates of MREL eligible 
liabilities by market analysts that would imply new subordinated debt issuance needs in the 
order of EUR 560 bn.12 Such high required levels of issuance also stem from the assumption 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   that existing senior bank bonds that do not have a subordination clause would not be counted 
to fulfil MREL. Such a requirement for subordination exists in the TLAC standard but the BRRD 
omits the issue and the EU Commission or the Single Resolution Board have not yet clarified 
what will be applied in the case of MREL. The whole set of issues related to MREL have to be 
addressed with great care, as very high, new requirements of subordinated debt or capital 
would not easily be absorbed in present market conditions and would therefore lead to financial 
stability concerns. Ultimately, the level of MREL required for a bank should depend on how it 
is planned to be resolved. On this matter, let me note that the BRRD sets no direct or automatic 
link  between  determining  the  MREL  level,  and  the  8%  bail-in  rule  enables  the  use  of  the 
resolution fund for absorbing losses or to recapitalise a bank. They are separate requirements, 
which serve different purposes, and therefore also have different scopes. 
Low interest rate environment 
2.3.  
Beyond the structural trends and regulatory developments described earlier, the current low 
interest  rate  environment,  at  global  level,  also  poses  important  challenges  for  the  banking 
sector. To understand why interest rates are so low, it is useful to refer to the concept of an 
equilibrium (or neutral) real interest rate. The importance of this concept is that it provides a 
sort of anchor to a monetary economy, implying that monetary policy needs to shadow the real 
equilibrium rate in order to meet its price stability mandate. When applying different model-
based  methods  to  estimate  the  real  equilibrium  rate  for  the  euro  area,  it  emerges  that,  in 
comparison to pre-crisis years, estimates of the equilibrium real rate have sharply declined 
during the crisis and have continued on a declining trend and are now in negative territory, as 
is the case for the U.S. (see Chart 2). If the real equilibrium rate is decreasing then failure of 
monetary policy to accompany the downward trend would leave the economy with too high 
borrowing  costs  with  respect  to  the  return  on  investment.  In  turn,  this  would  discourage 
investment and consumption and generate recessionary and deflationary pressures.13  
Regulation of shadow banking and the boundary problem 
2.4.  
The  regulatory  reforms for the  banking  sector  are  contributing to  a shift of  activity  and  the 
emergence  of  new  players  in  the  non-banking  space,  which  in  turn  is  leading  to  tougher 
competition in areas traditionally dominated by banks. 
To ensure a level playing field and to contain the emergence of new risks beyond banking, we 
need to continue our efforts to establish a comprehensive regulatory framework for non-banks 
and market-based activities. In my view, while we have improved our understanding of the 
risks in this part of the financial system, there is still significant work ahead of us to overcome 
the  potential  weaknesses  in  the  regulation  of  entities  and  activities  in  this  sector.  Let  me 
mention two areas where important efforts are currently underway. First, at the global level, 
the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has just published its consultation paper on addressing 
structural  vulnerabilities  in  the  asset  management  sector.  The  paper  lays  out  various 
recommendations  that  aim  at  strengthening  the  resilience  of  asset  management  and 
investment funds. Second, at the EU level, the work of the European Banking Authority (EBA) 
on the new prudential regime for investment firms is well under way. This new regime will cover 
a significant number of non-bank entities providing investment services. As recommended in 
the  EBA  report  of  December  2015,  the  regime  is  expected  to  have  three  tiers,  aiming  at 
introducing risk-sensitivity and proportionality. Systemic bank-like entities are expected to be 
subject  to  the  full  CRR/CRD  IV  requirements,  and  less  significant  entities  subject  to  less 
onerous and more specific requirements. 
Another important aspect in dealing with the risk stemming from shadow banking activities 
relates to the introduction of macroprudential margins and haircuts in SFTs, including repos, 
as well as in OTC Derivatives transactions.14 
These tools would reach beyond the banking system and also address the build-up of leverage 
and liquidity risks in parts of the financial system, where we have seen rapid growth in recent 
years. Macroprudential authorities should have the power to set margins and haircuts. Margins 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   and haircuts are a determinant of the build-up of leverage via derivatives and SFTs, and are 
strongly interlinked with the procyclicality of that leverage. For derivatives, the initial margin 
determines the amount of exposure that can be created for a given amount of equity. In turn, 
the size of the haircut on SFT collateral, particularly in repos, determines the amount of funding 
market players can obtain for a given amount of collateral. In exuberant times, low volatility 
and risk-aversion as well as competitive pressure lead to low margins and haircuts, supporting 
the build-up of leverage. When the cycle turns, higher volatility and higher risk aversion feed 
into higher margins and haircuts, amplifying de-leveraging pressures. As a result, a vicious 
cycle can emerge, where higher margins and haircuts force de-leveraging and more sales, 
generating a liquidity spiral. That is what Gary Gorton called “the run on repo” in the core of 
the recent financial crisis15. The practices of re-use and re-hypothecation of securities also 
deserves  to  be  looked  into  and  limited.  These  practices  amplified  the  expansion  of  inside 
liquidity, creating the liquidity illusion that all individual institutions were well funded which was 
proven not true when “the run on repo” unfolded with significantly higher haircuts. 
Another important measure to mitigate excessive leverage in the shadow banking sector would 
be to introduce prudential leverage ratios. To monitor and impose a limit on both simple and 
synthetic leverage ratios, built by the use of derivatives, would be essential. Appropriately, the 
monitoring  of  the  two  concepts  of  leverage  is  included  in  the  FSB  proposed  policy 
recommendations to address structural vulnerabilities from asset management activities. 
3.   The alchemy of banks, the financial crisis and structural reform proposals 
The discussion about the expansion of non-bank banking activities raises the issue whether a 
more fundamental reform of the monetary and financial system is necessary to reduce the 
probability  of financial  and  banking crises. The essential fragility  of  banks,  and  now  of the 
market-based credit system, is the enormous maturity transformation inherent to their activity, 
where the commitment to honour short-term liabilities – either in the form of deposits or short-
term securities – has to be ensured at all moments. 
In the past, the privilege of creating money by taking-in deposits, resulting from the extension 
of credit, justified the more intense regulation of banking. However, as explained earlier, other 
entities or activities are also now engaged in creating forms of money, increasing the maturity 
transformation  and  leverage  of  the  system  while  not  being  regulated  as  banks.  Trying  to 
contain  leverage  in  the  financial  system  by  just  putting  more  demands  on  banks  will  not 
address the system expanding outside the boundary. 
Proposals to address the problem have emerged since the crisis and try to put an end to “the 
alchemy  of  banking”,  thus  eliminating  panics  and  runs  either  on  deposits  or  on  repos  and 
similar short-term liquidity “promises”. 
Building on ideas dating back to the 1930s, the proposal of Narrow Banking, sustains that 
banks would collect deposits remunerated at very low interest and would only invest in very 
safe and short-term assets, such as government treasury bills. Extending credit to firms would 
not be permitted, for not being sufficiently safe. Financing of investment would have to come 
from capital markets or firms’ self-financing. 
There is a variety of versions of this proposal, the famous one being the so-called Chicago 
Plan, proposed in 1930 by Chicago professor, Irving Fisher and also temporarily supported by 
Milton  Friedman,  whereby  a  100%  liquid  reserve  requirement  would  be  applied  to  all 
deposits.16  The  principles  of  Narrow  Banking  were  subsequently  adopted  by  the  Positive 
Money movement, an international social movement active in 12 countries. 
Besides generating a financial system that would not create enough funding for investment 
and growth, the approach brought to the present times has the major flaw of not addressing 
the “boundary problem” as it addresses only the role of banks. 
Another proposal – Limited Purpose Banking – put forward by Laurence Kotlikoff in 201017 
would  transform  all financial  institutions  into  entities fully funded  with  equity,  like mutual  or 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   investment funds. Entities could extend credit but a public institution should be in charge of 
validating the respective ratings of those credits. Also in this case, the approach would lead to 
insufficient finance for economic development. 
An interesting and challenging vision is described in the book The end of banking18 written by 
a macroeconomist and an investment banker under a pseudonym. The proposal is not only 
the end of banks but also the end of banking activity, defined as the “creation of money out of 
credit”. It rests on two main elements: new digital technologies and new accounting rules that 
would  impede  the  “creation  of  money  out  of  credit”  by  any  type  of  firm.  In  this  case,  the 
boundary problem is explicitly recognised and addressed. 
The first element – digitalisation – will allow the unbundling of banks’ functions by different 
types of firms using digital techniques. The pooling that banks do by collecting small deposits 
can be done over the internet; diversification of credits using hard big data to select, scoring, 
rating  and  monitoring  borrowers  and  loans’  credit  risk,  are  also  made  possible  by  digital 
algorithms; maturity transformation and supply of liquidity services can be achieved by offering 
market  liquidity:  custody  accounts  (not  deposits)  would  offer  immediate  liquidity  by  rapidly 
selling assets in the market. While not being cash-deposit liquidity, the speed and optimisation 
software functions would get very close to it. 
Unbundling of these functions is already taking place with FinTech and it will be completed 
easily, according to the authors. 
However,  the  new  FinTech  institutions  could  still  try  to  do  banking  by  matching  liquidity 
“promises”  with  securitised  or  unsecuritised  credit.  The  second  element  of  the  proposal 
impedes this by introducing a new legal and accounting concept of insolvency, that the authors 
call a systemic solvency rule. A firm would be insolvent if its real assets would become less 
than its total liabilities. Financial assets would thus not be counted as real assets. A different 
way to enunciate the rule is that a firm would be insolvent whenever its financial assets exceed 
its common equity. In this way, financial assets created by credit will have to be funded by 
equity and so the alchemy of creating money out of credit could not hold. 
The proposal is not much different from Limited Purpose Banking whereby financial firms are 
a  sort  of  mutual  or  investment  fund.  While  financial  technology  would  dispense  with  any 
government intervention, the proposal is not more viable than the Limited Purpose Banking, in 
my view. 
In  his  recent  book,  Mervyn  King  proposes  another  approach  to  the  problem  of  creation  of 
money or quasi-money through the granting of credit either in the form of loans or the purchase 
of securities. In a nutshell, the proposal is as follows: all financial firms’ assets when funded by 
short-term liabilities would have mandatorily to be reported to the central bank and a haircut 
would be negotiated to be applied for the provision of central bank liquidity should a situation 
of liquidity stress emerge. The haircuts would be negotiated well in advance of any stressful 
situation and the agreed liquidity provision would be extended without any other conditions. 
The potential huge extension of central bank liquidity with monetary policy consequences and 
the possibility of significant losses to the central bank in a crisis, with rapidly declining asset 
valuations, 
fraught  with  difficult  practical 
implementation problems. It should also be stressed that the proposal, although aware of the 
boundary problem, does not eliminate the possibility of creation of money and quasi-money 
out of credit. What it does is to eliminate the liquidity crises that are normally the triggers of 
financial crises. If and when inside liquidity would fail, outside (central bank) liquidity would be 
readily available at a price. 
A different approach to the central problem of the vulnerabilities created by the emergence of 
a lightly regulated sector creating short-term liabilities is suggested by Morgan Ricks in his 
recent book.19 It consists of establishing the legal obligation that all forms of short-term liabilities 
created by financial institutions would have to be insured against a fee by an official institution, 
similarly to what happens to deposits. This is certainly feasible but although reassuring users 
the  proposal  controversial  and 
renders 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   of financial services, the scheme is not so encompassing as the one proposed by Mervyn King 
and would not avoid liquidity strains in a crisis or the creation of money out of credit. 
In conclusion, this analysis shows that it is difficult, if not impossible, for our economies – so 
dependent on credit to invest and grow – to dispense with banking as an activity. Despite being 
under siege with great needs of consolidation in the sector, banks are not going to disappear 
in the near term. 
4.   European banking sector: facts and challenges 
Let me turn to some of the more specific challenges that euro area banks are facing in the 
post-crisis environment. First, I will focus on the low profitability environment banks operate in 
and then address the structural challenges related to overcapacity in some banking markets 
and the large stock of NPLs. Finally, I will discuss the prospects for bank consolidation and 
some aspects of the resolution regime. 
Low profitability 
4.1.  
A key challenge for European banks is linked to the prolonged period of low profitability in the 
sector. While bank profitability has recovered somewhat recently, it remains at very low levels. 
Euro area significant banks’ average Return on Equity (ROE) was 5.8% in 2015, remaining 
below their cost of capital (estimated to be around 9%). In fact, the negative gap between 
banks’  ROE  and  cost  of  equity  has  persisted  since  the  2008  financial  crisis  despite  some 
narrowing in this gap recently (see Chart 3). 
Furthermore, analysts remain unconvinced of the prospect of a significant recovery in bank 
profitability in the near future. This is also reflected in continued low market valuations of euro 
area banks. While market scepticism regarding banks’ earnings outlook pushed down price-
to-book ratios around the globe (see Chart 4) during the episode of heightened financial market 
volatility at the start of 2016, a continuing wedge between euro area and U.S. banks may partly 
reflect the greater challenges euro area banks are facing in restoring profitability and adjusting 
to a post-crisis intermediation model. 
The  continued  weakness  in  bank  profitability  reflects  a  number  of  factors,  including  both 
cyclical  and  structural  challenges.  A  key  cyclical  challenge  is  linked  to  the  difficulties  in 
increasing revenues in a low nominal growth and low interest rate environment and a flat yield 
curve. The impact of the low interest environment on margins will vary across banks due to 
differences in banks’ ability to reprice deposits or in the interest rate sensitivity of their assets 
(including, for instance, the relative share of floating vs fixed rate loans). That said, compressed 
margins  are  only  one  side  of  the  coin  as  the  positive  impacts  of  our  monetary  policy 
accommodation  helps  offset  the  pressure  on  margins  –  through  increased  credit  volumes, 
lower impairment costs, higher capital gains on securities holdings as well as through funding 
cost benefits from the TLTRO II. 
Turning to structural factors, in line with ECB analysis, the IMF recently highlighted some key 
structural  challenges  for  the  banking  sector  that  include  the  large  stock  of  non-performing 
assets,  excess  capacity  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  incomplete  adjustment  of  business 
models. Let me address each of these factors in turn. 
First, a large stock of legacy non-performing assets in certain banking sectors continues to 
dampen  profitability  prospects  of  banks  with  high  NPLs  that  consume  capital  and  do  not 
generate  revenue  while  it  also  ties  up  operational  capacity  and  involves  legal,  as  well  as 
administrative costs. The problem of NPLs is more related to its impact on profitability that on 
the  robustness  of  balance  sheets,  as the  coverage  by  provisions  and  collateral  is  95%  on 
average. 
Second, there are signs that overcapacity in some banking sectors could hinder the recovery 
of  profitability  also  given  still  subdued  demand  for  loans.  In  fact,  there  is  some  empirical 
evidence that EU banks operating in less concentrated markets tended to be less profitable in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the  period  between  1991  and  2013.20  Chart  5  shows  how  the  degree  of  concentration  in 
banking sectors affects their efficiency in terms of cost/income ratios, 
Third,  the  adaptation  of  business  models  to  the  new  operating  environment  is  incomplete. 
Accordingly,  banks’  return  to  sustainable  profitability  and  thus  banking  sector  stability  will 
depend on their ability to adapt their business mix to the new operating environment. 
The financial crisis and new regulatory requirements have had a profound impact on banks’ 
activities and business models. Pre-crisis profitability levels of many banks were boosted by 
high leverage and/or reliance on relatively cheap wholesale funding as well as, in some cases, 
elevated risk-taking (in real estate lending or securitisation exposures) in order to generate 
revenues. Changes in banks’ behaviour and in the regulatory framework have rendered some 
of the (previously) most profitable business strategies less viable which, coinciding with weak 
macroeconomic  and 
financial 
performances since the crisis. Banks’ return to sustainable profitability and thus banking sector 
stability  will  depend  on  their  ability  to  adapt  their  business  mix  to  the  new  operating 
environment. 
Chart 621 shows that banks have been moving in the direction of increasing retail banking, have 
improved significantly their leverage ratio (equity over assets) and reduced their reliance in 
wholesale funding, decreasing their transformation ratio (see chart on the left above). At the 
same time, fees and commissions have been increasing although they are still below levels in 
other jurisdictions (see chart on the right above). What is also striking is that the cost/income 
ratio has stayed stable, indicating that the banks have not been sufficiently effective in reducing 
costs. 
financial  market  conditions,  has 
to  deteriorating 
led 
Non-performing loans 
4.2.  
As I highlighted earlier, cyclical profitability challenges in some countries are amplified by the 
large stock of non-performing assets. Euro area significant institutions held nearly EUR 950 
billion of nonperforming loans (NPLs) at the end of 2015, equivalent to about 9% of euro area 
GDP,  and  their  average  NPL  ratio,  at  7.1%,  is  high  by  international  standards  and  clearly 
exceeds those of US and UK peers.22 NPL ratios vary widely across the euro area, but remain 
at rather elevated levels in the majority of countries that were most affected by the financial 
crisis. 
At the same time, progress in reducing NPL remains slow, which can be explained by a number 
of impediments to the decisive resolution of NPLs. These include institution-specific factors, 
such  as  limited  operational  capacity  or  the  lack  of  adequate  management  experience.  In 
addition,  there  are  a  number  of  structural  factors  impeding  the  swift  resolution  of  NPLs, 
including flawed personal and corporate insolvency laws, inefficient judicial systems, the lack 
of effective out-of-court workout frameworks, an underdeveloped NPL servicing industry and 
NPL market as well as tax impediments. 
As  I  mentioned  before,  the  presence  of  high  NPLs  has  a  significant  impact  on  banks’ 
profitability, as a sizeable part of the assets are not generating revenue. This however does 
not raise issues about bank solvency. There is a misleading perception that the Asset Quality 
Review (AQR) and stress tests done in 2014 should have cleaned up the NPLs from the banks’ 
balance  sheets.  AQR  and  stress  test  exercises  are  not  about  taking  NPLs  out  of  banks’ 
balance sheets but about ensuring that with a proper valuation there are enough provisions 
and capital to ensure the point-in-time solvency of the institution. These exercises are solvency 
or capital exercises done over a relatively short horizon and not about longer term projections 
of banks’ profitability. 
An AQR assesses the appropriateness of valuations of NPLs using a sampling approach, and 
usually marks them down in line with their fair value. This creates a gap in the balance sheet 
that has to be filled by provisions or capital. It is a point-in-time exercise and it was thoroughly 
conducted  in  2014,  implemented  by  almost  500  external  auditors  and  experts  in  SSM 
countries. The balance sheet valuation of the banks was then corrected and static solvency 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   fully assured at that moment. As mentioned before, the exercise was not about reducing NPLs 
to zero in one go all and related collateral or about cleaning up the whole balance sheet. 
EBA stress tests use a static balance sheet methodology that assumes that the initial balance 
sheet quantities, including NPLs, remain unchanged throughout the three year horizon of the 
test. They deal with NPLs by changing in the adverse scenario the Loss Given Default (LGD), 
translating  predefined  macroeconomic  adverse  scenarios  into  LGD  projections,  thereby 
generating losses and reducing capital. In the 2014 exercise, these losses had to be covered 
by an increase in capital if the capital ratio came below the established minimum threshold 
(which was 5.5 % CET1 under the adverse scenario). 
Stress tests are capital, or solvency exercises, conducted annually to check if the banks, after 
incurring the losses associated with materialisation of an adverse scenario, remain solvent 
with a capital ratio above the minimum requirements. These exercises, by definition, do not 
investigate profitability developments over five or six years and ways to enhance profitability 
by getting rid of poorly remunerated assets (such as NPLs). The projections of net profits in 
the stress test are not only over a relatively short horizon but also assume a static approach. 
In  reality,  banks  would  react  to  the  adverse  conditions  by  changing  assets  and  liabilities. 
However, if anything, the static approach is more demanding for banks because it ignores the 
relative improvements they could engineer under stress by adjusting their balance sheets. 
In particular, stress test exercises cannot capture the enhanced ongoing efforts in banks with 
high NPL ratios. Resolution of NPLs does not involve only collateral liquidation but also debt 
restructuring for viable distressed debtors. Restructuring positively contributes to the future 
profitability of banks with high level of NPLs. NPL resolution is anyhow a lengthy and complex 
process, and its full positive effects will materialise only beyond the horizon of the stress test. 
In conclusion, stress tests analyse only the solvency of banks, do it annually but do not test 
the profitability of banks going forward into horizons beyond a couple of years. If profitability 
continues to be low in the future and the bank does not retain profits to build-up capital, then 
the stress test simulates again losses in an adverse scenario and if there is a capital shortfall 
below  the  defined  threshold,  capital  will  have  to  be  increased.  A  capital  exercise  is  not  a 
medium-term business plan for banks and does not deal with scenarios of reducing NPLs. 
Beyond AQR and stress test results, the management and the supervisors of banks then have 
to discuss forward-looking business plans as well as the necessary measures to maintain the 
banks sound and profitable which in the present conditions requires a reduction of NPLs. 
The  resolution  of  the  large  post-crisis  NPL  overhang  in  Europe  requires  a  comprehensive 
strategy involving coordination among all relevant stakeholders. Clearly, there is a large role 
to play for micro-prudential supervision in addressing NPL issues. Accordingly, the SSM has 
established a separate task force to focus on the NPL issue and to design the best response 
and long-term strategy for banks to reduce their NPLs levels. 
In addition, structural polices need to complement the supervisory response and address major 
institutional and structural impediments to NPL resolution. These should include measures to 
improve the legal environment relevant for NPL workouts, for instance by introducing efficient 
personal and corporate insolvency frameworks as well as speeding up debt recovery. Other 
areas  for  improvement  include  distressed  debt  markets  as  well  as  impediments  related  to 
taxation. 
In parallel, banks should further strengthen internal workout capabilities and, if needed, use 
external  expertise  of  distressed  asset  managers,  while  authorities  should  support  the 
development of an NPL servicing industry and of an efficient NPL market, as well as the carve-
out of specific NPL portfolios and their transfer to special-purpose vehicles (SPVs) or their 
outright sale on the market. Regarding the latter, asset management companies (AMCs), often 
benefitting  from  state  support,  were  used  in  the  crisis  by  several  euro  area  countries  to 
separate  troubled  assets  from  going  concern  banks.  However,  the  attractiveness  of  asset 
separation schemes has fallen significantly since the implementation of revised State Aid rules 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   in 2013, as a result of very strict interpretations, with financial stability considerations playing 
a minor role, even if mentioned in the regulation. The present situation, after a new round of 
reduced stock prices following Brexit, deserves a deep reflection about the offsetting of some 
market failures with a small public support to markedly improve the stability of some banking 
sectors. 
Without this approach, the only solution available will be for supervisors to impose time limits 
for writing-off NPLs which realistically will then take several years to reach reasonable levels. 
In any case, improving conditions of the work-out of bad assets in the balance sheet of banks, 
changing legislation to speed up collateral execution, facilitating the expansion of a secondary 
market for bad assets, are anyhow essential to overcome the whole problem as efficiently and 
fast as possible. 
Overcapacity in the banking sector 
4.3.  
One  of  the  structural  impediments  to  the  recovery  of  bank  profitability  is  related  to  the 
overcapacity in some parts of the euro area. Market concentration has been on an upward 
trend both at the euro area and EU level since the pre-crisis period.23 
Taking a cross-country view, significant differences remain across countries. Banking systems 
in larger countries, such as Germany and Italy are more fragmented, and concentration levels 
tend to be lower (see Chart 7). By contrast, banking systems in smaller countries tend to be 
less fragmented and more concentrated. These stark differences in market concentration are 
partly  a  reflection  of  structural  features  of  the  banking  sector,  due  to  the  important  role  of 
savings or cooperative banks. 
With regard to capacity indicators, the resizing of the banking sector since the financial crisis 
was  also  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  the  number  of  bank  branches  and  employees  per 
population  in the  past few  years. While this generally  brought  about  some  improvement  in 
banks’ cost-to-income ratios, some banking systems continue to show indications of excess 
capacity (for instance, countries characterised by high bank branch per capita ratios). 
With  all  these  factors  taken  together,  it  can  be  argued  that  there  is  scope  for  further 
consolidation  without  reinforcing  the  so-called  “too-big-to-fail”  problem  and  for  reaping  the 
benefits of efficiency-driven consolidation. The same is true about the euro area as a whole. 
Prospects for bank consolidation 
4.4.  
Overcapacity in parts of the banking sector, coupled with the ongoing structural trend towards 
market-based financing, imply that the European banking sector is bound to continue to shrink 
in  the  future.  This  raises  the  important  question  of  how  to  achieve  a  reduction  in  excess 
capacity  in  the  banking  sector  without  triggering  bank  distress  and  negatively  affecting 
economic activity. The possible ways of consolidation in the banking sector include Mergers 
and Acquisitions (M&A, domestically and across borders), the downsizing of business activities 
(especially by large and complex banks) as well as resolution and orderly exits. 
In principle, M&As accompanied by downsizing are the best option for consolidation in the 
sector  with  the  banking  union  providing  a  favourable  backdrop.  Ultimately,  the  euro  area 
economy needs banks that are large and efficient enough to operate and diversify risks on a 
cross-border basis within a European single market, but small enough to be resolved with the 
resources of the Single Resolution Fund. This would help reap the full benefits of the banking 
union  and  improve  the  trade-off  between  financial  stability  and  economic  efficiency.  From 
banks’ perspective, operating efficiencies are likely to become the primary M&A motivation in 
a  low  profitability  environment  with  cross-border  credit  risk  diversification  benefits  being  a 
possible additional driver. 
Despite  the  clear  rationale  for  bank  consolidation  via  M&As,  the  merger  wave  seen  in  the 
period 2005–07 is unlikely to be repeated in the foreseeable future (see Chart 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Looking at post-crisis trends, total M&A activity in the EU banking sector has declined since 
the high values recorded in 2007, especially in terms of the value of transactions, but also in 
terms of the number of transactions. 
Regarding  the  prospects  of  reducing  excess  capacity  via  resolution  and  orderly  exits,  the 
changed  regulatory  landscape  –  with  enhanced  early  intervention,  recovery  and  resolution 
tools in place – should in principle help to pursue a constructive path to consolidation. Indeed, 
it will be possible to preserve critical functions, by intervening early and restructuring a bank, 
or in the resolution stage, by selling critical parts of the failing bank to a private sector buyer or 
by  setting  up  a  bridge  bank,  for  example.  Orderly  resolution  will  thus  not  entail  the  mere 
collapse of a bank, which could be value-destroying and endangering financial stability, but 
would allow consolidating the banking sector by preserving its value. 
Clearly,  all  resolution  processes  will  have  to  be  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), the more transformative piece of legislation in the 
context of the Banking Union. One of its fundamental features is that the use of resources from 
the Single Resolution Fund (with or without a fiscal backstop) or from any public programme, 
can only take place after a bail-in of shareholders and creditors amounting to at least 8% of 
total  liabilities  of  a  given  bank,  including  own  funds.  The  level  of  8%  is  very  substantial 
compared to the losses banks faced in the recent crisis. Between 2008 and 2010, only one 
bank incurred losses in excess of the 8% threshold, and the average for all banks was slightly 
less than 3%. If we look further back at the Nordic financial crisis in the 1990s, the banks 
affected endured losses well below 8% of their total liabilities including own funds. Thus, under 
the BRRD, the use of money from the Resolution Fund or, after that, from public programmes 
(either national or from direct European recapitalisation), should occur extremely rarely, if at 
all. 
Additionally, as the European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) has been postponed, one 
can conclude that, in the context of Banking Union, there is now a low level of risk sharing, 
contrary to what was the case during the first years of the crisis. The IMF, in its recent April 
issue  of the  Global  Financial  Stability  Review  alerts to this  problem:  “The  European  Union 
State  Aid  rules  -….  and  the  BRRD  are  important  checks  on  market  distortions  and  moral 
hazard, but they should be implemented carefully, as public support may still be needed in a 
crisis.  […]  The  new  mandatory  bail-in  regime  under  the  BRRD  could  raise  implementation 
challenges. Building sufficient institution-specific buffers will take time, and in the meantime 
the new legal framework limits the use of public funds without creditor bail-in at a time when 
pockets of weakness are still to be found in banks.” 
These words of caution by the IMF imply that while the BRRD has of course to be applied, it 
should be considered in its entirety, including the possible use of the exemption for financial 
stability reasons, at the national or European levels, as foreseen in its Article 32. In my 2014 
speech here in Madrid at this same event organised by the University of Navarra, I said: “I fully 
support the change of culture from easy public bailouts to a new culture of private bailing-in 
[…] Yet, we need to bear in mind that it is not only direct public support for banks that has a 
cost for taxpayers, but also financial instability – indeed, the costs of the latter may be higher. 
Compare the worldwide costs for taxpayers stemming from the absence of public intervention 
to rescue  Lehman  Brothers,  with the  zero  cost for taxpayers following the  USD  700  billion 
injection into U.S. banks in 2008 (which have been totally repaid by the banks). In other words, 
financial instability can have a meaningful cost to taxpayers even if it is not visible in the very 
short term – a notion that all policy makers should keep in mind.” 
5.   The response by the banks 
What I have outlined today is that in the post-crisis environment, banks are facing a number of 
difficult challenges. How should banks respond to these challenges? 
Banks’  strategic  responses  to  the  changed  business  and  operating  environment  imply  the 
adaptation  of  business  models.  There  is  no  “one-size-fits-all”  strategy  for  business  model 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   adjustment and the optimal strategy will depend on the starting point of each individual bank 
and on its operating environment. Concentration in their core competences and divestment of 
ancillary activities will be necessary in many cases. 
Given the cyclical profitability challenges arising from the low interest rate environment, banks 
will  have  to  continue  increasing  the  share  of  fees  and  commissions’  income.  International 
comparisons  suggest  that  euro  area  banks  have  significant  room  to  expand  non-interest 
income. However, such a shift is likely to be gradual and is also dependent on competition 
from both within and outside the banking sector. 
Another clear avenue to address profitability pressures is to further increase cost efficiency. 
The  ongoing trend  of  customers  shifting  towards  digital  platforms for  banking  services  has 
important implications for banks’ business models and their cost containment strategies. Such 
strategies  include,  among  other  things,  a  rationalisation  of  the  retail  branch  network  and 
improving  multichannel  distribution  capacities.  This  in  turn  also  requires  additional  costly 
investment into IT infrastructures that could lead to significant cost savings in the long term, 
both in terms of expanding the customer base and enhanced product distribution. 
Banks  with  high  levels  of  NPLs,  with  or  without  any  European  policy  support,  will  have  to 
steeply improve their workout capacity to deal with the problem. 
Banks should also take advantage of central bank policies, and in particular the new series of 
Targeted Long Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO II). To recall, these new operations offer 
long-term  funding  at  attractive  conditions  to  banks  to  further  ease  private  sector  credit 
conditions  and  to  further  incentivise  bank  lending  to  the  real  economy.  Looking  at  the 
implications of monetary policy accommodation in their entirety, it is important to stress that its 
positive effects – through increased credit volumes but also lower impairment costs, capital 
gains on debt securities as well as lower funding cost of the TLTRO II – have the potential to 
offset the pressure on margins. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Our monetary policy has been the only expansionary policy in the euro area. 
Putting together all its policy effects, it has undoubtedly helped banks, as the improvement in 
profitability since 2013 illustrates. We trust that we will achieve normalisation of inflation levels 
in the next few years, which will change the macroeconomic environment for the better, thereby 
supporting the banking sector. At the same time, we are well aware of collateral effects of our 
policy on the economy and know the limits of certain policy instruments. 
As I mentioned earlier today, banks are not going to disappear any time soon under a wave of 
Fintech start-ups. However, in the present situation we must count on the ingenuity, effort and 
competence of the banks to change into more efficient institutions with lower cost/income ratios 
and  with  the  capacity to face fierce  competition in  a  world  of  changing  technology. Only  a 
robust and profitable banking sector can serve the economy and finance the economic growth 
that we need. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Adrian  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2009),  “The  Shadow  Banking  System:  Implications  for  Financial 
Regulation”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review 13:1–10. 
Autonomous Research, “MREL: Senior on the firing line”, 3 June 2016. 
Chamley, C., L. Kotlikoff and H. Polemarchakis (2012), “Limited Purpose Banking – moving 
from `trust me` to `show me` banking”, American Economic Review, 102 (3): 113–19. 
Claessens, S., Z. Pozsar, L. Ratnovski and M. Singh (2012), “Shadow Banking: Economics 
and Policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Notes 12/12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   24 
April 
2014 
University, 
Claessens S. and L. Ratnovski (2014), “What Is Shadow Banking?”, IMF Working Paper 14/25. 
Constâncio, V. (2014), “Banking Union: meaning and implications for the future of banking”, 
Banking  Union  Conference  organised  by  the  Master  in  Banking  and  Financial  Regulation, 
Navarra 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/ 
sp140424_1.en.html 
Constâncio, V. (2014), “Beyond traditional banking: a new credit system coming out of the 
shadows”, lecture at SAFE Goethe University. 
Constâncio,  V.  (2016),  “The  challenge  of  low  real  interest  rates  for  monetary  policy”, 
Macroeconomics  Symposium  at  Utrecht  School  of  Economics,  15  June  2016 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160615.en.html. 
Constâncio, V. (2016), “Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, ESRB International 
Conference on the Macroprudential Use of Margins and Haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June 
2016 http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160606.en.html 
Duffie, D. (2016), “Financial regulatory reform after the crisis: an assessment”, ECB Forum on 
Central Banking, Sintra, 29 June 2016. 
ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6/2015. 
ECB Financial Stability Review, Issue 5/2016, Special Feature C, “Recent trends in euro area 
banks’ business models and implications for financial stability”. 
ECB Financial Stability Review, Issue 5/2015, Special Feature “Bank profitability challenges in 
euro area banks: the role of cyclical and structural factors” by C. Kok, C. Móré and C. Pancaro. 
ECB Report on Financial Structures, October 2015. 
Goodhart,  C.  (2008),  “The  boundary  problem  in  financial  regulation  “,  National  Institute 
Economic Review, October. Also reproduced in Goodhart, C. (2010) “The regulatory response 
to the financial crisis”, Edward Elgar, Chapter 12. 
Gorton  G.  B.  and  A.  Metrick  (2009),  “Securitized  Banking  and  the  Run  on  Repo”,  NBER 
Working Paper No. 15223, August 2009. 
King, M. (2016), “The end of alchemy: Money, banking and the future of the global economy”, 
Little, Brown. 
Kotlikoff, L. (2010), “Jimmy Stewart is dead: ending the world’s ongoing financial plague with 
Limited Purpose Banking”, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Kumhof, M. and J. Benes (2012), “The Chicago Plan revisited”, IMF working paper 12/202. 
McKinsey, “Cutting Through the FinTech Noise: Markers of Success, Imperatives for Banks”, 
December 2015. 
McKinsey, “The Fight for the Customer”, Global Banking Annual Review 2015. 
McMillan, J. (2014), “The end of banking: money credit and the digital revolution”, Zero/One 
Economics, Zurich. 
Mehrling P., Z. Pozsar, J. Sweeny, and D.Neilson, (2013),“Bagehot was a Shadow Banker: 
Shadow  Banking,  Central  Banking  and  the  Future  of  Global  Finance”, Institute  of  New 
Economic Thinking. 
Pozsar Z., T. Adrian, A.B. Ashcraft, H. Boesky (2010), “Shadow Banking”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Report 458. 
Pozsar,  Z.  (2011),  “Institutional  Cash  Pools  and  the  Triffin  Dilemma  of  the  U.S.  Banking 
System”, IMF Working Paper No 11/190. 
Pozsar, Z. (2014) “Shadow Banking: The Money View”, Office of Financial Research Working 
Paper 14–04. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Ricks, M. (2016), “The Money Problem: rethinking financial regulation”, University of Chicago 
Press. 
Shin, H.S. (2009), “Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System”, BIS Annual 
Conference. 
[1]  See Constâncio, V. (2014), “Banking Union: meaning and implications for the future of banking”, Banking Union 
Conference organised by the Master in Banking and Financial Regulation, Navarra University, Madrid 24 April 
2014 http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140424_1.en.html. 
[2]  See the article titled “The fiscal impact of financial sector support during the crisis”, ECB Economic Bulletin, 
Issue 6/2015. 
[3]  See Constâncio, V. (2014), “Beyond traditional banking: a new credit system coming out of the shadows”, lecture 
at SAFE Goethe University. 
[4]  See  among  others,  Shin  H.S.  (2009),  “Financial  Intermediation  and  the  Post-Crisis  Financial  System”, BIS 
Annual Conference; Adrian T. and H.S. Shin (2009), “The Shadow Banking System: Implications for Financial 
Regulation”, Banque  de  France  Financial  Stability  Review  13:1–10;  Pozsar  Z.,  T.  Adrian,  A.B.  Ashcraft, 
H. Boesky  (2010),  “Shadow  Banking”, Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report  458;  Claessens  S, 
Z. Pozsar, L. Ratnovski and M. Singh (2012), “Shadow Banking: Economics and Policy”, IMF Staff Discussion 
Notes  12/12;  Mehrling  P.,  Z.  Pozsar,  J.  Sweeny,  and  D.  Neilson  (2013),  “Bagehot  was  a  Shadow  Banker: 
Shadow  Banking,  Central  Banking  and  the  Future  of  Global  Finance”, Institute  of  New  Economic  Thinking; 
Pozsar, Z. (2014), “Shadow Banking: The Money view”, Office of Financial Research Working Paper 14–04; 
Claessens S. and L. Ratnovski (2014), “What Is Shadow Banking?”, IMF Working Paper 14/25. 
[5]  See Ricks, M. (2016), “The Money Problem: rethinking financial regulation” University of Chicago Press, where 
the author writes: “When we talked about shadow banking, we were referring to the financial sector’s use of vast 
amounts of short-term debt to fund portfolios of financial assets. The short-term funding markets are enormous, 
but they are fairly obscure. They exist largely in the background, as part of what might be called the “operating 
system”  of  modern  finance.  These  markets  have  weird  names  –  like  repo,  Eurodollars,  and  asset-backed 
commercial paper – but this confusing terminology belies their simplicity. These markets are not exotic at all. 
They are as simple as can be: they are just short-term debt.” (Preface, page ix). 
[6]  Pozsar, Z. (2011), “Institutional Cash Pools and the Triffin Dilemma of the U.S. Banking System”, IMF Working 
Paper 11/190. 
[7]  See  Duffie,  D.  (2016),  “Financial  regulatory  reform  after  the  crisis:  an  assessment”  ECB  Forum  on  Central 
Banking, Sintra, 29 June 2016. 
[8]  See Goodhart, C. (2008), “The boundary problem in financial regulation”, National Institute Economic Review, 
October. Also reproduced in Goodhart, C. (2010) “The regulatory response to the financial crisis”, Edward Elgar, 
Chapter 12. 
[9]  King, M. (2016), “The end of alchemy: Money, banking and the future of the global economy”, Little, Brown. 
[10]  See McKinsey, “Cutting Through the FinTech Noise: Markers of Success, Imperatives for Banks”, December 
2015. 
[11]  See McKinsey, “The Fight for the Customer”, Global Banking Annual Review 2015. 
[12]  See Autonomous Research, “MREL: Senior on the firing line” 3 June 2016. 
[13]  For details, see lecture by V. Constâncio “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy”, delivered 
at the Macroeconomics Symposium at Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016. 
[14]  For further explanations see Constâncio, V. (2016), “Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, Speech 
at the ESRB international conference on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 June 2016 in http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160606.en.html. 
[15]  See Gorton G. B. and A. Metrick (2009), “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”, NBER Working Paper No. 
15223, August 2009. 
[16]  See Kumhof, M. and J. Benes (2012), “The Chicago Plan revisited” IMF working paper No 12/202. 
[17]  Kotlikoff, L. (2010), “Jimmy Stewart is dead: ending the world’s ongoing financial plague with Limited Purpose 
Banking”,  Hoboken,  NJ:  Wiley:  see  also  Chamley,  C.,  Kotlikoff,  L.  and  H.  Polemarchakis  (2012),  “Limited 
Purpose  Banking  –  moving  from  `trust  me`  to  `show  me`  banking”,  American  Economic  Review,  102  (3):  
113–19. 
[18]  McMillan, J. (2014), “The end of banking: money credit and the digital revolution”, Zero/One Economics, Zurich. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   [19]  Ricks, M. (2016) “The Money Problem: rethinking financial regulation”, University of Chicago Press. 
[20]  See, for example, the special feature by Kok, C., Móré, C. and Pancaro, C., “Bank profitability challenges in 
euro area banks: the role of cyclical and structural factors”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2015. 
]See  Special  Feature  C:  “Recent  trends  in  euro  area  banks’  business  models  and  implications  for  financial 
stability”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2016. 
[21 
[22]  The average non-current loan ratio (a proxy for the NPL ratio) of US banks stood at 1.5% at the end of 2015, 
while the average NPL ratio of UK banks participating in the EBA transparency exercise was 3.2% (based on 
data for the first half of 2015). 
[23]  See the ECB report on financial structures, October 2015. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
