  William C Dudley: Market and funding liquidity – an overview 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2016 Financial Markets 
Conference, Fernandina Beach, Florida, 1 May 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website. 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 
21st  Annual  Financial  Markets  Conference.  This  year’s  topic,  focusing  on  the  connection 
between liquidity and financial stability, is an excellent one. As the first speaker, I thought it 
would be useful to lay out what I see as some of the key issues. I may raise more questions 
than provide answers, but, hopefully, my remarks will help to stimulate our discussion and 
debate over the next two days. 
As I see it, in the context of our financial system there are two distinct types of liquidity. The 
first is what is typically referred to as market liquidity. I would define market liquidity as the 
cost  –  both  in  expense  and  time  –  of  buying  or  selling  an  asset  for  cash.  Market  liquidity 
reflects  a  number  of  factors,  including  any  direct  transaction  expense,  such  as  brokerage 
costs; the price the transaction is executed at relative to the midpoint of the bid-ask spread; 
how  much,  if  at  all,  the  transaction  moves  the  market  price;  and  the  immediacy  or 
speediness with which the transaction can be completed. 
With respect to market liquidity, there are a number of important open questions. Has market 
liquidity declined for some asset classes? If so, what are the causes? In particular, has the 
increase in the regulatory requirements imposed on systemically-important securities dealers 
adversely impacted market liquidity? If this is the case, are there adjustments that could be 
made that might improve market liquidity without impairing financial stability? 
The  second  important  type  of  liquidity  is  funding  liquidity.  By  funding  liquidity,  I  mean  the 
ability of a financial entity to raise cash by borrowing on either an unsecured or a secured 
basis. Although market and funding liquidity are often treated as distinct, they can be closely 
related.  This  is  especially  the  case  during  a  financial  crisis.  If  funding  liquidity  declines 
because of market stress, for example, this may cause intermediaries to become less willing 
to  provide  market  liquidity.  Declines  in  market  liquidity,  in  turn,  may  further  impair  funding 
liquidity, creating a negative feedback dynamic. 
Capital and liquidity requirements play a role in preventing such a self-reinforcing negative 
dynamic.  The  central  bank  may  also  have  an  important  role  to  play  as  the  lender-of-last-
resort. When and how the central bank intervenes – and what the appropriate preconditions 
should  be  to  maintain  market  discipline  and  mitigate  moral  hazard  –  are  important  open 
questions. 
As always what I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily the views 
of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.1  
Turning first to the issue of market liquidity, the evidence that market liquidity has diminished 
is mixed. Some market liquidity metrics have not changed much in recent years. For the U.S. 
Treasury  market,  quoted  bid-ask  spreads  in  the  inter-dealer  market  have  remained  stable 
since 2010 at their pre-crisis levels (Exhibit 1). And, order book depth, while lower now than 
                                                
1  Tobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, Michael Fleming, Catherine Kung, Ernst Schaumburg, Joseph Tracy, Erik 
Vogt and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in 2012 and 2013, does not appear low by historical standards (Exhibit 2).2 For the corporate 
bond  market,  some  evidence  even  suggests  improving  market  liquidity.  For  example, 
excluding the financial crisis period, the realized bid-ask spread calculated from TRACE data 
has been trending down since the early 2000s (Exhibit 3).3  
But these metrics don’t tell the whole story. In particular, we have significant data gaps that 
make  it  difficult  to  comprehensively  measure  market  liquidity.  For  example,  in  the  U.S. 
Treasury market we have poor visibility into dealer-to-customer transactions. In this market 
segment, business is conducted bilaterally on an over-the-counter (OTC) basis – typically by 
phone or through electronic trading platforms like Tradeweb and Bloomberg that are based 
on the traditional request-for-quote model. The U.S. Treasury has issued a detailed request 
for information seeking public comment on the many factors that are affecting the structure 
and  liquidity  of  the  U.S.  Treasury  market,  and  is  seeking  comments  on  the  relevant  data 
gaps.4 This is an important step that will help clarify what further work is needed in this area. 
Even in the corporate bond market where we have detailed TRACE transaction data, this still 
tells an incomplete story. TRACE data show what trades have taken place, not what trades 
have  potentially  been  foregone  because  of  any  possible  diminution  of  market  liquidity. 
Gaining a better understanding of this phenomenon is being actively researched by my staff. 
In  contrast  to  the  market  liquidity  metrics  such  as  bid-ask  spreads,  indirect  evidence  on 
market  liquidity  suggests  that  there  has  been  a  decline.  Asset  managers  report  that  large 
blocks of securities are now harder to buy and sell without generating significant movements 
in prices. Also, average trade sizes have decreased (Exhibit 4) and there is evidence of a 
growing bifurcation in the corporate bond market, with greater activity and liquidity in those 
bonds that were issued more recently, larger in size or brought to market by larger issuers. 
Also, capital and liquidity requirements for the largest securities dealers – which have been 
raised significantly since the financial crisis – might have adversely impacted market liquidity. 
These  regulatory  changes  likely  have  affected  the  profitability  of  dealer  intermediation 
activities and consequently the provision of market liquidity. 
For the Treasury market, the most important change in regulatory requirements appears to 
be the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR). The SLR limits the leverage of dealer balance 
sheets. In the SLR, all assets are treated the same in terms of required regulatory capital. 
Consequently, the SLR is much tougher on low-risk assets as compared to the risk-based 
capital  measures  that  it  complements.  This  makes  the  economics  of  repo-financing  much 
less  attractive.  Not  surprisingly,  we  observe  significant  declines  in  the  quantity  of  repo 
financing by dealers (Exhibit 5). 
For  the  corporate  bond  market,  the  most  relevant  regulatory  changes  appear  to  be  the 
increase  in  the  Basel  risk-weighted  capital  ratio,  the  Comprehensive  Capital  and  Analysis 
Review (CCAR) stress tests and the Volcker Rule – which prohibits proprietary trading for a 
number of asset classes such as corporate bonds, albeit not U.S. Treasuries. We do observe 
significant  declines  in  recent  years  in  securities  dealers’  holdings  of  corporate  bonds 
(Exhibit 6). 
It  would  be  surprising  if  these  declines  in  repo  and  corporate  bond  holdings  did  not  have 
some  consequence  for  market  liquidity.  However,  we  do  not  observe  marked  declines  in 
dealer holdings of Treasuries, even as overall dealer assets have stagnated (Exhibit 7). The 
                                                
2  See Adrian, Fleming, Stackman, Vogt (2015) Has U.S. Treasury Market Liquidity Deteriorated?, Liberty Street 
Economics Blog, August 17, for further analysis of Treasury market liquidity. 
3  See  Adrian,  Fleming,  Vogt,  Wojtowicz  (2016)  Corporate  Bond  Market  Liquidity  Redux:  More  Price-Based 
Evidence, Liberty Street Economics Blog, February 9, for further analysis of corporate bond market liquidity. 
4  See U.S. Department of Treasury, Notice Seeking Public Comment on the Evolution of the Treasury Market 
Structure, January 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stagnation in dealer assets might indicate that inventory risk has shifted from dealers to asset 
managers  and  other  buy-side  participants,  reflecting  a  shift  in  market-making  from  a 
“principal” to an “agency” model. 
While increases in regulatory requirements have undoubtedly played a role, I think that other 
non-regulatory factors are also important. Liquidity provision is affected by changes in market 
structure, how trades are executed, and by competition from those operating outside of the 
regulatory  boundaries  that  have  been  established  for  systemically-important  financial 
institutions. Similarly, the demand for liquidity is also evolving with the growth of large asset 
managers, mutual funds, exchange traded funds (ETFs) and principal trading firms (PTFs) – 
which  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  high-frequency  trading  firms.  In  the  U.S.  Treasury 
market, for example, high-frequency trading firms have seized a large proportion of the inter-
dealer  market  in  recent  years  (Exhibit  8).  In  the  credit  market,  a  rapidly  rising  share  of 
corporate bonds outstanding is now held by mutual funds (Exhibit 9). Because mutual funds 
are not natural providers of intraday liquidity,5 their rapid growth may have contributed to the 
decline  in  secondary  market  trading  activity.  Fixed-income  market  liquidity  may  also  be 
declining for cyclical reasons. Dealer inventories have historically been sensitive to changes 
in  the  size  of  credit  risk-premia  and  term-premia  (Exhibit  10).  Finally,  the  effects  of 
unconventional monetary policy on rate expectations and corporate bond issuance may also 
be affecting market liquidity. This is an area in need of further study. 
To  reiterate,  the  evidence  that  market  liquidity  has  diminished  is  mixed.  But  even  if  one 
agrees  with  the  position  that  market  liquidity  has  diminished,  concluding  that  tougher 
regulatory requirements are the most important factor would be premature at this stage. The 
available evidence and common sense suggest that the changes in the regulatory regime are 
likely  important,  but  we  need  to  do  considerably  more  work  before  we  reach  a  definitive 
conclusion on their relative contribution. 
Furthermore, even if additional evidence supported the conclusion that market liquidity has 
declined  due  to  the  increase  in  the  regulatory  burden  on  the  major  securities  firms,  this 
decline  would  still  need  to  be  weighed  against  the  benefits  of  a  more  resilient  and  robust 
financial  system.  During  the  last  cycle,  market  liquidity  was  plentiful  prior  to  the  financial 
crisis.  But,  as  the  financial  system  became  stressed  and  several  large  systemic  firms 
teetered on the brink of failure, market liquidity quickly dried up. A somewhat higher cost for 
the provision of market liquidity during the more benign stages of a financial cycle might be 
worthwhile  if  it  were  accompanied  by  less  volatility  and  stress  when  the  cycle  inevitably 
turned down. In fact, even if market liquidity costs are now going to be higher on average, 
this might be a small price to pay for a much more stable financial sector. 
Also, it is important to recognize that market liquidity conditions a few years from now may be 
very different from the situation today. If the cost of providing liquidity services has increased, 
this creates strong incentives for innovators to find better ways to match buyers and sellers. 
In my view, this innovative response is already underway. For example, in both the Treasury 
and  corporate  bond  markets,  firms  are  being  established  to  more  efficiently  match  buyers 
and  sellers  of  less  liquid  bonds  in  order  to  reduce  search  costs  and  the  need  to  carry 
inventory. Furthermore, execution algorithms have been developed that divide large trades 
into  smaller  sizes,  thus  reducing  the  costs  of  moving  large  blocks  of  securities.  Market 
liquidity conditions could very well improve over time as innovation occurs in response to this 
new regime. 
Let me now turn to the topic of funding liquidity. I think this issue deserves as much attention 
as market liquidity. After all, during the financial crisis the demise of several major financial 
institutions  resulted  from  their  inability  to  finance  their  long-dated  illiquid  assets.  The 
                                                
5  Mizrach, B. (2015). Analysis of Corporate Bond Liquidity. FINRA Office of the Chief Economist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  deterioration in funding liquidity also increased the degree of systemic stress as firms were 
forced  to  sell  assets,  which  depressed  their  prices,  undermining  the  solvency  of  firms 
throughout the financial system. 
As I noted earlier, while funding liquidity can be considered as its own distinct subject, it does 
have a direct link back to market liquidity. If firms that trade and invest in securities cannot 
obtain funding liquidity, this will likely lead to less transactions volume, thinner markets and 
less overall market liquidity. It is also likely to lead to less pricing efficiency resulting in wider 
and  more  persistent  disparities  in  the  prices  of  similar  assets.  Without  access  to  funding, 
leveraged  players,  such  as  hedge  funds,  will  find  it  more  difficult  to  react  to  transient 
dislocations  in  market  prices  by  engaging  in  arbitrage  –  that  is,  buying  the  cheaper  and 
selling  the  more  expensive  asset.  Without  a  reliable  source  of  short-term  funding,  market 
functioning can become impaired, which can further disrupt funding and market liquidity. 
This can be seen by looking at the relationship between the volume of dealer-funded repo 
backed by U.S. Treasury securities versus the size of Treasury bid-ask spreads (Exhibit 11).6 
During times of financial crisis – such as in 2008 – sharp deleveraging of dealers’ repo books 
coincides with an increase in Treasury bid-ask spreads. However, during non-crisis periods, 
this  correlation  is  quite  low.  This  relationship  between  funding  and  market  liquidity  is  also 
evident when we examine the relationship between the dispersion of Treasury yields relative 
to a fitted Treasury yield curve and Treasury bid-ask spreads (Exhibit 12). Large dispersions 
of Treasury yields from what is implied by a fitted yield curve may indicate funding liquidity 
strains,  as  market  participants  find  it  more  difficult  to  arbitrage  relative  price  distortions.7 
Again, we see a strong correlation between the sizes of the yield curve errors and of bid-ask 
spreads during a financial crisis, but not during non-crisis periods. 
The drop in the availability of dealer-funded repo financing also appears to have led to less 
efficient  arbitrage  between  closely  related  asset  pairs,  such  as  on-the-run  and  off-the  run 
Treasuries,  corporate  bonds  and  credit  default  swaps,  and  Treasuries  versus  interest  rate 
swaps. The price differences or yield spreads between the more capital intensive and less 
capital intensive assets have widened. 
For  example,  we  can  see  this  in  the  difference  between  the  fixed-rate  paid  on  a  10-year 
interest rate swap and the secondary market yield on a 10-year Treasury note (Exhibit 13). 
Whereas historically this spread has been positive – reflecting the fact that an interest rate 
swap  has  more credit  risk  than  a Treasury  security  –  the spread  has  been  negative  since 
September 2015. Market participants suggest that this shift has occurred because the higher 
capital requirements have made it unattractive for dealers to arbitrage away this dislocation. 
Similarly,  dealers  apparently  are  unwilling  to  provide  the  funding  and  the  balance  sheet 
capacity necessary for their leveraged clients to arbitrage away this dislocation. The degree 
to which this shift in the yield spread between Treasury and interest rate swap yields is due 
to  the  differential  capital  requirements  imposed  on  cash  versus  derivative  instruments 
warrants more investigation. 
Just  as  market  and  funding  liquidity  are  interlinked,  so  are  funding  liquidity  and  capital 
requirements. All else equal, stronger capital requirements reduce firms’ vulnerability to runs. 
This  suggests  that  funding  liquidity  risk  can  be  addressed  in  many  different  ways.  First, 
capital requirements can be bolstered to reduce the risk that a firm will become insolvent in 
particularly  bad  states  of  the  world.  Second,  improved  reporting  and  transparency  can 
reduce the degree of uncertainty about whether a firm is solvent, thus reducing the risk that 
                                                
6  Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity” Review of Financial Studies 22(6) 
pp. 2201–2238 provide a theory that features strong correlation between market and funding liquidity during 
crises. 
7  Hu, Pan, Wang (2013) “Noise as Information for Illiquidity” Journal of Finance 68(6), pp.2341–2382 provide 
further evidence on the relationship between yield curve fitting errors and alternative funding liquidity metrics. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  investors might wrongly perceive that a firm is insolvent, when, in fact, it still has adequate 
capital.  Third,  liquidity  requirements  can  be  increased  to  reduce  the  risk  that  the  firm  will 
have to engage in a fire sale of assets that might deplete its capital. Also, a liquidity buffer 
gives  the  firm’s  management  time  to  respond  to  bad  events  without  having  to  resort 
immediately to selling assets. Fourth, a lender-of-last-resort can provide a liquidity backstop 
that  makes  funding  liquidity  more  resilient.  Consider  the  case  when  a  counterparty  is 
uncertain about how other potential lenders view a firm’s solvency. If there is no lender-of-
last-resort backstop, this may cause firms to be unwilling to lend, not because they perceive 
the counterparty as insolvent, but, instead, because they are worried about what others think. 
That  is,  I  may  be  unwilling  to  lend  to  you,  not  because  I  perceive  you  as  insolvent,  but 
because I am uncertain about how others view your solvency. If I do lend and others don’t 
share my view, will I be able to get my money back? With a lender-of-last-resort added to the 
picture,  I  no  longer  need  to know  what  others  think.  As  long  as  the  lender-of-last-resort  is 
available, if I am correct in my assessment that the firm is solvent, then I can be assured that 
I will be paid back. 
This  issue  was  particularly  relevant  during  the  financial  crisis  when  counterparties  even 
pulled back from firms that were widely viewed as solvent. The Federal Reserve stepped in 
and  created  funding  backstops  for  a  wide  array  of  assets,  such  as  commercial  paper  and 
asset-backed securities. This bolstered the confidence of counterparties in one another and 
restored market  and funding  liquidity. Of  course,  this type  of  lending  is only  feasible  to  an 
institution  that  is  deemed  to  be  solvent  with  sufficient  collateral  available  to  pledge  to  the 
lender-of-last-resort so that it can safely secure its loan. 
In  practice,  all  of  these  methods  are  in  place  to  address  funding  liquidity  risk.  Capital 
requirements  have  been  increased;  there  is  much  better reporting  about  how  firms  will  do 
under significant stress tests; liquidity requirements – such as the liquidity coverage ratio – 
provide  a  buffer  that  allows  management  more  time  to  respond  to  problems;  and,  if 
necessary, the central bank can act as the lender-of-last-resort to support market confidence 
and funding liquidity. 
So, should more be done to support funding liquidity? In my view, an important issue is to 
identify and address gaps in the lender-of-last-resort function. In the U.S., some significant 
gaps remain. For example, the Federal Reserve has a very limited ability to provide funding 
to  a  securities  firm,  even  on  a  fully  collateralized  basis.  The  Discount  Window  is  only 
available  to  depository  institutions,  and  Section  23A  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  severely 
constrains the ability of a depository institution to pass Discount Window funding along to its 
securities  affiliate.  Although  the  Federal  Reserve  may  be  able  lend  to  a  securities  affiliate 
under its emergency lending authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, this is 
not  a  standing  facility  –  it  can  only  be  established  if  “unusual  and  exigent”  circumstances 
exist  and 
facility  must  have  broad-based  eligibility,  among  other 
requirements.8  
the  program  or 
                                                
8  A  program  or  facility  has  broad-based  eligibility  only  if  it  is  designed  to  provide  liquidity  to  an  identifiable 
market or sector of the financial system. The program or facility will not be considered to have a broad-based 
eligibility if fewer than five persons or entities would be eligible to participate, or if it is designed to assist a 
company avoid bankruptcy, resolution or insolvency (including by removing assets from its balance sheet) or 
aid a failing financial company. See Regulation A, 12 CFR 201.4(d). In addition to the “unusual and exigent” 
circumstances and broad-based eligibility requirements, other conditions for making Section 13(3) emergency 
credit include obtaining the affirmative vote of a requisite number of Federal Reserve Governors and the prior 
approval of the U.S. Treasury Secretary, the emergency credit is not extended to an insolvent borrower, the 
lending Federal Reserve Bank is secured to its satisfaction, evidence is obtained regarding the unavailability 
of  adequate  credit  accommodation  from  other  banking  institutions  under  prevailing  circumstances  to 
borrowers  of  the  emergency  credit,  penalty  interest  rate  is  set  for  the  emergency  credit,  and  meeting 
disclosure/reporting  requirements.  See  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  (12  USC  343)  and 
Regulation A (12 CFR 201.4(d)). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  the  U.S., given  the  restrictions  on  central  bank  lending,  if  a  securities firm  were  to  lose 
access to funding the remaining options available would be finding a means of replenishing 
the firm’s capital, selling assets, or selling all or part of the securities firm’s operations. While 
this  might  be  manageable  in  the  case  of  a firm-specific  idiosyncratic  shock,  it might  prove 
more  difficult  if  a  common  shock  was  broadly  hitting  the  securities  industry.  In  this 
circumstance, the failure of one firm could increase the stress on other firms that were facing 
similar difficulties. If all of the requirements for Section 13(3) are met, the central bank could 
provide  liquidity  support.  However,  since  this  is  not  a  certainty,  it  is  worth  considering 
possible alternatives. Now that all major securities firms in the U.S. are part of bank holding 
companies and are subject to enhanced prudential standards as well as capital and liquidity 
stress  tests,  providing  these  firms  with  access  to  the  Discount  Window  might  be  worth 
exploring. To me, this  is  a more  reasonable  proposition  now  than  it  was  prior  to  the  crisis 
when the major dealers weren’t subject to those safeguards. 
More generally, I am happy to report that the Committee on the Global Financial System – 
one of the Bank for International Settlements’ central bank groups – is engaged in a project 
to determine what lender-of-last-resort gaps currently exist, focusing, in particular, on those 
that  may  create  vulnerability  in  terms  of  financial  stability.  One  area  that  I  anticipate  will 
receive considerable attention is whether there are any gaps with respect to the activities of 
globally systemic firms that operate on a cross-border basis. 
Another issue that still needs greater attention is the appropriate role for the home- versus 
host-country  supervisor.  The  regulatory  and  supervisory  responses  for  large,  systemically-
important  firms  that  operate  on  a  cross-border  basis  need  to  be  closely  coordinated, 
especially during times of stress. In particular, expectations about who will be the lender-of-
last-resort need to be well understood in both the home and host countries. 
We  have  made  considerable  progress  in  recent  years  in  enhancing  the  safety  and 
soundness of the U.S. financial system. But there is more that we need to do. In particular, 
we  need  to  study  and  understand  how  market  liquidity  and funding  liquidity  conditions  are 
changing and what factors are driving that evolution. Conferences like this one go a long way 
in  that  regard.  They  serve  as  an  important  forum  for  discussing  ideas  and  improving  our 
knowledge and understanding. This will provide a solid foundation for any policy actions. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
