  Erkki Liikanen: Macroprudential policy in Europe and the world – 
challenges, experiences and institutional structures 
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  First  annual  ECB 
macroprudential  policy  and  research  conference,  jointly  organised  with  the  International 
Monetary Fund, Frankfurt am Main, 27 April 2016. 
 Macroprudential policy – goals and definitions 
Before the Global Financial Crisis, the term “macroprudential” was not commonly used even 
among experts. Organisations such as the IMF, and notably BIS, may take credit for its early 
projection. 
The  concept  has  now  of  course  received  much  more  attention  among  experts  after  the 
financial  crisis.  In  this  conference,  for  example,  we  have  been  analysing  macroprudential 
issues from different angles. There have been many insightful presentations yesterday and 
today.  To  mention  one,  my  colleague  Vitor  Constâncio  yesterday  presented  six  guiding 
principles of macroprudential policy in his interesting speech. 
Still, “macroprudential policy” or its sister-term “systemic risk” are hardly “household names”. 
My recent experience with the editorial process of a book chapter that I wrote suggests that 
these  terms  are  not  established.  (The  experienced  language  consultant  used  by  the 
publisher had marked the words “macroprudential policy” and asked: “Is it widely known what 
it  means?  and  the  words  “systemically  important  banks”  in  my  text  and  asked:  “What  are 
these?”). So I agree with Don Kohn about what he spoke about communication. 
We must  keep  in  mind  that  we  have  entered  a  new  important  area  of  policy,  with  its  own 
terminology, which is unfamiliar to the public. For legitimacy and accountability, we have to 
make sure that we explain and talk about these new things to the public in a comprehensible 
manner. 
The  experts  are  also  still  in  search  for  the  best  definitions  of  macroprudential  policy  and 
systemic risks. In general terms, macroprudential policy can be understood as measures to 
control systemic risks which can threaten financial stability. 
Judging  by  the  recent  literature,  we  can  think  of  at  least  two  concrete  objectives  of 
macroprudential policy. 
According to the first objective, the goal of macroprudential policy is to control the effects of a 
credit  crunch  or,  more  generally,  a  large-scale  balance-sheet  contraction  of  financial 
institutions on the society.1 
According to the second and perhaps more ambitious objective, the goal of macroprudential 
policy is to prevent an excessive build-up of risks in the financial sector as a whole. In other 
words, it is about mitigating the financial cycle especially in booms.2 
Below I will mainly focus on the second objective. 
As  we  focus  on  the  prevention  of  excessive  build-up  of  risks  in  the  financial  sector,  it  is 
essential to note that macroprudential policy complements microprudential policy. Both use 
the same tools, especially capital requirements. But macroprudential policy also uses other 
tools such as loan-to-value caps. 
                                                
1  Cf. Kashyap, A. (2013). Notes for Northwestern Advanced Workshop for Central Bankers. 
2  Cf. Freixas, X., L. Laeven, J-L. Peydro (2015): Systemic risk, crises, and macroprudential regulation. The MIT 
Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  When defining the confines of macroprudential policy, it is also important to understand its 
relationship with monetary policy. In the long term, financial stability is a prerequisite for price 
stability. Hence the two policy areas are clearly intertwined. 
However,  in  the  short-  and  medium-term  the  economic  cycle  and  the  financial  cycle  can 
behave  quite  differently.  To  deal  with  the  latter,  a  separate  set  of  macroprudential  policy 
instruments is needed. This way the two policy areas can best advance their common long-
term interests. 
Next I will talk about 
1. 
the challenges of macroprudential policy in the current juncture and especially in the 
European context. 
To illustrate the current challenges, I will also look back to history in Finland in the 
late 1980’s, few years prior to the dramatic banking and financial crisis of Finland in 
the early 1990s, and 
try to draw some macroprudential lessons of those experiences for today´s policy-
makers. 
I will finish by discussing the emerging challenges from the growing shadow banking 
activities, and draw some conclusions. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Challenges of macroprudential analysis, policy, and implementation 
Successful  macroprudential  policy  is  a  sum  of  three  things:  1)  good  and  timely  analysis, 
2) sufficient and effective policy instruments (tools), and 3) effective implementation. 
We are on our way in Europe to get this done. Still a number of challenges can be identified 
in each of the three elements. 
The analytical challenges come in two parts. 
First, this has been a timely conference. We must admit that academic research still has a lot 
to do in terms of developing better models and establishing empirical facts. One contributing 
factor to the global financial crisis may even have been the scarcity of systemic risk elements 
in  leading  macroeconomic  models  used  in  policy  work  prior  to  the  crisis.  Promisingly,  that 
gap has now started to narrow. 
Second,  macroprudential  analysis 
improving  our 
understanding of the potential risks to financial stability involved  in the current low  interest 
rates environment and the use of unconventional monetary policy measures. For example, 
there  are  again  potential  risks  related  to  “searching  for  yield”  and  the  related  migration  of 
banking-like activities to the less regulated shadow banking sector. I will return to this below. 
Concerning  macroprudential  policy  instruments,  the  set  of  necessary  tools  for  the  banking 
sector is already at the disposal of competent authorities. On the other hand, we may lack 
sufficient  tools  to  address  potential  systemic  risks  in  the  less  regulated  shadow  banking 
sector.3 
High-quality  analysis  and  a  well-designed  toolkit  need  to  be  complemented  by  the  third 
element  of  successful  macroprudential  policy:  a  timely  and  forceful  implementation  of  the 
appropriate  policies.  The  implementation  may  be  particularly  challenging  because  of  three 
types of implementation lags. 
imminent  challenge 
faces  an 
in 
                                                
3  See Constancio, V. (2015): “Macroprudential policy in Europe: ensuring financial stability in a banking union”, 
ECB speeches, 28 October. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, there is often a lag between the build-up of systemic risks and the observation of those 
risks,  especially  when  the  risks  develop  outside  of  the  radar  of  supervision,  as  they  have 
often done. 
Second,  macroprudential  policymakers  may  not  have  the  necessary  tools  to  address  the 
identified risks. In most countries, the available macroprudential tools and the limits on their 
use are given by the national legislation. Usually, a lengthy legislative process is needed to 
add any new tools into the toolbox. 
Third, similar to many other policies, there is a lag between the point of time at which some 
macroprudential measure is taken, and the time at which the measure will start to have an 
impact. 
A case study of macroprudential policy implementation: Finland in the 1980’s 
To illustrate the difficult challenges in macroprudential policy implementation, let me make a 
brief digression to the financial history of Finland. 
The deregulation of the Finnish financial markets took place in 1986 and even before. In the 
spring  of  1987  I  became  the  Minister  of  Finance.  In  autumn  1987,  the  rate  of  growth  of 
lending rose above 15 %. By summer 1988, the growth rate had surpassed 25 %. At the end 
of 1988, the growth rate was a stunning 31 % 
In  a  hindsight,  Finnish  policymakers  reacted  much  too  slowly  to  this  increase  in  lending. 
Why? 
1. 
The  Bank  of  Finland  was  reluctant  to  return  to  the  old  days  of  administrative 
regulations. In addition, the central bank had no statutory right in Finland to demand 
cash reserve deposits from the banks. 
The Ministry of Finance proposed to end the tax-deductibility of interest expenses. 
This  was  heavily  opposed  by  political  parties.  Some  gradual  progress  was  made, 
but it was too modest. 
And of course, the macroprudential tools of today – like the Countercyclical Capital 
Buffer  requirement  or  the  loan-to-value  cap  –  were  not  available  then.  And 
obviously, there was no designated authority with the macroprudential mandate. 
2. 
3. 
Finally, in late 1988, the Ministry of Finance proposed a solution in which a ceiling would be 
imposed on the growth of lending and a progressive tax imposed on lending in excess of that 
amount. 
The Bank of Finland first regarded the proposed tax as a return to a repressive regulation. 
But finally it used the proposed tax as a threat to pull the banks into a voluntary agreement 
that gave  the  Bank  of  Finland  a  right to  raise  the  cash  reserve  requirement  of  banks to  a 
maximum  of  12  %.  This  would  be  an  additional  non-interest  bearing  deposit  requirement, 
which  would  be  imposed  on  the  whole  banking  sector  on  the  basis  of  combined  credit 
growth. 
Ultimately, this system of supplementary non-interest bearing cash deposits had the desired 
cooling effect on bank lending. While the agreement was in force in 1989, lending grew at 
less than a half the rate of 1988. But, as you know, it was too late. 
The  experience  illustrates  that  macroprudential  policymakers  need  to  have  the  necessary 
tools and mandates well in advance of any trouble. It is too late to build the tool-set in the 
middle of the crisis. 
Our  experiences  also  demonstrate  that  policymakers  need  to  be  aware  of  the  costs  of 
macroprudential inaction. A rapid rise in, say, house prices may serve both politicians and 
house-owners  in  the  short-term.  But,  in  the  longer  term,  everybody  hurts  from  the 
policymakers’ failure to act. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The European framework for macroprudential policy 
The  macroprudential  framework  in  Europe  and  in  the  euro  area  is  specifically  tailored  to 
reflect the European institutional features and financial architecture. 
As  elsewhere  in  the  world,  also  in  the  European  countries  the  national  macroprudential 
authorities play the key role in macroprudential analysis and policy-decisions: they are, or at 
least  should  be,  best  informed  of  the  cyclical  and  structural  macroprudential  risks  and 
vulnerabilities in their countries. 
In  the  countries  belonging  to  the  banking  union,  the  macroprudential  powers  are  shared 
between  national  designated  macroprudential  authorities  and  the  European  Central  Bank. 
More  specifically, 
the  ECB  has  a  right  to  apply  stricter  requirements  for  certain 
macroprudential tools than those proposed by the national macroprudential authorities. 
The role of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is, in turn, to monitor cross-border 
and  cross-sectoral  systemic  risks  in  the  whole  EU  area,  and  provide  macroprudential 
warnings  and  recommendations  to  national  authorities  and  European  bodies.  Last  but  not 
least,  the  European  Capital  Adequacy  framework  (CRD  IV/CRR)  provides  a  common 
regulatory rulebook directing also the use of most macroprudential tools. 
The  European  macroprudential  set-up  is  generally  appropriate  for  Europe’s  bank-based, 
highly  integrated  and  thereby  potentially  fragile  financial  system.  Research  suggests  that 
banking  oriented  financial  systems  –  like  that  in  Europe  –  may  be  particularly  prone  to 
systemic  risks  and  crises.4  In  highly  integrated  markets  these  risks  and  crises  can  rapidly 
spread across borders and markets. 
One  of  the  strengths  of  the  euro  area  macroprudential  policy,  as  I  see  it,  is  that  the  joint 
responsibility between the ECB and national authorities is likely to reduce the inaction bias 
inherent  in  taking  unpopular  and  intrusive  macroprudential  actions.  The  ESRB,  by  closely 
monitoring and evaluating national macroprudential frameworks and policies, plays a similar 
role in the whole EU area. 
There are also weaknesses in the European framework. Some EU-level regulatory rules and 
procedures  concerning  the  use  of  macroprudential  tools  are,  as  I  see  them,  overly 
complicated and bureaucratic. For example, the European capital adequacy framework does 
not  yet  provide  national  authorities  with  fully  satisfactory  ways  to  increase  residential 
mortgage risk-weights for macroprudential reasons. 
Given the inherent inaction bias in macroprudential policy-making, a too complex regulatory 
rules  may  provide  national  macroprudential  authorities  a  convenient  excuse  for  deferring 
necessary macroprudential actions. 
The challenge of new players and new technologies 
Finally,  let  me  share  a  few  thoughts  on  the  potential  changes  in  banking  and  financial 
intermediation. 
Recently,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  discussion  on  the  increasing  role  of  new  players  and 
technologies and the diminishing role of traditional deposit banks in financial intermediation. 
And indeed, banking-like activities have  increasingly shifted to the shadow banking sector. 
The credit intermediation has also to some extent shifted away from the banking sector to the 
debt securities market. 
                                                
4  See e.g. ESRB (2014): Is Europe Overbanked? Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  When  evaluating  these  changes,  it  is  useful  to  recall  the  history  of  major  technological 
breakthroughs. One of the lessons of history is that we tend to overestimate the impacts of 
new players and technologies in the short term but underestimate these in the long term.5 
In  the  light  of  this  observation,  we  may  end  up  exaggerating  the  short-term  effects  of  the 
much-discussed potential game-changers like shadow banks or digitalisation on the financial 
system and financial stability. Still, we may underestimate their impact in the long term. To 
illustrate, Nokia wanted to beat Motorola and Ericsson in the mobile terminal market and it 
did. But the more dangerous competitors, Google and iPhone, came from a completely new 
direction which did not exist before. 
Another  lesson  in  history  is  that  changes  always  bring  new  risks  (or  old  risks  in  new 
disguise).  The  macroprudential  policy-makers  are  well  aware  that  we  must,  for  example, 
build  sufficient  information  collection  systems  and  tools  for  macroprudential  policy  to  deal 
with systemic risks building up in and migrating to the shadow banking sector. 
One factor that keeps us on guard concerning financial stability is the prolonged low interest 
rate environment. The current record-low global real interest rates reflects the weak global 
economic  growth  and  abundancy  of  global  savings  relative  to  profitable  investment 
opportunities. 
It is clear that low interest rates may be generating search-for-yield and risk-taking incentives 
in  some  asset  markets.  To  counteract  these  pressures,  the  role  of  a  well-functioning 
macroprudential framework and policy will be quite central in the future. 
Conclusions 
Finally, let me conclude by commenting on the argument by some that we have already gone 
too  far  in  micro  and  macroprudential  regulation.  For  instance,  could  it  be  that  the 
strengthened  regulation  is  currently  hampering  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
euro area? 
Focusing on bank capital, there is ample evidence suggesting that a solid banking sector is a 
key to unimpeded credit flows. Banks struggling with debt overhang or non-performing loans 
lend less. 
In  accordance  with  this,  experience  strongly  suggests  that  a  swift  recapitalisation  of  the 
banking sector in response to crises is a key measure to restore economic growth. 
So, the regulatory measures we have taken after the crisis, and their implementation must be 
done properly. 
                                                
5  This is the so-called Amara´s law, named after the futurologist Roy Amara. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
