  Sharon Donnery: Lessons from the past, safeguarding stability for the 
future 
Address  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the 
Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) Economic History Symposium, Dublin, 9 June 
2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Mark  Cassidy,  Yvonne  McCarthy,  Mícheál  O’Keeffe  and  Rebecca  Stuart  for  their 
contributions to this speech. 
Introduction 
Good morning. On behalf of the Central Bank of Ireland, I am delighted to welcome you to 
the  fourth  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research  Economic  History  Symposium.  The 
conference  has  a  fascinating  and  varied  programme  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland 
welcomes the chance to be involved. Unfortunately the Governor is unable to be here and 
sends his best wishes. 
Both  economic  history  and  the  history  of  economic  thought  provide  valuable  lessons  for 
policymakers today, not least central bankers in our quest to safeguard price and financial 
stability.  And  yet,  despite  the  numerous  experiences  of  financial  crises  over  the  past  two 
centuries, recent events highlighted starkly the lack of both analytical frameworks to assess 
the risks associated with the build-up of financial imbalances, and the policy tools to mitigate 
them. 
For my introductory remarks, I would like to reflect briefly on the recent actions taken by the 
Central  Bank  to  contribute  to  financial  stability  in  Ireland  through  the  introduction  of 
macroprudential policies. 
Lessons from the past 
The term “macroprudential” only surfaced in public documents in the mid-1980s.1 However, 
throughout much of the twentieth century, and particularly during the post-war period, there 
were  numerous  examples  of  central  bank  interventions  in  the financial system that  can,  in 
retrospect, be considered “macroprudential”. During this time, many central banks in Europe, 
and the US, used quantitative controls rather than interest rates to steer the economy and 
maintain bank stability. Measures such as credit controls, reserve ratios and liquidity ratios 
were used in Europe, and loan-to-value and repayment caps in the US.2 
Such  measures  were  largely  implemented  at  a  time  when  the  boundaries  between  fiscal, 
monetary,  industrial  and  prudential  policies  were  less  clearly  defined.  Financial  market 
deregulation  and  increasing  central  bank  independence  led  to  the  clearer  delineation  of 
these policy functions. At the same time, the rise of inflation targeting meant central banks 
used these non-interest rate policies less and less. In Ireland, credit, capital, and interest rate 
controls were progressively dismantled from the 1980s.3 
 
1  See  Galati,  Gabriele  and  Richhild  Moessner  (2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy  –  A  Literature  Review”,  BIS 
Working Papers, No.337, Bank for International Settlements. 
2  See Kelber, Anna and Eric Monnet (2014), “Macroprudential policy and quantitative instruments: a European 
historical  perspective”,  Banque  de  France  Financial  Stability  Review,  No.  18,  April  and  Elliott,  Douglas  J., 
Greg  Feldberg  and  Andreas  Lehnert  (2013),  “The  history  of  cyclical  macroprudential  policy  in  the  United 
States”, Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2013-29. 
3  A full overview of the different measures can be found in “A Chronology of Main Developments in the Central 
Bank of Ireland 1943–2013”, Central Bank of Ireland booklet (2013) , also see Kelly, John and Mary Everett 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the 2000s many suggested the best contribution monetary policy could make to financial 
stability was to keep inflation low and stable, and if imbalances did emerge, the central bank 
could always “clean up” afterwards.4 The effective microprudential supervision of individual 
banks would, it was thought, also safeguard financial stability. 
The  recent  crisis  provided  a  clear  demonstration  that  such  an  approach  is  not  sufficient. 
Recent  evidence  shows  that  in  the  post-war  period,  real  estate  credit  has  become  an 
increasingly  important  predictor  of  fragility  in  the  financial  sector.5  Financial  imbalances 
resulting from  the  unsustainable  expansion  in  asset  and  credit  prices,  or  contagion  across 
the  financial  sector  due  to  interconnectedness  and  strategic  complementarities  such  as 
“herding” behaviour among market participants, can lead to the build-up of systemic risk. 
Since  such  imbalances  have  very  serious  consequences  for  the  real  economy  and  price 
stability, one response is for the central bank to use interest rates to “lean against the wind”, 
and that may be appropriate in episodes of severe financial exuberance.6 However, it is very 
challenging for central banks to manage their price stability objective and address concerns 
about systemic risks with just one tool; namely interest rates. Any central bank aiming to cool 
off systemic risk by hiking rates might risk disrupting the business cycle to the detriment of its 
price  stability  objective,  or  vice  versa.  That  is  why  independent  policy  instruments  are 
needed to address each policy objective.7 
Macroprudential  policies  are  now  commonplace.  They  are  generally  regulatory  policies  or 
instruments  with  the  specific  objective  of  mitigating  risks  to  financial  stability.  They 
complement  monetary  policy  in  two  key  ways.8  First  they  can  be  used  to  target  regional 
imbalances,  which  is  crucial  in  jurisdictions  like  the  euro  area  where  monetary  policy 
decisions  are  taken  for  the  area  as  a  whole.  Second,  while  monetary  policy  affects  all 
segments  of  the  economy,  macroprudential  policies  can  be  used  to  temper  sector-specific 
imbalances in a more granular manner. 
Looking  to  more  recent  Irish  history,  our  own  experience  shows  very  clearly  why  both 
dimensions  are  important. We  have  seen  the  damage that  can result from  loose financing 
conditions and excessive leverage, and our economists in the Bank have published a body of 
analytical  work confirming this. The research shows a positive relationship between higher 
loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios and subsequent mortgage defaults. It also shows a 
relationship  between  higher  loan-to-value  ratios  and  banks’  losses  from  defaults.9  The 
evidence highlights that lending at high multiples of income was one of the main causes of 
                                                                                                                                                   
(2004), “Financial Liberalisation and Economic Growth in Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 
Autumn 2004. 
4  Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1999), “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility.” In New Challenges for 
Monetary  Policy,  77–128.  Proceedings  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  Economic  Symposium, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26–28. 
5  Jorda, Oscar, Alan Taylor and Moritz Schularick, (2016), “The great mortgaging: housing finance, crises and 
business cycles”, Economic Policy 2016 pp. 107–152. 
6  See,  for  example,  Bordo,  Michael  D.  and  Olivier  Jeanne,  (2002)  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices:  Does 
“Benign Neglect” Make Sense?”, International Finance, 5(2): 139–64. 
7  This follows the so-called ‘Tinbergen rule’ (see Tinbergen, Jan, (1952), “On the Theory of Economic Policy”, 
North-Holland Pub. Co., Holland). 
8  They also complement existing microprudential supervision and banks’ own risk management practices. 
9  See  Hallissey,  Niamh,  Robert  Kelly  and  Terry  O’Malley  (2014),  “Macro-prudential  tools  and  credit  risk  of 
property  lending of  Irish  Banks”,  Central  Bank of  Ireland,  Economic  Letter  Vol.  2014,  No.  10, or  McCarthy, 
Yvonne (2014), “Disentangling the Mortgage Arrears Crisis: The Role of the Labour Market, Income Volatility 
and Negative Equity”, The Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, Vol.43, pp. 71 – 90. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increases in property prices during the first part of the last decade and was also a significant 
reason for the sharp contraction in the downturn.10 
From a policy perspective, looking back, one of the main conclusions of the Honohan Report 
– and criticisms of the Central Bank – was that the Bank had “an unwillingness … to take on 
board sufficiently the real risk of a looming problem and act with sufficient decision and force 
to head it off in time. Rocking the boat and swimming against the tide of public opinion would 
have required a particularly strong sense of the independent role of a central bank in being 
prepared to spoil the party and withstand possible strong adverse public reaction”.11 
We  at  the  Bank  have  learnt  many  lessons  from  the  crisis  and  over  recent  years,  very 
substantial  progress  has  been  made  at  national  and  European  level,  towards  establishing 
robust frameworks for identifying emerging risks and taking forceful decisions to counteract 
these. 
Strengthening the resilience of the financial system 
The  mission  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  safeguard  stability  and  protect  consumers.  In  this 
context, our objective, as the independent authority responsible for macroprudential policy, is 
to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  households  and  the  banking  system  so  that  both  can 
withstand adverse movements in credit and property prices, and other economic shocks.12 
This, unpopular as it may sometimes appear, also involves introducing policies to reduce the 
potential  for  imbalances  to  build  up  in  the  first  place  given  that  they  can  lead  to  financial 
distress. 
Given  the  importance  of  real  estate  asset  prices  in  driving  the  financial  cycle,  in  February 
2015,  the  Central  Bank  introduced  macroprudential  measures  to  limit  the  amount  of  new 
mortgage lending that can take place at high loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios. This 
followed  a  public  consultation  process,  which  received  widespread  support.13  Ireland, 
however, is not alone in introducing such measures. Whilst the calibration and impact differ 
greatly, sixteen Member States of the European Union have introduced some form of loan-
to-value,  loan-to-income,  or  debt  service-to-income  (DSTI)  measure  to  enhance  the 
resilience of their respective domestic financial systems.14 
The threshold for the loan-to-income ratio in Ireland is set at 3.5 times gross income. This 
acts  as  a  restraint  on  excessive  repayment  burdens  and  unsustainable  increases  in 
household debt. Recognising the difficult situation first-time buyers can face in entering the 
market (and indeed the lower credit risk among this cohort of borrowers), the loan-to-value 
ratios  that  were  introduced  distinguish  between  first-time  buyers  and  other  mortgage 
borrowers.15 
 
10  McCarthy,  Yvonne  and  Kieran  McQuinn  (2013),  “Credit  conditions  in  a  boom  and  bust  property  market”, 
Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper, No 8/RT/13. 
11  See Honohan Patrick (2010, 16), “The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008: 
A Report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank”. 
12  Under  Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  1024/2013  (‘SSMR’)  and  Regulation  (EU)  No  468/2014  of  the  ECB 
(‘SSMFR’),  macroprudential  powers,  including  the  capital  buffer  provisions  as  transposed  into  S.I.  158/  of 
2014, are shared between the ECB and the national authorities; meaning, inter alia, that the ECB is capable of 
setting  higher  macroprudential  (including  buffer)  requirements  than  those  set  by  National  Designated 
Authorities (NDAs). This includes an ECB power to set a capital buffer rate where a national authority has not 
set any rate. 
13  See Feedback Statement on CP87: Macro -prudential policy for residential 2015 mortgage lending. 
14  An  overview  of  national  measures  is  published  by  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  can  be  found 
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/national_policy/html/index.en.html. 
15  See Kelly, Robert, Terry O’Malley and Conor O’Toole (2015), “Designing Macroprudential Policy in Mortgage 
Lending: Do First Time Buyers Default Less?”, Research Technical Paper, 02RT15, Central Bank of Ireland.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The latest data available to the Central Bank on house purchase prices for first-time buyers 
nationally suggests the median house price was €200,000 for the first half of 2015.16 This is 
associated  with  a  deposit  requirement  of  10  per  cent  of  the  purchase  price.  For  first-time 
buyers  in  Dublin,  the  median  purchase  price  over  the  period  was  €262,000;  the  deposit 
requirement in this case is 11.6 per cent. 
An additional important feature of the measures is that a certain amount of new lending is 
allowed  above  the  specified  thresholds.17  These  allowances  recognise  that  higher  loan-to-
value or loan-to-income mortgages can be appropriate in certain circumstances, as laid out 
in the banks’ own credit policies, and can help to ease some valid concerns about market 
access difficulties, without permitting excessive leverage or credit risk to build up across the 
system as a whole. 
In  addition,  in  December  2015,  the  Bank  announced  the  first  settings  of  both  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  other-systemically  important  institutions  (or  O-SII)  capital 
buffer.18  These  measures  are  part  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  toolkit  which  is 
applicable in all EU Member States. 
The countercyclical capital buffer is a prudential tool designed to respond to fluctuations in 
the economic cycle and stabilise lending activity. When credit growth picks up, banks will be 
required  to  hold  additional  capital.  When  the  economic  cycle  turns,  banks  will  be  able  to 
release  this,  allowing  stable  lending  to  the  real  economy,  through  the  cycle.  Although  at 
present, following the Central Bank’s assessment, we have set this buffer at zero per cent for 
Irish exposures. 
The  O-SII  buffer  is  an  additional  capital  buffer  applied  to  banks  that  are  systemically 
important for the domestic economy. The Central Bank has set this buffer at 1.5 per cent for 
its systemic institutions, to be phased in over the period 1 July 2019 to 1 July 2021. 
It is very clear to me that if these measures had been in place fifteen years ago, the scale of 
financial  crisis  experienced  in  Ireland  would  have  been  much  more  limited.  This  time,  our 
measures  have  been  introduced  early  in  the  cyclical  recovery  in  the  market  in  order  to 
prevent the recovery from becoming destabilised by excessive leverage being taken on by 
households. 
The mortgage rules in particular are designed to limit the risk of a house price – credit cycle 
emerging once again. While the parameters may in the future be amended, either tightened 
or  loosened,  in  response  to  cyclical  conditions,  these  measures,  which  seek  to  underpin 
prudent  lending  standards,  have  been  introduced  as  permanent,  structural  features  of  the 
Irish mortgage market. Moreover, the evidence threshold to justify adjustments to these rules 
is significant. 
                                                                                                                                                   
The loan-to-value measures include a maximum loan-to-value ratio of 80 per cent for non-first-time buyers of a 
 
primary residence, while for first-time buyers a higher cap of 90 per cent applies for the first €220,000 of the 
value of the house and the 80 per cent loan-to-value then applies to the part of the value of the house above 
€220,000. The maximum loan-to-value ratio is set at 70 per cent for buy-to-let borrowers. 
16  Figures are from a loan-level dataset held at the Central Bank of Ireland. 
17  20 per cent of the value of new mortgage lending is allowed above 3.5 times gross income, 15 per cent is 
allowed at loan-to-value ratios above the thresholds for primary dwelling homes and 10 per cent of lending at 
loan-to-values above the threshold for BTL properties. A number of exemptions from the measures are also 
included  in  the  regulations,  reflecting  specific  circumstances  of  the  Irish  mortgage  market  at  the  time  of 
introduction.  Borrowers in negative equity, for example, are exempt from the  loan-to-value restrictions while 
mortgage holders switching between lenders, without an increase in principal (i.e. switchers), are exempt from 
both the loan-to-value and loan-to-income restrictions. 
18  See http://www.centralbank.ie/stability/MacroprudentialPol/Pages/default.aspx for further details. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Review of the measures 
The macroprudential measures introduced by the Central Bank will be reviewed on a regular 
basis.  Specifically,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  will  be  reviewed  on  a  quarterly  basis, 
while the O-SII buffer and the mortgage regulations will be reviewed annually. These reviews 
should not be seen as an indication that we intend to change the measures. Rather because 
they are structural, that we periodically evaluate and monitor these measures is crucial.19 
In  November  this  year,  the  Central  Bank  will  publish  a  report  examining  the  impact  and 
effectiveness  of  the  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income  measures  since  their  introduction. 
However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  it  is  still  quite  early  in  the  life  of  the  measures, 
which  have  a  medium-term  focus.  Nevertheless,  the  report  will  bring  together  an  in-depth 
analysis on their early performance against their stated objectives, as well as analysis on the 
potential side effects of the measures. More specifically, the review  will draw on analytical 
projects  covering  household  resilience  and  borrower  types,  banking  resilience  and  bank 
lending  practices,  house  price  and  credit  dynamics,  in  addition  to  insights  on  the  rental 
market, housing supply  and unsecured lending. In addition, the review  will encompass the 
utilisation of allowances which operate as part of the mortgage regulations. 
The review will also be informed by a public call for evidence on the impact of the measures. 
This  call  for  evidence  will  be  detailed  at  the  launch  of  the  Central  Bank’s  Macro-Financial 
Review on 14 June. The call for evidence will remain open from 15 June to 10 August. 
In the years ahead, much attention will be paid to enhancing knowledge on the impact and 
effectiveness of macroprudential policies, and on strengthening macroprudential frameworks. 
I hope that the analytical work undertaken at the Central Bank of Ireland can contribute to the 
development of ideas and methodologies in this area. 
We acknowledge that our measures impact individuals’ ability to access credit and purchase 
houses.  However,  these  policies  are  designed  to  enhance  household  and  banking  sector 
resilience and protect the system as a whole. And in this context, we must take a medium to 
long term view. In time, I believe history will look favourably upon these policies. 
Let  me  finish  by  thanking  you  once  again  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  and  I 
hope you have a stimulating conference. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19  As emphasised in “A Macroprudential Policy Framework for Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
