  Jerome H Powell: Recent economic developments, the productive 
potential of the economy, and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 26 May 2016. 
 Original presentation is on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website: Slides (PDF). 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. I will begin by reviewing recent economic 
developments  and  then  turn  to  supply-side  considerations,  such  as  the  level  of  potential 
output and the potential growth of our economy. I will conclude with a discussion of monetary 
policy. As always, the views I express here today are mine alone. 
Recent developments and the state of the economy 
The U.S. economy has improved steadily since the recovery began  seven years ago. Our 
economy  is  now  10  percent  larger  than  at  its  previous  peak  in  2007.  Employment  has 
surpassed its 2008 peak by 5 million workers, and the unemployment rate has fallen from 
10 percent  to  5  percent,  close  to  the  level  that  many  observers  associate  with  full 
employment. 
Labor market developments remain healthy, with employers adding roughly 200,000 jobs per 
month so far this year – a pace similar to that of the past several years (figure 1). Job growth 
continues to be substantially faster than the underlying growth of the labor force, so the labor 
market  continues  to  tighten.  Despite  the  strong  job  gains,  the  unemployment  rate  has 
flattened out at 5 percent over the past six months thanks to a welcome increase in the labor 
force participation rate. Meanwhile, there are tentative and encouraging signs of a firming in 
wages, seen most clearly in the data on average hourly earnings, which are rising faster than 
inflation and productivity. All told, labor market indicators show an economy on solid footing. 
Recent  spending  data  have  been  less  positive  than  the  labor  market  data.  Growth  of 
personal consumption slowed noticeably in the first quarter. Business fixed investment has 
fallen  for  two  consecutive  quarters,  mainly  because  of  a  steep  decline  in  energy-related 
capital expenditures. As a result, gross domestic product (GDP) growth over the two quarters 
ending in March 2016 is estimated to have averaged only 1 percent on an annualized basis. 
This  estimate  may  continue  to  move  around  as  more  data  come  in.1  And  there  are  good 
reasons to think that underlying growth is stronger than these recent readings suggest. Labor 
market data generally provide a better real-time signal of the underlying pace of economic 
activity.2  In  addition,  retail  sales  surged  in  April,  as  did  consumer  confidence  in  May, 
suggesting  that  the  pause  in  consumption  may  have  been  transitory.  Moreover,  stronger 
demand  would  be  more  consistent  with  an  environment  that  remains  quite  supportive  of 
growth, with low interest rates, low gasoline prices, solid real income gains, a high ratio of 
household  wealth  to  income,  healthy  levels  of  business  and  household  confidence,  and 
continuing strong job creation. Indeed, current forecasts for second-quarter GDP growth are 
for a rebound to around 2-1/4 percent.3  
                                                
1   For  example,  according  to  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis,  a  70  percent  confidence  band  around  the 
estimate of first-quarter GDP would extend from negative 0.7 percent to 1.7 percent, which implies that the 
spending data should be taken with a grain of salt. 
2   Analysis by Board staff finds that lagged employment growth provides a better signal of current-quarter GDP 
or employment growth than does lagged GDP growth. 
3   For  example,  the  May  Blue  Chip  forecast  for  second-quarter  real  GDP  growth  was  2.3  percent,  and  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s GDPNow forecasting model predicted 2.5 percent, as of May 17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Inflation remains below the 2 percent target of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), 
with total inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures at 
3/4  percent  over  the  12  months  ending  in  March  and  core  inflation  at  1-1/2  percent,  both 
slightly higher than a year earlier. Core inflation has been held down by falling import prices, 
owing in large part to the rise in the dollar, as well as the indirect effects of lower oil prices on 
core prices. As the recent financial market tensions have eased, oil prices have increased 
and the dollar has weakened a bit on net. If oil prices and the dollar remain broadly stable, 
inflation should move up further over time to our 2 percent objective. Inflation expectations 
seem to be under some downward pressure. Some survey-based measures are at the low 
end  of  their  recent  historical  ranges.  Market-based  measures  of  longer-term  breakevens 
have  declined  significantly  since  mid-2014  and  stand  near  all-time  lows.  While  I  see 
expectations as staying reasonably well anchored, it is essential that they remain so and that 
inflation return over time to the 2 percent objective. 
The easing in global financial conditions since mid-February and the associated waning in 
downside  risks  are  welcome,  and  in  part  reflect  expectations  that  the  FOMC  would  move 
more  slowly  in  removing  monetary  accommodation.  However,  underlying  risks  will  likely 
remain until global growth is on a stronger footing. Growth and inflation remain stubbornly 
low  for  most  of  our  major  trading  partners.  In  China,  stimulus  measures  should  support 
growth in the near term but may also slow China’s necessary transition away from its export- 
and investment-led business model. Meanwhile, the ongoing buildup of debt there is notable. 
There  is  also  some  remaining  uncertainty  about  China’s  exchange  rate  policy.  Elsewhere, 
risks  are  posed  by  the  upcoming  “Brexit”  vote,  ongoing  pressures  from  refugee  flows  into 
Europe,  and  challenging  conditions  for  emerging  economies  such  as  Brazil,  Russia,  and 
Venezuela. 
Despite  these  downside  risks,  I  see  U.S.  demand  growing  at  a  moderate  pace,  the  labor 
market  continuing  to  heal,  and  inflation  returning  over  time  to  the  FOMC’s  2  percent 
objective. The economy is on track to attain the Committee’s dual mandate of stable prices 
and maximum employment. 
Supply-side considerations 
For several years after the crisis, economic activity remained far below its potential, and the 
need for highly accommodative policy seemed clear. As the shortfall of output from potential 
has  narrowed,  supply-side  considerations  such  as  the  level  and  growth  rate  of  potential 
output  naturally  begin  to  matter  more  for  policy.  I  will  turn  now  to  a  discussion  of  these 
issues. 
The  tension  between  labor  market  and  spending  data  is  not  a  recent  phenomenon. 
Throughout the recovery period, forecasters have consistently overestimated both actual and 
potential GDP growth while underestimating the rate of job creation and the pace of decline 
of the unemployment rate (table 1). For example, in 2007, the average expectation for long-
run GDP growth from the Blue Chip survey of 50 forecasters was 2.9 percent (table 2). After 
successive reductions, the estimate now stands at 2.1 percent. Blue Chip forecasters also 
underestimated the decline in the unemployment rate. Other well-known forecasts followed 
this  same  pattern,  including  those  of  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  the  Survey  of 
Professional  Forecasters,  and,  yes,  FOMC  participants.  The  pattern  suggests 
that 
forecasters have only gradually taken on board the decline in potential in the wake of the 
financial crisis. 
Output growth can be decomposed into increases in hours worked and changes in output per 
hour,  or  productivity  growth.  For  the  United  States,  much  of  the  post-crisis  decline  in 
estimates of potential output growth appears to reflect weak labor productivity growth rather 
than  damage  to  labor  supply.  Labor  productivity  has  increased  only  1/2  percent  per  year 
since 2010 – the slowest five-year growth rate since World War II and about one-fourth of the 
average  postwar  rate  (figure  2).  For  further  perspective,  productivity  growth  averaged 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
1-1/2 percent during the so-called slow productivity period from 1974 to 1995 and 3 percent 
during the tech-boom decade from 1995 to 2005. The slowdown has been worldwide and is 
evident  even  in  countries  that  were  little  affected  by  the  crisis  (figure  3).  Given  the  global 
nature of the phenomenon, changes in factors specific to the United States are probably not 
the main drivers. 
One  factor  holding  back  productivity  in  recent  years  has  been  the  meager  growth  in  the 
business  sector’s  capital  stock  (figure  4).  This  weakness  is  consistent  with  the  weak 
recovery  in  demand.4  Another  important  factor  is  the  marked  decline  in  total  factor 
productivity (TFP) growth (figure 5). TFP is that part of productivity that is not explained by 
capital  investment  or  labor  quality;  it  is  thought  to  be  mainly  a  function  of  technological 
innovation.5  A  broad  decline  in  the  dynamism  in our  economy  may  also  be  contributing  to 
lower TFP.6 There is strong evidence that the slowdown in TFP growth in the United States 
preceded  the  financial  crisis,  particularly  in  sectors  that  produce  or  use  information 
technologies.7  
The  range  of  opinions  on  the  future  path  of  productivity  growth  is  wide,  and  the  historical 
record provides ample grounds for humility.8 A middle-ground position that seems to underlie 
many current forecasts is that productivity is probably still being held down by cyclical factors 
and lingering effects of the crisis. As those factors dissipate, labor productivity growth should 
move up to 1-1/2 percent or so, the lower end of its longer-run range. 
In addition to productivity, the other principal factor in potential output is labor supply, which 
is  determined  by  the  working-age  population,  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment,  and  the 
trend labor force participation rate. Both the natural rate of unemployment and labor force 
participation initially appeared to suffer crisis-related damage. But more recent data are a bit 
more encouraging. 
The natural rate of unemployment reflects the matching of characteristics that employers are 
seeking  with  those  of  the  unemployed. With  the  dramatic  labor  market  dislocations  of  the 
crisis,  it  was  not  surprising  to  see  measures  of  matching  efficiency  deteriorate,  and  many 
                                                
4   See Eugenio Pinto and Stacey Tevlin (2014), “Perspectives on the Recent Weakness in Investment,” FEDS 
Notes  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  November  21).  Their  analysis 
indicates that investment growth over the expansion has been consistent with a model using business output 
growth and the user cost of capital. In a second model, they show that the modest increases in the capital 
stock are consistent with the increase in labor supply and TFP. 
5   Over  long  periods  of  time  total  factor  productivity  is  primarily  driven  by  innovation,  knowledge  and  the 
efficiency  with  which  inputs  are  put  to  use  owing  to  the  evolution  of  business  practices  as  well  as  the 
influences of public capital stock, government regulations and other factors. Over shorter periods of time TFP 
will also capture the variations in the intensity of utilization of inputs, such as capacity utilization and hours per 
worker. Disentangling TFP from capital deepening and hours worked can be challenging. 
6   See,  for  example,  Ryan  Decker,  John  Haltiwanger,  Ron  Jarmin,  and  Javier  Miranda  (2014),  “The  Role  of 
Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 
(Summer), pp. 3–24. 
7   See John Fernald (2014), “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession,” 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 29, no. 1 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research). 
Some  have  argued  that  part of  the  TFP  slowdown  may  actually  be  a  measurement problem,  owing  to  the 
difficulty in measuring the productivity of health care, information technology, and other services. Others see 
the evidence for that claim as weak. For example, a recent paper finds little evidence that the slowdown arises 
from  growing  mismeasurement  in  information-technology-related  goods and services.  See  David  M.  Byrne, 
John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or 
a Measurement Problem?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, March 4. 
8   On the pessimistic end of the spectrum are analysts such as Robert Gordon; among the optimists are Erik 
Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee. See Robert J. Gordon (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The 
U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Erik Brynjolfsson 
and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant 
Technologies (New York: W.W. Norton). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
observers raised their estimates of the natural rate accordingly. But there are other factors, 
such  as  demographic  change,  that  may  have  led  to  a  decline  in  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment.9  Blue  Chip  forecasters’  estimate  of  the  natural  rate  have  now  returned  to 
around  5  percent,  about  the  same  as  before  the  crisis,  suggesting  that  these  factors  are 
roughly offsetting. Of course, estimates of the natural rate are highly uncertain.10  
Trends in labor force participation add another element of uncertainty. Participation has been 
declining since about 2000 and is estimated to have a trend rate of decline of 20 to 30 basis 
points per year, driven by population aging and other longer-term trends such as the decline 
in  participation  by  prime-age  males.  But  the  participation  rate  fell  sharply  after  the  crisis, 
faster than its apparent trend. It has been important to understand how much of the post-
crisis decline is cyclical, and thus amenable to repair by supportive policies, and how much is 
secular, due either to longer-run trends or to irreversible crisis-related damage. It has been a 
relief to see the participation rate improve over the past two years relative to estimates of its 
trend; indeed, participation is now close to some such estimates.11 Still, despite this relative 
improvement, the performance of the U.S. economy on this dimension has been poor relative 
to that of most OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries. 
For  example,  in  the  prime-age  group  of  25  to  54,  the  United  States  experienced  a 
2 percentage point decline in labor force participation from 2007 to 2014, while most OECD 
countries saw an increase (figure 6). The United States now stands at the low end of labor 
force participation for both men and women in this age group – above Italy, but well below 
Germany, France, and Spain.12  
Lower potential growth would likely translate into lower estimates of the level of interest rates 
necessary to sustain stable prices and full employment. Estimates of the long-run “neutral” 
federal funds rate have declined about 100 basis points since the end of the crisis. The real 
yield on the 10-year Treasury is currently close to zero, compared with around 2 percent in 
the mid-2000s. Some of the decline in longer-term rates is explained by lower estimates of 
potential growth, and some by other factors such as very low term premiums. 
To sum up so far, estimates of long-run potential growth of the U.S. economy have dropped 
from about 3 percent to about 2 percent in the wake of the crisis, with much of the decline a 
function of slower productivity growth. The decline in realized productivity growth seems to 
be driven both by low capital investment that is well explained by weak demand and by lower 
                                                
9   For example, older labor force cohorts have lower participation but also lower unemployment rates. 
10   Confidence intervals around statistical estimates of the natural rate are routinely estimated to be quite wide, 
reflecting  both  uncertainty  about  the  correct  model  specification  and  uncertainty  about  the  parameter 
estimates  given  the  model.  The  canonical  paper  by  Staiger,  Stock,  and  Watson  puts  the  95  percent 
confidence  interval  at  1-1/2  percentage  points  on  either  side  of  the  point  estimate.  See  Douglas  Staiger, 
James  H.  Stock,  and  Mark  W.  Watson  (1997),  “How  Precise  Are  Estimates  of  the  Natural  Rate  of 
Unemployment?”  in  Christina  D.  Romer  and  David  H.  Romer,  eds.,  Reducing  Inflation:  Motivation  and 
Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 
11   For example, a paper by Stephanie Aaronson and others estimates a trend below the current participation 
rate, while the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate is above the current rate. See Stephanie Aaronson, 
Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), “Labor Force 
Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 
197–275;  and  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2016),  The  Budget  and  Economic  Outlook:  2016  to  2026 
(Washington: CBO, January 25). For the argument that most of the decline is related to the severity of the 
recession  and  is  likely  reversible,  see  Christopher  J.  Erceg  and  Andrew  T.  Levin  (2013),  “Labor  Force 
Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession (PDF),” IMF Working Paper WP/13/245 
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, July). 
12   Different countries use slightly different concepts for measuring labor force participation, and therefore cross-
country comparisons may reflect some measurement issues. However, to the extent that these differences are 
constant  over  time,  comparisons  of  the  relative  performances  will  be  little  affected.  Accordingly,  it  is  worth 
highlighting that the labor force participation rate in the 25–54 age group has declined somewhat in the U.S. 
since 2008, while it has been relatively steady or even increased some in other major advanced economies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
TFP growth. Expectations of lower productivity growth going forward are more a function of 
slower gains in TFP. Lower potential output growth would mean that interest rates will remain 
below their pre-crisis levels even after the output gap is fully closed and inflation returns to 
2 percent. 
Over time, our understanding of the relationship between recessions and supply-side factors 
has evolved.13 There is a growing body of work suggesting that recessions can leave behind 
lasting damage – especially severe recessions associated with a financial crisis. One recent 
analysis  suggests  that  about  one-third  of  the  time,  there  is  no  permanent  supply-side 
damage; about one-third of the time, there is a reduction in the level of potential output but 
not its subsequent growth rate; and about one-third of the time, there is a reduction both in 
the level of output and in the growth rate.14 Unfortunately, recent experience suggests that 
the United States is at risk of falling in the last category (figure 7). 
It goes without saying that economic policymakers should use all available tools to minimize 
supply-side damage from the crisis. We need policies that support labor force participation 
and  the  development  of  skills,  business  hiring  and  investment,  and  productivity  growth  – 
policies that are, for the most part, outside the remit of the Federal Reserve. Monetary policy 
can contribute by continuing to support the expansion as long as inflation remains consistent 
with our 2 percent objective and inflation expectations remain stable. 
Strong labor markets do seem to be averting some of the damage that might otherwise have 
become  permanent.  Improved  matching  is  reducing  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment. 
Potential  workers  are  being  pulled  into  the  labor  force  by  rising  real  wages  and  the 
recognition  that  jobs  are  becoming  easier  to  find.  Over  a  longer  period,  stronger  demand 
should support increased investment, driving productivity higher. Moreover, as the economy 
tightens, firms will have rising incentives to get more out of every dollar of capital and hour of 
work. 
Real-time  estimates  of  potential  output  are  highly  uncertain;  forecasts  of  potential  growth 
even  more  so.  We  can  estimate  growth  of  the  working-age  population  reasonably  well. 
Future levels of labor force participation are less certain. Least certain of all are forecasts of 
TFP. If the optimists are right, then there will eventually be another wave of high productivity 
growth  driven  by  the  truly  remarkable  evolution  of  technology.  That  would  mean  higher 
potential  growth,  faster  increases  in  living  standards,  and  also  a  return  to  higher  interest 
rates over time. 
What if the pessimists are right and productivity growth remains low for another decade, or 
indefinitely?  The  consequences  would  include  lower  potential  growth  and  relatively  lower 
living standards. Our longer-term fiscal challenges would be significantly greater. 
Monetary policy 
The implications for monetary policy of these supply-side issues have been limited, but they 
begin to matter more as we near full employment. 
                                                
13   See, for example, Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), “Potential Output and 
Recessions:  Are  We  Fooling  Ourselves?”  IFDP  Notes  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  November  12);  and  Olivier  Blanchard,  Eugenio  Cerutti,  and  Lawrence  Summers  (2015), 
“Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF),” IMF Working Paper 
WP/15/230 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, November). 
14   See Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers, “Inflation and Activity,” in note 13. The authors argue that damage from 
recessions may be caused by hysteresis or by supply shocks such as oil price spikes or financial crises. In 
some  cases,  the  link  between  recessions  and  future  growth  may  reflect  “reverse  causation,”  whereby  the 
recession is caused by the realization that future growth will be lower than had been expected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
For the near term, my baseline expectation is that our economy will continue on its path of 
growth  at  around  2  percent.  To  confirm  that  expectation,  it  will  be  important  to  see  a 
significant strengthening in growth in the second quarter after the apparent softness of the 
past  two  quarters.  To  support  this  growth  narrative,  I  also  expect  the  ongoing  healing 
process in labor markets to continue, with strong job growth, further reductions in headline 
unemployment  and  other  measures  of  slack,  and  increases  in  wage  inflation.  As  the 
economy tightens, I expect that inflation will continue to move over time to the Committee’s 
2 percent objective. 
If  incoming  data  continue  to  support  those  expectations,  I  would  see  it  as  appropriate  to 
continue to gradually raise the federal funds rate. Depending on the incoming data and the 
evolving risks, another rate increase may be appropriate fairly soon. Several factors suggest 
that the pace of rate increases should be gradual, including the asymmetry of risks at the 
zero lower bound, downside risks from weak global demand and geopolitical events, a lower 
long-run  neutral  federal  funds  rate,  and  the  apparently  elevated  sensitivity  of  financial 
conditions  to  monetary  policy.  Uncertainty  about  the  location  of  supply-side  constraints 
provides another reason for gradualism. 
There  are  potential  concerns  with  such  a  gradual  approach.  It  is  possible  that  monetary 
policy  could  push  resource  utilization  too  high,  and  that  inflation  would  move  temporarily 
above target. In an era of anchored inflation expectations, undershooting the natural rate of 
unemployment should result in only a small and temporary increase in the inflation rate.15 But 
running  the  economy  above  its  potential  growth  rate for  an  extended  period  could  involve 
significant risks even if inflation does not move meaningfully above target. A long period of 
very low interest rates could lead to excessive risk-taking and, over time, to unsustainably 
high  asset  prices  and  credit  growth.  Macroprudential  and  other  supervisory  policies  are 
designed  to  reduce  both  the  likelihood  of  such  an  outcome  and  the  severity  of  the 
consequences if it does occur. But it is not certain that these tools would prove adequate in a 
financial  system  in  which  much  intermediation  takes  place  outside  the  regulated  banking 
sector.  Thus,  developments  along  these  lines  could  ultimately  present  a  difficult  set  of 
tradeoffs for monetary policy.16  
Conclusion 
To  wrap  up,  with  the  support  of  monetary  accommodation,  our  economy  has  made 
substantial progress. My view  is that a continued gradual return to more normal monetary 
policy settings will give us the best chance to continue to make up lost ground. 
                                                
15   See, for example, Laurence Ball and Sandeep Mazumder (2011), “The Evolution of Inflation Dynamics and the 
Great  Recession,”  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  (Spring),  pp.  337–381;  Blanchard,  Cerutti,  and 
Summers, “Inflation and Activity”, in note 13. 
16   See for example, Jeremy C. Stein (2013), “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy 
Responses.” Tobias Adrian and Adam B. Ashcraft (2012), “Shadow Banking Regulation” FRBNY Staff Report 
No. 559, and Samuel G. Hanson, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011), “A Macroprudential Approach 
to Financial Regulation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives vol. 25, no. 1, both note that macroprudential tools 
may not be sufficient to fully address risks rising outside of the regulated banking sector. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
