   Hiroshi Nakaso: Toward a “Comprehensive Assessment” of the 
monetary easing 
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting hosted by 
the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan (ACCJ), Tokyo, 8 September 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak at a business luncheon hosted 
by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan. 
All eyes seem to be on a comprehensive assessment to be conducted at the Bank of Japan’s 
September 2016 Monetary Policy  Meeting (MPM). This is, of course, the main topic of my 
speech today. Before addressing that issue, however, I would like to touch on responses taken 
by central banks after the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union (EU) –the so-
called Brexit – and decisions made at the Bank’s MPM held in July 2016. For me, these topics 
are not appetizers served before the main dishes. I believe that they are important policies on 
their own. 
Responses to Brexit 
On June 23, 2016, contrary to general consensus, a majority of voters in the United Kingdom 
supported leaving the EU, and this led to global financial markets destabilizing, manifested in 
such developments as the rapid depreciation of the pound sterling. 
As Japan’s markets were the first to be exposed to the unfolding results of the referendum, 
they reacted violently. The yen’s exchange rate appreciated rapidly and the stock prices fell 
sharply.  The  authorities  around  the  world,  including  those  in  the  G7  countries,  responded 
quickly and effectively. The G7 central banks expressed their intention to ensure adequate 
liquidity  and  support  the  functioning  of  markets.  In  the  Japanese  context,  we  judged  it 
necessary to ensure accessibility of globally operating Japanese firms and financial institutions 
to funding liquidity in foreign currencies, in particular to U.S. dollar funding liquidity, and to that 
end, to reinforce  the  backstop facilities  that  had  been  installed  during  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis. 
Enhancement of monetary easing in July 
In light of heightened uncertainties surrounding overseas economies, such as those stemming 
from the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, the Bank decided at the July 2016 MPM to 
enhance monetary easing. Specifically, measures taken by the Bank are threefold (Chart 1). 
The first is an increase in the Bank’s purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Specifically, 
the amount of purchases will be almost doubled from an annual pace of about 3.3 trillion yen 
to an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen. This measure aims at preventing the deterioration in 
business confidence and consumer sentiment and promoting proactive risk-taking. I think that 
this amount is significantly large given the fact that foreign investors’ cumulative net purchases 
of stocks amounted to about 16 trillion yen for the first three years of Abenomics (Chart 2). 
The second is a doubling of the size of the Bank’s lending program in U.S. dollars to support 
economic growth (the Special Rules for the U.S. Dollar Lending Arrangement to Enhance the 
Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth 
Conducted through the Loan  Support  Program).  Under  this  lending  program, the  Bank  will 
provide back-to-back financing in U.S. dollars to financial institutions by using its own U.S. 
dollar  reserve  funds  in  cases  where  these  financial  institutions  make  foreign  currency-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   denominated investments and loans to firms, which contributes to the strengthening of the 
foundations for economic growth. The duration of the Bank’s lending can be up to 4 years 
through rollovers. The loans under the program enable firms to receive stable funding in U.S. 
dollars  over  the  long  term,  and  the  program  has  been  actively  used  for  funding  of  firms, 
including local ones through regional banks. The size of the program was doubled and raised 
to 24 billion U.S. dollars. 
The third is an expansion in the amount of collateral that can be pledged under the Bank’s U.S. 
dollar funds-supplying operations. The Bank has been conducting U.S. dollar funds-supplying 
operations regularly with U.S. dollar funds raised through a network of bilateral swap lines 
among central banks. With this operation, financial institutions can raise U.S. dollar funds on 
a full allotment basis. Nevertheless, there is a condition that the amount of funds to be provided 
is up to that of eligible collateral pledged by each institution because in principle, transactions 
with  the  Bank  should  be  backed  by  collateral.  Under  the  current  monetary  policy,  many 
financial  institutions  have  sold  Japanese  government  securities  (JGSs)  to  the  Bank  while 
holding a substantial amount of current account balances with it. Under these circumstances, 
the  Bank  decided  to  establish  a  new  securities  lending  facility  in  which  it  lends  JGSs  to 
counterparties of these operations against their current account balances with the Bank. This 
enables the financial institutions to raise U.S. dollar funds against JGSs borrowed from the 
Bank. The new facility is designed to provide for a rainy day by precluding concern about the 
lack of collateral they hold. In this way, it is expected to further enhance effectiveness of the 
U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations as a backstop. 
These  measures,  despite  their  technical  nature,  can  contribute  meaningfully  to  ensuring 
access  to  funding  liquidity  in  foreign  currencies  and  thus  to  economic  stability.  I  want  to 
reiterate that such a technocratic endeavor is no less important than such big policy moves as 
the negative interest rate or the massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), 
which tend to attract more attention. 
Background of comprehensive assessment 
I.  
I would now like to turn to the broad framework of monetary policy. Against the backdrop of 
heightened uncertainty over the outlook for prices, with a view to achieving the price stability 
target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, the Bank decided to conduct at the next MPM, 
to be held in late September, a comprehensive assessment of the developments in economic 
activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  of  the  policy  effects,  over  the  past  three  years  since  the 
introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). 
The background is twofold. First, since the introduction of QQE, Japan’s economic activity and 
prices have improved substantially, and Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation. However, 
the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved yet, despite the unprecedented 
large-scale monetary easing. The Bank will analyze how monetary policy has functioned during 
these years and what factors have possibly hampered achievement of the 2 percent target. 
Second, under “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” which was introduced more than half a 
year ago, various interest rates, including JGB yields as well as rates for lending and corporate 
bonds, have declined substantially; thus, the policy already has exerted remarkable effects. At 
the  same  time,  however,  it  has  had  an  impact  on  financial  markets’  liquidity  and  financial 
institutions’ profits. The Bank will also assess the effects and impact of this policy. 
II.  
Mechanism of QQE 
Natural rate of interest and real interest rate 
Regarding the first point, I would like to start with the basics of the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism. In fact, the main transmission mechanism of monetary policy, be it conventional 
or unconventional, is the same. That is, real interest rate effects; in other words, driving the 
real interest rate higher or lower than the “natural rate of interest,” which is the level of the real 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   interest rate neutral to economic activity and prices. The bigger the difference in these rates, 
the more effective the monetary easing or tightening will be. 
The potential growth rate and expected growth rate are considered proxies for the “natural rate 
of interest.” As Japan has continued to struggle with a trend decline in the potential growth rate 
since the bubble burst, the Bank has lowered its policy rate to ensure the monetary easing 
effects (Chart 3). In 1999, it introduced the zero interest rate policy. Starting in 2001, the Bank 
conducted  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  such  as  quantitative  easing  and 
Comprehensive  Monetary  Easing.  Nevertheless,  the  monetary  easing  provided  by  those 
policies proved insufficient to overcome deflation. 
Mechanism of QQE 
Based on this experience, in 2013, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent, and with 
a view to achieving the target at the earliest possible time, it launched QQE. The transmission 
mechanisms of QQE are also expected to operate through real interest rate effects. QQE aims 
to raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent and through large-scale monetary easing that underpins 
the commitment. At the same time, the Bank exerts downward pressure on nominal interest 
rates across the entire yield curve through purchases of JGBs. The compound effects through 
these channels compress real interest rates. This decline in real interest rates boosts firms’ 
and households’ economic activity, which in turn leads to higher inflation rates, supported by 
higher  inflation  expectation.  It  was  assumed  that,  as  people  actually  experience  inflation, 
inflation expectations correspondingly would rise further (Chart 4). This last point is called an 
“adaptive formation mechanism” of inflation expectations, and it is a key concept of what I will 
talk about later. 
The innovative quality that might stand out in comparison with measures previously taken by 
the  Bank  of  Japan  and  other  central  banks  is  that  QQE  focuses  on  inflation  expectations. 
Specifically, based on the Fisher Equation, which states that the nominal interest rate is equal 
to the sum of inflation expectations and the real interest rate, QQE aims to lower real interest 
rates by raising inflation expectations while compressing nominal interest rates. 
Economic activity and prices under QQE 
This mechanism has worked and produced intended effects. QQE brought about a decline in 
the real interest rate by raising inflation expectations and lowering the nominal interest rate. 
As I mentioned earlier, the “natural rate of interest” has been on a trend decline. Despite that, 
the level of the real interest rate has been pushed down significantly lower than the “natural 
rate of interest” and the financial conditions have improved. Specifically, a moderate increase 
in lending coupled with a decline in interest rates, a rise in stock prices, and depreciation of 
the yen have been observed, and these have boosted economic activity. As a result, regarding 
economic activity, corporate profits marked a record high level and the unemployment rate, 
released last week, has declined to a remarkably low level of 3.0 percent. As for wages, the 
annual labor-management wage negotiations in 2014 resulted in base pay rises for the first 
time in two decades; base pay rises have continued for three consecutive years since then. 
Looking  at  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  output  gap  has  improved  close  to  the  long-term 
average of 0 percent. On the inflation front, on a basis excluding fresh food and energy, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, which had been around minus 0.5 percent before the 
introduction of QQE, turned positive, and thereafter has remained in positive territory for two 
years  and  ten  months  (Chart  5).  This  is  the  first  time  since  the  late  1990s,  when  Japan’s 
economy fell into deflation, that the CPI inflation rate has remained in positive territory over a 
protracted period. I think Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined 
as a situation where prices decline on a sustained basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Reasons for missing 2 percent price stability target 
However, it is true that the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved. This also 
has to do with developments in inflation expectations, which is a key factor for real interest rate 
effects to operate. Looking back, the mechanism worked as expected or better than expected 
over the first year or so from the introduction of QQE. Thereafter, however, exogenous factors 
emerged  such  as  a  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  weakness  in  demand  following  the 
consumption  tax  hike  from  the  beginning  of  fiscal  2014.  This  was  compounded  by  the 
slowdown in emerging economies from summer 2015 that accompanied volatile developments 
in global financial markets. As a result, the observed inflation rate has declined, and inflation 
expectations, which are formed in an adaptive manner, stalled. This seems to be the main 
factor that hampers achieving the price stability target of 2 percent (Chart 6). 
It is widely accepted that people’s inflation expectations are formed by two factors: a “forward-
looking formation mechanism” and an “adaptive formation mechanism.” In Japan, the effects 
of  the  “adaptive  formation  mechanism”  seem  to  have  dominated.  This  seems  to  be  partly 
because  the  price  stability  target  has  been  missed  under  prolonged  deflation.  In  addition, 
during  wage  negotiations  in  Japan,  such  as  the  so-called  spring  offensive  or  shunto  in 
Japanese, wages are decided on a basis of the actual price developments in the previous 
fiscal year. This may have been one of the factors behind the “adaptive formation mechanism.” 
The Bank, by continuing with QQE, has been trying to enhance the “forward-looking formation 
mechanism” and thereby to raise people’s inflation expectations and anchor them to the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent.  As  a  result,  perhaps  we  have  managed  to  deanchor  the 
deflationary expectation that the prices would never rise. But inflation expectations are still in 
transition to be reanchored at 2 percent. 
Looking ahead, as the observed inflation rate is expected to revert to a gradual rising trend, 
inflation  expectations  will  be  pushed  up  by  the  “adaptive  formation  mechanism.”  However, 
given that the observed inflation rate is likely to hover at slightly negative or about 0 percent 
for the time being, uncertainty persists about this point. For this reason, I think it is all the more 
important for the Bank to firmly maintain its commitment to achieving the price stability target 
of 2 percent at the earliest possible time from the viewpoint of enhancing the “forward-looking 
formation mechanism.” The comprehensive assessment is conducted with the aim of achieving 
the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time. To avoid any possible misunderstanding, this 
was  explicitly  referred  to  in  the  statement  released  after  the  MPM  in  July  2016.  At  the 
forthcoming MPM, we will discuss what needs to be done to achieve the 2 percent target at 
the earliest possible time. Means toward reducing the level of monetary policy accommodation 
will not be on the agenda. 
III.  
Effects and impact of “QQE with a negative interest rate” 
Issues of the comprehensive assessment 
Let me now move on to the topic of the negative interest rate policy. 
In terms of the transmission mechanism of policy effects, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
is an extension of the aforementioned policies. Namely, the Bank considers real interest rate 
effects as the basic mechanism. Against the backdrop of weak inflation expectations that had 
started to descend further, the Bank decided to keep real interest rates lower by reducing the 
nominal  interest  rates  beyond  the  zero  bound.  By  applying  the  negative  interest  rate  to  a 
portion of financial institutions’ current account balances with the Bank, in combination with its 
JGB purchases, the Bank intended to further compress interest rates on JGBs across the entire 
yield  curve.  This  was  expected  to  affect  various interest rates,  including those for  lending, 
corporate bonds, and CP, spreading the effects of a decline in the real interest rate to economic 
activity and prices. On the other hand, from the inception of the negative interest rate policy, 
the single most important issue has been that the policy should avoid having an excessively 
negative  impact  on  financial  institutions’  profits,  thus  impairing  the  financial  intermediation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Based on the experience of the past six months, the Bank will also assess the effects and 
impact of this policy. This will be the second pillar in our comprehensive assessment. 
What we learned over the last six months 
In  my  opinion,  there  are  six  points  we  have  learned  over  the  last  six  months  since  the 
introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Let me elaborate. 
First, a combination of the negative interest rate policy and JGB purchases proved extremely 
powerful in exerting downward pressure across the entire yield curve. This seems to have 
operated through the mechanism in which (a) the negative interest rate applied to financial 
institutions’ current account balances with the Bank has resulted in a decline in short-term 
interest  rates,  and  (b)  financial  institutions  have  been  discouraged  to  hold  current  account 
balances through JGB sales, and this, together with a decline in risk premiums caused by JGB 
purchases, has lowered long-term interest rates. Moreover, the so-called search for positive 
yield  by  investors  has  boosted  the  demand  for  assets  with  positive  yields,  substantially 
lowering yields on super-long-term JGBs. Such mechanism has exerted downward pressure 
and flattened the yield curve, particularly toward the longer end. This first point has proven the 
effectiveness of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” as a monetary policy tool (Chart 7). 
Second, some were concerned that lower risk-free rates, or JGB yields, might not lead to a 
decline in banks’ lending rates or interest rates on corporate bonds and CP, as room is limited 
for a decline in rates on deposits, the main source of funding for financial institutions. I also 
considered that such concern deserves attention, but banks’ lending rates, as well as interest 
rates for corporate bonds and CP, have fallen significantly thus far, each marking historical 
lows (Chart 8). 
Third, new developments relating to corporate finance have emerged recently; for example, 
the issuance of corporate bonds with a maturity of over ten years and firms’ borrowings through 
subordinated  loans  have  increased.  Super-long-term funding  had  been  observed  mainly  in 
infrastructure  firms  such  as  those  related  to  electricity  and  transportation,  but  now  is 
increasingly shared by a wider range of industries (Chart 9). 
Fourth,  according  to  the  results  of  surveys  such  as  the  Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan (Tankan) and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices  at  Large  Japanese  Banks  (often  dubbed  the  Loan  Survey),  financial  institutions’ 
lending attitudes have remained proactive. Thus far, we have seen little evidence that the profit 
squeeze caused by the negative interest rate is adversely affecting their intermediary functions 
(Chart 10). 
Fifth, however, the flipside of such positive developments is the growing pressure on financial 
institutions’ profits. This can be seen from the larger fall in lending rates relative to a marginal 
decline in rates on deposits. For Japan, the impact of the negative interest rate policy on the 
profits of financial institutions tends to be relatively large. This is due to such factors as the 
amount outstanding of deposits far exceeding that of lending, and the interest margin already 
being extremely small following prolonged competition among financial institutions. Given that 
profitability affects the soundness of financial institutions in a cumulative manner, we are fully 
aware of the fact that the impact can vary depending on the duration of the policy. The view 
that the Bank might disregard the intermediary function performed by the financial sector is 
totally unfounded. In fact, ever since our homegrown financial crisis in the 1990s, we have 
committed ourselves to maintaining financial system stability, which is a mandate given to us 
under the Bank of Japan Act. Besides, the banking system is the key transmission channel for 
monetary policy. 
Sixth, as long-term and super-long-term rates have declined significantly, the rates of return 
on investments of insurance and pension products have declined, the sales of some saving-
type products are suspended, and the net present value of retirement benefit obligations has 
increased. Although direct impacts of these developments on the entire economy may not be 
substantial,  we  should  take  account  of  the  possibility  that  such  developments  can  affect 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   people’s confidence by causing concerns over the sustainability of the financial function in a 
broad sense, thereby negatively affecting economic activity. 
Thinking on the monetary policy management 
“QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” must be pursued as the most appropriate macroeconomic 
policy, by striking the right balance between the powerful policy effects described in the first 
four points I mentioned and the possible adverse effects on financial intermediation that I listed 
as the fifth and sixth points. There is usually a trade-off between these two aspects, but the 
way we balance them must be dynamic. For example, a static and uniform judgment that rules 
out any further cuts in the negative interest rate in view of financial institutions’ profits would 
not  be  the  right  approach.  Depending  on  the  situations  for  economic  activity,  prices,  and 
financial conditions, further measures may still be deemed necessary after weighing policy 
effects against the cost on financial intermediation. Through numerous discussions I have had 
with the leaders of financial institutions, I think I fully recognize the effects of the large-scale 
monetary policy on financial institutions and financial markets, and the likely impacts if the 
policy is to continue. Based on this recognition, we will take measures that we judge necessary 
for Japan’s economy. 
It is from this standpoint that I will participate in discussions of the comprehensive assessment 
at  the  next  MPM.  Based  on  a  candid  assessment,  we  will  decide  whether  or  not  it  will  be 
necessary to make adjustments to the current policy framework, and if judged necessary, in 
what way it should be adjusted. 
Closing remarks 
Lastly,  let  me  talk  about  the  relationship  between  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and  the 
government’s fiscal management and a growth strategy. 
The  first  relationship  is  that  with  the  government’s  fiscal  management.  Usually,  when  the 
government  increases  fiscal  expenditures  by  issuing  government  bonds,  interest  rates  on 
government bonds will rise, which discourages private-sector investment. This effect is called 
“crowding out.” In this regard, in a “policy mix” where the central bank pursues monetary easing 
at the same time, the rise in interest rates will be contained, thereby preventing “crowding out” 
effects. In the current Japanese context, this is exactly what is taking place. Market interest 
rates in Japan have been in negative territory across a wide range of maturities due to the 
effects  of  the  Bank’s  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate.”  In  this  situation,  the  economic 
stimulus  of  the  government’s  fiscal  expenditure,  coupled  with  the  monetary  expansion,  is 
bound to prove very powerful due to the synergy effects. This type of powerful “policy mix” has 
been in place in Japan over the last three years and is likely to be reinforced further with the 
new large-scale fiscal “stimulus package” in combination with “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate.” 
The second relationship is that with a growth strategy. As I said earlier, it is important that the 
Bank lowers the real interest rate while at the same time the government raises the natural 
rate of interest by promoting a growth strategy. In this regard, there should be an emphasis on 
“at the same time.” Structural reforms raise potential growth and reduce uncertainty about the 
future, so that firms and households spend more today in anticipation of higher profits and 
incomes in the future, thus raising current demand. On the other hand, demand stimulus from 
monetary easing raises potential output through an increase in the capital stock as well as 
labor input. Thus, I believe monetary policy to overcome deflation and supply-side reforms to 
raise the growth potential must be pursued in tandem, or “at the same time,” to bring Japan’s 
economy back on track toward sustained growth. The Bank should continue with the monetary 
easing that successfully reshaped Japan’s economy such that it may be described as no longer 
being  in  deflation,  move  further  to  terminate  deflation,  and  achieve  the  2  percent  target. 
Meanwhile, I think that it is worth noting that the government’s recent economic measures 
focus on “investment for the future.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   It has been thirty-eight years since I joined the Bank of Japan. During this period, the economic 
and financial environment surrounding Japan has changed dramatically and the policy agenda 
for the central bank shifted accordingly. As a freshman, I could hardly imagine that this central 
bank traditionally renowned as an inflation fighter was going to be engaged in such a difficult 
struggle  to  overcome  deflation.  Such  changes  never  lose  steam.  More  recently,  after  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  active  discussions  have  taken  place  around  the  world  about 
policy responses to the slower growth trend and the framework of the monetary policy in such 
a situation, ignited by Larry Summers’ Secular Stagnation Hypothesis. I already expressed my 
opinion  in  New  York  earlier  this  year,  so  I  will  not  repeat  this  today.  However,  I  have  an 
impression that some topics that formerly had been confined to academic circles are today 
openly discussed as practical policy challenges that need to be addressed from a medium- to 
long-term perspective. I really feel this when attending international meetings and conferences. 
The  answers  vary  from  country  to  country,  and  they  are  not  as  straightforward  as  those 
provided in textbooks. For policy makers around the world, I sense that this has become a 
common  challenge  that  underlies  contemporary  policy  discussions  and  practices.  I  am 
reminded that, in order for policy makers at central banks and governments to appropriately 
keep abreast of the speed and dynamism with which the environment changes, they should 
not adhere simply to past common sense. Recently, I often think that we central bankers must 
have the courage to evolve with the times and adapt to the environment while cherishing the 
central bank’s DNA; that is, “the policy actions based on theory and research.” This last point 
is  somewhat  superfluous  and  clearly  outside  the  scope  of  the  upcoming  comprehensive 
assessment, and I would like to finish my speech by reminding you that this is just my thought. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
