  Yves Mersch: Oral hearing of the Federal Constitutional Court 
16 February 2016 in the OMT proceedings 
Introductory  statement  of  the  European  Central  Bank  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Oral  hearing  of  the  Federal 
Constitutional Court in the OMT proceedings, Karlsruhe, 16 February 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Distinguished members of the Second Senate, 
Introduction 
You have once again invited the European Central Bank to provide its opinion, as an expert 
third  party,  on  the  decision  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of 
6 September 2012, whose compatibility with national constitutional law you are reviewing in 
these  proceedings.  This  is  the  decision  that  approves  the  main  parameters  of  the 
Eurosystem’s outright monetary transactions on the secondary market for government bonds 
– so-called OMTs. I am happy to accept this invitation. 
What has changed since the last oral hearing on 11 June 2013? 
The Court of Justice of the European Union has, on the basis of the facts provided by you, 
responded to the questions submitted to it for a preliminary ruling. 
The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union,  which  is  competent  under  the  Treaties  to 
interpret  Union  law  and  the  validity  of  the  acts  of  the  Union’s  institutions,  including  the 
European Central Bank, found OMTs to be compatible with Union law: 
The European Central Bank did not exceed its monetary policy mandate either as regards 
the  conditionality,  the  selectivity  or  the  parallelism  of  OMTs  nor  as  a  circumvention  of  the 
limits  and  conditions  laid  down  by  the  assistance  programmes  of  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism – the so-called ESM. The Court of Justice of the European Union followed the 
arguments put forward by the European Central Bank and confirmed that OMTs in view of 
their  objectives  and  the  instruments  provided  for  achieving  them,  fall  within  the  area  of 
monetary  policy  and  therefore  within  the  powers  of  the  Eurosystem.  Monetary  policy 
measures, such as OMTs, may have indirect effects on the stability of the euro area, without 
this  leading  to  monetary  policy  measures  being  treated  as  equivalent  to  economic  policy 
measures. The fact that the European Central Bank will take an independent monetary policy 
decision  on  the  implementation  of  OMTs  also  excludes  the  possibility  that  the  ESM’s 
assistance programmes were circumvented. 
The Court of Justice of the European Union also confirmed that OMTs are proportional and 
that the European Central Bank, as regards the judicial review of these conditions, should be 
granted a broad discretion. As a result the European Central Bank was entitled to take the 
view that the purchase of government bonds on the secondary markets, in accordance with 
the  conditions  laid  down  on  6  September  2012,  is  likely  to  facilitate  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism  and  to  safeguard  the  singleness  of  monetary  policy.  These 
conditions were characterised by the fact that the interest rates for government bonds in the 
various euro area Member States were highly volatile with extreme spreads, which were not 
caused  by  macroeconomic  differences  but  by  strong  distortions  of  the  government  bond 
markets, largely due to the unfounded concerns of investors regarding the reversibility of the 
euro. OMTs do not go beyond what is required in order to achieve these objectives. They are 
not only strictly linked to their objectives, their volume is also – as the European Central Bank 
indicated in the last oral hearing – limited in several respects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  also  decided  that  OMTs  do  not  breach  the 
prohibition  of  monetary  financing.  In  particular,  the  Court  emphasised  that  OMTs  do  not 
remove  the  impetus  for  Member  Stets  to  follow  a  sound  budgetary  policy.  The  Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank’s draft decision and draft guideline on OMTs, which 
were already available  on 6 September 2012, contain adequate safeguards to ensure that 
the intervention of the Eurosystem does not result in an effect equivalent to that of a direct 
purchase of government bonds from the public authorities and bodies of the Member States. 
I  should  like  to  cite  a  few  examples.  The  European  Central  Bank’s  Governing  Council 
decides on the scope, the start, the continuation and the suspension of the intervention on 
the secondary markets. In addition, a minimum period is observed between the issue of a 
security on the primary market and its purchase on the secondary market. Furthermore, any 
prior announcement concerning either its decision to carry out such purchases or the volume 
of purchases envisaged is precluded. There is therefore no certainty that government bonds 
will be purchased. 
What role does the European Central Bank see for itself in these oral proceedings in the light 
of this confirmation of its actions? 
The European Central Bank cannot make any statements on the compatibility of OMTs with 
national constitutional law as it has no competence in this regard. Nevertheless, the ECB’s 
working assumption has always been that the Maastricht Treaty, which transferred monetary 
policy to the European Central Bank, has been declared as being compatible with national 
constitutional law. 
The European Central Bank is participating in this oral hearing in order to assist in clarifying 
any  remaining  questions,  insofar  as  they  are  based  on  the  subject  matter  of  these 
proceedings, i.e. OMTs are covered but not other monetary policy measures. 
At the same time the European Central Bank’s Governing Council must be able to decide 
independently on future monetary policy, in order to fulfil its duty of maintaining price stability 
in the euro area, as the Senate has described in paragraph 32 of its order for reference. 
Mr Chairman, 
Distinguished members of the Second Senate, 
Following on from these introductory words I will focus on two points, which you identified in 
your communication with the European Central Bank as being significant: 
• 
• 
First, the timeliness and modalities for the implementation of OMTs; 
Second, the possible volume of OMTs and potential risks for the federal budget. 
Timeliness and modalities for the implementation of OMTs 
As regards the timeliness of OMTs, let me be quite clear: OMTs were developed in January 
2012, to confront an extraordinary crisis situation. This crisis situation was characterised by 
massive  distortions  of  the  government  bond  market  that  developed  their  own  momentum. 
This in turn led to a disruption of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, which posed 
a threat for price stability. 
With OMTs the Eurosystem substantiated one of the monetary policy instruments provided 
for under the Statute. It can be activated by the Governing Council, providing the conditions 
and the need for such action are present. 
The  European  Central  Bank’s  Governing  Council  may  activate  OMTs  under  the  following 
conditions, which must be met cumulatively: 
• 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  must  establish  that  the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism is impaired, in particular due to unfounded 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     fears regarding the reversibility of the euro, and is leading to unwarranted spreads 
on the government bond markets. 
The Member State whose government bonds will be sold on the secondary market 
must  participate  in  an  appropriate  ESM  programme.  Appropriate,  in  this  context, 
means exclusively macroeconomic adjustment programmes or enhanced conditions 
credit  lines,  which  facilitate  primary  market  purchases  on  the  government  bonds 
market via a corresponding ESM facility. 
The Member State whose government bonds are being purchased on the secondary 
market  must  comply  with  the  strict  conditionality  and  satisfactorily  implement,  as 
verified by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, the programme. 
The Member State whose government bonds are being purchased on the secondary 
market must have access, or be regaining access, to the government bonds market. 
This will also be verified by the European Central Bank’s Governing Council. 
As  regards  the  first  condition,  the  impairments  to  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism  have  noticeably  declined,  not  least  thanks  to  the  monetary  policy  measures 
carried out by the European Central Bank, in particular the development of OMTs. The euro 
area is confronting a slow but steady recovery. Certain Member States that in 2011 and 2012 
were subject to market overreactions are now seeing signs of positive growth. Irrespective of 
the fact that yields for government bonds have reacted in varying degrees to new economic 
developments,  there  has  been  a  clear  reduction  in  the  yield  spreads  compared  to  the 
situation  in  2012.  It  is  not  the  aim  of  OMTs  to  harmonise  interest  rates  regardless  of  the 
differences between Member States’ macroeconomic or budgetary situation. 
Concerning  the  second  condition,  two  euro  area  Member  States  are  currently  undergoing 
ESM macroeconomic adjustment programmes. However, none of these programmes allow 
primary market purchases through the ESM to the government bonds market. 
In  conclusion,  I  can  state  that  OMTs  are  in  principle  available  as  monetary  policy 
instruments. The conditions for their crisis and location-related activation are, however, not 
currently met. 
Possible volumes and potential risks for the federal budget 
With regard to the possible volume of OMTs it remains the case that no ex ante quantitative 
limits are set on the size of OMTs in order to prevent market participants from adjusting to 
this  situation  and  using  these  instruments  for  their  own  purposes  to  the  detriment  of  the 
effectivity of the monetary policy instruments put in place. Notwithstanding this, the possible 
volume  of  OMTs  is  in  fact  quantitatively  limited  to  one  to  three-year  government  bonds, 
which are suitable for OMTs. Government bonds with a maturity of on to three years form 
only  a  small  part  of  the  entire  volume  of  government  bonds.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European  Union  has  confirmed  that  it  follows  from  this  that  the  commitments  that  the 
European Central Bank enters into are, in fact, circumscribed and limited. In order to ensure 
that maturities are not significantly shortened, it is foreseen that the European Central Bank’s 
Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  the  maturity  structure  and  the  termination  of  new 
issues of government bonds in the concerned Member States. Thus the volume of OMTs is 
limited in a variety of ways. 
In assessing the potential risks of OMTs it should be taken into account that, in principle, the 
use  of  monetary  policy  instruments  to  maintain  price  stability  entails  financial  risks  for  the 
Eurosystem. This applies not only to OMTs but also to main refinancing operations, to cite 
just  one  standard  monetary  policy  instrument  as  an  example.  The  Eurosystem  uses  main 
refinancing  operations  to  make  central  bank  money  available  to  banks.  In  principle,  these 
bank  loans  could  also  fail,  even  though  the  risk  of  this  occurring  is  slight.  Therefore,  the 
European Central Bank’s Governing Council limits these risks, by requiring the provision of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  collateral for main refinancing operations. The European Central Bank’s Governing Council 
has also taken precautions with regard to OMTs in order to limit the Eurosystem’s financial 
risk.  This  is  done,  in  particular,  by  applying  a  requirement  of  strict  conditionality  and  the 
monitoring  of  the  satisfactory  implementation  of  the  programme.  This  strict  conditionality, 
compliance with which is to be independently assessed by the European Central Bank from 
the monetary policy perspective, ensures that the Member States concerned apply sufficient 
budgetary  discipline  and  carry  out  structural  reforms,  to  achieve  a  sustainable  budgetary 
position.  For  the  implementation  of  OMTs,  as  for  other  monetary  policy  operations  of  the 
European Central Bank, creditworthiness and risk management rules apply. In this way an 
excessive default risk is avoided. 
It should be added, that the European Central Bank will not carry out any purchases using 
OMTs during the review of an ESM assistance programme. This also ensures that market 
conditions  are  not  directly  influenced  by  European  Central  Bank  purchases  whilst  the 
programme is being assessed by the Troika. 
The  comparison  between  OMTs  and  main  refinancing  operations  demonstrates  that  the 
financial  risks  of  various  monetary  policy  instruments  differ  as  to  their  degree  but  not  as 
regards their  principle  nature. Thus  the  Court  of  Justice  of the  European  Union  held  in  its 
judgment that the precautions foreseen for OMTs are likely to reduce the risk of losses. It 
also  recalled  that  a  central  bank,  such  as  the  European  Central  Bank,  has  a  duty  to  take 
decisions that, like open market transactions, inevitably involve a risk of floss. 
With regard to the necessity mentioned in the hearing outline, in connection with the potential 
risks  of  OMTs  for  the  federal  budget,  for  a  recapitalisation  of  the  Bundesbank,  I  would 
confirm the position of the European Central Bank that was provided in the last oral hearing. 
As far as I am aware, under German law there is no obligation for the federal government to 
recapitalise the Bundesbank, even when its losses are of such a magnitude that its equity 
base is threatened. 
Such  a  “default  liability”  can  also  not  be  deduced  as  a  general  rule  under  Union  law  in 
respect of the individual Member States when the central bank’s equity is drastically reduced. 
In accordance with the principle of financial independence as established by Article 130 of 
the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  it  follows  that  a  central  bank  must 
permanently  have  adequate  equity  available  to  fulfil  its  monetary  policy  tasks  within  the 
Eurosystem.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  every  loss  must  be  immediately  and  fully 
offset by private or public shareholders or the Member States. A central bank can in the short 
and medium-term, even with reduced or negative equity, fulfil its Eurosystem monetary policy 
tasks.  In  this  respect  a  reduced  or  negative  equity  does  not  preclude  from  the  outset  an 
orderly and stability-oriented monetary policy. 
Only when this situation continues for too lengthy a period – the European Central Bank’s 
last Convergence Report spoke of “a prolonged period of time” – would doubts arise as to 
whether the central bank can still adequately fulfil its Eurosystem monetary policy tasks. Only 
in  such  an  extreme  case  –  and  exclusively  in  this  case  –  would  they  be  recapitalised,  not 
immediately, but – again in the words of the European Central Bank’s Convergence Report – 
“within a reasonable period of time”. 
Conclusion 
Mr Chairman, 
Distinguished members of the Second Senate, 
I and my colleagues are at your disposal for further questions on these and other issues. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
