  Gent Sejko: Conducting monetary policy when fiscal space is limited 
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  high-level  seminar  on 
“Rethinking  monetary-fiscal  policy  coordination”,  jointly  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Slovenia 
and the International Monetary Fund, Tirana, 20 May 2016. 
 Dear Panel Moderator, 
My honorable fellow Panelists, 
I believe this seminar provides a perfect platform for exchanging insights on the coordination 
of monetary and fiscal policies. This issue is quite topical from the perspective of challenges 
central banks are facing today. 
Before  going  into  more  detail  on  the  topic  of  this  panel,  I  would  like  to  share  some 
thoughts with you regarding the coordination of monetary and fiscal policies. 
The price stability mandate of the central bank and their operational independence does not 
lessen the need of effective coordination between monetary and fiscal policies. At a strategic 
level, the foremost objective of the macroeconomic policy is to achieve sustainable growth, in 
a context of price stability and a viable external account. 
This goal requires the contribution of both the fiscal and the monetary policies, within their 
respective domains, as well as a fair degree of coordination amongst them. 
On a macro scale, a balanced policy mix and an effective policy coordination requires: 
– 
Policy  sustainability:  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  need  to  be  on  a  sustainable 
path. Prevailing academic consensus requires this sustainability to be anchored in 
simple  and  effective  policy  rules,  such  as  an  inflation  targeting  regime  and  some 
kind  of  fiscal  sustainability  law.  Furthermore,  sustainability  is  mutually  reinforcing: 
inflation  expectations  can  only  be  anchored  if  the  fiscal  policy  does  not  rise 
destabilizing fears while, at the same time, the fiscal policy can be more sustainable 
if it is not burdened by excessively high interest rates, fueled by a not so credible 
monetary policy; 
Policy credibility: monetary and fiscal policies need to be credible. Policy credibility 
arises  from  a  combination  of  a  clear  and  sustainable  policy  framework,  the  right 
structure of incentives, as well as a positive track record; 
Policy  awareness:  in  other  words,  the  recognition  of  different  goals,  different 
transmission  channels  and  different  time  frames,  informing  and  constraining 
monetary and fiscal policies. 
  In  the  long  run,  a  balanced  policy  mix  would  minimize  demand  volatility,  enhance  the 
allocation  of  resources,  and  promote  long-term  growth.  Effective  policy  coordination  would 
limit the fiscal deficit to a level that can be financed via capital markets, without recourse to 
monetary financing, without distorting the allocation of resources, and without unsustainable 
external  borrowing.  Effective  policy  coordination  would  also  bind  monetary  policy  towards 
achieving  its  price  stability  mandate,  thus  reducing  long-term  risk  premia  and  supporting 
financial stability. 
As a corollary to all what I mentioned, a weak stance in one policy area burdens the other 
policy area with excessive demands. 
This brings me to the specific topic of this panel: conducting monetary policy when 
fiscal space is limited. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
The  aftermath  of  the  recent  crisis  left  all  economies  in  the  region  struggling  to  reignite 
economic  growth.  Most  of  the  countries  are  doing  this  while  at  the  same  time  facing  the 
pressing need to consolidate their public finances. 
Albania  is  no  exception.  Although  the  repercussions  of  the  crisis  were  not  so  severe, 
economic growth has almost halved compared to its pre-crisis trajectory. Aggregate demand 
is  unable  to  generate  full  employment  of  labor  and  capital,  while  CPI  inflation  has 
continuously  undershot  our  target.  In  this  economic  landscape,  our  monetary  policy  has 
taken an ever more expansionary stance: the policy rate – now at 1.25% – is at a historical 
minimum,  which  would  have  been  unthinkable  a  few  years  ago;  we  have  increased  our 
liquidity injection operations as well as expanded the range of accepted collateral; and we 
have also made use of conditional forward guidance as an alternative instrument of monetary 
policy. 
On the other hand, our public debt jumped from around 55% of GDP in 2008 to around 72% 
of  GDP  today,  on  account  of  the  joint  action  of  automatic  stabilizers  and  some  degree  of 
countercyclical 
to  be 
unsustainable,  especially  given  the  difficult  financing  conditions  in  international  financial 
markets. It was also thought to be counterproductive, because of crowding out concerns in 
the  presence  of  tight  liquidity  conditions  in  domestic  financial  markets  and  because  of 
negative feed-back loops through higher risk premia. 
As a result, our fiscal policy is now locked on a consolidation path, aiming to bring the public 
debt  below  60%  of  GDP  within  the  end  of  this  decade.  This  means  the  monetary  policy 
remains  the  only  countercyclical  tool  to  stimulate  economic  activity.  Taking  everything  into 
account, I believe fiscal consolidation, coupled to an expansionary monetary policy, delivers 
the correct policy mix in the country. 
However,  given  our  experience  so  far,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  on  three 
observations: 
– 
fiscal  stimulus.  However, 
fiscal  expansion  was 
thought 
this 
First,  monetary  policy  remains  effective  even  in  the  presence  of  fiscal 
consolidation.  In  Albania,  we  have  been  able  to  steer  interest  rates  into  a 
downward  trajectory  and  to  stimulate  credit  growth  in  the  domestic  currency. 
However,  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  hampered  by  fiscal 
contraction. While the two policies moving in opposite directions would not be ideal 
in the best of times, it is doubly so in the presence of balance sheet adjustment in 
the  private  sector  and  heightened  risk  premia  and  deleveraging  in  the  financial 
sector. 
Second,  monetary  policy  can  still  achieve  its  goal  of  price  stability  in  the 
presence of fiscal consolidation. However,  this  statement  needs  to  be  qualified 
further. On a longer term perspective, inflation remains a monetary phenomenon. If 
a central bank is committed to its price stability mandate and given enough time for 
the monetary transmission mechanism to work, there should be no reason why we 
should  not  be  able  to  meet  our  inflation  targets.  However,  there  are  two  caveats 
here: 
– 
In  pursuit  of  its  inflation  target,  a  central  bank  can  and  might  be  forced  to 
engage in un-conventional monetary policy tools. This is very much the case 
when  central  banks  are  flirting  with  the  limits  of  conventional  instruments  of 
monetary policy (zero lower bound of policy rates or extreme risk aversion in 
the  financial  system).  As  we  know,  un-conventional  tools  can  be  both 
distortionary  and  present  us  with  the  risks  of  unintended  consequences  in 
terms  of  financial  stability.  Under  certain  premises,  the  risk  associated  with 
employing un-conventional monetary policy tools might be sufficiently strong to 
revisit the scope or the speed of fiscal consolidation; 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   A  prolonged  undershooting  of  the  inflation  target  might  decouple  inflation 
expectations from the inflation target of central banks requiring a more active 
monetary policy. This is not an argument against the policy mix per se; rather, 
it  is  a  reminder  of  the  crucial  role  that  central  bank  communication  and 
management of expectations should have. 
 Third, we should avoid burdening monetary policy with too many goals or risk 
losing our credibility. With public finances highly indebted, politicians have been 
only  too  happy  to  place  the  burden  of  economic  recovery  on  central  banks.  As 
central bankers, we might enjoy this visibility, but we must be cautious on not getting 
carried away. We must always remind ourselves of what monetary policy can and 
cannot achieve: we can ultimately affect nominal variables in the economy, i.e. the 
price level, but we can affect neither long-term growth nor general prosperity in the 
economy. To that extent, I think we must always remind politicians on carrying out 
their duties on structural reforms and make best use of the breathing space provided 
by monetary policy. 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
