   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustainable inclusive growth and good 
governance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 2016 General Assembly of the League of Municipalities 
of the Philippines, Manila, 10 February 2016. 
 Distinguished officers and members of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP) 
under the leadership of National President Sandy Javier, fellow workers in government, special 
guests, magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! 
Thank you for inviting the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas to your general assembly with the theme 
“2016 and Beyond: Promoting Good Governance and Sustainable Inclusive Growth.” 
This is the first time for me to speak before an association of local government executives. 
Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  why  a  Central  Bank  governor  is  addressing  municipal 
governments. Well, two reasons. First, LMP National President Javier is a former classmate in 
college and two, BSP shares your objective of postering sustainable inclusive growth. 
Pareho po tayo. Clearly, our government – at the national and local levels  – believes that 
promoting  sustainable  inclusive  growth  and  good  governance  go  hand  in  hand.  In  this 
connection, I am pleased to report that our track record shows that we continue to achieve 
major gains in both fronts. 
Just the other week, the National Economic and Development Authority reported that that our 
economy expanded by 6.3 percent in October to December last year. Ladies and gentlemen, 
this  means  that  the  Philippines  has  achieved  68  quarters  of  uninterrupted  or  sustained 
economic growth. 
This brought the average full year economic growth of the Philippines to 5.8% in 2015, among 
the highest in Asia after India, China and Vietnam. Our growth would have been better if we 
did  not  have  to  deal  with  the  adverse  effects  of  El  Nino,  other  weather  disturbances  and 
adverse external conditions. 
In fact, analysts describe Philippine economic growth as remarkable, as it is taking place when 
the global economy is slowing down as a result of financial and geopolitical challenges. 
NEDA  said  this  level  of  growth  (in  the  last five years)  has  not  been  seen  in  the  past four 
decades as this is based on public and private investments in areas that create jobs, increase 
incomes, and improve people’s wellbeing. In other words, these are investments that promote 
sustainable inclusive growth. On the part of the BSP, we continue to be successful in providing 
stability  to  prices through  our  monetary  policies  and  in keeping  our  banking sector  sound, 
stable and liquid. 
All  these  give  us  cause  to  be  optimistic  about  sustaining  inclusive  growth  in  2016  and 
beyond,... particularly if adherence to good governance becomes the norm from the national 
agencies as well as to the local government units. 
Members of the LMP, good governance is also the rationale that underpins the requirement by 
government to get prior opinion of the BSP’s Monetary Board (MB) on all government loans, 
including those from LGUs to ensure that borrowings are consistent with overall state financial 
goals.  This  requirement  is  essentially  based  on  the  1987  Constitution  (Article  12)  that 
mandates  the  BSP  to  provide  policy  direction  in  the  areas  of  money,  banking  and  credit. 
Furthermore, Republic Act No. 7653 or the BSP Charter (Section 123) provides that the BSP 
functions  as  financial  advisor  on  official  credit  operations  of  the  Government,  its  political 
subdivisions and instrumentalities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
The objective is to enable the BSP to monitor public sector borrowings and to assess their 
impact on monetary aggregates, the price level and the balance of payments in fulfillment of 
its role and mandate to promote and maintain monetary and financial stability. 
As you may know, requests for MB opinion on planned borrowings may be submitted directly 
to the BSP by the LGUs or through the lending banks. 
The BSP recognizes the importance of credit to LGUs, particularly municipalities. Thus, the 
BSP has issued circulars to streamline the documentary requirements and facilitate the review 
process on how LGUs can secure MB opinions on LGU loans. 
We have since registered a significant increase in LGU’s engagement with the BSP. In 2015, 
the BSP received a total of 347 requests for MB opinion, an increase of 35 percent from the 
257 requests in 2014. The cooperation of the LGUs and lending banks enabled the BSP to 
render MB opinion on 334 or 96 percent of these requests. 
About 76 percent of the requests we received in 2015 came from municipalities, involving a 
total of P12.2 billion. It is notable that the majority of the loans for which BSP rendered an 
opinion  in  2015  were  used for  infrastructure  projects  such  as farm-to-market  roads,  public 
markets and multi-purpose halls. 
These  purposeful  spending  by  local  governments  provide  a  boost  not  only  to  community 
development but also to broader national growth. Indeed, in the context of governance, local 
government units play a significant role in ensuring that investments made translate to better 
infrastructure, employment generation and sustainable inclusive growth. 
The  BSP  continues  to  review  its  procedures  to  further  refine  and  facilitate  the  process  of 
securing an MB opinion, as well as to address issues concerning the length and the validity of 
the MB opinion. These efforts constitute BSP’s support for LGUs in delivering critical economic 
and social services to your constituents. 
In  addition,  the  BSP  continues  to  develop  an  inclusive  financial  system  that  supports 
sustainable  inclusive  growth.  This  covers  economic  and  financial  education,  consumer 
protection, as well as access to credit through microfinance or the Credit Surety Fund program. 
As of January this year, there were 45 operational Credit Surety Funds across the country. 
Together,  they  have  granted  more  than  P2  billion  in  loans  to  Micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises or what we call MSMEs. Under this program, collateral-challenged MSMEs that 
are members of cooperatives gain access to bank loans with credit guarantees issued by the 
Credit Surety Fund. In some provincial CSFs, certain municipalities share in the pooling of 
contributions  of  cooperatives,  banks  and  NGOs  to  provide  surety  cover  or  guarantees  for 
credit-worthy MSMEs. 
You will also be happy to know that the BSP and 12 other government agencies are now 
working  together  to  implement  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion,  a  common 
platform to reach out to the unbanked and the underbanked sectors of our society so that they 
can benefit from being part of the formal financial system. 
We hope to partner with the LMP and its members to make this a truly successful grassroots 
program. For your constituents and your municipalities, financial inclusion means being part of 
the  mainstream  where  financial  services  such  as  deposits  are  safer  and  where  loans  are 
infinitely more affordable (from 15 to over 20%), compared to informal lenders who charge as 
much as over 1,000 percent in interest per year. This should generate tremendous benefits for 
those who remain outside our financial mainstream. 
Finally,  we  seek  the support  of the  LMP  to  continue to  inform  your  constituents  about  our 
demonetization program. That while the old banknote series can no longer be used to pay for 
goods and services, they can still be exchanged for the new generation banknotes at banks or 
at the BSP branches and regional offices across the country until December 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  LMP.  Sustaining  the  momentum  of  the  Philippine  economic 
success story lies on the decisions we make and the actions we take today; they provide the 
foundation on which to sustain economic activities that generate jobs and improve the lives of 
Filipinos. The task before us therefore is to secure this position of strength and deliver on our 
commitment to our constituents, amidst continuing change and challenges. 
Let us continue to work on our common goal: to promote sustainable inclusive growth and 
good governance in 2016 and beyond. 
Marami pong salamat sa LMP. Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po 
tayong lahat! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
