  Raghuram Rajan: Policy and evidence 
Inaugural  Address  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan, Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  the 
10th Statistics Day Conference 2016, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 26 July 2016. 
 Good morning. It is a pleasure to welcome learned statisticians and economists from across 
the  world  to  this  Statistics  Day  celebration  at  the  RBI.  I  am  sure  you  will  spend  the  day 
discussing advances in the fields of economics and statistics. These discussions will be very 
valuable. We certainly need to improve the quality and timeliness of our statistics, and big 
data can be very helpful.  
What I want to talk about this morning is, however, not the quality or timeliness of the data 
but the use of evidence in the policy dialogue. Some may believe that all it takes to convince 
the body politic of the necessity to choose one policy over another is to present the evidence, 
complete with careful, well identified tests. Confronted with the evidence, the advocates of 
misguided  policies  will  simply  bow  to  the  superiority  of  the  other  side’s  arguments  and 
withdraw gracefully. Unfortunately, as many of you who advise policymakers know, this is not 
how the real world works.  
Let me make the point using a current debate in India. There is a belief in some quarters that 
the Reserve Bank has hurt economic growth by keeping interest rates and borrowing costs 
too  high,  that  those  high  rates  have  reduced  credit  and  spending  but  had  little  effect  on 
inflation.  Inflation  has  come  down  only  because  of  good  luck  stemming  from  low  energy 
prices.  Furthermore,  the  RBI  has  compounded  the  growth  slowdown  by  urging  banks  to 
clean up their balance sheets. The RBI, of course, stands by its policies. Nevertheless, this 
debate is very important because it could shape policy directions in India over the medium 
term. 
Now what does the evidence say? I am going to offer some simple charts only, not detailed 
econometric  tests,  but  they  should  indicate  the  rationale  for  our  actions.  Specifically, 
monetary  policy  has  not  been  too  tight.  Instead,  I  will  argue  that  the  slowdown  in  credit 
growth has been largely because of stress in the public sector banks, stemming from past 
mistakes  in  lending.  This  will  not  be  fixed  just  by  a  cut  in  policy  rates.  Instead,  what  is 
required is a clean-up of the balance sheets of public sector banks, which is underway and 
needs to be taken to its logical conclusion. I will then speculate why economic evidence finds 
it so hard to prevail in the public debate, not just in India but elsewhere in the world. 
Public sector lending vs private sector lending 
Let us start by looking at public sector bank credit growth compared with the growth in credit 
by  the  new  private  banks.  As  the  trend  in  non-food  credit  growth  shows  (Chart  1),  public 
sector  bank  non-food  credit  growth  has  been falling  relative  to  credit growth  from the  new 
private sector banks (Axis, HDFC, ICICI, and IndusInd) since early 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This is reflected not only in credit to industry (Chart 2), but also in micro and small enterprise 
credit (Chart 3).1  
                                                  
1 
In  Chart  2,  the  latest  negative  growth  April  number  may  be  an  aberration  because  of  UDAY  bonds  being 
transferred from bank loan books to investments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    The  relative  slowdown  in  credit  growth,  albeit  not  so  dramatic,  is  also  seen  in  agriculture 
(Chart 4), though public sector bank credit growth is picking up once again.  
Whenever one sees a slowdown in lending, one could conclude there is no demand for credit 
– firms are not investing. But what we see here is a slowdown  in lending by public sector 
banks vis a vis private sector banks. Why is that? 
Such a simple identification test suggests that the problem is not that aggregate demand for 
credit  is  low  because  interest  rates  are  too  high.  That  would  have  implied  a  slowdown  in 
credit  across  the  board.  Yet  the  real  rates  of  credit  growth  from  private  sector  banks  to 
different sectors are extremely high, and private banks typically do not charge lower interest 
rates  than  public  sector  banks.  This  suggests  strong  demand  for  loans  from  them  at 
prevailing  interest  rates.  The  obvious  conclusion  one  should  draw,  therefore,  is  that  the 
slowdown  is  because  something  is  affecting  credit  supply  from  the  public  sector  banks 
specifically. 
Could  it  be  the  lack  of  public  sector  bank  capital?  If  we  look  at  personal  loan  growth 
(Chart 5),  and  specifically  housing  loans  (Chart  6),  public  sector  bank  loan  growth 
approaches private sector bank growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    The lack of capital therefore cannot be the primary culprit. Rather than an across-the-board 
shrinkage  of  public  sector  lending, there seems  to  be  a  shrinkage  in  certain  areas  of  past 
high credit exposure, specifically in loans to industry and to small enterprises. 
Additionally, the fact that the credit slowdown dates from early 2014 suggests that the bank 
cleanup, which started in earnest in the second half of fiscal year 2015, was not the cause. 
Indeed, the slowdown is best attributed to over-burdened public sector bank balance sheets 
and growing risk aversion in public sector bankers. Their aversion to increasing their activity 
can  be  seen  in  the  rapid  slowdown  of  their  deposit  growth  also,  relative  to  private  sector 
banks (see Chart 7). After all, why would public sector banks raise deposits aggressively if 
they are unwilling to lend? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In sum, the Indian evidence, supported by the narrative of experiences from other parts of 
the world such as Europe and Japan, suggests that what we are seeing is classic behavior 
by  a  banking  system  with  balance  sheet  problems.  We  are  able  to  identify  the  effects 
because parts of our banking system do not suffer from such problems. The obvious remedy 
to anyone with an open mind would be to tackle the source of the problem – to clean the 
balance  sheets  of  public  sector  banks,  a  remedy  that  has  worked  well  in  other  countries 
where it has been implemented. Clean up is part of the solution, not the problem, and that is 
what we are doing. 
Another take on whether rates are too high 
Let  me  now  turn  back  to  inflation.  No  doubt,  the  RBI  has  emphasized  the  fight  against 
inflation, and a key element of any disinflationary process is to curtail aggregate demand. At 
the  same  time,  because  past  excess  investment  and  low  global  demand  created 
overcapacity  in  certain  sectors,  the  RBI  could  afford  to  be  less  aggressive  in  curtailing 
demand than in different circumstances. This is why we chose a gentle glide path to bringing 
down inflation, first down to 8 percent in 2015, then 6 percent in 2016, and now 5 percent in 
2017. We have cut interest rates by 150 basis points since January 2015. With CPI inflation 
currently close to the upper bound of our inflation target, few could sensibly argue that we 
have not been adequately accommodative. Of course, our last policy statement indicated we 
expect it to come down to around 5 percent by March 2017. 
Critics offer two contradictory arguments on inflation. On the one hand, they argue that we 
have killed demand and growth through high rates – though this itself seems at odds with the 
received wisdom that we are the fastest growing large economy in the world. On the other, 
they argue that our policy has had little effect on curbing inflation, that disinflation has been a 
result of the fall in oil and other commodity prices. 
It is worth pointing out that the disinflation process started in late 2013, long before oil prices 
collapsed. Moreover, a significant part of the fall in oil prices globally has not been passed on 
domestically, as the government has hiked excise on petrol and diesel, and refinery margins 
have also waxed and waned. For instance, even as the price of the Indian crude basket fell 
72  per  cent  between  August  2014  and  Jan  2016,  the  pump  price  of  petrol  fell  only 
17 per cent.  Therefore,  while  I  do  want  to  acknowledge  the  benign  international  price 
environment in bringing down inflation, it is not the entire story. To see this, we plot inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  in  non-traded  education  and  health  care  services  in  Chart  8,  as  well  as  the  broader 
miscellaneous component of the CPI index. Here too, inflation has come down. 
How  could  the  Reserve  Bank  have  brought  down  inflation  without  killing  demand?  By 
bringing down the public’s expectations of inflation and by not giving in to the clamor to slash 
interest  rates!  Interestingly,  the  clamor  builds  up  whenever  year-on-year  inflation  is  low 
relative  to  the  policy  rate,  no  matter  whether  low  year-on-year  inflation  is  because  of 
mechanical  base  effects,  and  regardless  of  whether  inflation  is  projected  to  go  up  in  the 
future. No serious central bank determines policy on such a basis, but it sometimes is the 
focal point for the media debate here. 
As a final piece of evidence on whether our policy is too tight, consider Chart 9 plotting real 
policy  rates  around  the  world.  Given  our  real  growth  is  amongst  the  highest  in  the  world, 
while  our  inflation  is  in  the  upper  tier,  one  would  expect  our  real  policy  rate  to  be  high. 
Instead, it is right in the middle of the pack of large countries, and significantly lower than 
China,  a  country  we  often  like  to  compare  ourselves  with.  Once  again,  evidence  seems 
contradictory to the views of the critics of our policy. 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally, some legitimate concerns have been raised about whether our inflation target should 
include  volatile  components  of  inflation  like  vegetables  and  other foods.  In  reality,  the  RBI 
has typically looked through such volatility in setting policy rates. Even in the new inflation 
framework,  the  inflation target  has  to  be  breached  three quarters  in  a  row  for  the  MPC  to 
have  to  explain  its  failure.  Volatile  components  like  vegetables  tend  to  be  smoothed  over 
three quarters.  At the  same time,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  drop food  entirely  from  the  target 
index. It is the single most important consumption category for most Indians still. Moreover, 
as  Indians  get  richer,  there  are  some  structural  shifts  in  consumption  patterns  that  are 
reflected  in  higher  prices  for  favored  items.  It  would  not  be  appropriate  to  ignore  these 
structural  shifts  and  the  need  for  associated  supply  responses.  It  is  heartening  that  after 
years  of  high  pulse  inflation,  we  are  seeing  a  strong  attempt  by  the  Government  to 
encourage pulse cultivation, and early sowing patterns suggest possible significant increases 
in pulse production. 
Why do arguments persist despite contrary evidence? 
Why  is  the  debate  uninfluenced  by  the  data?  Why  is  it  that  as  we  seem  to  be  bringing 
inflation under control, public voices to abandon the fight are loud? I don’t know for sure but 
let me hazard a guess; Is it possible the political economy of inflation is different from the 
received wisdom we were taught in class as students? And are there parallels to the political 
economy of bank cleanup? 
Specifically, despite all the public commentary against inflation and its pernicious effect on 
the  weaker  sections  of  society,  there  seems  to  be  surprisingly  little  anxiety  in  public 
commentary about inflation so long as it stays in the high single digits. Industrialists welcome 
negative real rates of interest for obvious reasons. Many middle class savers value the high 
nominal  interest  rates  on  their  fixed  deposits,  not  realizing  that  their  principal  is  eroding 
significantly  every  year.  The  Keynesian  economist  is  happy  because  monetary  policy  is 
extremely accommodative. The analysts cheer every cut in interest rates because markets 
are  assumed  to  have  a  Pavlovian  positive  response  to  them.  Even  the  poor  are  inured  to 
their fate of seeing real incomes erode, and are only aggrieved when the price of some food 
staple sky-rockets. Interestingly, short term spikes in food staples are not really controllable 
by  monetary  policy,  which  then  leads  to  the  incorrect  generalization  that  since  monetary 
cannot control the politically most important aspects of inflation, it cannot control inflation in 
general. 
With no powerful and vocal political constituency getting agitated about generalized inflation 
so long as it is only moderately high, opponents of disinflationary policies are free to frame 
the  debate  as  they  wish.  The  persuasive  way  is  to  claim  that  interest  rates  are  hurting 
growth. The argument is hard to refute because there is always some sympathetic borrower 
who is paying seemingly excessive rates. The high prevailing borrowing rate of some small 
borrower – say 15 percent today – is held out as Exhibit A of the central bank’s inconsiderate 
policies,  never  mind  that  the  rate  charged  includes  the  policy  rate  of  6.5  percent  plus  an 
additional spread of 8.5 percent, consisting of a default risk premium, a term premium, an 
inflation risk premium, and the commercial bank’s compensation for costs, none of which are 
directly affected by the policy rate. 
The  press  is  constantly  urged  to  frame  the  debate  as  inflation  versus  growth,  and  with 
inflation  still  moderate,  only  the  excessively  conservative  central  bank  could  be  against 
growth! Never mind that overly accommodative policy today will set up inflation for the future; 
Never mind that the last forty years of economic theory and practice suggests that the best 
way central banks can support growth over the medium term is by keeping inflation low and 
stable. 
The reality, of course, is that high inflation is not stable. As we have seen in India’s own past, 
and in other emerging markets, moderately high inflation tends quickly to become very high 
inflation. The currency then becomes volatile, leading occasionally to external stress. After 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  all, one of the reasons we were termed the Fragile Five in the summer of 2013 was because 
of our high inflation. Moreover, the saver eventually recognizes that high inflation erodes the 
value of his financial savings and switches to real assets like gold. Since we do not mine gold 
in the country, this also puts pressure on the current account. 
In sum, the fragilities associated with high inflation accumulate, and eventually could lead to 
crisis.  However,  the  belief  that  there  is  a  strong  powerful  domestic  constituency  against 
inflation in India, which was drummed into our heads as students, may be a myth, certainly at 
moderately high levels of inflation. Without any political push back as inflation rises, what is 
to ensure macroeconomic stability? 
Unlike more authoritarian Asian economies that used severe administrative measures to deal 
with bouts of high inflation during their growth phase, our democratic structure rightly does 
not  permit  such  measures.  So  it  is  better  that  we  tackle  inflation  up  front  by  building  the 
necessary institutions. Perhaps this is why successive governments, in their wisdom, have 
given  the  RBI  a  measure  of  independence.  Certainly,  such  concerns  would  support  the 
current government’s decision to enshrine its commitment to low inflation through a formal 
inflation target and the creation of a monetary policy committee. 
Interestingly, a similar public dynamic seems to be at work in attitudes towards cleaning up 
the public sector banks. Clearly, over-levered promoters have no incentive to see the banks 
tighten  screws  and  demand  repayment.  Some  public  sector  bank  CEOs  with  a  short 
remaining  tenure  would  prefer  not  taking  stern  action  and  recognizing  NPAs.  They  might 
indeed prefer transferring any problems to their successor. Investors in bank shares, at least 
initially, do not welcome disclosures of loan losses. And depositors, knowing the government 
stands  fully  behind  public  sector  banks,  are  rightly  unperturbed  by  the  quality  of  bank 
balance sheets. 
So it is easy to ignore the problem of loan losses and hope it somehow goes away, much as 
it  is  easy  to  ignore  moderately  high  inflation.  But  as  with  inflation,  loan  losses  have  a 
tendency to increase. The lesson from other countries is that by the time losses get too big to 
ignore, they are too late to manage, and the system is in crisis. As with inflation, it is the task 
of the central bank to press for bank clean up earlier, when few amongst the public support 
the central bank’s activism. 
Fortunately, after an initial reluctance, banks have entered the spirit of the cleanup and some 
have gone beyond what was demanded of them. The stock market, after reacting negatively 
initially early this year, has been more supportive of public sector bank stock prices, probably 
reflecting the belief the cleanup is good over the medium term. Promoters are selling assets 
and paying up, and new asset reconstruction companies are being started to buy assets. To 
restore  bank  balance  sheets  to  health,  it  is  important  this  process  be  taken  to  its  logical 
conclusion. 
Criticism of the central bank using arguments unsupported by evidence is not just an Indian 
phenomenon. The Bank of England was criticized for laying out the economic costs of Brexit, 
the  ECB  has  been  criticized  for  doing  too  much  to  restore  health  to  troubled  peripheral 
economy  financial  sectors,  and  the  Fed  is  under  fire  for  departing  from  the  Taylor  Rule. 
Criticism comes with the territory, and central banks need to make the case for their policies. 
At the same time, it is important that governments around the world look beyond sometimes 
uninformed and motivated public criticism and protect the independence of their central bank 
to act. That is essential for stable sustainable growth. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
