  François Villeroy de Galhau: Europe at a crossroads – how to achieve 
efficient economic governance in the euro area? 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, recorded for the 
event at Bruegel, Brussels, 22 March 2016. 
 Summary 
There  is  a  growing  perception  of  the  need  to  rethink  the  economic  governance  of  the 
euro area. Compelling ideas have been put forward to that effect; yet their implementation is 
tricky, especially in the present climate of Euroscepticism. 
Shifting from ideas to action has become urgent if monetary policy is not to remain the only 
game in town. Clearly, the single monetary policy cannot be a substitute for the coordination 
of national economic policies or the lack of reforms. To be sure, the debate over EMU reform 
is  politically  loaded;  but  for  euro  area  citizens  the  poor  coordination  of  national  policies 
involves  a  high  cost  in  terms  of  growth,  of  several  points  of  GDP.  The  economic  case 
therefore needs to be made: this discussion is not about “more Brussels”, it is about more 
growth  and  jobs  in  Europe.  In  addition,  it  is  not  a  choice  between  domestic  reforms  or 
European coordination; we need both. 
Between  complete  integration  –  of  the  monetary-policy  type  –  and  monitored  national 
policies,  as  currently  conducted,  the  missing  link  is  “full  coordination”  of  fiscal  and 
structural  policies.  This  is  clearly  shown  in  a  matrix  crossing  these  three  degrees  of 
integration and the four policy dimensions (monetary, financial, fiscal and structural). 
This full coordination of national fiscal and structural policies can only be achieved by setting 
up  a  legitimate  decision-making  institution,  embodied  by  a  euro  area  Finance  Minister, 
whose role is here concretely specified. This would make the euro area more than the sum of 
its parts. 
Within a mandate to achieve the strongest, sustainable and balanced growth, this institution’s 
role would be to prepare and propose the euro area collective strategy, and to supervise 
its  implementation  by  Member  States.  Furthermore,  the  Finance  Minister  would  also  be 
responsible  for  implementing  efficient  crisis  management.  While  moving  towards  further 
integration, the Minister could be given the authority to manage a euro area Convergence 
Fund, evolving in three stages towards a euro area budget. 
In  all  events,  the  Minister  will  need  to  be  backed  by:  a  legitimacy-enhancing  appointment 
process; a genuine Treasury administration; and a strong democratic control over euro area 
affairs. 
To echo Robert Mundell, economic policy as a whole “isn’t just the best game in town, it is 
the only game”, not monetary policy alone. We cannot afford another missed opportunity: for 
EMU, for its citizens, 2016–2017 is the decisive time to act. 
 All  of  us  probably  agree  that  there  is  one  necessity:  the  euro  area  needs  to  rethink  its 
economic governance, notwithstanding significant institutional changes implemented during 
the  crisis.  Progress  is  badly  needed,  although  progress  is  very  difficult  to  achieve,  in  a 
climate  of  growing  Euroscepticism.  I  want  to  pay  tribute  to  Helmut  Schmidt,  one  of  the 
greatest Europeans, who said clearly in Frankfurt in October 2011: “There was a failure to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
set  the  economic  rules  of  the  game  for  the  currency  union.  A  powerful  authority  with 
responsibility for fiscal and economic policy was not set up.”1 
In  that  spirit,  I  speak  today  as  a  committed  European  and  a  contributor  to  EMU  since  its 
outset,  as  well  as  a  Member  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  Some  of  the  ideas  I  will 
elaborate  upon  were  put  forward  in  my  February  joint  paper  with  Jens  Weidmann,  even 
though  what  I  will  say  today  does  not  necessarily  represent  his  views  or  those  of  other 
colleagues of the ECB or, naturally, those of the French government. 
While such ideas to enhance economic governance are not all new, their implementation is 
tricky:  this  will  be  the  main  thrust  of  my  speech.  Shifting  from  ideas  to  action  is  urgent  if 
central  banking  is  not  to  remain  the  only  game  in  town.  For  this  reason  notably,  central 
bankers  can  legitimately  contribute  to  the  debate.  Yet,  taking  action  will  obviously  be  a 
decision for political leaders. 
This  issue  has  already generated many  prominent  contributions: for  instance  Jean-Claude 
Trichet2 in 2011 advocated the need for a European finance minister; Mario Draghi3 called, in 
early 2015, for a “quantum leap” in European integration and institutional convergence and 
Ignazio  Visco4,  last  November,  wished  parallel  and  decisive  progress  on  political  Union. 
Although  I  cannot  quote  all  contributors,  Bruegel  has  also  promoted  a  European  fiscal 
capacity and a stronger coordination of economic policies, along with Jean Pisany Ferry and 
many others.5 
Last  year,  the  Five  Presidents  Report,  followed  by  the  EMU  pack  of  the  European 
Commission reflected a more consensual view of how to deepen and strengthen EMU in four 
different areas: financial, fiscal, economic, and political – and with two different horizons, the 
short term and the long term, recognising that the latter may require a revision of the Treaty. 
How  to  reform  the  Euro  Area(EA)’s  economic  governance  is  the  subject  of  a  loaded  but 
much-needed debate requiring some principled choices (I). Among the latter, I will elaborate 
on the priority towards a “full coordination” of national economic policies, and the subsequent 
need for a strong EA Finance Minister with very concrete tasks I will detail today (II). 
I.  
The loaded debate we must have and some fundamental principled choices. 
The debate is loaded because of at least three fault lines. 
A.  
First,  in  the  relationship  between  the  EA  and  the  rest  of  the  EU,  deepening  integration 
across both perimeters at the same time, let alone at the same pace, is not warranted. This 
raises the prospect of a multi-speed Europe, especially at a time when EU membership could 
become a reversible matter. We shouldn’t fear different speeds. In clearer terms: whatever 
the limits of the February “Brussels agreement”, I am strongly in favour of the UK remaining 
within  the  EU;  yet,  irrespective  of  the  outcome of  the  British  referendum,  the  EA  can  and 
should pursue further integration. 
                                                
1   Helmut Schmidt, Remarks at the Farewell event for European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, 
October 19, 2011. 
2   Building  Europe,  building  institutions,  Speech  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet  on  receiving  the  Karlspreis  2011  in 
Aachen, 2 June 2011. 
3   Speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, at SZ Finance Day 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2015. 
4   European Union: progress or regress?, Dinner speech by Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, Istituto 
Affari Internazionali 50th Anniversary Conference, Rome, 13 November 2015. 
5   Agnès  Bénassy-Quéré  and  Xavier  Ragot,  Conseil  d’Analyse  Economique,  A  Policy  Mix  for  the  Euro  Area, 
March  2015  ,  or  Daniel  Gros  and  Cinzia  Alcidi,  European  Parliament  In-Depth  Analysis,  Economic  policy 
coordination in the euro area under the European Semester, November 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Second, tensions and heterogeneity within the EA, especially between  the so-called core 
and periphery, have been exacerbated by the crisis so that the prospect of risk sharing may 
be perceived as involving permanent transfers across economies. Pooling risks would thus 
be seen as involving moral hazard, with permanent suspicion of “free rider” behaviour. Yet, 
we must realise that heterogeneity across countries calls for reinforced cooperation, based 
on risk reduction together with risk sharing. It is the only way forward to resolve the tension 
between solidarity and responsibility. 
Last, on the crucial issue of economic governance for the EA, France and Germany have 
not always seen eye to  eye. In Germany, “economic government” as advocated by Pierre 
Bérégovoy in the early ‘90s, was originally seen as a threat to ECB independence and is now 
viewed as a new trick to avoid implementing domestic reforms. To be fair, the French call for 
Germany to support coordination, and the German doubt about French reforms, have been 
and are still both well-founded. A weak outcome would be that nothing would happen before 
the French and German elections of 2017. But even in this case, 2016 can and must be a 
year of intense preparation. 
B.  
Why this remains a necessary debate and why we must make the economic 
case 
We know there is deep political resistance to sharing fiscal resources and sovereignty, as 
well as Euroscepticism and lack of a sense of national ownership of European matters. The 
sad example of the refugee crisis illustrates how European countries so far have displayed 
little solidarity to find a common solution. From a political economy perspective, this can be 
seen as tension between national preferences and common interest. 
This  is  why  we  need  to  make  the  economic  case.  If  we  are  to  promote  a  stronger 
governance of the euro area, it cannot be a purely institutional case out of blind belief in ever 
closer integration. It is not a theological issue and not solely a political one either. It is a very 
concrete tool to achieve the full economic potential of the euro area. We must strive to reach 
such an agreement for the good of the citizens of Europe. It has to be grounded in candid 
economic analysis and empirical evidence. This discussion is not about “more Brussels”, it is 
about more growth and jobs in Europe. 
Clearly,  monetary  policy  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  economic  policy  coordination  or 
the lack of reforms. The ECB has worked extremely hard to fulfil its mandate. Yet, there are 
economic  and  even  political  risks  to  overburdening  monetary  policy:  these  are  risks  to 
financial  stability,  to  the  proper  functioning  of  credit  channels,  and  to  central  bank 
independence, as enshrined in the treaties. For that reason alone central bankers need to 
take part in this debate. The way we have handled the crisis has shown how unprepared and 
uncoordinated we were. Not only did this episode affect our credibility, it also revealed the 
economic costs of non-coordination in terms of prevention and management of crises, both 
at the national and collective level. 
At  the  national  level,  Member  States  have  been  lacking  the  capacity  to  mitigate  large 
shocks in the EMU context. The non-binding nature of economic policy coordination, as set 
out in the Lisbon Strategy or the Agenda 2020, is partly to blame. Some Member States also 
proved to be poorly committed to implementing domestic structural and fiscal reforms that 
would  have  created  more  policy  space  to  address  shocks.  Collectively,  the  expected 
dynamics  between  peer  pressure  and  market  discipline  did  not  work,  as  markets  did  not 
believe  in  the  no-bail-out  principle,  and  as  national  authorities  did  not  really  accept  peer 
pressure, nor the implementation of the rules. 
The  absence  of  coordination  has  a  genuine  economic  cost.  Several  studies  have 
estimated it for the EA. It includes a) the cost of crises and assistance programmes, as well 
as b) the impact on growth due to uneven compliance with budgetary rules before the crisis 
and rigidity of the rules during the crisis. Let me mention a few numbers. Banking and fiscal 
crises can be extremely costly: relative to the U.S. growth trajectory, the EA has fallen behind 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
by  5  percent  of  GDP  per  capita  since  2011.  Both  the  European  Commission6  and  the 
NIESR7  have  shown  the  large  impact  of  simultaneous  fiscal  consolidation  in  Europe,  with 
around 2% larger GDP declines due to intra-EA spillovers. Optimal policy coordination in the 
EA would have required differentiated consolidation efforts in line with available fiscal space, 
leading to better growth outcomes. 
A last illustration relates to asymmetric adjustment driven by current account imbalances at 
the country level at the beginning of the crisis and contributing to the large external surplus at 
the euro area level today. A surplus of more than 3 % of GDP, for an economic area which 
still has a negative output gap of more than 2%, is clearly suboptimal. 
In sum, all these figures point to a significant cost of non-coordination, of at least 2% of the 
EA GDP at present. 
To take the debate forward, three principled choices have to be made. 
C.  
These  principled  choices  are  needed:  (i)  to  resolve  the  debate  between  coordination  and 
reforms;  (ii)  to  simplify  rules  and  embrace  institution-based  policymaking;  in  order  (iii)  to 
achieve full coordination. 
First, we do not have to choose between coordinating economic policies and domestic 
reforms.  This  is  the  cornerstone  of  any  French-German  agreement:  breaking  the  political 
gridlock  on  coordination  versus  reforms,  and  making  parallel  progress  on  both  domestic 
reforms  and  European  coordination.  This  requires  overcoming  distrust  and  putting  both 
aspects under the same umbrella, namely a common institution. 
Second,  institutions  with  a  mandate  are  superior  to  rules  without  institutions.  To 
bolster policy consistency and coordination, we admittedly need simpler rules. For instance, 
the  complexity  of  the  reforms  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  and  the  so-called 
“Fiscal Compact” is such that Finance ministers privately admit they do not know  whether 
their country is completely abiding by the rules. But we learnt in real life that we cannot rely 
simply on rules. They should be supported by strong institutions with discretionary powers. 
Mario Draghi pointed out the fundamental difference between a monetary policy institution 
and fiscal rules, which are exemplified by the track records of the ECB and SGP respectively. 
Third,  there  is  room  for  an  intermediate  level  of  integration,  which  I  would  call  “full 
coordination of national policies”, a presently missing link between integration, as we have 
for  monetary  policy  decision-making,  and  rule-based  surveillance  such  as  is  currently  the 
case  for  national  fiscal  policies.  To  illustrate  this,  a  matrix  is  obtained  by  comparing  the 
4 components of economic policy (monetary, financial, fiscal and structural) in columns with 
the 3 levels of integration in rows: namely the lowest level of “monitored national policies” 
(with recommendations), the intermediate level  of “fully coordinated national policies” (with 
incentives)  and  the  upper  level  of  “integrated  policy”  (with  common  instruments). The four 
components of economic policy displayed here are quite distinct, but they all contribute to the 
same objective: to boost growth but also to smooth shocks. Their classification is organised 
more or less – from left to right – in terms of their effect on stabilisation vs. allocation, in other 
words of their cyclical vs. structural effects. I do not need to elaborate on monetary policy. As 
a complement to monetary union, economic union can be seen as the combination of three 
main policy instruments: (i) financial, (ii) fiscal and (iii) structural. All three policy dimensions 
indeed have a supply-side impact on resource allocation (to a growing extent going right). 
                                                
6   Jan in’t Veld, Fiscal consolidations and spillovers in the Euro area periphery and core, European Commission 
Economic Paper 506, October 2013. 
7   Dawn  Holland  and  Jonathan  Portes,  Self  Defeating  Austerity,  National  Institute  Economic  Review  No.  222 
October 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I could elaborate on the financial dimension of EMU. The Banking Union, when completed, 
has  the  potential  to  move  up  to  the  highest  level  of  institutional  integration.  Similarly,  the 
Juncker Plan is a useful integrated instrument, although too weak and slow at present. I have 
stressed  elsewhere  the  need  for  and  the  benefits  of  moving  ahead  with  a  much  stronger 
“Financing  and  Investment  Union”,  incorporating  these  steps  forward  and  going  well 
beyond the proposed Capital Markets Union. 
 Yet,  today  I  prefer  to  focus  on  the  fiscal  and  structural  policy  dimensions  of  EMU.  In 
practice, our fiscal framework has been implemented as a fairly weak monitoring framework. 
Likewise, on the structural front, the MIP (Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure) is clearly 
lacking  teeth.  An  institution  is  clearly  missing  to  develop  a  mandatory  and,  hence,  full 
coordination  of  national  policies  in  the  fiscal  and  structural  areas,  an  idea  I  will  elaborate 
upon in a few moments. 
The highly political nature of the debate should not hide the strong economic rationale for 
such  a  reform.  15  years  ago  Peter  Kenen8  argued  that  a  fiscal  integration  could  make 
currency areas thrive, even though they did not meet all the features of an optimal currency 
area.  To  be  sure,  the  highest  level  of  policy  integration  would  logically  involve  building  a 
genuine fiscal union, as well as completing the Single Market; but that would surely require 
more  ex  ante  convergence  and  resolution  of  legacies  from  the  past.  My  view  is  that  we 
should leave the door open to further integration for countries that are willing and ready to 
consider it. I will come back to it, but first I would like to highlight what I consider to be the 
most urgently needed part of EMU reform, namely. 
                                                
8   Peter Kenen, Currency unions and policy domains, Princeton University, November 2000. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 II.  
How to set up a strong institution to fully coordinate national fiscal and 
structural policies. 
 This institution is  what  would enable us to achieve the second level of integration, i.e. full 
coordination  of  national  policies.  In  economic  terms  it  would  help  internalise  negative 
externalities  (e.g.  demand  spillovers,  or  financial  contagion)  from  asymmetric  economic 
shocks  across  jurisdictions,  as  well  as  optimize  positive  externalities  between  fiscal  and 
structural policies. In political terms it would help make the Euro area more than the sum 
of its parts. Jean Monnet famously declared that “nothing is possible without men, but 
nothing lasts without institutions”. I am convinced that establishing a strong institution 
led  by  a  euro  area  Finance  Minister  would  contribute  to  cement  further  integration  of 
economic policy. 
So let me describe first the mandate and the shared strategy, then the tasks of a euro area 
Finance minister, and last the way to anchor its legitimacy and capacity. 
Which mandate and what strategy? 
A.  
The  Commission  has  already  introduced  a  two-stage  European  semester,  so  that  the 
discussion of the outlook for the euro area precedes country-by-country analysis. We must 
take  this  further:  the  mandate  of  this  decision-making  institution  must  be  to  achieve  the 
strongest,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  To  fulfil  the  mandate,  this  institution  –  in 
particular  the  euro  area  Finance  Minister  at  the  head  would  be  tasked  to  outline  the 
collective  strategy.  It  would  be  essential  for  the  Euro  Area,  informed  by  independent 
advisory  bodies,  to  collectively  agree  on  overall  economic  policy  objectives,  and  on  the 
division  of  tasks  through  the  setting  of  individual  performance  targets  for  Member  States. 
Such  an  agreement  could  be  reached  by  a  process  following  more  or  less  the  European 
Semester calendar: 
• 
A  preparation  phase  would  provide  the  macro  framework  and  take  on  board 
individual  country  contributions,  as  well  as  the  expertise  from  the  Fiscal  and 
Competitiveness  Councils.  This  phase  would  require  assessing:  first,  potential 
growth, with a quantified ambition to raise it; second, the euro area output gap, and 
employment,  taking  into  account  limited  cross-border  labour  mobility;  third,  the 
sustainable fiscal and external positions for the euro area as a whole, as well as the 
sustainable distribution of these positions across countries. There is some similarity 
with what the G20 has been aiming at with its “Framework for growth”, a process 
through  which  countries  identify  shared  objectives,  the  policies  needed  to  reach 
them,  and  the  progress  toward  them  …  although  we  can  obviously  be  more 
ambitious for the euro area. 
In  a  decision  phase,  the  euro  area  Finance  Minister  would  propose  a  strategy, 
consisting of the collective objective and – as far as necessary – its country specific 
translations in terms of reforms and policy stance. This proposal would be subject to 
formal opinions from the Fiscal and Competitiveness Councils. It would then have to 
be adopted at simple majority by the Eurogroup, and further to be endorsed by the 
European Parliament. In case of a stalemate, it would be for Heads of States and 
Governments  –  the  European  Council  in  a  euro  format  –  to  adopt  the  collective 
strategy, on the basis of an adapted proposal by the EA Finance Minister. 
 We should  of  course  bear  in mind  the  rationale for  subsidiarity.  Euro  area  outcomes  will 
remain dependent on national policies. Many areas of policy-making and all implementation 
will remain decentralised. Yet full coordination will require that economic policy stance and 
spillovers be collectively agreed upon, and that Member states work consistently to achieve 
the common objectives. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  include 
incentives.  Negative 
incentives  would  of  course 
Which tasks for a euro area Finance Minister? 
B.  
First, the Minister would be in charge of preparing the euro area-wide collective strategy 
to fulfill the mandate I already described. 
Second, the Finance Minister would be responsible for supervising the implementation of 
policy  objectives  and  institutional  discipline,  using  adequate  instruments  to  provide 
symmetric 
the  effective 
implementation  of  existing  sanction  mechanisms.  They  could  be  broadened  in  contractual 
procedures,  already  put  forward  in  the  2013  Franco-German  contribution  on  EMU,  or  in 
Chancellor Merkel’s9 “binding reform contracts” proposal, and including positive incentives. 
One  of  them  would  be  the  access  to  a  euro  area  ”Convergence  Fund”,  through  which 
Member  States  could  benefit  from  common  funding,  once  they  have  established  a  track 
record  and  convincingly  avoided  moral  hazard.  In  addition  conditioning  the  participation  in 
economic governance on compliant implementation could provide strong incentives. 
Third,  the  Finance  Minister  would  be  responsible  for  implementing  centralised  crisis 
management.  The  specific  features  of  the  ESM  set-up  shed  light  on  inherent  euro  area 
limitations, as Member States decided solidarity would not be part of the usual governance 
system. As a result, the ESM is grounded in an intergovernmental treaty. A Finance Minister 
for  the  euro  area  would  naturally  be  in  charge  of  overseeing  ESM  operations.  Crisis 
management methods themselves could surely better integrate debt sustainability, liquidity 
support, and financial stability, some weak points recently underlined by the IMF. 
Last, while moving towards further integration, the Minister could be given the authority for 
managing  a  Euro  area  Convergence  Fund,  evolving  towards  a  Euro  budget. We  are 
touching  here  on  the  issue  of  a  common  fiscal  capacity,  promoted  recently  by  Pier  Carlo 
Padoan or Benoît Coeuré. I think it reasonable, as successfully done in the past, to build it in 
three stages. In the first stage, Member States would be free to join, and the Convergence 
Fund  would  be  allocated  to  financing  common  goods  such  as  European  infrastructure 
investment or refugee settlement. In a second stage that would represent a significant step 
up,  this  budget  could  become  a  stabilisation  instrument,  centralising  a  well-defined  set  of 
policy instruments, such as a European layer of unemployment insurance. The third and final 
stage  of  fiscal  integration  would  only  be  achieved  if  agreement  can  be  found  both  on 
financing (direct revenue-raising capacity and common debt issuance) and on the desirable 
level  of  business  cycle  synchronization.  As  access  to  this  third  stage  would  be  linked  to 
reduced  risks,  this  perspective  would  be  a  powerful  incentive  for  national  discipline  and 
commitment as shown during the march to the Euro. 
How to set up a legitimate institution with a genuine administrative capacity? 
C.  
Further integration and democratic accountability should progress together, as discussed in 
my  recent  article  with  Jens  Weidmann.  We  need  to  enable  the  European  economic 
administration  to  be  more  efficient,  while  establishing  strong  enough  political  legitimacy  to 
ensure balance between liability and control. A European Treasury headed by a euro area 
Finance  Minister  would  have  a  chance  of  embodying  such  a  delicate  undertaking.  These 
institutional changes obviously require a new Treaty, notwithstanding the “low hanging fruits” 
we can and must pick up in the coming year. 
First, we need a legitimacy-enhancing appointment process. The Finance Minister could 
thus be appointed for a five-year period by the European Council acting by qualified majority 
on  a  proposal  from  the  president  of  the  EU  Commission.  The  new  appointment  would  be 
subject to the formal approval of the European Parliament, and the Finance Minister would 
be  member  of  the  Commission,  as  well  as  chair  of  the  Eurogroup.  The  Minister  would 
                                                
9   Angela Merkel’s first parliamentary speech of the third term, 18th December 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
thereby  have  the  legitimacy  to  represent  internationally  the  euro  area  in  Economic  and 
Financial fora, alongside the President of the ECB. 
Second, the euro area Finance Minister would need to be backed by a genuine Treasury 
administration,  which  could  include  staff  from  the  Commission’s  Economic  and  Financial 
Directorate General, the ESM, and the Economic and Financial Committee Secretariat. Such 
a  civil  service  would  also  benefit  from  the  public  advice  of  two  independent  bodies,  the 
European Fiscal Board and the Competitiveness Council. 
Last, if we succeed in implementing further integration, we will need stronger democratic 
control over euro area affairs. To this end, we will need to consider institutionalising a euro 
area format of the European Parliament. Relationships between euro area MPs and national 
parliaments  will  also  need  to  be  enhanced,  through  an  inter-institutional  agreement,  or  by 
creating dedicated commissions. 
 To conclude, let me briefly recap: 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
The  lack  of  economic  coordination  has  a  high  growth  cost  for  Euro  area 
citizens, of several points of GDP 
type  –  and  solely 
Between  complete 
“monitored”  national  policies  –  as  at  present  –,  the  missing  link  is  a  full 
coordination of fiscal and structural policies 
This  full  coordination  can  only  be  achieved  by  setting  up  a  legitimate 
decision-making institution, embodied by a Finance Minister of the euro area, 
in charge of elaborating its “collective economic strategy”. 
integration  –  monetary  policy 
Robert Mundell, father of the theory of optimal currency areas, did acknowledge that the euro 
area was far from optimal. Yet he remained confident, saying: “it will be achieved because, 
for Europe, it isn’t just the best game in town, it’s the only game.” Economic policy as a 
whole, not central banking alone, is indeed the only game in town. Of course, we always 
face the risk of failure when conducting far-reaching reforms. Yet we cannot afford another 
missed opportunity and we have to act swiftly without losing a longer term view. For EMU, for 
its citizens, 2016–2017 is the decisive time to act. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
