   Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy in Japan 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kushiro, 2 June 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing  the 
political, economic, and financial communities of eastern Hokkaido, including Kushiro. I would 
like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the 
activities of the Bank of Japan’s Kushiro Branch and Obihiro Office. 
In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan  and  abroad,  as  well  as  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  touch  briefly  on  the 
economy of eastern Hokkaido. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on actual 
conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
I.  
Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad 
Global financial markets and overseas economies 
A.  
Global financial markets -- which had been unstable since the turn of the year, affected by an 
interest rate hike by the Federal Reserve in December 2015 -- have been gradually regaining 
stability following the Group-of-Twenty (G-20) Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
Meeting  in  Shanghai  (Shanghai  G-20)  in  late  February.  Recently,  crude  oil  prices  have 
rebounded  despite  adverse  factors  such  as  the  stalled  negotiation  among  oil-producing 
countries  over  production  cuts,  while  currencies  and  stock  markets  of  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  have  generally  been  recovering.  This  situation  may  be 
described  as  a  lull  in  the  negative  spiral  of  the  strong  dollar  --  and  the  consequent 
strengthening  of  Chinese  yuan  --  and  the  weak  crude  oil  prices,  which  had  increased  the 
uncertainty  of  the  future  prospects  of  the  world  economy.  The  communiqué  issued  at  the 
Shanghai G-20 indicated a consensus among the authorities of various countries on the need 
to deal with the economic slowdown not only by implementing monetary policy measures but 
also by taking every possible policy measure. As expectations have also spread that the pace 
of U.S. interest rate hikes will be moderate, a sense of relief appears to have gradually grown 
in the markets. 
Even so, causes for concern remain. The problem -- posed by the financial market turmoil 
caused by the Global Financial Crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis as well as its 
spillover effects on the real economy -- was an acute disease, so to speak, so it was clear what 
solutions should be prescribed. Meanwhile, the problem that has emerged recently can be 
described  as  a  chronic  disease,  given  that  dollar-denominated  debts  built  up  by  emerging 
economies,  including  China,  and  commodity-exporting  economies  during  the  period  of 
monetary easing in the United States are coming to the fore again as a debt overhang issue 
since the start of a liftoff by the Federal Reserve. It will probably take a long time before this 
problem can be cured. 
Looking back at developments in the world economy during the recent period, the annualized 
growth rate of the U.S. economy, which is the driving force of the world economy, was a low 
0.8 percent in the January-March quarter because of the sluggishness in industrial production 
accompanying the appreciation in the U.S. dollar and the decline in commodity prices and 
because of unfavorable weather conditions in the winter. According to the nowcast by regional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Federal Reserve Banks and other forecasts, the growth rate appears likely to be somewhat 
higher in the April-June quarter. However, the U.S. employment statistics for April, the latest 
month for which the data is available, showed a slight slowdown in employment after a period 
of firm growth. 
With  the  economic  recovery  phase  about  to  enter  its  eighth  year,  the  economic  cycle  is 
presumed to be gradually reaching maturity. Therefore, at the beginning of the year, there were 
even voices of concern over a possible economic downturn. Although such fears have proved 
unfounded,  there  is  the  risk  that  productivity  growth  will  be  sluggish  as  business  fixed 
investment  continues  to  lack  momentum  amid  the  prolonged  slowdown  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies. Under these circumstances, I am paying attention to the risk 
that a squeeze on firms’ profit margins may affect employment, income, and consumption if 
wages increase too rapidly relative to the productivity growth because of tight labor market 
conditions. 
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy is generally regaining stability despite a slight slowdown 
mainly in exports and production, as the effects of the economic stimulus measures taken by 
the authorities are apparently starting to appear. The exchange rate of the Chinese yuan, which 
became a source of the instability in the global financial markets since last year, has recently 
stayed stable and the stock market is also in a state of calm. The somewhat moderate decline 
in the yuan’s effective exchange rate following the recent pause in the rise in the U.S. dollar is 
apparently easing concerns over the future prospects of exports and production. In addition, a 
sense of relief is apparently growing in the markets because the Shanghai G-20 has alleviated 
concerns that the kind of abrupt change in the exchange rate system that was made in the 
summer of 2015 may occur again. 
Still, as the problem of excess production capacity in the manufacturing sector lurks in the 
background, the low growth in fixed asset investment and inventory adjustments are expected 
to continue for a while. As for prices, the disinflationary trend is likely to continue for a while, 
as the supply-demand conditions remain easy, mainly with respect to goods. 
As  for  overseas  economies,  as  I  have  explained  until  now,  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies,  including  China,  and  commodity-exporting  economies  is  coming  to  a  halt. 
However,  as  the  recovery  of  the  U.S.  economy,  which  is  the  driving  force,  lacks  strong 
momentum, the world economy is expected to remain in a state of slight deceleration for the 
time being. While the negative spiral of the strong dollar -- and the strong Chinese yuan -- and 
the  weak  crude  oil  prices  is  in  a  lull  in  the  global  financial  markets,  market  liquidity  has 
apparently  been  reduced  due  to  various  financial  regulations.  In  addition,  the  influence  of 
algorithmic trading and high-frequency trading (HFT) is apparently growing, so the possibility 
cannot be ruled out that the markets will become unstable again because of the effects of the 
U.S. economic developments and ensuing monetary policy conduct. Therefore, I continue to 
pay attention to the possibility that these factors will affect such aspects as market confidence. 
Japan’s economy 
B.  
Japan’s economy grew by 1.7 percent in the January-March quarter this year on an annualized 
quarter-on-quarter  basis,  after  posting  negative  growth  of  1.1  percent  in  the  October-
December quarter last year; however, if the leap-year factor is excluded, the latest growth was 
close  to  zero.  Recently,  private  consumption  has  continued to  be  lackluster  after  weather-
related factors that affected consumption in the winter have dissipated. In addition, production 
activity, which has recently been more or less flat or weaker due to the effects of the slowdown 
in  emerging  economies,  including  China,  and  commodity-exporting  economies  and  of  an 
accident at a steel plant, is showing some weakness, mainly in the transportation equipment 
sector, whose supply chains have been disrupted by the damage caused mainly in Kumamoto 
Prefecture by the earthquake. Production activity in the affected region has already partially 
shifted to the recovery production phase thanks to the strength of Japanese manufacturing 
industries’ business continuity planning. In addition, restoration and reconstruction projects are 
expected  to  be  implemented  under  the  recent  supplementary  budget,  and  reconstruction 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
demand is expected to emerge. Therefore, there will be no need to change the medium-term 
scenario.  However,  diffusion  indexes  (DIs)  of  the  Economy  Watchers  Survey,  which  is  a 
leading  indicator  of  the  short-term  economic  trend,  declined  to  the  lowest  level  since 
immediately after the consumption tax hike in 2014 on a seasonally-adjusted basis because 
of the impact of the earthquake in Kumamoto, among other factors. 
Regarding the medium-term scenario, while Japan’s potential growth rate continues to slump 
in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent due in part to the sluggishness of capital stock accumulation, 
the world economy lacks momentum as I mentioned earlier. I therefore am somewhat cautious 
about the outlook compared with the Bank’s baseline scenario in the April 2016 Outlook for 
Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report). In fact, real GDP growth has recently been 
fluctuating almost evenly between positive and negative growth. As the economic growth rate 
continues to be low, the potential economic growth rate is less likely to rise. 
Compared with the low growth rate of real GDP, aggregate income formation as measured by 
real gross national income (GNI) and real gross domestic income (GDI) has so far remained 
relatively firm. Moreover, because of the robustness of the aggregate income formation, it has 
been presumed that Japan’s economy is resilient to such shocks as the slowdown in overseas 
economies. However, income receipts from abroad converted into yen terms are expected to 
be  eroded  by  the  yen’s  appreciation  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and  the  decline  in 
commodity prices that has until recently contributed to the improvement in the terms of trade 
is generally coming to a halt. As the strong yen contributes to the improvement in the terms of 
trade, it offsets the effects of the halt in the decline in commodity prices. All the same, it may 
become difficult to emphasize the relative firmness of aggregate income formation compared 
with expenditure-based GDP. 
Meanwhile, as is indicated by the consumption activity index, which is compiled by the Bank’s 
Research  and  Statistics  Department  based  on sales-  and  supply-side  statistics, the  actual 
trend of private consumption may have stayed stable compared with private consumption in 
terms  of  preliminary  GDP  data,  which  reflects  demand-side  statistics  such  as  the  Family 
Income and Expenditure Survey. When demand-side statistics show weaker results than the 
actual trend due to sample factors or for other reasons, the level of private consumption in 
terms of revised GDP data is likely to be revised upward compared with the preliminary data. 
Therefore, the perception of the recent consumption trend may also be changed when revised 
GDP data are announced in one and a half years. 
However, as the relatively firm aggregate income formation may lack momentum somewhat 
due to the reason that I already mentioned, a scenario in which a virtuous economic cycle from 
income to spending will pick up steam does not seem to be so persuasive. While firms are 
earning record profits, they have until now been cautious about raising base salary or making 
domestic  business  fixed  investments  because  of  the  view  that  such  bumper  profits  are  a 
temporary windfall brought by the weak yen and the improvement in the terms of trade. This 
cautious trend may grow depending on the results of the recent developments in the global 
financial markets. 
After all, as Japan’s economy, with its potential growth rate of nearly 0 percent, is so fragile as 
to be liable to post negative growth even because of trivial external factors such as weather 
conditions, I expect that its growth is highly likely to remain sluggish in the future while being 
susceptible to developments in the global financial markets and overseas economies. Even 
so, nonmanufacturing industries, which maintain relative firmness in terms of employment and 
business  fixed  investment,  will  serve  as  a  buffer  against  the  weakness  of  manufacturing 
industries, so I expect that recession can be avoided. 
Prices 
C.  
Regarding consumer prices, my outlook presented in the April 2016 Outlook Report continues 
to be lower than the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. This is because, due to 
the various domestic and overseas downside factors that I mentioned earlier, it is difficult at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
the moment to expect that the potential growth rate will clearly rise from the current level of 
nearly 0 percent, leading to an inflation that is consistent with income growth. Although the 
inflation rate will not reach the price stability target of 2 percent during the projection period 
according to my forecast, I believe that it is unnecessary to achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent at all costs. People are not hoping for inflation that is not accompanied by income 
growth.  We  have  learned  from  our  experiences  that  if  inflation  rises  ahead  of  income, 
consumer sentiment dampens due to a decline in real income, producing negative effects on 
consumption. Although the year-on-year growth rate in the SRI-Hitotsubashi Unit Value Price 
Index, which I cited in my previous speech, has recently slowed down steeply, it stayed at 
around  2  percent  throughout  last  year.  In  short,  this  index,  which  is  closer  to  people’s 
perception of inflation because it reflects the effects of changes in the volume of products and 
minor  product  modifications,  indicated  a  higher  growth  rate  than  consumer  price  statistics 
compiled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
In order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary 
easing (QQE) in April 2013. Because more than three years have passed since the introduction 
of QQE, I believe it is high time that we reviewed the significance of this commitment. In this 
regard, I have been having uneasy feelings about the approach of aiming to achieve a specific 
inflation rate within a specific time frame, given the time lag required for monetary policy effects 
to be produced and the uncertainty over the effects. I have some doubts as to why Japan alone 
should  set  a  specific  time  frame  amid  the  disinflationary  trend  around  the  world,  including 
emerging economies, and whether the target can be achieved through monetary policy alone. 
For my part, I have not changed my position that the Bank should achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent as a medium- to long-term goal. I consider this as a rolling target, which 
means that we should constantly aim to achieve it at the earliest possible time with a time 
horizon of about two years. Based on this idea, I submitted a proposal to revise the description 
in the April 2016 Outlook Report at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) in April. 
The recent environment surrounding consumer prices contains various unfavorable factors, 
such as (1) an expected delay in the improvement in the output gap due to the slow recovery 
in the real economy, (2) an expected lack of momentum in the pace of year-on-year wage 
growth following the labor-management negotiations this spring, and (3) the possibility that the 
yen’s appreciation since the beginning of the year will affect the underlying inflation trend that 
has been led by rising prices of food products and durable consumer goods. As is indicated by 
the  SRI-Hitotsubashi  Unit  Value  Price  Index,  which  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  year-on-year 
growth in the goods price index based on the point-of-sale (POS) data collected through chain 
stores appears to have slowed. The price index based on the POS data covers only around 
20 percent of the consumer price index (CPI) in terms of its weight, so the trend in the POS 
data-based index may not necessarily affect overall prices immediately. Service prices, which 
have a substantial weight in the CPI, may have a pent-up potential for a rise following the 
recent  increase  in  hourly  wages  for  non-regular  employees.  Unlike  changes  in  food  and 
clothing prices, changes in prices of individual services, which are provided by many small 
firms, are seldom featured in media reports, making it difficult to keep track of them. Therefore, 
looking at consumer price statistics is the only way to examine the trend of overall service 
prices. 
As for the outlook, while the year-on-year growth rate of prices of food products and durable 
consumer goods are expected to peak out as indicated by the POS data, the key will be the 
extent to which prices of individual services, with their pent-up potential for a rise, can offset 
that. However, house rent and imputed rent, which have a large weight in service prices, are 
strongly  correlated  with  wages,  and  given  the  results  of  the  labor-management  wage 
negotiations this spring, it may be difficult to expect much of a rise in rents. House rent and 
imputed rent are not adjusted for quality associated with the passage of time, so the presence 
of a downward bias in consumer price statistics has been pointed out. With respect to public 
service prices, which also have a large weight, there are various factors that constrain price 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
increases. One such factor is the norm applied to prices by those who are reluctant to tolerate 
a hike in fees for public services. 
In consideration of all these factors, it is highly uncertain whether or not an increase in service 
prices will offset an expected drop in the year-on-year growth rate of goods prices, resulting in 
a higher growth or a similar rate of growth in overall prices. 
Although people’s inflation expectations over the medium to long term are relatively stable, 
their expectations over the short term have been affected in a backward-looking manner by 
the recent price trend that reflects energy price movements. This is clearly apparent in firms’ 
inflation expectations indicated in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan). Furthermore, comments made by the respondents in the Economy Watchers Survey 
suggest the possibility that people’s sentiment has become cautious due to the introduction of 
the negative interest rate policy. I assume that this reflects people’s cautious outlook on future 
supply-demand conditions, which I assume is also affecting people’s inflation expectations. 
II.  
Future conduct of monetary policy 
Introduction of QQE with a negative interest rate 
A.  
More than three years have passed since the introduction of QQE. My understanding was that 
this  measure  was  a  kind  of  shock  therapy  intended  to  influence  the  formation  of  people’s 
expectations by resorting to a bold action. As was indicated by the fact that the time frame of 
about two years was initially assumed, I at least did not expect that this measure would be 
continued for a very long time. Therefore, I have had mixed feelings about the expansion of 
QQE in October 2014 and the introduction of a negative interest rate in January this year. I 
voted against both of these measures. As for the reason for my opposition to a negative interest 
rate in particular, I believe that the expansion of the monetary base and the introduction of a 
negative interest rate are essentially contradictory and their combination lacks sustainability. 
Moreover, I believe that the negative interest rate policy has the effect of monetary tightening, 
rather than an effect of easing. In addition, the negative interest rate policy could affect financial 
system stability. 
Let me elaborate on this point a little further. Under the current policy framework, a marginal 
increase in the current account balance at the Bank, which accounts for most of the increase 
in the monetary base, is subject to a penalty in the form of a negative interest rate. However, 
maintaining the current pace of increase in the monetary base while imposing such a penalty 
is illogical. I believe that introducing a negative interest rate would be meaningful only when 
the monetary base target and the asset purchase target are gradually reduced, namely, when 
tapering is implemented, so I cited this as the reason for my vote against the introduction of a 
negative interest rate at the January MPM. I believe that it is desirable to maintain the system 
in which balances in current accounts at the Bank are divided into three-tiers -- which was 
adopted at the time of the introduction of a negative interest rate -- from a somewhat longer-
term perspective with an eye to a future exit from QQE. I therefore submitted a proposal to that 
effect at the March MPM. 
Next, I will explain my argument that the negative interest rate policy has the effect of monetary 
tightening  and  may  affect financial  system  stability.  Soon  after  the  MPM in  January,  stock 
prices plunged, led by bank share prices, while the yen appreciated in the foreign exchange 
market. In addition, there was a series of suspensions of subscription for and pre-maturity 
redemption of safe investment instruments, such as money market funds (MMFs) and medium-
term government bond funds. In response, people’s sentiment deteriorated. This is presumably 
not only because of concerns over a possible erosion of deposits but also because the wrong 
perception  has  spread  that  Japan’s  economic  conditions  worsened  so  much  that  such  an 
extraordinary measure as the negative interest rate policy needed to be taken. 
Financial institutions are facing the risk of a negative spread for marginal assets due to the 
extreme flattening of the yield curve and the drop in the yield on government bonds in short- 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
to  long-term  zones  into  negative  territory.  When  there  is  a  negative  spread,  shrinking  the 
balance  sheet,  rather  than  expanding  it,  would  be  a  reasonable  business  decision.  In  the 
future, this may prompt an increasing number of financial institutions to take such actions as 
restraining loans to borrowers with potentially high credit costs and raising interest rates on 
loans to firms with poor access to finance. There is also the risk that financial institutions that 
have problems in terms of profitability or fiscal soundness will make loans and investment 
without adequate risk evaluation. From financial institutions’ recent move to purchase super-
long-term bonds in pursuit of tiny positive yield, I detect a vulnerability similar to that seen 
before the so-called VaR (Value at Risk) shock in 2003. 
In  the  meantime,  because  of  the  decline  in  the  function  of  the  short-term  money  market, 
distortion due to the concentration of funds raised in the call market in banks, trust banks in 
particular, was seen. As a result, investment trusts and other risk-taking market participants 
have given up on investing in short-term financial instruments, leading to a loss of diversity 
among market participants. Such a weakening of the financial intermediary functioning could 
affect  the  financial  system’s  resilience  against  shocks  in  times  of  stress.  In  addition,  an 
excessive drop in bond yields in the super-long-term zone could also make the financial system 
vulnerable by increasing the risk of a buildup of financial imbalances in the system. 
The Bank is responsible for maintaining both price stability and the financial system stability. 
Therefore, when a conflict is expected in performing these two mandates, it is necessary to 
consider the respective pros and cons of the two mandates and pursue a finely-balanced policy 
measure. However, as I already explained, the negative interest rate policy could disturb the 
delicate balance. 
Economic effects of QQE with a negative interest rate 
B.  
The  negative  interest  rate  policy  has  been  highly  effective  in  lowering  longer-term  interest 
rates,  rather  than  in  achieving  the  initial  goal  of  further  pushing  down  the  yield  curve  by 
lowering the short end of the yield curve. However, the steep drop in the yields in the long-
term and super-long-term zones reflects the fact that, in pursuit of a positive yield when yields 
even in the long-term zone are negative, funds that have lost attractive investment destinations 
are flowing into further longer-term zones, where the yields remain above zero, albeit barely. 
Unfortunately, this is the opposite of portfolio rebalancing that was an intended purpose of the 
negative interest rate policy. 
Opinions are divided on the economic effects of the negative interest rate policy, and this is a 
factor fueling worries among people over this measure. In this respect, it is a fact that as a 
result of the decline in market interest rates, housing loan rates and firms’ borrowing rates have 
already dropped, so it may be possible to ease people’s aversion to this policy measure if they 
are presented with convincing evidence that it brings positive macro-level income effects by 
facilitating housing loan refinancing and that it stimulates business fixed investment. 
However, firms’ fixed investment has long been kept within their level of cash flow and lending 
rates that have already declined to extremely low levels cannot be expected to drop further on 
the same scale as the drop in market interest rates. Therefore, I am skeptical about the idea 
that the negative interest rate  policy  will stimulate business fixed investment. Rather, if  an 
investment project can only be profitable on the assumption of the continuation of an extremely 
low interest rate, that is the problem. 
While the interest rate decline was prominent in the long-term and super-long-term zones, 
there are  only a few private economic agents that are willing or able to raise funds with a 
maturity ranging from 20 years to 40 years. Rather, the excessive interest rate decline in the 
long-term and super-long-term zones could not only threaten the sustainability of the social 
security  system  as  broadly  defined,  including  corporate  pensions,  through  a  drop  in  the 
discount rate of pension liabilities, but could also undermine people’s confidence by producing 
significant negative effects on corporate finance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Monetary base target and asset purchase target 
C.  
As I mentioned earlier, I believe that it is desirable to aim to achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent as a medium-to long-term goal and I expect that the road toward this goal will be 
long. Therefore, I believe that the challenge from now on is reforming the policy framework, 
which is intended to provide solutions in the short term, so as to adapt it to a long-term initiative. 
The first thing the  Bank  should  do for that  purpose  would  be to  make the  asset  purchase 
operation more flexible and also explore flexible approaches to the monetary base target. 
Let me cite a specific example. Since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, there 
have been some cases in which bid prices for the Bank’s asset purchase offers were unusually 
high compared with market prices or in which the difference between the minimum successful 
bid  rate  and the  average  successful  bid rate  was  very  large. This situation  represents the 
realization of the theory that if the Bank offers a higher purchase price than the market price, 
the  offer  always  attracts  willing  sellers.  Therefore,  it  may  be  said  that  the  buildup  of  the 
monetary base is proceeding even amid the negative interest rate environment. However, if 
we look at the situation from another angle, it can be said that there is a reasonable chance 
that unless the Bank continues to purchase assets at higher prices than market prices, this will 
result in undersubscriptions, and the buildup of the monetary base will be impeded. 
The Bank is taking such measures as eliminating abnormal bids, imposing bidding limits, and 
excluding issues which were purchased at abnormal prices from eligible assets. I believe that 
it  is  appropriate  to  give  consideration  to  avoid  distorting  market  price  formation  by  flexibly 
conducting these market operations as necessary. As a result of such operations, the Bank 
may fall slightly short of its asset purchase target by asset class and the monetary base target 
of 80 trillion yen. However, if the Bank is to ensure the sustainability of its current policy, I 
believe that conducting such operations would be inevitable. 
We  must  pay  sufficient  attention  to  the  risk  that  the  failure  to  achieve  the  targets  will  be 
mistaken as tapering, triggering an unexpected reaction. However, given that the Bank’s asset 
purchases have proved to be so effective in lowering various interest rates, I take the view that 
there would be no problem if the Bank’s purchases fall slightly short of the targets as a result 
of excluding abnormal bids that are far apart from market prices. Rather, it would be desirable 
if this view gradually took hold in the market. While I voted against the expansion of QQE and 
the  introduction  of  a  negative  interest  rate,  it  would  not  be  desirable  if  concerns  over  the 
sustainability  of  the  Bank’s  asset  purchases  grew  in  the  market  at  a  time  when  the  Bank 
continues to purchase on such a large scale, and if the effects of the policy were undermined 
by an unforeseen incident. It is my sincere hope that the Bank will conduct monetary policy 
flexibly  under  the  flexible  price  stability  target  while  obtaining  better  understanding  by  the 
market. 
Concluding remarks: economic activity in Eastern Hokkaido 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of eastern Hokkaido. 
This region has a vast amount of land facing the part of the Pacific Ocean where the Oyashio 
Current flows. Blessed with rich nature, this region has prosperous agricultural, forestry and 
fishery industries and is one of the main food supply bases in Japan. Other industries that have 
a  large  presence  in  this  region  include  the food  industry,  whose  main  items  are  dairy  and 
processed fishery products; the civil engineering and construction industry, which undertakes 
public works and private construction; and the transportation industry, which supports long-
distance  distribution.  Tourism  also  supports  the  local  economy,  as  Tokachi,  Kushiro,  and 
Nemuro have their respective tourism resources of global value. 
Looking at the local economic conditions, in relation to fishery, the situation of fishing of major 
fish such as salmon, trout, and Pacific saury is severe. However, although public investment 
has been decreasing, business fixed investment as a whole has been increasing against the 
backdrop of strong corporate earnings. In addition, private consumption has been resilient. An 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   
increase in agricultural income and stable fuel prices are also positive factors for this region, 
so the local economy has been steadily picking up. 
Under  these  circumstances,  to  achieve  longer-term  growth,  the  region  takes  initiatives  to 
enhance productivity and increase added value by taking advantage of its strengths and to 
invigorate trade and other exchanges both within and outside the region. For example, with 
respect to distribution, the Doto Expressway, which connects central Hokkaido with eastern 
Hokkaido,  has  been  extended  to  the  Akan  area,  representing  the  improvement  of  the 
distribution network and the integration of eastern Hokkaido. In addition, the expansion work 
of Kushiro Port, which has been designated as an International Strategic Bulk Port, has got 
into full swing. As for tourism as well, the region’s efforts are bearing fruits. For example, this 
region has been selected as part of a broad-area sightseeing tour route and as a showcase of 
Japan’s strength as a tourism-oriented country, and the Food Valley plan is making progress. 
Furthermore, there are activities led by the private sector, including exporting agricultural and 
fishery products such as Chinese yams and Pacific saury, and increasing the value added to 
dairy and livestock products. There are also activities to enhance the region’s growth potential, 
such as exploring for tourism resources -- including the Hokkaido Garden Path, whale and bird 
watching, and making use of national parks -- as well as constructing a thermal power plant 
using the only underground coal mine in Japan. I understand that regional financial institutions 
are not only providing financial support but also enhancing their own advisory function and 
helping to search for new customers. 
I hope that while these initiatives are continued, progress will be made in fostering new leaders 
and strengthening broad-area cooperation, and that the economy of the eastern Hokkaido will 
be further invigorated. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     15 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     17 
