  Raghuram Rajan: Money and education 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  Shiv  Nadar 
University, Delhi, 7 May 2016. 
 Thanks very much for inviting me to speak today. First, congratulations to all of you who are 
receiving degrees today. Congratulations also to your teachers, family, and friends who have 
invested in you and supported you. 
Convocation speeches are meant to give you one last set of issues to ponder on before you 
are let loose on the world. I will actually talk about two issues – an economic point deriving 
from  my  training  as  an  economist,  and  a  point  about  private  universities  deriving  from  my 
work at one for over 20 years. I embark on this talk comforted by the knowledge that the bar 
for convocation speeches is low. If you even remember a word I say a few years from now, I 
will have surpassed the average convocation speaker – most people don’t remember who 
spoke at their convocation, let alone what they said. 
First,  the  economic  point:  In  a  very  interesting  recent  book,  Harvard  philosopher  Michael 
Sandel points to the range of things money can buy in modern society. He seems to want to 
make us angry at the growing dominance of the market.1 Professor Sandel worries not just 
about  the  corrupting  nature  of  some  exchanges  as  they  are  monetized  but  also  questions 
their effectiveness; For instance, do kids really develop a love of reading if they are bribed to 
read  books?  He  is  also  concerned  about  unequal  access  to  money,  which  makes  trades 
using  money  inherently  unequal.  More  generally,  Sandel  fears  that  the  expansion  of 
anonymous  monetary  exchange  breaks  down  social  cohesion,  and  argues  for  reducing 
money’s role in society. 
While  Sandel’s  concerns  are  not  entirely  new,  his  examples  are  worth  reflecting  on.  For 
instance,  some  companies  pay  the  unemployed  to  stand  in  line  for  free  public  tickets  to 
Congressional  hearings  in  the  United  States.  They  then  sell  the  tickets  to  lobbyists  and 
corporate lawyers who have a business interest in the hearing but are too busy to stand in 
line. Clearly, public hearings are an important element of participatory democracy. All citizens 
should have equal access. So selling access seems a perversion of democratic principles. 
The  fundamental  problem,  though,  is  scarcity.  We  cannot  accommodate  everyone  in  the 
room who might have interest in a particularly important hearing. So we have to “sell” entry. 
We can either allow people to use their time to bid for seats – the one who stands the longest 
wins  the  seat  –  or  we  can  auction  seats for  money.  The former  seems fairer,  because  all 
citizens seemingly start with equal endowments of time – we all start with 24 hours in a day. 
But is a single mother with a high pressure job and three young children as equally endowed 
with spare time as a student on summer vacation? And is society better off if she, the chief 
legal counsel in a large corporation, spends much of her time standing in line for hearings? 
Whether it is better to sell entry tickets for time or for money thus depends on what we hope 
to achieve. If we want to increase society’s productive efficiency, people’s willingness to pay 
with money is a reasonable indicator of how much they will gain if they have access to the 
hearing. Auctioning seats for money makes sense – the lawyer contributes more to society 
by  preparing  briefs  than  standing  in  line.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  important  that  young 
impressionable citizens see how their democracy works, if it is important that we build social 
solidarity by making corporate executives stand in line with jobless teenagers, perhaps we 
should  force  people  to bid  with  their  time  by  standing  in  line,  and  make  entry  tickets  non-
transferable. And if we think that both objectives should play some role, perhaps we should 
                                                
1   What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of the Market, by Michael Sandel, 2012, Allen Lane, London. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  turn a blind eye to some operators hiring those with spare time to stay in line in lieu of busy 
lawyers, so long as they do not corner all the seats. 
What about the sale of human organs, another example Sandel worries about? Something 
seems  wrong  when  a  lung  or  a  kidney  is  sold  for  money.  However,  we  celebrate  the 
kindness  of  a  stranger  who  donates  a  kidney  to  a  young  child.  So,  clearly,  it  is  not  the 
transfer of the organ that outrages us – we do not think the donor is misinformed about the 
value of their kidney or is being fooled into parting with it. Nor, I think, do we have concerns 
about the scruples of the person selling the organ – after all, they are parting irreversibly with 
something that is very dear to them for a price that few of us would agree to. 
I think part of our discomfort has to do with the circumstances in which the transaction takes 
place. What kind of society do we live in if people have to sell their organs to survive? But 
while a ban on organ sales may make us feel better, does it really make society better off? 
Possibly,  if  it  makes  society  work  harder  to  make  sure  people  are  never  driven  to  the 
circumstances that would make them contemplate a sale. Possibly not, if it allows society to 
turn  its  back  on  the  underlying  problem,  either  moving  the  trade  underground,  or  forcing 
people in dire circumstances to resort to worse remedies. 
But I also think part of our unease has to do with what we perceive as an unequal exchange. 
The seller is giving up part of her body in an irreversible transaction. The buyer is giving up 
only  money  –  perhaps  earned  on  a  lucky  stock  trade  or  through  an  overpaid  job.  If  that 
money  was  earned  by  selling  a  portion  of  a  lung,  or  by  painful  savings  accumulated  after 
years  of  backbreaking  work,  we  might  consider  the  exchange  more  equal.  But  the  central 
virtue of money is precisely its anonymity. We need know nothing about the rupee we get to 
be  able  to  use  it.  But  because  money’s  anonymity  obscures  its  provenance,  it  may  be 
socially less acceptable as a medium of payment for some objects. 
Professor Sandel makes us think. But he seems to move too quickly to prescribe banning 
monetary  transactions,  when  his  real  concern  is  perhaps  with  the  unfair  distribution  of 
money. What he also seems to ignore are the virtues of anonymity. In a free market, all it 
takes to buy what you want is money. You do not need a pedigree, a great family history, the 
right table manners, or the right fashionable clothing or looks. It is because money has no 
odour, because it is the great equalizer, that so many people across history have been able 
to acquire resources and invested them to make the world we live in. Indeed, making it easy 
for Dalits to start businesses may do more for their social status because money empowers 
than many other forms of affirmative action. Rather than prohibiting the use of money and 
wealth, let us think about increasing society’s tolerance for its use. 
What can you take away from all this? First, that it helps to question everything, including my 
interpretation of Sandel, for only with questioning comes clarity. Second, if you believe my 
interpretation,  there  is  a  strong  link  between  society’s  support  for  free  markets  and  the 
fairness  with  which  wealth  and  opportunity 
the  population. 
Unfortunately, even while inequality between countries is diminishing today, inequality within 
countries is increasing. Today, even well-run market economies seem to be favouring those 
who already have plenty. In part, this is because skills and capabilities have become much 
more important in well-paid jobs, and those born in good circumstances have a much better 
chance at acquiring these. The winner-take-all nature of many occupations, where a few of 
the most capable entrepreneurs and the best workers take most of the income (think apps, 
architecture or acting, for example) accentuates the value of early childhood preparation; and 
hence the benefit of being born to the right parents in the right community. Income inequality 
is on the rise, with some having colossal incomes and others worrying about the next meal. 
What can we all do to restore faith in markets? We have to work to provide effective access 
to  schooling  and  healthcare  for  all,  a  non-discriminating  job  market  with  many  jobs,  equal 
opportunities for further advancement regardless of gender, race or background. All this will 
increase the perceived legitimacy of wealth and society’s willingness to broaden the areas 
where  it  is  spent.  Thoughtful  philanthropy,  as  reflected  in  the  founding  of  this  school,  can 
is  distributed  among 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  further help enhance society’s acceptance of great wealth. Finally, as you embark on careers 
that  are  likely  to  be  very  successful,  you  should  earn  by  creating  perceptible  value  and, 
equally,  spend  to  create  value.  Not  only  will  your  work  be  more  enjoyable,  but  you  will 
strengthen the economic freedoms we sometimes take for granted. 
Let me turn briefly to my point about private education. Private education across the world is 
expensive, especially in high-quality research universities, and getting more expensive all the 
time. That is because the critical resource, good professors, is in short supply. Two solutions 
are  proposed.  One  is  technology.  Why  not  have  the  best  professors  beam  lectures  at 
thousands  of  students  over  the  net?  The  problem  is  that  while  such  classes  seem 
theoretically attractive, completion rates are abysmal. We do not finish such courses perhaps 
for the same reason we do not simply take a course syllabus and read the recommended 
books in the library – there are too many distractions in life for us to complete without other 
forms  of  compulsion.  Online  courses  still  need  to  figure  out,  not  just  how  to  get  student 
commitment, but also how to provide the learning support that a university community and 
environment offers. 
A second solution is to dispense with research and to have teachers who do not do research. 
After all, such teachers do not need Ph.Ds, and there should be many more available. Yet it 
does appear that students prefer degrees from research universities in the United States to 
those from teaching colleges, even for their undergraduate degrees where students do little 
research.  Let  me  conjecture  why.  It  is  not  that  research  professors  know  more  about  the 
basic material that has to be taught – their research is often specialized in a narrow area. 
Neither does research necessarily make you a good teacher – understanding the material at 
a  deeper  level  may  sometimes  make  it  more  difficult  to  explain.  I  do  think,  however,  that 
good research requires curiosity. Almost all researchers remain curious through their lives, 
and  constantly  update  their  teaching  material  to  reflect  developments  in  the  field.  I  would 
conjecture,  though  I  have  no  proof,  this  is  why  teaching  at  research  universities  is,  on 
average,  preferred  to  teaching  at  teaching  colleges  –  you  are  taught  more  up-to-date 
challenging material in the former. 
The bottom line is that education at high quality research universities will remain expensive 
for a while, certainly till we learn to combine technology and people better. Given the need to 
broaden access to all the deserving, we have to make degrees affordable. One part of the 
solution is student loans, but we have to be careful that student loans are repaid in full by 
those who have the means, while they are forgiven in part for those who fall on bad times, or 
those who take low paying public service jobs. We also should make sure that unscrupulous 
schools  do  not  prey  on  uninformed  students,  leaving  them  with  high  debt  and  useless 
degrees. A second part of the solution is philanthropy, not just by the founders, but by the 
successful students from a university. Giving back to the university is a way of subsidizing 
the costs of future generations acknowledging the subsidies you received from the founders 
when you got your degree. I hope we develop a strong culture of alumni giving in India. 
You have been very patient in listening to me. Let me conclude. India is changing, in many 
ways for the better. You will be able to help shape our country, the world, and your place in it. 
By  all  means  set  yourself  ambitious  goals.  But  remember  that,  as  both  ancient  Indian 
philosophers  and  modern  day  behavioural  psychologists  say,  the  achievement  of  narrow 
personal goals – greater wealth, rapid promotion, or increasing renown – rarely brings you 
anything  other  than  brief  pleasure.  I  don’t  claim  to  know  the  secret  of  happiness,  but  this 
seems obvious – if you like the journey, if you get pleasure from the work you do, it matters 
far less when, or indeed whether, you reach your destination. 
You  have  far  more  control  over  the  journey  you  choose.  And  often  the  most  enjoyable 
journeys  are  those  where  your  goals  are  broader  and  where  you  take  others  with  you, 
especially  others  who  could  not  make  it  without  your  help.  In  doing  so,  you  will  make this 
world a better, and more stable, place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Thank you! I wish you good luck in your future endeavours and hope they are crowned with 
success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
