  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
2 June 2016. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. I would like to thank Governor Nowotny for his kind hospitality and express 
our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of our meeting. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels 
for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases. 
Regarding  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  confirm  that  the  monthly  asset 
purchases  of  €80  billion  are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  March  2017,  or  beyond,  if 
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  As  a  next  step,  on  8  June  we  will  start 
making purchases under our corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP).  Moreover, 
starting on 22 June, we will conduct the first operation in our new series of targeted longer-
term  refinancing  operations.  Further  information  on  implementation  aspects  of  the 
CSPP will be released after the press conference on the ECB’s website. 
The comprehensive package of decisions taken in early March underpins the momentum of 
the  euro  area’s  economic  recovery  and  fosters  the  return  of  inflation  to  levels  below,  but 
close to, 2%. In particular, our measures continue to ease the cost of credit and contribute to 
a strengthening in credit creation. The economic recovery is gradually proceeding. Additional 
stimulus,  beyond  the  impetus  already  taken  into  account,  is  expected  from  the  monetary 
policy measures still to be implemented and will contribute to further rebalancing the risks to 
the outlook for growth and inflation. In the current context, it is crucial to ensure that the very 
low inflation environment does not become entrenched in second-round effects on wage and 
price setting. The Governing Council will closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price 
stability  and,  if  warranted  to  achieve  its  objective,  will  act  by  using  all  the  instruments 
available within its mandate. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP increased by 0.5%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2016, after 
0.3%  in  the  last  quarter  of  2015.  Growth  continues  to  be  supported  by  domestic  demand, 
while  being  dampened  by  weak  exports.  The  latest  data  point  to  ongoing  growth  in  the 
second quarter, though possibly at a lower rate than in the first quarter. Looking ahead, we 
expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate but steady pace. Domestic demand 
remains  supported  by  the  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  to  the  real 
economy.  Favourable  financing  conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability 
continue  to  promote  investment.  Moreover,  sustained  employment  gains,  which  are  also 
benefiting  from  past  structural  reforms,  and  still  relatively  low  oil  prices  provide  additional 
support  for  households’  real  disposable  income  and  private  consumption.  In  addition,  the 
fiscal stance in the euro area is slightly expansionary. However, the economic recovery in the 
euro area continues to be dampened by subdued growth prospects in emerging markets, the 
necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  a  number  of  sectors  and  a  sluggish  pace  of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
This  outlook  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  June  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.6% in 2016 and 
1.7%  in  2017  and  2018.  Compared  with  the  March  2016  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised up for 2016 and has remained 
broadly unchanged for 2017 and 2018. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside, but the balance of 
risks has improved on the back of the monetary policy measures taken and the stimulus still 
in the pipeline. Downside risks continue to relate to developments in the global economy, to 
the upcoming British referendum and to other geopolitical risks. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation in May 2016 was 
–0.1%,  up  from  –0.2%  in  April,  mainly  reflecting  higher  energy  and  services  price 
inflation. Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for oil, inflation rates are likely 
to remain very low or negative in the next few months before picking up in the second half of 
2016,  in  large  part  owing  to  base  effects  in  the  annual  rate  of  change  of  energy  prices. 
Supported by our monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation 
rates should recover further in 2017 and 2018. 
This  broad  pattern  is  also  reflected  in  the  June  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, 1.3% in 
2017  and  1.6%  in  2018.  In  comparison  with  the  March  2016  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections,  the  outlook  for  HICP  inflation  has  been  revised  slightly  up  for  2016,  reflecting 
recent oil price increases, and has remained unchanged for 2017 and 2018. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continued to grow at a robust pace in 
April  2016,  with  its  annual  rate  of  growth  standing  at  4.6%,  after  5.0%  in  March.  As  in 
previous  months,  annual  growth  in  M3  is  mainly  supported  by  its most  liquid  components, 
with  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  9.7%  in  April,  after 
10.1% in March. 
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) stood at 1.2% in April 2016, compared with 1.1% in March. Developments in 
loans to enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit 
risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The 
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation) 
remained broadly stable at 1.5% in April, after 1.6% in March. 
The monetary  policy  measures  in  place  since June  2014  have  clearly  improved  borrowing 
conditions  for  firms  and  households,  as  well  as  credit  flows  across  the  euro  area.  The 
comprehensive  package  of  new  monetary  policy  measures  adopted  in  March  this  year 
underpins  the  ongoing  upturn  in  loan  growth,  thereby  supporting  the  recovery  of  the  real 
economy. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  to  preserve  an  appropriate  degree  of 
monetary accommodation in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are 
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  supports  economic  activity.  As  emphasised  repeatedly  by  the 
Governing Council, and as again strongly echoed in both European and international policy 
discussions, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy 
areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the national and at the European levels. 
Structural  policies  are  essential,  given  continued  high  structural  unemployment  and  low 
potential  output growth  in  the  euro  area.  Structural  reforms  are  necessary  in  all  euro  area 
countries,  although  specific  reform  needs  differ  across  the  individual  economies.  At  this 
stage,  the  focus  should  be  on  actions  to  raise  productivity  and  improve  the  business 
environment, including the provision of an adequate public infrastructure, which are vital to 
increase  investment  and  boost  job  creation.  The  enhancement  of  current  investment 
initiatives, including the extension of the Juncker plan, and progress on the capital markets 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  union  will  also  contribute  positively  to  this  objective.  In  an  environment  of  accommodative 
monetary policy, the swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in line with the 
country-specific recommendations recently published by the European Commission, will not 
only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but will also make the euro 
area  more  resilient  to  global  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the  economic 
recovery, while remaining in compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and 
consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact over time and across countries is 
crucial to maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should 
strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
