  Ignazio Visco: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at a meeting (public, 
not  restricted  to  shareholders  alone)  for  the  presentation  of  the  Annual  Report  2015  – 
122nd Financial Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 31 May 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This year for the first time the presentation of these concluding remarks does not coincide 
with the Ordinary Meeting of Shareholders called to examine and approve the Bank’s annual 
accounts. That meeting, as you may recall, was held on 28 April, and starting next year it will 
be held by the end of March, as provided for in our new Statute. This is in line with the need 
that  has  arisen  within  the  Eurosystem  to  approve  and  publish  the  annual  accounts  of  the 
euro-area central banks according to a common deadline. 
Our financial results for the year, then, are already known; let me briefly summarize them. 
The  monetary  policy  operations  conducted  in  response  to  the  crisis  led  to  unprecedented 
growth and recomposition of the assets of the national central banks, with the Bank of Italy 
posting  an  increase  of  €57  billion  in  2015;  the  gross  profit  for  the  year  amounted  to 
approximately €6 billion, practically unchanged from 2014. Given the increased size of the 
balance  sheet  and  the  risks  associated  with  the  progressive  implementation  of  the  asset 
purchase programmes undertaken in furtherance of monetary policy aims, the provision for 
general risks was increased by €2.2 billion. The Bank of Italy’s net profit of €2.8 billion was 
allocated as follows: €300 million to the ordinary reserve and a dividend of €340 million to 
shareholders, the same as last year; the amount allocated to the State was €2.2 billion, in 
addition to €1 billion in taxes. 
The transition period that Parliament allowed for shareholders to dispose of their holdings in 
the Bank’s capital in excess of the 3 per cent ceiling expires at the end of this year. As of 
April, almost 14 per cent of the capital had been transferred to 50 new shareholders. A plan 
has also been drawn up to make the secondary market for the shares liquid. 
In its internal management, the Bank has pursued the strategic objectives of consolidating 
and further strengthening its role within the Eurosystem, improving its services to the public 
and making more efficient use of resources. This year I will present the Report on Operations 
and Activities that the Bank is required by law to make to Parliament. Here this morning I will 
touch on the major events. 
In  2015  we  launched  a  new  plan  for  the  rationalization  of  the  branch  network  to  improve 
service quality and achieve permanent cost savings. With the closure of 19 branches and 
3 detached  supervision  divisions,  chosen  on the  basis  of  local  demand for the  services  of 
each, the network now consists of 39 branches; there were 97 in 2008. With the definitive 
abandonment  of  the  old  provincial  branch  structure,  the  branches  located  in  the  regional 
capitals play a central role in the Bank’s new configuration. 
The  larger  branches  will  now  take  on  greater  responsibilities  in  supervising  financial 
intermediaries,  safeguarding  the  interests  of  bank  customers,  performing  monetary  policy 
operations,  and  handling  the  circulation  of  banknotes  and  coins.  To  meet  growing  public 
demand, four new Banking and Financial Ombudsman panels will be established by the end 
of this year in Bari, Bologna, Palermo and Turin, joining those already in operation in Milan, 
Naples and Rome. 
After  lengthy  talks  with  the  trade  unions,  we  have  made  highly  innovative  changes  to  our 
personnel  regulations.  The  reform  reduces  the  number  of  hierarchical  levels,  fosters  the 
organization  of  work  by  objectives,  and  envisages  pre-determined  terms  of  office  for 
executives,  review  of  managers’  performance  by  peers  and  colleagues,  and  a  strong 
emphasis  on  the  diversity  of  skills  and  professional  profiles  among  our  staff.  The  new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
organization  aims  to  promote  the  constant  development  of  our  human  capital,  favour 
demographic turnover, encourage staff to take on responsibilities, and streamline decision-
making processes. 
In order to create a working environment that guarantees respect, inclusion and well-being 
for all, the Bank made nurturing diversity one of the objectives of its strategic plan for the 
three-year  period  now  nearing  an  end.  In  keeping  with  this  philosophy,  the  Bank  stands 
ready to apply in full the principles laid down in the new law introducing and regulating civil 
unions and strengthening the provisions concerning cohabitation. 
The European Single Supervisory Mechanism has been in effect since November 2014. The 
staff  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  those  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities 
cooperate  closely;  the  joint  supervisory  teams  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  the  most 
important  banks  operate  in  a  setting  that  exploits  the  diversity  of  experience.  We  are 
committed,  along  with  the  other  system  authorities,  to  guaranteeing  the  complete 
development of common supervisory practices. 
After the  Bank  of Italy’s  designation  as  the  national  resolution  authority  for  banking  crises 
under  the  new  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  we  instituted  a  Resolution  and  Crisis 
Management Unit which reports directly to the Governing Board. The Unit intervenes in crisis 
management, works with the Single Resolution Board, and oversees the liquidation of banks 
and financial intermediaries. 
The  Bank  of Italy  endeavours  to  prevent  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  in  Italy, 
working  directly  with  its  Directorate  General  of  Financial  Supervision  and  Regulation  and 
through the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). The system assessment recently conducted by 
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) acknowledged its efficacy and full compliance with 
global  standards;  its  competencies  and  autonomy  make  the  FIU  an  essential  support  in 
investigations and legal proceedings. Targeted regulatory intervention in accordance with the 
new  European  rules  and  with  FATF  recommendations  could  be  achieved  with  the 
transposition  of  the  Fourth  EU  Anti-Money-Laundering  Directive.  In  2015  the  number  of 
suspicious  transaction  reports  continued  to  increase  rapidly;  cooperation  with  other  Italian 
and  foreign  authorities  has  deepened,  a  particularly  important  factor  in  the  fight  against 
terrorist financing. 
The  TARGET2-Securities  platform  for  the  settlement  of  securities  transactions  in  central 
bank  money,  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  manages  jointly  with  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  began 
operations last June. The launch of this complex infrastructure, developed with the central 
banks of France and Spain, was a success; the Italian financial system migrated to the new 
platform on 31 August. By the end of 2017 the TARGET2-Securities platform will be settling 
securities  transactions  in  21  countries.  This  marks  an  important  step  towards  the  full 
integration of European financial markets. With the completion of this project, we have further 
consolidated  the  Bank’s  long-established  role  as  provider  of  high-tech  services  to  the 
Eurosystem, such as the TARGET2 system for the gross settlement of euro-area payments. 
We have increased our media presence. The serious episodes involving some Italian banks 
have  spurred  us  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  explain,  in  rigorous  technical  terms  and  in  the 
clearest  possible  way,  our  supervisory  action  and  the  positions  taken,  in  accord  with  the 
Government,  in  discussions  with  European  institutions.  The  main  channel  used  to  publish 
documents,  notes  of  clarification  and  interventions  is  our  website.  We  have  reported  to 
Parliament  at  special fact-finding  hearings. We are  aware  of  the  importance  of  timely  and 
effective communication and we are striving to improve its quality, while complying with the 
confidentiality constraints imposed on us by national law and European rules to safeguard 
the efficacy of preventive supervisory action and any judicial inquiries. 
In a year that was once again challenging, all the women and men who work at the Bank of 
Italy  have  continued  to  demonstrate  the  highest  degree  of  professionalism  and  a  strong 
sense of responsibility. It is no mere formality that I express, personally and on behalf of the 
Governing Board, a profound appreciation of their dedication. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The monetary policy response to the risks of deflation 
Notwithstanding  signs  of  strengthening  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  the  euro-area 
economy  remains  exposed  to  global  risks.  Trade  continues  to  soften,  and  uncertainty 
persists  regarding  the  ability  of  China  and  other  emerging  countries  to  avoid  a  sharp 
slowdown  of  their  economies.  In  the  euro  area,  domestic  demand  needs  to  consolidate 
further in order to counter the slackness of foreign demand. 
Concerns  about  the  prospects  for  the  European  banking  system  continue  to  afflict  the 
markets,  heightened  by  uncertainty  concerning the  macroeconomic  outlook,  the regulatory 
stance,  and  the  as  yet  incomplete  configuration  of  banking  union.  In  some  countries,  the 
problems of the economy and public finance are interwoven with those of political instability; 
in  many,  hostility  to  the  European  project  is  gaining  traction.  A  negative  outcome  of  the 
referendum  on  the  United  Kingdom  remaining  in  the  European  Union  could  engender 
profound instability. 
For monetary policy, the main challenge remains the persistence of excessively low inflation, 
which turned negative in the first few months of this year. This phenomenon is not limited to 
the  euro  area.  In  large  part  it  stems  from  the  fall  in  oil  prices,  but  it  also  depends,  to  a 
significant extent, on internal dynamics: the margins of unused plant capacity and available 
labour are wider than in other advanced economies. 
As I have recalled on several occasions in recent years, like excessively high inflation, an 
overly subdued price dynamic is also harmful for economic and financial stability, especially 
when public and private debt are high and growth is weak. Resolute action is being taken to 
dispel the risk of a prolonged detachment of inflation expectations from the level consistent 
with  the  central  bank’s  objective.  In  the  euro  area,  the  responsiveness  of  longer-term 
expectations  to  the  fall  in  short-term  expectations,  which  is  very  modest  under  normal 
circumstances, remains pronounced, albeit less so than between the end of 2014 and the 
start of last year. 
We have acted with determination to encourage the return to price stability; as reiterated by 
the Governing Council of the ECB at its last monetary policy meeting, in furtherance of this 
objective we will continue if necessary to deploy all the instruments made available to us in 
our mandate. Official interest rates have been reduced repeatedly, bringing the Eurosystem’s 
deposit facility rate to negative levels. At the start of 2015 the Governing Council extended its 
Asset Purchase Programme to include public sector securities; in December the duration of 
the programme was prolonged to at least the end of the first quarter of 2017; in March we 
decided to increase the amount of monthly purchases and to begin, as of June, purchasing 
investment-grade bonds issued by non-bank corporations. We also introduced new longer-
term refinancing operations with conditions rewarding banks that provide more credit to the 
economy. 
These measures are of an exceptional scale. The financial asset purchases reached 9.4 per 
cent of euro-area GDP on 20 May and will reach 17 per cent in March 2017. In the other 
main advanced countries, the programmes adopted by the central banks have attained even 
larger dimensions: approximately 20 per cent of GDP in the US and the UK and upwards of 
60 per cent in Japan. 
The evidence demonstrates the efficacy of the expansionary measures. The cost of credit to 
the  economy  has  fallen  and  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  has  lessened.  The 
measures  have  fostered  a  decline  in  yields  and  bolstered  the  prices  of  a  wide  range  of 
financial  assets,  with  a  positive  impact  on  consumption,  through  wealth  effects,  and  on 
investment, through the fall in the cost of capital. They have buoyed business and household 
confidence.  According  to  our  estimates,  without  the  monetary  policy  measures  introduced 
between the middle of 2014 and the end of 2015, annual inflation and GDP growth would be 
about half a percentage point lower in the euro area in the three years 2015–17. For Italy, the 
estimated effects are more pronounced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The highly expansionary monetary policy stance is the result of well thought out decisions 
and reflects the weakness of the economy and the risk of deflation. The concerns voiced by 
some observers that a long period of very low interest rates could have a destabilizing effect 
on financial markets, adverse repercussions on the profits of banks and other intermediaries, 
or  undesired  distributive  consequences  must  be  carefully  considered;  however,  they  must 
not be overstated. 
At present, in the euro area as a whole there is no evidence of an excessive increase in the 
prices of shares, corporate bonds or houses. The growth in lending in relation to the cyclical 
position of the economy is moderate. Risks that may possibly arise in specific sectors can be 
addressed  with  selective  macroprudential  instruments,  as  has  already  happened  in  some 
countries, without interfering with the stance of monetary policy. 
Very  low  or  negative  interest  rates  can  dent  the  profitability  of  banks  and  institutional 
investors. For pension funds and insurance companies, the risks derive from maturity and 
yield mismatches between assets and liabilities which may require greater diversification of 
portfolios,  stronger  capital  buffers,  and  changes  to  contractual  conditions.  For  banks,  the 
lowering  of  rates  squeezes  interest  margins  but,  besides  producing  capital  gains  on  their 
securities portfolios in the short term, it has a positive effect on loan demand and the quality 
of credit. The impact differs according to the individual bank’s characteristics; the information 
available for euro-area banks indicates that the overall effects on profits have so far been 
limited. 
In  the  current  cyclical  conditions  the  main  risks  to  financial  stability,  to  the  profitability  of 
banks  and  firms,  and  even  to  household  income  continue  to  come  from  the  uncertain 
macroeconomic outlook and the persistence of exceptionally low inflation. Strengthening the 
economy  is  key  to  increasing  medium-  and  long-term  yields  and  to  mitigating  the  risks  to 
financial stability. 
All economic policies must contribute to this objective. Monetary policy must be accompanied 
by  fiscal  policies  that  are  consistent  with  cyclical  conditions  and  with  each  country’s  debt 
position, and by reform measures designed to permanently increase growth potential and job 
creation. 
The Italian economy: recovery and vulnerability 
Last  year,  the  Italian  economy  returned  to  growth  for  the  first  time  since  the  onset  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis. The positive signs are unmistakable, especially for domestic demand. 
However,  economic  activity  is  still  far  below  its  pre-recession  levels  and  is  subject  to  the 
same uncertainties weighing on the global and the European economy. 
The recovery, initially concentrated in the manufacturing sector, later spread to services and, 
somewhat  hesitantly,  to  construction.  The  improvement  in  the  labour  market  and  the 
Government’s income support measures have been favourably reflected in consumption. 
Following  a  prolonged  contraction,  capital  formation  has  gradually  picked  up  again.  Our 
surveys point to a further expansion in firms’ investment plans in manufacturing and services. 
The expansion now also involves industrial firms mainly producing for the domestic market. 
Contributory  factors  have  included  the  improvement  in  borrowing  conditions  and  the 
temporary fiscal incentives in force since the end of 2015. According to our estimates, the 
incentives could increase investment by 2.5 percentage points overall in 2016–17. 
The  decline  in  lending  to  firms  has  virtually  halted.  Banks  are  actively  seeking  to  use  the 
abundant  liquidity  at  their  disposal,  above  all  by  lending  to  firms  in  a  stronger  financial 
position  and  operating  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The  cost  of  credit  has  come  down 
appreciably for both large and small firms. 
In  relation  to  GDP,  however,  investment  is  still  far  below  its  pre-crisis  levels,  at  historical 
lows. Looking ahead, the main cause of uncertainty is the outlook for foreign demand: firms 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
see heightened geopolitical risks, which affect economic activity adversely both through their 
direct  impact  on  exports  and  through  the  greater  caution  in  investment  plans  that  they 
induce. 
As  has  been  observed  repeatedly  and  in  many  quarters,  a  relaunch  of  investment  in 
construction, principally to renovate existing buildings, enhance public facilities and mitigate 
hydro-geological  risks,  would  have  major  effects  on  employment  and  economic  activity.  A 
substantial amount of Italian territory is in fact urban, but there are a great many buildings 
and  infrastructures  in  a  state  of  disrepair,  while  little  progress  has  been  made  to  date  on 
environmental protection and energy efficiency. The modernization of our urban heritage also 
requires  legislative  initiatives  to  forge  a  more  effective  linkage  between  national  and  local 
norms  and  to  create  more  favourable  conditions  for  private  investment.  Achieving  this 
requires  a  broad  consensus,  on  a  par  with  that  required  for  the  conservation  and 
enhancement of Italy’s extraordinary natural and artistic heritage. 
The signs of economic improvement have now begun to spread to the South and Islands, 
although  the  gaps  with  respect  to  the  rest  of  Italy  have  continued  to  widen.  Preliminary 
estimates indicate that after seven consecutive years of recession, output in this part of the 
country  has  stopped  contracting.  In  areas  lagging  behind  it  is  vital  to  exploit  all  the 
opportunities for investment financing offered by the European Union. Fund utilization was 
higher  last  year  than  in  the  past,  thanks  above  all  to  the  reallocation  of  resources  from 
projects  behind  schedule  to  those  already  under  way.  The  impact  of  this  financing  on 
economic growth could be amplified by improving the planning stage and by project selection 
on the part of central and local authorities that favours direct investment over subsidies to 
firms, whose lack of efficacy we have repeatedly documented. 
The demand for labour has begun to grow again, at a higher rate than was expected a year 
ago and involving areas, sectors and occupational categories passed over by the signs of 
improvement  of  2014.  The  new  rules  governing  employment  relationships  have  had  a 
positive effect and, as of today, social security contribution relief even more so. The rise in 
employment has now extended to permanent hirings; it includes the South and Islands. After 
decreasing for three years, the number of hours worked has risen, albeit slightly, in industry 
too. Employment held firm in the early months of the year, even though many hirings had 
been brought forward to the end of 2015 in view of the reduction in social security relief from 
January onwards. 
The youth unemployment rate has fallen for the first time since 2007, declining by more than 
2  percentage  points.  Unemployment  is  still  too  high,  however.  Its  progressive  reduction, 
crucial  to  ensuring  citizens  have  adequate  living  conditions,  is  also  necessary for  bringing 
inflation back in line with price stability. In Italy, as in other countries, the responsiveness of 
wages to changes in unemployment is high; it is estimated that reducing the unemployment 
rate by 1 percentage point would correspond to additional wage growth of nearly 1 point over 
the following three years. 
Job gains could be greater if the recovery of domestic demand strengthens. Its increase has 
been greatly influenced by the strongly expansionary stance of monetary policy; fiscal policy 
has also contributed, although the room for manoeuvre is inevitably limited, given Italy’s high 
public debt. Yet increasing the economy’s capacity for growth is an essential objective. Both 
quantitatively and qualitatively, the potential growth rate is not set in stone, a replication of 
the disappointing performances of the past. Rather, it can be stimulated through appropriate 
measures; it depends on investment decisions and resource allocation mechanisms. 
Despite  the  highly  fragmented  nature  of  the  productive  economy,  which  curtails  its  overall 
competitiveness, the positive performance of many firms on international markets shows that 
Italy has the potential to recoup the growth gap it has accumulated in the last twenty years. 
Our surveys show that a considerable number of firms use new technologies, even in the 
traditional  sectors.  Signs  of  vitality  are  visible  throughout  Italy,  both  in manufacturing,  with 
highly  innovative  and  technologically  advanced  processes,  and  in  services.  This  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
benefited exports; despite the weakening of world trade, they grew faster in 2015 than the 
potential  demand  from  outlet  markets,  as  they  have  done  regularly  since  2010.  Italian 
exporters also succeeded in expanding their market position in mature markets; the gain in 
sales abroad was exceptionally positive for motor vehicles. 
However, the high incidence of small firms in our productive economy is a continued source 
of  weakness.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  2000s,  the  exports  of  firms  with  fewer  than 
50 workers have failed to keep pace with those of larger firms. Not only do Italian companies 
start out smaller, on average, than those of the other main European countries, they also find 
it harder to expand. 
Support should be given to innovative entrepreneurial initiatives, to business incubation, and 
to a quicker reallocation of productive resources to firms with better growth potential. In 2012 
criteria  were  established  for  innovative  start-ups  to  qualify  for  a  broad  range  of  benefits, 
including  incentives  for  those  investing  in  their  equity  and  a  fast  track  for  obtaining 
guarantees on bank loans. Preliminary evidence indicates that the programme enabled these 
firms to get larger flows of financing and to sustain higher rates of investment. 
The  priorities  for  reform  are  clearly  identified:  first  and  foremost,  they  are  to  eliminate  the 
obstacles to entrepreneurship posed by illegal activities, inefficiencies in general government 
and  civil  justice,  shortcomings  in  the  regulation  of  firms’  market  entry  and  exit,  limits  to 
competition, and insufficient resources and incentives for investment in innovation, research 
and  human  capital. The  results  obtained  in  labour  market  reform  and the  reduction  of  the 
backlog  in  civil  justice,  thanks  mainly  to  the  introduction  in  recent  years  of  measures  to 
reduce  litigation,  are  two  examples  demonstrating  that  the  reforms  undertaken  can  be 
effective, even if their effects mostly unfold in the medium term. 
The rule  of  law  is  the  sine  qua  non for  growth. Stepping  up  the fight  against  tax  evasion, 
corruption and organized crime, giving continuity to the measures put in place in recent years 
and  expediting  their  implementation,  could  make  it  possible  to  support  the  activity  of  the 
many  competitive  and  law-abiding  firms,  guaranteeing  that  everyone  follows  the  rules  and 
that competition is not restricted or distorted. 
The general government reform approved by Parliament last year is an important step. Its 
effects on economic activity and on people’s lives will depend on the manner and timeframe 
of  its  implementation.  The  effort  to  simplify  administrative  activity  and  to  revamp  its 
organization  requires  renewed 
facilitate  user 
identification and the payment of services via the Internet can further the digitization of Italy. 
Last  summer’s  changes  to  the  legislation  on  the  management  of  company  crises  and  the 
additional measures recently approved will facilitate the recovery of firms whose difficulties 
are reversible and ease the exit from the market of those that are no longer profitable. To 
stimulate the entry of new firms it is important that the annual legislative bill on competition 
be speedily passed. 
The  increase  of  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP, from just  under  100  per cent  in  2007  to  almost 
133 per cent last year, is largely a consequence of the crisis. If during that period real GDP 
growth  had  been  in  line  with  that  of  the  previous  decade  and  the  deflator  had  evolved  in 
keeping with the inflation target for the euro area, the debt burden would have risen by only 
3 percentage points, slightly less than the increase stemming from Italy’s financial assistance 
to countries in difficulty; had the positive effects of stronger growth on the government deficit 
been  taken  into  account,  the  debt  burden  would  have  been  lower.  This  simple  exercise 
highlights  the  risk  posed  to  the  economy  of  a  country  whose  competitiveness  is  lagging 
seriously behind and the importance of structural reforms to support its growth potential: they 
are all the more necessary when the public debt is so high. 
Following the recession triggered by the global financial crisis, fiscal policy limited the deficit, 
curbing the growth of the debt-to-GDP ratio. The primary budget balance returned to surplus 
in 2011 and net borrowing was brought back below the threshold of 3 per cent of GDP in 
initiatives  designed 
impetus.  The 
to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
2012. Keeping primary current expenditure in check played an important role: after recording 
modest growth in nominal terms up to 2014, it remained practically unchanged last year. 
Since 2014, when a particularly difficult three-year period for the Italian economy ended, the 
fiscal  policy  has  become  moderately  expansionary.  The  Government  seeks  to  reconcile 
support  for  growth  with  the  reduction  of  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio,  which  was  appropriately 
indicated as a strategic objective. In the Government’s plans, the reduction is to begin this 
year  and  gain  pace  in  the  next  three.  The  way  in  which  the  macroeconomic  context  will 
evolve could hinder the achievement of this goal in 2016. Careful monitoring of the public 
finances and the implementation of a programme of privatizations could permit the debt-to-
GDP ratio to approach the planned objective and ensure a significant reduction in 2017. 
With a view to supporting a faster, more durable recovery, it is necessary to revamp long-
deferred targeted public investment, including in intangible infrastructure; it is also important 
to further reduce the tax wedge on labour, bolster incentives to innovate and provide income 
support for the less well-off, hit especially hard by the crisis. While the budget affords limited 
leeway for these measures today, it is possible in any event to plan their implementation over 
a longer time horizon. 
Building Europe: progress and uncertainties 
The present conditions and prospects of the individual countries of the euro area are closely 
linked to those of the European construction. For years the area has withstood formidable 
tensions.  The  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis  had  not  yet  been  absorbed  when  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  erupted.  Triggered  by  weaknesses  in  individual  countries,  that  crisis 
was  fuelled  by  the  incompleteness  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Hesitancy  in 
defining  the  procedures  for  support  to  countries  in  difficulty,  due  in  part  to  the  lack  of 
adequate tools, fed fears of a break-up of the area. The spreads on government bond yields 
widened  dramatically,  in  some  cases  much  more  than  was  justified  by  the  economic 
conditions and public finances of the countries affected. 
Measures  to  deal  with  the  emergency  have  been  progressively  flanked  by  reform  of  the 
governance of the European Union and especially the euro area, initiated by intervention on 
public finance rules and macroeconomic surveillance. In the summer of 2012 the President 
of the European Council published the report “Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary 
Union”, prepared with the Presidents of the Commission, the Eurogroup and the European 
Central Bank. The report proposed taking, over a decade, concrete steps towards banking 
and  fiscal  union  and  strengthening  the  democratic  legitimation  of  the  common  institutions, 
the embryo of political union. The Governing Council of the ECB reiterated its determination 
to defend the single currency: the announcement of the possibility of purchasing government 
bonds  on  the  secondary  market  was  immediately  reflected  in  a  drastic  narrowing  of  yield 
spreads. 
The  reform  process  outlined  in  the  report  envisaged  a  gradual  renunciation  of  national 
sovereignty  in  economic  and  financial  matters  and  the  flanking  or  replacement  of  national 
intervention  tools  by  corresponding  common  instruments.  For  banks,  the  report  proposed 
transferring supervisory responsibility to the euro area and establishing joint crisis resolution 
and deposit guarantee mechanisms, to be supported with public funds through the European 
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  As  to  public  finance,  in  addition  to  implementing  the  reforms 
already approved (the Six Pack and the Fiscal Compact), it proposed gradual steps towards 
the creation of a euro-area budget and the issue of common debt. Most of these proposals 
were  taken  up  again  in  subsequent  reports,  somewhat  less  ambitious  on  certain  themes, 
including the Five Presidents’ Report of June 2015. 
The  results  have  been  significant  but  uneven.  The  restrictions  on  the  use  of  national 
mechanisms were put in place quickly, but the introduction and sharing of their supranational 
counterparts has been delayed. Likewise, a contained risk-sharing approach was adopted for 
common intervention to help individual member states in difficulty. The establishment of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
ESM has superseded the restrictive tenor of the no-bail-out clause in the European Treaty 
that would have precluded any form of assistance; however, the financial capacity of the fund 
is modest as it is supported by limited guarantees of the member states. 
The new institutional structure and many of the decisions that flowed from it were directed 
primarily at reducing the risks proper to individual member states or banks, even aside from 
the possible systemic implications. 
 This, in short, creates a situation of vulnerability: there is the danger not only that national 
and European authorities will be unable to react adequately to major shocks, but even that 
they will have trouble avoiding contagion triggered by circumscribed tensions. To effectively 
reduce  overall  risk,  the  measures  designed  to  attenuate  specific  fragilities  must  be 
accompanied by adequate safety nets based on supranational instruments. 
In  the  case  of  the  banking  system,  the  possibility  of  utilizing  public  resources,  whether 
national or European, as a means of crisis prevention and management has been virtually 
eliminated. International experience demonstrates that, in the face of a market failure, prompt 
public  intervention  can  prevent  the  destruction  of  wealth  without  necessarily  generating 
losses for the State, and indeed often producing profits. Greater scope for intervention of this 
sort, exceptional as it may be, should be reinstated. 
Moreover, the European Commission’s position on state aid precludes the use of mandatory 
deposit  insurance  schemes  for  purposes  of  crisis  prevention  and  orderly  crisis  resolution, 
even  though  these  funds  are  private,  given  that  they  are  financed  and  independently 
managed  by  banks;  the  effective  conduct  of  recovery  and  resolution  procedures,  instead, 
requires the use of all the tools available. There is no reason to stigmatize as improper state 
aid those initiatives that help to correct market failures without undermining competition. A 
rigid interpretation of the regulations on state aid, with little regard for financial stability, has 
also  hindered  the  plan  for  creating  a  company  to  manage  Italian  banks’  non-performing 
loans. 
With burden sharing and bail-in, it was decided to protect taxpayers by imposing instead a 
direct cost on savers and investors. The new regulations are a response to events in banking 
systems  other  than  the  Italian  one  that  were  directly  hit  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
rescued  by  massive  state  aid.  The  new  regulations  were  rightly  designed  to  combat 
opportunistic  behaviour by  banks,  but their  application  must  balance this  objective  against 
that of stability. Contrary to what was proposed by the Italian delegation in official fora, an 
adequate transitional period was not provided to give all the parties involved time to acquire 
a full understanding of the new regime, nor has the application of the new system to debt 
instruments already marketed, even to retail investors, been ruled out. 
Banking union must ultimately incorporate all the elements envisaged in the original design. 
The Single Resolution Fund has been created but the resources contributed by the banks, 
initially subdivided by country, will not be pooled for some time; and no clear determination to 
use it has transpired. The single deposit guarantee system has not yet been finalized; the 
European Commission recently presented a proposal, it too envisaging a lengthy period of 
transition. In both cases there is no provision for a European public financial backstop, which 
has been called for since the 2012 Report and is necessary to guarantee that banking union 
has the capacity to safeguard systemic stability. 
In  discussion  and  in  the  political  debate,  the  theme  of  prudential  requirements  against 
sovereign  exposures  is  often  linked  with  that  of  the  completion  of  banking  union,  on  the 
grounds that risks have to be reduced before they can be shared. The issue needs to be 
addressed  with  no  preconceived  opinions,  and  without  taking  hasty  decisions  that  could 
aggravate rather than mitigate risks. There is no consensus on the overall advantages of the 
various reform options: furthermore, experience teaches that transitions originally  intended 
as gradual are often suddenly speeded up by the market. In any case, the issue needs to be 
resolved in a coordinated way at global level and in the proper institutional fora. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 least 
 
 
Poor  compliance  with  fiscal  rules  in  the  period  preceding  the  crisis  justified  their  being 
strengthened,  but  these  last  few  years  have  demonstrated  how  important  it  is  to  enforce 
them  taking  account,  as  foreseen  by  the  rules,  of  exceptional  circumstances  and  the 
concurrent  implementation  of  longer-term  intervention.  At  the  beginning  of  last  year  the 
European  Commission  established  the  conditions  for  applying  the  flexibility  clauses  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  can  allow  national  budgets  to  perform  the  function  of 
macroeconomic  stabilization,  at 
in  part,  when  necessary.  However,  not  all 
contingencies can be foreseen; the Commission is often compelled to interpret the margin for 
flexibility provided by the rules in an unavoidably discretionary manner. 
A common budget, which can only be achieved by further transfers of national sovereignty 
and  an  adequate  strengthening  of  the  democratic  legitimacy  of  supranational  institutions, 
would make it possible to implement policies consistent with the cyclical conditions in various 
economies and in the euro area overall, promptly and with no doubts as to their legitimacy. 
The single currency needs to interact with a single fiscal policy. 
To be effective, a fiscal union requires the introduction of common debt instruments and, at 
the same time, decisions on the treatment of pre-existing national debt with a view to a single 
euro-area debt. A number of practical proposals to this effect have been put forward, some of 
them quite recently. In my concluding remarks on this occasion four years ago, amidst very 
severe sovereign debt tensions, I emphasized the need to increase our common resources, 
including by instituting a fund to which a portion of sovereign debts could be assigned; these 
would  eventually  be  redeemed,  according  to  clearly  defined  rules  and  without  transferring 
funds between countries, thereby giving rise to a form of fiscal union not lacking cogent rules 
and powers of control and intervention. 
The  levels  of  public  and  private  debt,  as  well  as  the  indicators  of  the  former’s  long-term 
sustainability, differ markedly among euro-area countries. In Italy, for example, the ratio of 
private  debt  to  GDP  is  lower  than  the  EU  average;  that  of  public  debt  is  very  high,  while 
Italy’s  sustainability  indicators  are  among  the  area’s  best,  thanks  in  part  to  a  series  of 
pension reforms. On average, the situation in the euro area is comparable to or better than in 
the other main advanced economies; the less favourable position of European firms is offset 
by the better situation of households. 
Yet it is the euro area that is the focus of the markets’ most serious concerns. The area is 
currently  subject  to  exceptional  strains,  both  economic  and  geopolitical.  The  reaction  of  a 
large part of public opinion, and in some cases of governments, has been one of fear and 
rejection; the European project is seen more and more as part of the problem, less and less 
as the solution. But it is the very magnitude and the diffuse nature of the risks we face that 
demand a common strategy that goes beyond emergency response. To move forward in the 
integration  process  we  need  to  rebuild  trust  among  countries,  both  at  a  political  level  and 
between ordinary citizens. The first step has to be to tackle weaknesses at the national level, 
as Italy has done in the past few years and will have to continue doing. However, the effort of 
individual countries must be sustained by concrete progress in the European construction. 
Banks and supervision: these last, challenging years 
Beginning  in  the  second  half  of  2011,  at  the  height  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and 
continuing in 2012, Italian banks had to deal with a significant deterioration in their wholesale 
funding;  although  the  quality  of  loans  in  general  was  deteriorating,  situations  of  severe 
difficulty  remained  limited  to  just  a  few  banks.  In  2013  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
acknowledged the proven ability of the Italian banking system to contain the effects of the 
crisis and ensure adequate capitalization by resorting to the market. 
With  the  return  of  the  recession,  widespread  company  failures  and  job  losses  fuelled  a 
further  rise  in  non-performing  loans;  in  a  vicious  circle,  increased  credit  risk  led  banks  to 
tighten  supply.  Most  of  our  banking  system  has  faced  the  crisis  with  courage  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
transparency,  but  in  more  than  a  few  cases  the  effects  of  the  long,  deep  recession  have 
been compounded by imprudent and at times fraudulent conduct by senior management. 
 As  the  crisis  unfolded,  international  banking  regulations  changed  rapidly,  especially,  as  I 
noted  earlier, those  on  the  management  of  bank failures. The  issue  of the four  banks  put 
under resolution in November needs to be examined in this context. I will not dwell today on 
the events that led them into crisis, on our supervisory action and our close cooperation with 
the  judiciary;  we  have  described  this  on  many  occasions,  in  statements  and  notes  of 
clarification,  and  most  recently  in  my  testimony  before  the  Senate  on  19  April  giving  a 
detailed account of the recent crises involving several Italian banks. Together the four banks 
accounted  for  1  per  cent  of  total  system-wide  assets.  The  repercussions  of  their  collapse 
confirm that even when the banks involved are small, loss of public trust can spread quickly 
and generate persistent systemic effects. 
Our  intervention  ensured  the  operational  continuity  of  the  four  intermediaries.  The  new 
banks, their balance sheet assets freed of bad debts, are now strengthening their ties with 
their million or more customers among depositors and small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Recent Government measures to reimburse the holders of subordinated bonds issued in the 
past seek to strengthen customer trust. The sale of the four banks on the market is at an 
advanced stage and adheres to strict criteria of transparency, impartiality and competition; 
the process is scheduled to be completed during the summer. The assignee of the bad debts 
is  preparing  the  data  necessary  for  their  competitive  sale.  This  could  contribute  to  the 
development of a market for non-performing loans in Italy. 
Banking crises are always delicate to navigate for supervisory authorities. They are called 
upon to minimize the likelihood of collapses and contain the fallout. This responsibility entails 
a reflection on the causes of the crises, on how they can be identified more quickly and on 
how  on-  and  off-site  intervention  can  be  improved.  But  an  important  point  should  not  be 
forgotten:  the  laws  and  the  prudential  supervisory  model  that  have  gained  international 
acceptance over the years, under the impulse of the Basel Committee, are rightly centred on 
entrepreneurial  independence  in  banking.  Supervisory  authorities  cannot  systematically 
make banks’ operating decisions for them. 
Anomalies and irregularities are usually discovered or confirmed by on-site inspections; we 
carry out about 200 every year. Ferreting out these often cleverly concealed situations is not 
easy  and  can  take  time.  The  supervisory  authority  performs  the  difficult  job  of  conducting 
inspections and investigations; it does not have the tools available to the judicial authorities 
(such  as  search  and  seizure).  The  powers  and  responsibilities  of  the  administrative 
authorities  and  of  the  prosecution  are,  as  is  only  right,  kept  strictly  separate.  The full  and 
timely cooperation of the two is obviously essential. 
Once we have identified a problem, we always aim to lay the groundwork for its resolution. 
When we uncover evidence of a possible crime we promptly inform the prosecutor’s office. 
The public is not usually aware of this since, with rare exceptions, the law imposes official 
secrecy on the reports, information and data obtained by the Bank of Italy in the course of its 
supervisory activity. There is a precise and important reason for such a rule: to prevent news 
of  isolated  incidents  from  exacerbating  temporary  or  solvable  problems  and  generating 
destabilizing effects, with serious consequences for all. 
In  the  last  twenty  years  we  have  managed  through  special  administration  125  crises  of 
primarily  small  banks,  56  of  which  in  the  last  seven  years.  Over  half  the  procedures 
concluded with banks resuming ordinary administration. About a third of the banks involved 
were  liquidated,  and  liquidation  was  almost  always  accompanied  by  the  transfer  of  assets 
and liabilities to another bank, thereby guaranteeing the continuity of customer relations. As 
a  result  of  our  intervention  it  was  possible  to  hold  to  account  those  responsible  for  the 
failures. 
Prior  to  the  recent  regulatory  changes,  bank  crises  were  resolved  with  no  costs  for 
depositors or bondholders thanks to the intervention of deposit guarantee funds. We have 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
taken resolute action in the numerous problematic cases which did not go as far as special 
administration,  calling  for  remedial  action,  obtaining  the  replacement  of  directors  where 
necessary – even with the limited regulatory instruments available, which have only recently 
been revised – and imposing capital increases. 
We are aware of the greater difficulties encountered nowadays in dealing with banking crises 
and  the  serious  consequences  that  may  ensue  in  terms  of  investors’  trust. We  constantly 
update our methods and procedures of preventive intervention. We are open to constructive 
criticism, as we are committed to being accountable for our work. 
We  work  closely  with  government  authorities,  with  the  other  supervisory  and  control 
authorities and the banks themselves. Examples of this cooperation are the creation of the 
Atlante  private  investment  fund,  which  has  already  participated  in  a  capital  increase 
requested by the supervisory authorities, and the initiatives to set up voluntary banking funds 
for intervention in the event of a crisis. 
The problems still facing Italian banks 
Banks  in  Italy,  like  those  in  other  countries,  are  faced  today  with  profound  changes  in 
technology  and  market  structure.  The  still  weak  economic  situation  and  the  uncertainty 
associated  with  regulatory  changes  are  compounded  in  Italy  by  the  large  volume  of  non-
performing  loans,  which  squeeze  profitability,  and  inadequate  governance  arrangements. 
Important measures have been taken of late on both fronts; banks need to act swiftly to seize 
all the opportunities these offer. 
Net of value adjustments that banks have already made, the stock of non-performing loans 
comes to just under €200 billion. More than half that amount refers to situations where the 
borrower’s  difficulty  is  temporary.  Looking  at  bad  debts  alone,  the  net  value  is  less  than 
€90 billion.  This  burden  is  considerable,  but  it  is  in  large  part  backed  by  collateral  whose 
value was carefully examined in 2014 during the comprehensive assessment of the leading 
euro-area  banks;  in  addition  to  this  collateral,  there  are  personal  guarantees.  Overall,  the 
concerns  about  the  quality  of  Italian  banks’  assets  must  be  taken  seriously,  but  without 
overestimating the extent of the problem. 
The non-performing loans are largely the legacy of the long and deep recession. We have 
now reached a turning point. The moderate economic recovery under way since last year is 
being reflected in a significant decline in the flow of new non-performing loans; in 2015 this 
was  equal  to  3.7  per  cent  of  total  loans,  compared  with  4.9  per  cent  in  2014;  for  the 
household  sector,  the  flow  is  back  down  to  pre-recession  levels.  The  process  of 
normalization continues. 
One factor that until now has played a role in the growth of the stock of non-performing loans 
has  been  the  slowness  of  insolvency  and  recovery  procedures.  The  legislative  reforms 
introduced last summer and those approved at the beginning of this month serve to speed 
them  up.  With  the  out-of-court  assignment  of  property  pledged  by  firms  as  collateral, 
recovery times could shrink to a matter of months from the previous estimate of more than 
three  years,  already  reduced  by  last  summer’s  reforms.  The  system-wide  impact  of  the 
measures imposing the stipulation of explicit agreements will increase as they are included in 
new  and  renegotiated  loan  contracts  with  greater  frequency.  Shorter  recovery  times  can 
increase the value of non-performing loans substantially, making it easier to dispose of them 
on the market. 
A significant contribution could come from improving the efficiency of the courts; there are 
considerable geographical disparities in the length of foreclosure and bankruptcy procedures, 
sometimes  even  within  the  same  region.  The  disposal  of  bad  debts  could  be  further 
facilitated by the state guarantee scheme for securitized bad debts (Gacs), which will help to 
raise  the  sale  price  by  making  the  senior  tranches  of  securitizations  more  attractive  for 
investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
The  growth  of  the  market  in  non-performing  assets  will  also  receive  a  boost  from  the 
investments  of  Atlante,  a  private  fund  that  can  concentrate  on  the  riskiest  securitization 
tranches.  Even  with  relatively  modest  resources  for  the  moment,  Atlante  can  demonstrate 
that buying bad debts at higher prices than those now offered by specialized investors can in 
fact  produce  attractive  returns.  We  believe  the  fund  has  the  determination,  independence 
and professionalism to meet this challenge; the more it succeeds, the more it will become 
possible to raise fresh resources, creating a virtuous circle. 
Sale  is  only  one  of  the  ways  of  dealing  with  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans. 
Supervisory  authorities  and  banks  have  a  common  interest,  in  this  phase,  in  making  the 
active,  efficient  and  informed  management  of  such  loans  a  strategic  objective.  Possible 
improvements  range  from  strengthening  internal  procedures  to  outsourcing  to  specialized 
operators. As part of its efforts to motivate the banks, the Bank of Italy has recently launched 
a new periodic survey to gather detailed information on the stock of bad debts, the related 
collateral  and  guarantees,  and  recovery  procedures.  It  lays  the  basis  for  vigorous 
organizational  intervention  which,  in  turn,  is  the  precondition  for  solving  the  problem,  not 
overnight but within a reasonable timespan. 
Those responsible for European supervision are aware that the reduction of non-performing 
exposures can only be gradual. The actual situation of the individual banks will be assessed 
and the most appropriate supervisory measures identified considering the context in which 
they operate. At the same time, within the Single Supervisory Mechanism we are striving to 
make  our  action  more  effective  with  respect  to  all  the  risks  that  bear  on  banks’  balance 
sheets, more importantly those associated with structured financial products. 
The  law  reforming  the  cooperative  banks  has  created  the  conditions  for  resolving  the 
problem  of monitoring  the  activity  of  the  directors,  which  in  cooperatives  can  be  less than 
effective or even subject to perverse incentives, and that of constraints on capital-raising in 
the  market.  In  the  largest  of  the  cooperative  banks,  these  weaknesses  were  particularly 
serious.  The  law  provides  appropriately  differentiated  remedies.  The  smallest  cooperative 
banks  are  offered  opportunities,  which  have  to  be  fully  exploited,  to  improve  their  overall 
quality  of  governance  and  increase  their  capacity  to  raise  capital.  For  large  cooperative 
banks, a sharp break was necessary. 
Their transformation into joint stock companies makes it possible to solve what had become 
urgent  problems,  such  as  the  lack  of  transparency  of  directors’  decisions,  the  self-
referentiality  of  several 
foster 
consolidations  that  make  it  possible  to  rationalize  the  banks’  organization,  increase 
profitability and efficiency, and strengthen capital. The law has set an appropriate period of 
time – ending next December – to allow the largest cooperative banks to plan their strategic 
choices and carry out all the necessary formalities for their corporate transformation. 
This  process  needs  to  be  completed  swiftly:  waiting  until  the  last  minute  will  expose  the 
banks to uncertainty. 
The  reform  of  the  mutual  banks  must  be  carried  out  fully  and  without  delay;  this  is 
indispensable to strengthen the sector and bring its business model up to date, adapting to 
changing  technologies  and  markets.  The  Bank  of  Italy  will  issue  the  secondary  legislation 
without delay, in coordination with the ECB; we expect its equally timely implementation by 
the system. In defining group structures and the relations among the various components, it 
is necessary to follow strictly entrepreneurial logic, by means of a cohesion pact that gives 
effective powers to the parent company, and to strive for rationalization and efficiency gains. 
The mutual banks’ associations can still play a representative role at the national and local 
level,  without  undue 
the  group’s  strategic  planning,  operational 
management and control functions. 
figures,  and  resistance 
interference  with 
to  change. 
It  must 
top-tier 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  income  sources; 
Banks’ costs and profitability 
To  fund  the  economy  banks  must  be  stable  and  well-capitalized;  they  must  be  able  to 
generate adequate profitability. In recent years profits have been squeezed by the need to 
adjust  the  value  of  non-performing  loans;  the  write-downs  amounted  to  more  than 
€120 billion in the four years 2012–15. With the economic recovery, the impact of this factor 
is diminishing, but new elements have emerged, such as low interest income, the need to 
reduce  financial  leverage,  and  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  some  services  due  to  advances  in 
technology  and  increased  competition.  A  recovery  necessarily  entails  an  increase  in 
efficiency,  a  curbing  of  costs,  and  a  diversification  of 
targeted 
consolidations, according to sound business projects, can stimulate and abet this process. 
In 2015 banks’ operating costs – net of extraordinary contributions to the National Resolution 
Fund – remained stable. The cost-income ratio is 64 per cent, slightly above the average for 
European groups and below that of the main French and German banks. Nevertheless, given 
their specific situation, for many Italian banks it remains imperative to take steps to contain 
costs, including staff costs, by adapting the quality and quantity of personnel to technological 
and market developments. The business model, grounded in a widespread presence in local 
markets, is in need of further adjustment by continuing to reduce the number of branches, 
which last year declined to around 30,000 or 11 per cent less than in 2008. 
Greater  use  of  technology,  starting  with  further  development  of  digitization,  would  permit 
significant cost savings in the provision of traditional services amenable to standardization. In 
the list published last February by the European 
Commission, our country still ranked twenty-third in Europe in the use of e-banking, although 
this  is  increasing  and  banks  have  expanded  the  array  of  products  they  offer  through 
innovative channels. The pronounced disparities between banks of different size show there 
is  room for  improvement: the  share  of  households  with  access  to  home  banking  is  in fact 
nearly 60 per cent for the five largest groups, 45 per cent for small banks and barely 35 per 
cent for minor banks. 
The  savings  thus  obtained  could  be  fruitfully  invested  in  reorganizing  branch  networks, 
concentrating the physical points of contact with customers in a limited number of branches 
specialized in offering high value added services, such as corporate finance for businesses 
and asset management for households. A branch network whose design avoids overlap and 
increases  efficiency  in  contacts  with  customers  is  not  to  the  detriment  of  relations  with 
households and businesses. 
Another  impetus  for  revisiting  the  business  model  is  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system 
towards  a  growing  role  for  channels  of  financing  for  the  economy  alternative  to  banking. 
Even though non-bank intermediation remains decidedly less well-developed in Italy than in 
other countries, some recent initiatives – in favour of credit funds, the issuance of loans by 
securitization vehicles, the financing of businesses via mini-bonds and a more active role of 
insurance  companies  –  are  making  for  a  more  dynamic  market.  This  process  will  be 
furthered by European measures for the capital markets union. Moving in this direction, we 
will soon publish for consultation regulations enabling foreign funds to make loans in Italy. 
Banks can respond to the downsizing of traditional channels by increasing proceeds from the 
development  of  new  services.  In  seizing  these  opportunities,  the  necessary  safeguards  to 
prevent conflicts of interest must be put in place. The changing external context calls not only 
for greater financial awareness on the part of customers, but also for even stricter controls on 
the correctness of banks’ conduct. The Bank of Italy is actively engaged on various fronts: it 
has stepped up its supervisory action with regard to the transparency and proper conduct of 
banks, with the goal of focusing their attention on service quality and increasing customer 
satisfaction;  it  has  strengthened  the  Banking  and  Financial  Ombudsman;  it  assesses 
customer  complaints  of  improper  practices  and  assiduously  calls  upon  banks  to  resolve 
disputes.  Together  with  Consob  and  the  Government,  we  are  working  on  enhancing 
consumer protection and financial education for bank customers, including young people, in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  
 
the firm belief that this is a structural overhaul that necessitates a national plan, a collective 
effort, and a long-term commitment. 
For  the  banks  that  are  in  difficulty,  swifter  and  more  resolute  cost  containment  is 
indispensable. The repercussions on the employees involved may be also softened by the 
recent expansion of eligibility for the solidarity fund for the banking industry. For minor banks 
the  problems  posed  by  the  large  stock  of  non-performing  loans,  scant  diversification  of 
sources of income and the need to adapt to technological developments may be acute. In 
several cases they must be dealt with by implementing farsighted consolidations that exploit 
potentially substantial economies of scale and scope. It is necessary to move rapidly in this 
direction,  overcoming  the  outdated  concept  of  mere  local  presence  which  has  often 
aggravated  rather  than  attenuated  the  problems  of  the  real  economy  and  of  the  banks 
themselves. 
 We  are  slowly,  haltingly  coming  out  of  a  lengthy  period  of  crisis,  not  only  financial  and 
economic. The recovery is not yet on a firm footing. The consensus forecasts are that Italy 
will not return to pre-crisis levels of income for some time; estimates of our economy’s growth 
potential are disappointing. We can and must do more. 
Monetary  policy  covers  the  whole  of  the  euro  area;  its  contribution  to  keeping  aggregate 
demand  buoyant  is  crucial;  it  is  now  providing  highly  favourable  conditions  that  Italy  must 
take advantage of to introduce further structural reforms, which are necessary to relaunch 
business activity and create more and better job opportunities, particularly for young people. 
Reforms tend to bear fruit only after some time; the more comprehensive is the project and 
the  clearer  the  objective,  the  sooner  we  can  make  an  impact  on  confidence  and 
expectations. Our goal must be to lead firms and the economy as a whole back onto a path 
of sound and steady growth in productivity; innovation and investment must benefit from a 
nurturing and rewarding environment. 
The financial system still faces enormous challenges. Efforts to strengthen it must continue. 
Backed by tangible progress on the European front, creating a more open capital market that 
will  welcome  firms  which  today  do  not  issue  shares  and  bonds  is  an  objective  we  cannot 
overlook. Financial intermediaries must become more efficient, more profitable and venture 
into new areas of operation and so become more stable and safe. The authorities must be 
pragmatic in seeking to adapt their tools to safeguard stability. 
The Italian banks have clearly suffered from the crisis; as national and European supervisory 
authority  we  now  have  to  handle  delicate  and  difficult  situations.  We  are  doing  so  in  an 
environment that has undergone profound and rapid changes, cooperating actively with all 
the institutions and authorities concerned. 
The volume of non-performing loans is large and earning capacity is low. And yet there is 
widespread  determination  to  overcome  the  difficulties  and  once  again  serve  the  economy 
with profit. The measures taken to deal with bad debts, now and in the future, are important; 
our assessment of the first steps made in this direction is positive; the work must continue 
with  courage  and  farsightedness.  The  Bank  of  Italy,  as  well  as  the  Government  and  the 
banks, will ensure that these measures are as effective as possible on both the technical and 
regulatory level. 
To minimize the risk of bank crises, however, we need swift action, structural change, far-
reaching organizational reform and constant monitoring of the quality of senior management. 
Major reform measures have been introduced in the last twelve months or so concerning the 
role of banking foundations and the structure of the cooperative banks and mutual banks. In 
some cases, pre-existing weaknesses have led to extremely adverse results. Opportunities 
have now arisen that must be grasped without delay. The process is not an easy one, as 
recent events have demonstrated. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  new  European  crisis  resolution  procedures  stem  from  justifiable  concerns  about  how 
opportunism  and  favouritism  can  weigh,  including  financially,  on  the  community.  The  new 
rules must be applied responsibly and advisedly to counter this type of conduct and prevent 
an irreversible deterioration in a bank’s balance sheet from persisting too long and worsening 
the  effects  of  its  collapse.  Adjustments  can  be  suggested  to  make  the  crisis  resolution 
procedures  more  effective  and  less  likely  to  generate  instability,  not to prolong  irreparable 
situations  but  to  resolve  them  in  an  orderly  manner.  Such  action  is  part  of  the  efforts  to 
ensure the success of banking union, to which we are fully committed. 
The European construction is proceeding by gradual and increasingly difficult stages. There 
has been a significant transfer of sovereignty on economic and financial matters, especially 
in recent years. It is, in fact, illusory to believe that we can direct the course of the economy 
and  finance,  patently  global  phenomena,  from  within  the  limited  confines  of  individual 
European  countries.  This  construction,  however,  is  lopsided  and  incomplete;  its  very 
sustainability requires that the missing elements be incorporated. 
Today progress appears more difficult. The legacy of the crisis and the anxieties generated 
by geopolitical tensions – the migrant emergency and civil wars in nearby countries – have 
roused in the sentiments of many of Europe’s citizens, and at times in the governments that 
give  voice  to  them,  fears  and  prejudices  once  thought  long  buried.  Distrust  leads  to 
disaccord; in the exasperated pursuit of mutual reassurance, looking only to short term gain, 
the  necessary  steps  are  hard  to  take.  Moving  forward  on  the  basis  of  a  series  of 
compromises is becoming more difficult. European unity is achieved with the development of 
democratic institutions appointed to manage shared sovereignty. 
During the crisis the task of safeguarding the stability of the euro area fell almost entirely to 
monetary  policy,  owing  to  the  persistent  fragility  of  the  other  elements  of  the  institutional 
framework, which were only belatedly and insufficiently rectified. It is not easy to recover trust 
or a sense of belonging; nor is it possible to ignore the underlying reasons fuelling protest 
among national public opinion and criticism of political institutions, especially European ones. 
Well-being  and  security  are  basic  needs:  however,  guaranteeing  them  by  responding  to 
global challenges in a fragmented manner and keeping threats at bay by rebuilding national 
barriers  have  little  chance  of  success;  on  the  contrary,  they  inflict  inevitable  and  serious 
damage. 
The  concrete  achievement  of  monetary  union,  banking  union,  capital  markets  union,  and 
even the prospect of a common fiscal policy, all call for a leap in quality. The identification of 
shared  ground  on  questions  that  are  fundamental  to  defining  our  common  European 
citizenship, such as internal security and the management of immigration, will make it less 
difficult to proceed with the construction of a “genuine economic and monetary union”. 
Altiero  Spinelli  died  in  Rome  thirty  years  ago.  His  life  was  an  unceasing  testament  to  the 
belief  that  his  generation,  the  one  that  had  both  unleashed  and  endured  the  fratricidal 
European wars of the twentieth century, was bound to overcome forever its divisions with the 
union of the democratic states of Europe. Europe counts him among its founding fathers. To 
reprise  the  words  of  the  Ventotene  Manifesto,  the  document  Spinelli  drafted  over  seventy 
years  ago  with  his  companions  during  internment,  we  still  need  a  union  that  “breaks 
decisively  economic  autarchies”;  a  union  that  starts  anew  from the founding  values  of  the 
European project: peace, liberty, equality, and the promotion of well-being for all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
