   Benoît Cœuré: Time for a new Lamfalussy moment 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Professor Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
 I would like to thank Lucas Guttenberg for his assistance in preparing this speech. All views expressed herein 
remain mine. 
Summary 
Recalling  the  crucial  contribution  of  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  to  European  integration,  Benoît 
Cœuré calls for a new method to accelerate this process at a commemorative conference in 
Budapest today. The fact that Europe is facing so many challenges should not discourage 
Member States from integrating further. On the contrary, says Benoît Cœuré, countries sharing 
the euro should show they are able to go forward in a unified manner. A successful euro area 
is  crucial  for  a  successful  European  Union.  A  strong  political  commitment  to  complete  the 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is also needed to strengthen the recovery and spur 
investment. It will show the public, business and markets that we are serious about make the 
euro  a  success.  In  the  end,  there  will  be  no  sustainable  economic  convergence  without  a 
political convergence, which implies a common understanding of what economic and fiscal 
policies look like in a monetary union. This is a root cause of why the spirit of the common rules 
is not sufficiently implemented. The moment has come to structure the process of integration 
in  a  new  manner.  This  means  putting  the  debate  on  European  integration  back  where  it 
belongs – in the political arena. 
 
Dear Governor Matolcsy, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Almost  to  the  day  15  years  ago,  on  15  February  2001,  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  and  his 
Committee of Wise Men submitted their Final Report on the Regulation of European Securities 
Markets  to  the  Commission.1  To  deepen  integration  in  the  Union’s  financial  markets,  they 
proposed to distinguish between the political choices and the more technical measures in the 
area of financial legislation; the former would be made by the legislators themselves, while the 
latter  would  be  left  to  technical  bodies.  The  intention  was  to  significantly  streamline  the 
legislative process in order to ensure that the Union’s legal framework for financial services 
was  keeping  up  with  the  rapidly  changing  realities  on  the  ground.  The  offspring  of  the 
Lamfalussy Report is today’s European System of Financial Supervision, comprising the EBA, 
ESMA, EIOPA and ESRB. 
Lamfalussy and his colleagues had realised that there are moments when one has to shift 
gears and change the method in order to progress. It was the right time, an auspicious moment 
– or kairos as the ancient Greeks called it – to make a change.  
I will argue that today that we have reached another such kairos, that we are at a point where 
we should consider changing our method again. Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) needs 
a  Lamfalussy  moment,  a  moment  when  we  realise  that  our  current  approach  to  moving 
European  integration  forwards  is  no  longer  good  enough,  and  that  we  should  seek  new 
solutions.  
                                                
1   Lamfalussy, A. et al., “Final Report of the Committee of Wise Men on the Regulation of European Securities 
Markets”, Commission of the European Communities, 2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In 2000, aiming for new solutions meant developing new ways of tackling technical standards. 
This time, our goal should be to design a political strategy to broaden the scope of integration 
so as to make EMU truly sustainable; to achieve this, we will need new political convergence 
to accompany new economic convergence.  
To explain my thinking, let me first turn to the economic recovery and how to consolidate it; 
and second, how shifting gears with regard to completing Economic and Monetary Union could 
help to improve the situation in which we currently find ourselves.  
A challenging time for Europe  
At this conference a year ago, I argued that Lamfalussy had been right to claim early on that 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  implied  interdependencies  which  needed  to  be  governed 
robustly.  I  also  acknowledged  that  we  had  certainly  not  reached  that  point.2  Indeed,  2015 
provided  us  with  numerous  examples  of  the  deficiencies  of  our  governance  framework. 
Negotiations with the Greek government went on for months, exposing the shortcomings of 
our institutional architecture in addressing collectively what was a collective problem – securing 
Greece’s future in the euro. In parallel, the economic and fiscal policies of individual Member 
States did not do enough to complement the impulse coming from our very accommodative 
monetary policy stance, leaving euro area growth until recently far below its potential, and far 
below what would be needed to secure the future of our unemployed young people.  
But  2015  was  also  the  year  when  our  countries’  focus  shifted  away  from  the  unresolved 
economic issues and towards the global challenges that Europe is facing. It is not for me as a 
central banker to comment on matters such as migration policies. Nevertheless, allow me two 
remarks:  
Many  of  the  challenges  with  which  the  Union  is  confronted  –  be  they  refugees,  be  they 
terrorism,  climate  change,  or  the state  of  the  economy  –  point  to  the fact that  we  need  to 
strengthen our capacity to work together in a spirit of joint responsibility. What frightens the 
public and markets alike is that Europe seems too often unable to act in a unified manner. 
Hence, I am convinced that if we can advance in one area and show that we can act jointly, 
this will help us to work together in other policy areas as well.  
And we should be under no illusions: if downside risks to the recovery were to materialise, this 
would not make it easier to respond to the refugee crisis or to counter terrorism. Therefore, the 
fact that Europe is facing pressing challenges in other policy areas should not discourage us 
from progressing as regards Economic and Monetary Union. On the contrary, an economically 
successful euro area is crucial for a successful European Union. 
Ingredients for a structural recovery 
At the ECB, we have always made it clear that we are ready and able to play our part in the 
recovery. This means ensuring stable prices – which means inflation being below, but close 
to, 2% in the medium term. Price stability acts as a foundation on which the economy can 
grow. This was the rationale behind the ECB embarking on large-scale public sector purchases 
one year ago. And this was also the rationale for our re-calibration of the purchase programmes 
in December. 
The euro area numbers clearly show that our monetary policy is having the intended effect.3 It 
represents a major contribution to the ongoing cyclical recovery. And the Governing Council 
                                                
2   See Cœuré, B., “Lamfalussy was right: independence and interdependence in a monetary union”, lecture at the 
Lamfalussy Lecture Conference, Magyar Nemzeti Bank, Budapest, 2 February 2015. 
3   See ECB, “The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures”, Economic Bulletin 
7/2015, pp. 32-51, December 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   will review and possibly reconsider its stance when it meets in March. But for the recovery to 
become structural – and thus to increase growth potential and reduce structural unemployment 
– monetary policy does not suffice.  
I have recently explained elsewhere that rebalancing in the euro area has come a long way 
since the start of the crisis, but is not finished yet.4 The challenge now is to further consolidate 
the recovery and the rebalancing of the economy. 
In my view, three ingredients could make a difference here:  
First,  more  flexible  economies  to  ensure  that  adjustments  can  take  place  via  market 
mechanisms.5 This means making the most of a low-interest rate environment to embark on 
structural reforms. These will not only increase growth tomorrow by boosting productivity and 
employment, but also will send a signal of confidence and unleash investment opportunities 
today.6  
Which leads me to the second ingredient: higher levels of investment. Since the beginning of 
the crisis, investment has shrunk markedly. Of course, we should be careful not to assume 
that investment levels right before the crisis were desirable, as they partly reflected exuberant 
behaviour. But despite the current low interest rate environment, we are still well below the 
average numbers for the period 1995-2005 for both public investment and private investment.7 
This shows that an essential ingredient for sustaining the recovery is still missing. 
And  third,  which  brings  me  back  to  my  call  for  a  Lamfalussy  moment,  a  strong  political 
commitment to complete Economic and Monetary Union so as to give the public, businesses 
and markets a strong signal that we are serious about making the euro a lasting success.  
Given that today’s conference is in honour of Alexandre Lamfalussy, I’ll focus the rest of my 
comments on that last point – completing EMU. 
The  Five  Presidents’  Report,  which  was  published  last  summer,  provides  a  very  useful 
roadmap  for  moving  ahead.  However,  discussions  in  recent  months  have  shown  that  not 
everyone agrees on the need to complete EMU. 
Nevertheless, in my view we might be able to agree, for a start, on three principles that could 
guide  future  work  towards  a  complete  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  that  strongly 
reinforce the proposals made in the report. These principles are as follows:  
Risk sharing and risk reduction – a parallel approach 
First, risk sharing and risk reduction should go hand in hand – both as regards strengthening 
the banking union and as regards economic and fiscal policies.  
Think of it as being like building a house. Of course you will want to take all the necessary 
precautions to prevent fires, and you will want your neighbours to do the same. But even with 
the best precautions, you will probably still want to buy fire insurance, and rightly so. And if you 
buy it together with all your neighbours, it will be much cheaper.  
                                                
4   See Cœuré, B., “Rebalancing in the euro area: are we nearly there yet?”, speech at Danish Economic Society 
in Kolding, 15 January 2016. 
5   See Cœuré, B., “The future of Europe: building on our strengths”, speech at the plenary session on “The Future 
of Europe” during the fifth German Economic Forum in Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 2013. 
6   See  Cœuré,  B.,  “Structural  reforms:  learning  the  right  lessons  from  the  crisis”,  speech  at  the  Economic 
conference organised by Latvijas Banka in Riga, 17 October 2014. 
7   Public investment in the euro area was 3.2% of GDP for 1995-2005 compared with 2.6% projected for 2016, 
while private investment in the euro area was 18.7% of GDP for 1995-2005 compared with 17.3% projected for 
2016. See European Commission, Annual Macroeconomic Database, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The same logic applies to EMU. Risk reduction on its own will not be sufficient; we will need to 
better share the remaining risk as well. The two are complementary.  
For banking union, this means reducing risks in banks in parallel to establishing a common 
deposit  insurance  scheme  and  a  robust  fiscal  backstop.  This  is  what  the  Commission  has 
proposed, and this is why we support their approach. 
When we speak about fiscal and economic policies, combining risk sharing and risk reduction 
means that more pooling of fiscal resources – which I believe is ultimately necessary to provide 
better  insurance  against  shocks  –  will  have  to  be  accompanied: (i)  by  a  new  convergence 
process  which  ensures  that  all  economies  have  a  similar  resilience  to  shocks;  and  (ii)  by 
initiatives  to  restore  the  credibility  of  our  fiscal  rules.  These  two  elements  are  all  about 
preventing risk sharing from becoming a one-way street, in other words preventing risk sharing 
from turning into risk shedding. 
Joint decision-making on matters of common concern 
The second principle we might be able to agree on is that there are policy domains where 
coordination via rules has run its course and is no longer a viable substitute for joint decision-
making within common institutions. The argument here has two parts:  
On the one hand, there should be no doubt that the rules that are in place have to be respected. 
This is not some kind of theological dogma. This is because it is economically and politically 
the right thing to do – not only to avoid the macroeconomic instability stemming from excessive 
imbalances, but also to re-establish mutual trust, which is the precondition for progress. Think 
about the high public debt levels of many Member States. If we want to be able to tackle the 
next  crisis  and  have  sufficient  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre,  strictly  applying  the  rules  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact today is both logical and imperative. 
But on the other hand we have seen the political limits of the rules-based framework. Every 
time the rules are set to bite, national interests prevail over those of the euro area. This is built 
into the framework: as long as economic and fiscal policies are in the end a matter of national 
competence and as long as commonly agreed rules are perceived as an intrusion into policies 
that are seen as genuinely national, the interests of the euro area as a whole will probably not 
be strong enough to carry the day unless a country is forced to enter a financial assistance 
programme.  
Therefore, we will, in the end, have to accept certain economic and fiscal policies in the euro 
area as truly shared competences, as the internal market already is; others, which are not 
essential for  the  smooth functioning  of  EMU,  should  remain  solely  a  national  competence. 
Hence, such a step should certainly not mean centralisation at European level for each and 
every policy. But it should mean that in those policy areas that are crucial for the functioning 
of EMU common legislation and policies will be needed where appropriate and warranted to 
ensure the primacy of the common interests of the euro area.  
Such legislation and policies will in turn necessitate the further development of our institutional 
architecture. One element here will be to strengthen the euro area executive with a euro area 
treasury, be it within the Commission or as a separate body. Another element will be to build 
up a genuine legislative capacity at euro area level and to make institutions acting in the euro 
area’s interest, such as the European Stability Mechanism, accountable to it.  
The Lamfalussy moment – making the debate on EMU political 
And then there is a third principle on which I hope agreement can be found, namely that we 
will see sustainable economic convergence only if accompanied by political convergence. Why 
is that so? It is because discussions on economic governance in the euro area in recent years 
have revealed that we still have no common understanding in Europe of what economic and 
fiscal policies should look like in a monetary union.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A common understanding of the aim of monetary policy did develop when the monetary union 
was being set up; today, we have a clear and broadly shared consensus that the ECB should 
first  and  foremost  pursue  price  stability.  We  have  seen  a  similar  approach  and  attitude 
increasingly being taken to financial regulation.  
But this is not necessarily the case for those policies which, as I just mentioned, remain largely 
in the national domain but subject to European coordination. This is no coincidence. Monetary 
policy and banking supervision are inherently technical and seemingly distant from the lives of 
ordinary people, whereas labour market institutions, product market regulations or the quality 
of  a  country’s  administration  are  not  at  all  like  this,  as  they  affect  the  everyday  lives  of 
individuals.  
The diversity of opinion on economic policy is a sign of a healthy, pluralist democracy and 
certainly  not  a  problem.  At  national  level,  institutions  and  procedures  exist  which  permit 
divergent views to be channelled into political decisions that leave little room for ambiguity.  
There are, as yet, no procedures or sufficient incentives to facilitate a consensus on the design 
of economic policies in a functioning economic and monetary union. This is a root cause of 
why the spirit of the common rules is not sufficiently respected – as there is no consensus on 
what this spirit ought to be.  
Our methods of advancing European integration have so far not been sufficient to foster such 
a consensus – hence we need a Lamfalussy moment and a shifting of gears.  
This would mean putting the debate on European integration back where it belongs – in the 
political arena.  
We  are  at  a  point  where  integration  cannot  and  should  not  continue  as  a  technical  and 
technocratic exercise. It is now time for political leaders to take up the baton, because only 
they will be able to convince their electorates of the need for further deepening.  
Therefore,  as I  said  earlier,  new  economic  convergence  will  need  to  be  complemented  by 
political convergence. Such a process would, in an inclusive and democratic way, ensure that, 
in  parallel  to  converging  economically,  we  would  develop  a  common  understanding  of 
economic policies in the euro area that would underpin our common rules.8  
Such  a  political  process  might  not  lead  to  the  best  outcome  from  our  point  of  view  as 
economists. But this would be a price worth paying if, in return, the outcome is a consensus 
that is fully democratically legitimised.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by saying that it is not my role to prescribe how such a process could be 
structured. But as long as we continue to speak the language of the insiders and remain vague, 
we will not engage citizens in a debate on the right economic policies for the euro area. I can 
perfectly understand why political leaders do not want to face their electorates and defend a 
euro area fiscal capacity when even we, as experts, cannot really agree on its definition.  
When presenting his preliminary report, Lamfalussy argued in 2000 that the Union had a clear 
choice “either to dawdle aimlessly along in our slowcoach, in the slow lane – with … the world 
passing us by, or to change and capture the benefits”.9 I could not have found a more fitting 
description of the situation we find ourselves in now. 
                                                
8   See Cœuré, B., “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary 
Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe” in Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
9   Summary  of  remarks  made  by  Alexandre  Lamfalussy,  Chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Wise  Men  on  the 
Regulation of European Securities Markets, to the Press concerning the Committee’s initial report published on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Thank you for your attention. 
   9  November  2000 
summary_en.pdf) 
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/lamfalussy/wisemen/lamfalussy-
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
