  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Overview of recent monetary and 
macroeconomic trends in Serbia 
Introductory speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, 
at the presentation of the Inflation Report – May 2016, Belgrade, 24 May 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  May  Inflation  Report.  As  always,  we  will  give  you  an 
overview of recent monetary and macroeconomic trends and our expectations for the period 
ahead. 
Let me start and conclude my speech by discussing the same topical news! We have revised 
our GDP growth projection for 2016 from 1.8% upwards. We now expect that the Serbian 
economy  will end this  year with a growth between 2.3% and 2.5%. Allow me to underline 
that, given the current movements, it is far more likely that the year-end GDP growth rate will 
be at the upper bound of the projection range, i.e. at 2.5%. And it is not that we are being 
overly optimistic; this projection is based on models, mathematics and indicators. 
If we compare the latest macroeconomic data with those presented in the February Report, it 
is  evident  that  the  economic  recovery  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia  has  continued,  and  more 
importantly, that the growth is based on long-term sustainable foundations. And that is why 
the macroeconomic outlook for the period ahead has been revised upwards relative to the 
previous Report. 
In  the  first  three  months  of  the  year,  fiscal  deficit  contracted  by  a  quarter  from  the  same 
period last year and equalled 1.7% of the estimated GDP, as compared to 2.4% in the same 
period a year earlier. 
The current account deficit of the balance of payments has more than halved compared to 
the corresponding period in 2015 – it equals 3.3% of the estimated GDP and remains fully 
covered by foreign direct investments. 
Our fiscal outlook has improved in response to a sustainable rise in tax revenue, while the 
narrowing  of  the  current  account  deficit  has  been  driven  by  more  favourable  trends  in 
external trade. 
Last time we met at the presentation of the February Report, we expressed no doubts as to 
the continuation of growth in exports and economic activity in the coming years. Indeed, the 
growth  has  continued  up,  and  has  done  so  at an  even  faster  pace than  expected.  Export 
growth, measured in euro terms, was exceptionally strong – it came at 13.4% yеаr-on-year in 
the  first  quarter,  and  is  without  any  doubt  attributable  to  both  high  growth  and  favourable 
structure  of  foreign  direct  investment.  Consumption  is  recovering  faster  than  anticipated. 
Owing  to  the  favourable  results  achieved  in  the  first  quarter,  we  have  revised  our  growth 
projection for this year from 1.8% to 2.3–2.5%. Let me say it again, considering the current 
movements,  GDP  growth  in  2016  will  most  likely  be  at  the  upper  bound  of  the  projection 
range. As so far, we expect that growth will be increasingly driven by investment into export-
oriented sectors, as this guarantees its sustainability. 
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  continued  safeguarding  macroeconomic  stability  and 
strengthening macroeconomic fundamentals. We are all witnessing the upheavals originating 
in  the  international  environment,  different  risks  spreading  from  across  markets  and 
continents. In such circumstances, we have succeeded in maintaining the stability of prices, 
relative  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  and  financial  system  stability.  Since  supporting  the 
economic  policy  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia  is  one  of  the  statutory 
objectives of the National Bank of Serbia, we find it exceptionally important that expansionary 
monetary  policy  and  macroeconomic  stability  have  also  led  to  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
financing for both the government and the private sector, whereby a significant contribution 
has been made to the creation of a better business and investment environment. 
Inflation in Serbia has remained relatively low and equalled 0.4% year-on-year in April. As 
expected,  disinflationary  pressures  prevailed  on  account  of  domestic  factors,  though  they 
were unexpectedly strong from price movements in the international environment. The lower 
inflation  projection  of  our  main  foreign  trade  partners,  notably  of  the  euro  area,  and  the 
continuing decline in the prices of primary agricultural commodities in the global market at 
the  turn  of  the  year  have  led  us  to  lower  our  February  inflation  projection  for  this  year. 
According to our most recent projection, year-on-year inflation should start rising gradually as 
of May and return within the target tolerance band early next year, stabilising thereafter at 
slightly above 3%. 
In an environment of low inflationary pressures and aiming to bring inflation back within the 
target tolerance band in a sustainable manner, which is over the medium term, and not in the 
short run or at any cost, we have continuously eased our monetary policy stance over the 
past three years. Monetary policy easing was particularly intensive last year, when the key 
policy  rate  was  cut  by  350  basis  points,  which  among  others  was facilitated  by  consistent 
implementation  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Even  though  inflationary 
pressures are low and macroeconomic fundamentals continue to improve, we have decided 
to  keep  the  key  policy  rate  unchanged  at  4.25%  for  the  time  being  because  of  persistent 
uncertainties  in  the  international  commodity  and  financial  markets.  On  the  other  hand, 
movements in the domestic market – most notably the continuing and significant narrowing 
of  internal  and  external  imbalances,  are  cushioning  the  effects  of  external  risks.  What  is 
certain in this time of uncertainties seeping in from the international environment is that the 
National Bank of Serbia shall, as so far, rise to all the challenges and that Serbia will record 
higher and sustainable economic growth rates led by export-oriented investment. 
The improved macroeconomic indicators and a brighter outlook for the period ahead have 
also been recognised and acknowledged by the European Commission, which revised up the 
economic growth projection for Serbia, and by rating agencies, which raised Serbia’s credit 
rating outlook. I now give the floor to Ana Ivković who will present to you in more detail our 
view of Serbia’s macroeconomic prospects in the period ahead. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
