Carolyn Wilkins: (S)low for long and financial stability
Remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Official
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum City Lecture, London, United Kingdom, 14 September
2016.
 I would like to thank Stephen Murchison, José Dorich and Grahame Johnson for their help in
preparing this speech.
Introduction
Let  me  first  thank  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  for  inviting  me  here
today. For policy-makers like me, the Forum’s analysis and commentary are invaluable.
Central bankers and fellow policy-makers around the world have dedicated the eight years since
the  global  financial  crisis  to  rebooting  their  economies  and  repairing  their  financial  systems.
Given the added challenges of a number of sovereign debt crises, an oil price shock and, most
recently,  the  unfolding  fallout  from  Brexit,  it  is  understandable  that  we  have  devoted  a  lot  of
energy to avoiding another financial meltdown and keeping the recovery on track. It is perhaps
not  as  epic  a  journey  as  in  Homer’s  classic,  but  this  odyssey  has  certainly  proven  long  and
perilous.
Eight years into this journey, there is an urgent need for all of us to consult the map to see where
we are headed over the longer run, and to take strategic decisions to help us avoid unnecessary
trouble ahead. We all know that, cyclical factors aside, demographic trends and other structural
factors are acting as a drag on the global economy’s potential to grow. This surely worries all of
you here, since growth is what ultimately drives the returns on your investments and your job
prospects. And with economies expanding more slowly, having growth that is inclusive is more
important than ever.
Slow  growth  worries  me  as  a  central  banker,  not  only  because  it  reduces  our  room  to
manoeuvre to achieve our inflation target. It also worries me because slower potential growth
materially increases risks to financial stability.
To  explain  these  concerns,  I  will  start  with  a  view  on  the  long-term  prospects  for  economic
growth and real interest rates. I will then give you some examples of how these prospects could
translate  into  increased  financial  system  vulnerabilities.  I  do  not  believe  we  are  powerless,
though,  so  I  will  end  by  outlining  some  promising  strategies  that  could  lead  us  safely  to  a
sustainable and solid growth path.
The long and winding road
Economic growth around the world since the crisis has repeatedly surprised economists on the
downside and has led to the term: “serial disappointment.” The Bank of Canada’s own forecasts
overestimated global growth by an average of half a percentage point each year in the past four.
1
Private sector consensus forecasts were off by even more.
The slow and halting recovery is partly the result of a number of cyclical factors that are taking
years to sort out, including deleveraging in the private and public sectors. It is also the result of
deeper structural trends that are driving down the global economy’s potential to grow.
Potential GDP growth at the global level declined from a peak of about 5 per cent in 2005 to just
over 3 per cent this year, according to Bank of Canada estimates.  This is huge. A 2-percentage-
point  reduction  in  global  potential  growth  translates  into  US$1  1/2  trillion  in  foregone  output
2
 1 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
around the world in 2016 alone. If that pace is maintained, foregone output will rise to just under
US$9 trillion five years from now. The slowdown has been widespread, although potential growth
varies widely across countries. China’s potential growth is estimated to be around 6 1/2 per cent,
down from just over 10 per cent.  In advanced economies, it is much lower—around 1 1/2 per
4
cent in Canada and around 1 3/4 per cent in the United States, for example.
3
Potential  output  is  made  up  of  two  parts—labour  supply  and  labour  productivity.  Both  are
contributing to the slowdown in global potential growth. Labour force trends will continue and the
numbers are striking:  growth in the working-age population will fall at the global level from around
5
1 per cent to 0.6 per cent over the next two decades.
It is difficult to precisely quantify the impact of demographic factors in terms of growth because a
tighter  labour  market  should,  over  time,  drive  wages  up.  Higher  wages  may  persuade  some
workers to postpone retirement or join the labour force but are unlikely to reverse the tide. So far
in Canada, demographic effects have been only partly mitigated by increased participation rates
6
of older workers.
The wild card here is the second component of potential output—labour productivity. Unlike the
growth of the workforce, which is mostly driven by demographic trends that are predictable and
evolve  at  a  glacial  pace,  productivity  growth  can  change  more  quickly. And  big  technological
innovations that fuel sea changes in productivity—such as electricity and the semiconductor—
are difficult to foresee.
So  far  this  century,  productivity  growth  has  been  hardly  encouraging.  The  effects  of  the
information technology revolution on  productivity  growth  are  fading  and  the  rate  of  adoption  of
new  technologies  is  slowing.  An  additional  source  of  drag  has  come  more  recently  from  a
significant slowdown in business investment which is in large part related to lingering uncertainty
7
and a steep decline in global trade growth.
The  medium-term  outlook  for  potential  output  growth  could  be  more  positive  if  tighter  labour
markets do eventually lead to wage increases and incite more investment in productive capital,
and  if  there  are  major  advances  in  technology  that  we  have  not  yet  imagined.   Without  a
meaningful rebound in productivity, population aging will lead to even lower potential growth than
9
in past decades.
8
Natural  by-products  of  slower  potential  growth  are  not  only  weaker  corporate  profits  and
dividends, but also a lower average rate of return on investments. One way to gauge this effect is
to estimate the neutral rate of interest; here I am referring to the risk-free real interest rate that
would prevail over the medium term if the global economy were operating at its potential, after the
effects of all cyclical forces had dissipated. This neutral rate would be just right to balance the
full-employment level of savings and investment.
10
In a lower-growth environment, businesses invest less and therefore have lower financing needs.
This  drives  down  the  neutral  rate,  since  a  lower  level  of  interest  rates  is  required  to  equate
savings with investment.
 This is one of the key reasons why we have reduced our estimate of
the neutral real rate for Canada over the past couple of years. It is about 1 1/4 per cent now,
down from about 3 per cent in the early 2000s. Estimates are highly uncertain, so it is best to put
a range of +/- 50 basis points around these numbers.
11
Global potential growth is not the only determinant of the neutral rate. There is also the increase
in global savings witnessed over the past decade and a half, the lingering effects of the financial
crisis on investment demand and post-crisis financial reforms. And while we often talk about the
existence of a “global” neutral rate, an array of factors like country-specific risk premiums push
interest rates to different levels across countries.
 2 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
It is essential to keep an eye on where the neutral rate is, since the stance of monetary policy
can  be  measured  as  the  gap  between  the  level  of  the  policy  rate  and  the  neutral  rate.  Some
economists, most prominently Harvard Professor Lawrence Summers, think there is a risk that
the neutral rate is so low in some economies that the effective lower bound is preventing central
banks from providing sufficient monetary stimulus. They argue that the structural factors that are
responsible  for  the  low  neutral  rate  could  persist  well  into  the  future,  contributing  to  “secular
stagnation.”
In Canada, with the target for the overnight interest rate currently set at 0.5 per cent, we judge
monetary policy to be quite stimulative, although less so than it would have been a decade ago
when the neutral rate was higher. At the same time, as population aging continues, the neutral
rate could fall further, unless productivity growth picks up or global savings fall. And the longer
weak investment persists, the more important this risk becomes.
The link between slow growth and financial stability
While we typically link financial stability risks to unsustainably high growth, slower growth and
lower  returns  can  also  add  to  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  through  a  number  of
channels. Let me talk about three.
The first is a macroeconomic channel that works through households. Years of low interest rates
have,  by  design,  encouraged  growth  in  household  credit,  leaving  many  highly  indebted.  In
Canada,  average  household  debt  is  around  165  per  cent  of  disposable  income. As  average
household  income  growth  slows,  we  can  expect  that  economic  shocks—such  as  foreign
demand shocks that reduce demand for exports or changes in commodity prices that adversely
affect  a  country’s  terms  of  trade—will  result  in  more  frequent  and  longer  periods  of  shrinking
incomes.  This  is  due  to  two  related  factors.  The  first  is  just  simple  arithmetic:  the  lower  the
average  growth  rate  of  household  income,  the  more  likely  it  is  adverse  shocks  will  push  it
negative.
The second factor is a bit more subtle. A lower neutral rate also makes it more likely that interest
rates will be constrained by the effective lower bound, meaning monetary policy will have less
scope to support income growth during periods of economic weakness.
To get a better sense of the practical importance of these factors, we ran simulations with the
Bank  of  Canada’s  main  policy  model.
  They  show  that,  for  Canada,  the  lower  neutral  rate
means that the probability of being at the effective lower bound—which we assume to be –0.5
per cent—has gone up from around 1 1/2 per cent to around 7 per cent.
12
13
Our simulations also confirm that there would be more episodes when the income of working-
age individuals actually declined. And the median duration of those episodes would increase from
three  to  six  months,  or  perhaps  more  if  low-income  households  bear  the  brunt  of  the  growth
slowdown. This would make households more vulnerable, particularly if they are already highly
indebted. This is because the debt burdens of households, relative to incomes, would rise more
frequently than in the past. And this would typically happen when growth is weak and businesses
and financial institutions are also relatively more vulnerable.
Of course, how worried we should be about indebtedness is related not only to income but also
to the value of debtors’ assets. When it comes to households, the most important asset in many
jurisdictions is residential property. In Canada, housing equity represents about one third of total
household assets. While demographic forces have been a source of upward pressure on house
prices  in  the  past,  continued  population  aging  and  slower  population  growth  going  forward
suggest a reversal of this trend. All else being equal, demographics will weigh on the demand for
housing.
 Any price effect would directly impact the net wealth of households, at least in the
transition period.
14
 3 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Obtaining  a  reliable  estimate  of  the  impact  of  demographics  on  house  prices  is  very  difficult.
Much will depend on the response of housing supply and the extent to which older households
downsize.  Other  factors  will  also  have  an  influence  on  housing  markets  in  Canada  and
elsewhere, many of which could work in the opposite direction. For instance, it will also depend
on how much urbanization and immigration bolster demand. The relative importance of these
15
other factors will differ within and across jurisdictions.
 Nonetheless, there is no guarantee that
relying on housing wealth will yield the expected payoff.
The  second  channel  through  which  slower  growth  and  lower  returns  affect  financial  stability
relates to risk taking. As households cope with shifts in the valuation of their main asset, they
may  also  face  lower  returns  on  other  investments  because  of  the  lower  neutral  interest
rate.
 And since people are living longer, they may need more savings for their retirement years.
16
Predicting the precise impact of lower interest rates on household savings is difficult because not
all households will choose the same strategy. Empirical studies find that household savings will
typically decline when interest rates fall. This suggests that workers, instead of saving more,
generally choose to invest in riskier assets, work longer or earn lower retirement incomes. But
these are not normal times, and with interest rates so low for so long, there may be a point at
which we observe higher savings.
17
Asset and pension fund managers also face increased incentives to take on more risk with a
lower neutral rate. Defined-benefit pension plans are in a particularly difficult position: funding and
benefit levels were set based on shorter lifespans, a smaller number of retirees relative to the
working-age  population,  higher  discount  rates  and  higher  expected  asset  returns.  Not
surprisingly, the funding status of major defined-benefit pension plans, both public and private,
has  deteriorated.
  Defined-contribution  plans  are  also  facing  pressures—the  amount  that
individuals need to contribute to fund a given level of nominal retirement income has increased
substantially.
18
Although  they  may  turn  to  increased  contributions  or  lower  benefits  over  time,  many  pension
funds  are  adopting  strategies  that  include  a  larger  share  of  alternative  assets  in  an  effort  to
generate higher returns. Some pension funds are also taking on more leverage. Large defined-
benefit plans have the scale and expertise to diversify into less-liquid assets and into regions with
higher  expected  returns,  including  in  emerging  markets  that  have  relatively  higher  potential  to
grow.
They also have a greater ability than many other investors to weather short-term market volatility
—and even take advantage of it—because their liabilities are largely long term and their funding is
secure. Nonetheless, pension funds are often large participants in the financial system, as they
are in Canada, and so risks in this sector merit careful monitoring.
Individual  investors  face  similar  challenges. As  rates  of  return  available  from  public  bond  and
equity markets decline, they too are searching for alternative sources of yield. The investment
industry has responded by creating fund products based on non-traditional, less-liquid underlying
assets that expand the range available to individual investors but also carry risks.
 Alternative,
open-ended  mutual  funds  are  an  interesting  example.  They  appear  to  offer  daily  liquidity  for
underlying assets that can be very illiquid, such as commercial real estate or commercial bank
loans. In reality, this practice could result in redemptions being suspended, as we saw with some
UK property funds in the wake of Brexit.
19
Market participants investing in a wider universe of riskier assets may be desirable if it increases
access to funding for productive projects. The crucial question is whether investors can properly
price  and  manage  the  risks.  History  is  rife  with  examples  of  when  excessive  and  prolonged
search for yield ended badly.
 4 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The third channel relates to bank business models. In most economies, the banking system is
integral  to  the  provision  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses  and  therefore  the  efficient
transmission of monetary policy. However, banks can also be the source of financial instability.
In  principle,  a  key  determinant  of  a  bank’s  level  of  profitability  is  net  interest  margin—the
difference  between  what  they  charge  on  loans  and  what  they  pay  for  funding. At  first  glance,
there is no theoretical reason banks could not achieve their desired margins even if the neutral
rate is lower. In practice, however, problems arise when policy rates drop to very low levels. This
is because banks do not always have the flexibility to reduce their funding costs in line with the
declines in their interest income. In particular, banks have proven reluctant to pass lower interest
rates—especially  negative  rates—on  to  their  retail  deposit  base.  In  the  United  States,
for  example,  net  interest  margins  narrowed  by  about  20  per  cent  between  2010  and  2015.
Without  significant  adjustments  to  expectations  for  returns  on  equity,  these  pressures  on
margins  could  prompt  banks  to  change  their  business  models  and  shift  activity  away  from
deposit-based  lending  toward  other  activities.  That  said,  banks  are  limited  by  Basel  rules  on
capital, leverage and liquidity in the amount of additional risk they can take on.
The demographic trends and other factors that have contributed to the decline in the neutral rate
will also likely have implications for how banks do business. As aging baby boomers switch from
saving  to  dissaving,  the  mix  of  banking  products  will  adapt.  Weaker  housing  demand  could
reduce the demand for mortgage and consumer credit, including home equity lines of credit. In
fact,  housing  itself  is  transitioning  from  being  a  savings  vehicle  to  a  dissaving  one,  through
products such as reverse mortgages, and may even drive innovation in the provision of financial
services.
20
Pressures  on  bank  business  models  come  at  a  time  when  banks  are  also  facing  increased
competition  for  profitable  segments  of  the  value  chain,  such  as  payments  and  data.  Clearly,
banks  are  adapting  in  response  to  these  pressures.  At  the  same  time,  important  financial
activities and related risks are migrating to the less-regulated sector. While financial reform has
reduced the likelihood of instability coming from banks, these trends merit monitoring.
Taking the long way home
These  risks  may  at  times  be  reminiscent  of  Odysseus’s  voyage  back  to  Ithaca.  Unlike
Odysseus, though, we are not at the mercy of the gods. There are some promising strategies to
mitigate the risks ahead.
The first is to promote a sound global financial system. G20 countries have to complete the post-
crisis financial reforms they have agreed to, whether those reforms are related to banks, financial
market  infrastructures  or  non-bank  financial  intermediation.  We  saw  some  of  the  benefits  of
increased bank capital and liquidity in terms of market functioning in the aftermath of the Brexit
vote.  It  is  still  early  days  for  financial  reform,  though,  and  we  may  not  have  gotten  everything
perfectly right. The Financial Stability Board is appropriately focused on measuring the effects of
the reforms, including those on financial market functioning and cross-border financial market
integration. Another important aspect that should be considered, where possible, is the impact on
wealth and income distribution.
21
A sound financial system also requires macroprudential tools to lean against credit cycles. The
effects of downturns in these cycles can be very costly and difficult to clean up. Monetary policy
is  too  blunt  an  instrument  to  fine-tune  credit  cycles.  That  is  why  macroprudential  measures
aimed at specific sectors are a better way to address financial vulnerabilities.
22
The second strategy is to adopt policies that promote growth. You will not be surprised to hear
that, as a central banker, I think that monetary policy best contributes to the overall health of the
economy by keeping inflation low and predictable. In pursuit of this goal, monetary policy can at
 5 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
times ease the financial stability risks associated with negative shocks that reduce households’
disposable incomes and their ability to service existing debt. This was the case in Canada when
we lowered our policy rate twice in 2015 in response to the oil price shock.
At the same time, the scope for monetary policy to offset negative demand shocks will be more
limited as we face a lower neutral rate. As was discussed at length in Jackson Hole last month,
central banks have developed other tools, like quantitative easing and productive uses of their
balance sheets.
 The efficacy and long-term effects of unconventional tools will only be known
over time.
23
There is another reason we should not count on monetary policy to solve everything. Monetary
policy is not well suited to deal with structural problems, and today’s challenges go far beyond
temporary shocks. Fiscal policy can be a powerful tool to boost growth, from both the demand
and  supply  sides.  Infrastructure  spending  can  be  particularly  effective  if  it  raises  trend  labour
productivity, since it can help raise potential growth and ease pressures on the neutral rate.
24
That  said,  government  spending  cannot  solve  everything  either.  We  know  that  an  aging
population will put pressure on public finances through pensions and healthcare spending.
When  I  was  at  the  G20  meeting  in  Chengdu  this  summer,  we  reiterated  the  urgency  of  a
comprehensive  strategy  to  achieve  a  stronger  trajectory  for  global  growth.  In  addition  to
investment in infrastructure, countries agreed to raise potential growth by reforming their product
and labour markets, as well as their tax systems, and to develop policies to support innovation
and enhance trade.
25
The  last  strategy  I’ll  mention  is  crucial:  we  have  to  adapt  to  the  new  reality  of  lower  potential
growth.  That  means  changing  our  investment  strategies  and  risk-management  practices  to
reflect lower rates of return for any given level of risk. For households, this may mean saving
more  before  retirement  or  planning  for  a  lower  post-retirement  income.  It  also  means
acknowledging a reduced capacity to grow out of existing debts. The faster we do this, the safer
the financial system will be.
Conclusion
Let me wrap up. At one point in their journey, Odysseus and his men come across an island
inhabited by lotus-eaters. The fruit of the lotus makes those who eat it forget about their journey
—so  much  so  that  Odysseus  has  to  force  a  couple  of  his  companions  back  on  the  ship  to
continue the trip home with him.
It strikes me that we may be at a similar point: after what we have been through, it is tempting to
enjoy some respite from our own long journey. We cannot. If there is one thing we have learned
from the past decade, it is that imbalances can take a long time to develop and even longer to
resolve.
Investors and market participants have to adapt to lower neutral rates. Countries must continue
to work to meet their G20 commitments and take fiscal and structural measures that will improve
long-term growth. Authorities have to continue to solidify the global financial system and guard
against emerging problems.
It is a long road, but it is the one that will get us safely home.
Content Type(s): Press, Speeches
1
2
Based on one-year-ahead forecasts. See J.-D. Guénette, N. Labelle St-Pierre, M. Leduc and L. Rennison, “The
Case of Serial Disappointment,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2016–10 (July 2016).
 6 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Economists  call  “potential  output”  the  maximum  output  that  an  economy  can  generate  without  sparking
inflationary pressures. Over time, an economy is expected to operate at its potential, with inflation steady. When
it does, the growth rate of potential output determines the pace of economic activity.
J. Bailliu, M. Kruger, A. Toktamyssov and W. Welbourn, “How Fast Can China Grow? The Middle Kingdom’s
Prospects to 2030,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2016–15 (April 2016).
A. Agopsowicz, D. Brouillette, S. Cao, N. Kyui and P. St-Amant, “April 2016 Annual Reassessment of Potential
Output in Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2016–4 (April 2016).
According to United Nations population projections of the 15–64 age group, as published in the 2015 Revision
of World Population Prospects. For access to the database, go to esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/.
See  C.  Cheung,  D.  Granovsky  and  G.  Velasco,  “Changing  Labour  Market  Participation  Since  the  Great
Recession: A Regional Perspective,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–2 (February 2015).
For a discussion of the linkages between trade and productivity, see S. S. Poloz, “A New Balance Point: Global
Trade,  Productivity  and  Economic  Growth”  (speech  to  the  Investment  Industry Association  of  Canada  and
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, 26 April 2016); C. Constantinescu, A. Mattoo
and  M.  Ruta,  “Does  the  Global  Trade  Slowdown  Matter?” Journal  of  Policy  Modeling  (forthcoming);  and  S.
Fischer, “Remarks on the U.S. Economy” (speech to The Aspen Institute, Aspen, Colorado, 21 August 2016).
Another key factor going forward will be global migration. If unemployed workers can relocate to where their
labour is employed more fully and productively, this could help offset the effects of demographic forces.
According to projections by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), after a very
brief recovery from the recent crisis, global potential growth will continue to decline until 2060. OECD, “Growth
Prospects and Fiscal Requirements over the Long Term,” in OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2013 Issue 1:
193–221.
This should not be confused with the short-term or contemporaneous concept of neutral, which is the interest
rate that would be required to equate an economy’s output with its potential at a given point in time.
While we expect retirees to transition from saving to dissaving, our research finds this is only a partial offset. R.
R. Mendes, “The Neutral Rate of Interest in Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2014–5
(September 2014).
The Terms-of-Trade Economic Model (ToTEM). The simulation results are based on the same distribution of
shocks as observed over the 1995Q1–2015Q2 sample. Canada’s potential GDP growth is estimated to have
fallen from just under 4 per cent in 2000 to around 1 1/2 per cent today.
The simulations also show that the average time spent at the effective lower bound would increase from about
1.5 to 6.5 quarters.
E. Takáts, “Ageing and Asset Prices,” Bank for International Settlements Working Papers No. 318 (August 2010).
In countries such as Canada, Australia and New Zealand, population growth, migration and urbanization have
contributed to a rise in house prices since the mid-1990s. See L. Schembri, “The Long-Term Evolution of House
Prices: An International Perspective” (speech to the Canadian Association for Business Economics, Kingston,
Ontario, 25 August 2015).
When the neutral rate falls, asset prices should rise, all else being equal, because the rate at which future cash
flows are discounted declines. The gains in asset prices would help buffer the initial impact on pre-existing
holders of assets. Nevertheless, over time, lower returns would be unavoidable.
For surveys of the literature, see R. H. DeFina, “The Link Between Savings and Interest Rates: A Key Element in
the Tax Policy Debate,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review (November/December 1984):
15–21; and L. Rachel and T. D. Smith, “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate,” Bank of England Staff
Working Paper No. 571 (December 2015).
According to a 2015 survey conducted by Mercer, the average funding level for pension funds sponsored by S&P
1500 companies is 79 per cent. By comparison, the funds were fully funded before the global financial crisis.
See www.mercer.com/newsroom/september-2015-pension-funding.html.
 7 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
For a discussion of those risks, see S. Ramirez, J. S. Jimenez and J. Witmer, “Canadian Open-End Mutual
Funds: An Assessment of Potential Vulnerabilities,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2015): 47–
55.
A reverse mortgage lets owners borrow against their home equity, allowing them to turn it into cash without
having to sell the home or making regular payments. Interest accrues on the value of the loan, which is repaid in
full 
See www.fcac-
acfc.gc.ca/eng/resources/publications/mortgages/Pages/Understa-Comprend.aspx.
house. 
upon 
sale 
the 
the 
of 
For an example of this type of analysis, see J. Schroth, “Financial Crisis Interventions,” Bank of Canada Staff
Working Paper No. 2016–29 (June 2016).
Macroprudential tools are regulatory measures used to promote the safety of the entire financial system. For
more on the complementarity of monetary policy and macroprudential measures, see T. Lane, “Monetary Policy
and Financial Stability—Looking for the Right Tools” (speech to the HEC Montréal, Montréal, 8 February 2016).
J. L. Yellen, “The Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future” (speech to a symposium
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26 August 2016).
S. Leduc and D. Wilson, “Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and Evidence on the Impact of
Public Infrastructure Investment,” National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper No. 18042
(May 2012).
These efforts are part of the G20’s “2 in 5” ambition that was adopted by the G20 in 2014. At the 2014 Brisbane
Summit, G20 Leaders endorsed the comprehensive growth strategies initiative, which was designed to lift GDP
by more than 2 per cent above the baseline trajectory over the following five years.
 8 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
