  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Urban land management as a potential 
financing mechanism for urban development 
Discussion by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, of Prof. 
Paul Collier’s presentation on urban land management as a potential financing mechanism 
for urban development, 24 May 2016. 
 The essence of Paul Collier’s argument is that the binding constraint to development in Africa 
is a lack of connectivity in African cities. The lack of connectivity arises from a combination of 
the low population to land densities and poor transport services which characterise African 
cities,  including  Kampala.  It  impedes  the  functioning  of  labour  and  product  markets  and 
thereby prevents firms from achieving optimal economies of scale and formal sector status, 
which in turn depresses labour productivity. Consequently the key to development in Africa is 
massive  investment  in  African  cities,  by  three  sets  of  actors;  households  investing  in 
residential  property,  private  sector  businesses  investing  in  commercial  property,  including 
multi-story residential buildings, and the public sector investing in urban infrastructure. Most 
of  this  investment  will  entail  structures  of  various  types. To  mobilise  this  investment major 
reforms are needed to create well functioning land markets, long term urban planning and 
mechanisms to raise finance for the huge volumes of investment that would be needed. Paul 
Collier  estimates  that  the  average  African  city  will  need  approximately  $50  billion  of 
investment in structures – buildings and infrastructure – if its population is to enjoy middle 
income country standards of living. 
Although there are many useful insights in Paul Collier’s thesis, there are also a number of 
important aspects which can be questioned. Let me elucidate these. 
African development and structural transformation has undoubtedly been held back by the 
paucity  of  private  investment  in  labour  intensive  industries,  such  as  manufacturing,  as  a 
result of which the vast majority of the labour force in the urban areas, including Kampala, 
has  to  earn  its  living  in very  low  productivity  informal  household  enterprises.  Only  about  3 
percent  of  the  labour  force  in  Uganda  is  employed  by  a  formal  sector  business.  But  it  is 
debatable whether the binding constraint to private investment is really the poor connectivity 
of  African  cities,  rather  than  other  potential  constraints  such  as  the  poor  institutional 
environment for business, low quality of the workforce or a lack of competitiveness unrelated 
to urban connectivity, for example because of overvalued real exchange rates. I would like to 
see empirical evidence to support the contention that the poor urban connectivity, rather than 
other factors, is the binding constraint to private investment. 
If poor urban connectivity is not the binding constraint to private investment and thus higher 
productivity, then the massive investments needed in the urban areas to improve connectivity 
will not, by themselves, unleash growth and development. Instead they may turn out to be 
low  productivity  investments  which  could  cause  financial  distress  among  both  developers 
and those that have financed them. 
Investable resources in Africa are in scarce. Resources which are allocated for investments 
to  improve  urban  connectivity  must  unavoidably  be  at  the  expense  of  other  types  of 
investment,  such  as  investment  in  rural  development,  human  capital  development  or 
transport links to international markets. Therefore, if priority is to be accorded to investment 
in  urban  areas  to  improve  urban  connectivity,  we  need  to  see  strong  evidence  to 
demonstrate  that the  social  returns  to  these  investments  exceed those of  other  competing 
demands on scarce resources. 
Paul Collier argues that there is under-investment by the private sector in urban structures – 
housing and commercial buildings – and that this is partly because the financing of structures 
is  more  demanding  than  other  forms  of  investment  because  the  former  involves  lumpy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  investments  with  long  payback  periods.  However,  I  think  that  the  contention  that  there  is 
under-investment by the private sector in urban structures is tenuous. Uganda does not lack 
investment in structures. Over the last five years, an average of 18 percent of GDP has been 
invested in structures in Uganda, with investment in structures comprising 70 percent of total 
gross  fixed  capital  formation.  In  Kampala,  the  bulk  of  private  investment  comprises 
residential and commercial buildings. These investments provide only a very limited number 
of jobs and yield low real rates of return. In many cases the income earned from property is 
far lower than the cost of capital. Despite this, private investors favour property because of 
an  expectation  that  its  value  will  appreciate  in  real  terms  over  time  and,  in  some  cases, 
because of the social prestige which owning property brings to the owner. 
Most of the commercial investment in urban property that characterises Kampala and other 
African cities involves investment in the non traded goods sectors of the economy; housing, 
retail  trade  and  business  services.  I  would  argue  that  the  real  dearth  of  investment  in  our 
economy  is  not  in  urban  structures  but  in  labour  intensive  traded  goods  sectors,  such  as 
manufacturing industry and agro-processing, which are the engines for structural change. 
Paul  Collier  argues  that  the  huge  public  investments  in  urban  infrastructure  which  he 
advocates can be entirely self funding with the appropriate taxation. He argues that public 
investment will generate gains in productivity which will raise the value of land held by the 
private  sector.  Therefore,  by  levying  an  annual  tax  on  the  market  value  of  land,  the 
government or local authorities can mobilise the revenue needed to service the debt that it 
incurred  building  the  infrastructure.  I  am  sceptical  about  this  claim.  It  depends  upon  the 
notion that a shortage of public infrastructure is the binding constraint on productivity growth 
in  the  private  sector,  which  as  I  have  already  mentioned  is  not  axiomatic. If  private  sector 
productivity  in  urban  areas  does  not  rise  as  expected,  because  it  faces  other  constraints 
besides  the  inadequacies  of  public  infrastructure,  land  owners  will  lack  the  income  to  pay 
land  taxes,  even  if  their  land  appreciates  in  value.  This  would  leave  the  public  authorities 
lacking  the  revenue  to  repay  its  debt.  The  city  would  have  better  infrastructure,  but  its 
administration would be bankrupt and the provision of other vital services would suffer as a 
result. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
