  Stephen S Poloz: Living with lower for longer 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Association des 
économistes québécois, the Cercle finance du Québec and CFA Québec, Québec, Québec, 
20 September 2016. 
 I would like to thank Anthony Landry for his help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
It is not often that I get to speak to a room full of economists and, believe it or not, I consider 
it a privilege. People say that economists can never agree on anything, but I suspect that we 
can agree on at least one thing. What is the number one issue that people ask economists 
about today? It is ultra-low interest rates. 
You  probably  get  questions  from  both  sides,  just  as  I  do.  Young  folks  with  mortgages 
regularly thank me for keeping interest rates low. When I think about how much cumulative 
interest I have paid in my lifetime, it is no wonder that they are grateful. But I also hear from 
people, especially retirees, who are unhappy because they have saved their whole lives and 
are getting very little income from those savings today. 
Now, it is natural to give central banks the credit – or the blame – for ultra-low interest rates. 
Low  rates  have  been  with  us  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  G7  central  banks 
implemented coordinated interest rate cuts in 2008 – a sign of just how serious the situation 
was.  Some  of  the  hardest-hit  economies,  such  as  the  United  States,  Europe  and  Japan, 
implemented  unconventional  policies  to  ease  monetary  conditions  further.  Without  these 
efforts, the global economy could have fallen into a second Great Depression. 
We  avoided  that fate.  But  since  that  time,  policy  rates  have  generally  remained  extremely 
low, mainly because the economic headwinds that the crisis created have been slow to fade. 
Some central banks have even gone to negative interest rates, a bizarre concept for many, 
and  bond  yields  across  the  curve  are  also  ultra-low.  In  fact,  more  than  US$10  trillion  of 
government debt is currently trading with a negative yield. 
As  economists,  though,  we  can  also  agree  that  this  is  about  much  more  than  monetary 
policy. There are big, long-term, global forces acting on interest rates, and people need to 
understand  them  better.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Carolyn  Wilkins  spoke  about  this  same 
topic last week in London, focusing on the implications for financial stability. Today, I’m going 
to focus on the macroeconomic and monetary policy aspects of ultra-low rates and conclude 
with some thoughts on how other policies fit into the matter. 
Forces acting 
As  economists,  we  naturally  think  of  nominal  interest  rates  as  a  combination  of  expected 
inflation  and  the  real  interest  rate.  Under  Canada’s  inflation-targeting  regime,  inflation 
expectations  have  been  very  well  anchored,  even  during  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
subsequent recession. It follows that a decline in real interest rates is the issue at hand, and 
a drop in the real neutral rate is a big part of this. 
The  real  neutral  rate  is  a  theoretical  concept  that  can’t  be  directly  measured,  and  central 
banks don’t control it. But it is extremely important to understand: it is the inflation-adjusted 
risk-free  interest  rate  in  an  economy  –  the  real  interest  rate  that  is  neither  stimulative  nor 
contractionary when an economy is operating at full capacity without cyclical forces at play, 
thus balancing desired savings and investment. Presently, Bank staff estimate that the real 
neutral rate falls into the range of 0.75–1.75 per cent, which translates into a range for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  nominal neutral rate of 2.75–3.75 per cent. This is down from a range of 4.50–5.50 per cent 
in the pre-crisis period. 
The most  important force  pushing  the  neutral  rate  down  has  been  a  steady  decline  in  the 
potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  In  turn,  this  decline  is  being  driven  primarily  by  the 
aging of our population, which is slowing the rate of growth of the labour force. 
In effect, the baby boomers boosted potential economic growth significantly, starting in the 
1960s. Since that force has been in place for some 50 years, it is easy to think of that boost 
as  lasting  forever.  But  in  a  demographic  sense,  it  was  temporary.  Those  folks  have  been 
entering retirement for the past few years, and potential economic growth has been slowing 
as a direct result. 
There are other forces acting, of course, including rising global savings rates as developing 
countries  grow  to  represent  a  bigger  share  of  global  GDP.  At  the  same  time,  global 
investment  spending  has  moderated,  in  part  because  of  lower  potential  economic  growth; 
firms  need  to  invest  less  than  they  did  in  the  past  to  sustain  that  lower  potential  output. 
Technological change is also playing a role. But this combination of higher savings and lower 
investment means that the price of borrowing those savings in order to invest – the neutral 
interest rate – has ground even lower. 
Today, those forces seem permanent to people, but of course nothing is really permanent. 
Just as the 50-year boost to potential growth caused by baby boomers is ending, the forces 
acting today will unwind eventually. Put simply, we’re dealing with lower for longer, not lower 
forever. 
Even so, these processes act so slowly that we must adapt to them today. We cannot just sit 
back and wait for these slow-moving forces to reverse. People and companies, investors and 
savers, all need to understand these forces and make adjustments. 
Lower for longer and savers 
One group that has certainly been affected by lower for longer is savers, particularly seniors 
who planned to finance their retirement with interest income generated by a life of working 
hard to build savings. I have heard from many Canadians who are rightly worried about their 
ability to live off their savings and who are seeking a return to higher interest rates. 
I  certainly  can  sympathize  and  understand  these  concerns.  Demographic  and  economic 
changes, along with the low interest rates that followed the financial crisis, have upended the 
calculations that many Canadians made in planning for retirement. That is not their fault. 
But  at  the  heart  of  this  discussion  is  the  level  of  the  real  rate  of  interest.  Having  higher 
nominal  interest  rates  because  of  higher  inflation  would  not  help  savers,  because  higher 
inflation would just erode the future purchasing power of those savings. Maintaining a low-
inflation environment is the Bank’s primary goal. We do this because we’ve seen that it is the 
best  way  to  help  bring  about  solid,  sustainable  economic  growth.  That  growth  benefits 
everyone, from business owners  looking to expand, to workers looking for employment, to 
savers looking to protect their savings and find investment opportunities. 
In our most recent Monetary Policy Report, in July, we said that our current policy rate setting 
of 0.5 per cent was consistent with the economy returning to full capacity toward the end of 
2017 and inflation returning sustainably to its target. We’ll update our forecast next month, 
but  in  our  decision  on  September  7,  we  indicated  that  the  risks  to  our  projected  inflation 
profile have tilted somewhat to the downside following recent data on investment in both the 
United States and Canada, and the recent data on our exports. It is quite evident that our 
economy  is  still  facing  strong  headwinds,  and  we  need  stimulative  monetary  policy  to 
counteract them and move us closer to full capacity. We also need to watch the full effects of 
the government’s fiscal stimulus unfold. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, the decline in the real neutral rate means that any given setting of our policy rate 
will be less stimulative today than it was a decade or two ago. The current policy rate, while 
certainly providing monetary stimulus, is not as stimulative as it would have been before the 
crisis. 
By the same token, an immediate rise in our policy rate back to, for example, the 4.25 per 
cent that prevailed before the financial crisis would represent an extreme tightening of policy 
and would have significant consequences. This is just another way of saying that low interest 
rates are actually having big effects today, but the headwinds pushing back on that stimulus 
remain quite powerful. 
For some savers, ultra-low interest rates do have positive effects. In particular, the value of 
most  assets  rises  when  interest  rates  decline,  supporting  gains  in  household  wealth.  This 
effect may not be as obvious as the impact of low rates on savings. But lower interest rates 
generally mean higher stock and bond prices, as well as increases in the value of real estate, 
which has been another important source of wealth for many savers, particularly seniors. 
I realize this may be cold comfort to those people who have to adjust retirement plans to a 
lower-for-longer world. But the difficult reality is that savers must adjust their plans. That may 
mean some combination of putting aside more funds, working a little longer than planned or 
changing the mix of investments. There are no easy answers, particularly for some who have 
already retired. 
Compounding the challenge is the fact that people are now  living longer – life expectancy 
has  risen  by  about  6  years  since  the  early  1980s.  I  hope  you  will  agree  that  this  is 
unambiguously  good  news.  But  combining  longer  life  expectancy  with  low  interest  rates 
means that a person starting to save today would have to set aside much more to generate 
the same retirement income as a person who began saving 25 years ago, if both wished to 
retire at the same age. 
Lower for longer and companies 
The other group I would like to talk about today is companies and, specifically, their decisions 
about  business  investment.  Across  the  global  economy,  investment  spending  fell  sharply 
during the financial crisis, and the recovery has been unexpectedly weak. The recent drop in 
oil and other commodity prices has lowered investment plans even further. 
When  investment  slows,  it  means  an  economy’s  potential  output  also  grows  more  slowly, 
which can reinforce the trend toward lower interest rates. In contrast, raising potential output 
through increased investment can ease the downward pressure on global rates. 
With interest rates as low as they have been, the cost of capital certainly is not a problem for 
well-established businesses. But as economists, we know that credit provision will always be 
less than perfect in a financial system such as our own. And there is a risk that changes to 
global  banking  regulation,  designed  to  make  the  system  safer,  could  worsen  any  such 
imperfections. Put another way, it is likely that financing gaps continue to exist – and could 
easily have increased in importance – for new and young businesses, for small and medium-
sized  enterprises,  and  for  trade  finance  and  infrastructure.  Given  the  importance  of  young 
company growth at this stage of the business cycle, the Bank is monitoring data on company 
formation and credit flows carefully. 
Still,  we  are  seeing  a  number  of firms  in  Canada’s  non-resource  sector  that  are  operating 
close to full capacity. Under normal circumstances, you would expect investment intentions 
to be rising, but so far that has not really been the case. 
Research done at the Bank of Canada and elsewhere, including conversations with business 
leaders, suggests that the main cause of weak investment is the high level of uncertainty that 
companies are facing, particularly about future demand prospects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  And it is understandable that businesses would be uncertain. Companies have lived through 
the daunting experience of the financial crisis and Great Recession. On top of that, we have 
had all sorts of economic and geopolitical uncertainties across the global economy. In such 
an  atmosphere,  it’s  not  surprising  that  business  leaders  would  be  reluctant  to  commit  to 
major new investments. 
However,  in  my  conversations  with  Canadian  firms  I  have  picked  up  on  another  possible 
investment impediment – hurdle rates for new investments do not seem to have adjusted to 
the new reality. 
The  hurdle  rate  is  the  lowest  acceptable  rate  of  return  that  a  company  chooses  for  an 
investment to proceed. Generally, you calculate the hurdle rate by adding together the risk-
free  interest  rate,  a  measure  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  life  of  the  project  and  a 
premium  to  compensate  for  the  investment’s  risk.  Because  the  risk-free  interest  rate  is 
closely related to the real neutral rate, and because the real neutral rate has been declining, 
it follows that hurdle rates should also be lower, all else being equal. 
I have had some business leaders tell me that they have been surprised to see, for example, 
companies in Asia pursuing investments with implicit returns of around 3 to 4 per cent, well 
below most companies’ hurdle rates. My response has been to say that in the current and 
prospective environment, 4 per cent will probably turn out to be a pretty good return. 
If  uncertainty  is  the  main  impediment  to  investment  decisions,  then  it should  subside  over 
time as economies heal, improving the investment climate. But if companies are maintaining 
traditional hurdle rates, they are unlikely to invest any time soon, and we will not see the kind 
of growth, productivity and job creation we are looking for. And neither will the companies. 
Policy prescriptions 
So far, we’ve talked about the adjustments that are needed in response to powerful, slow-
moving global forces. We know that these forces have reduced the real neutral interest rate 
here in Canada and will keep the growth of potential output around 1.5 per cent for the next 
number of years. 
In such a context, increasing potential output growth by even a few tenths of a percentage 
point  would  make  an  important  difference  to  all  the  issues  I  have  spoken  about  today. 
Raising  potential  output growth  would  boost  the  real  neutral  rate  of  interest  and  long-term 
interest rates, and it would increase returns on investments for savers and companies alike. 
So if there are policies that would boost potential output – the sum of labour force growth and 
productivity growth – then we need to pursue them. 
Fortunately, there are many things that we collectively can do. The G20 has been discussing 
this  for  some  time,  describing  it  as  the  third  leg  of  the  policy  stool  –  structural  reforms  to 
complement monetary and fiscal policies. 
Here in Canada, one way forward is to identify and remove impediments to business growth. 
For example, new and young firms are often the ones that can do the most to improve an 
economy’s productivity, create new jobs and raise potential output. So we need to make sure 
that our tax and immigration policies, as well as our ability to finance growth of young firms, 
are as enabling as they can be, so we can nurture those firms and see them flourish right 
here. 
One  important  impediment  to  business  growth  that  is  widely  shared  globally  is  weak 
infrastructure. We know that infrastructure projects spur growth in the short term by boosting 
demand. More importantly, infrastructure projects can support long-term growth by raising an 
economy’s potential output. 
Among  economists,  there  has  been  some  debate  over  the  size  of  the  impact  on  potential 
output  that  infrastructure  projects  can  deliver.  Deputy  Governor  Sylvain  Leduc  did  some 
research  during  his  time  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco.  The  research 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  showed  that,  within  six  to  eight  years,  US  government  spending  on  highway  projects 
delivered at least one dollar, possibly two to three dollars, in increased output for every dollar 
spent.  It  would  be  helpful  to  have  more  research  on  the  fiscal  multipliers  of  infrastructure 
spending in Canada. But it seems likely to me that well-targeted infrastructure investments 
will yield more economic growth than just the first infusion of cash because they enable more 
growth to occur in the future. 
Another  key  avenue  shared  by  all  economies  is  trade  liberalization.  We  all  need  to 
encourage this, both within Canada and internationally, since the world seems to be entering 
a phase of doubt about the benefits of international trade. Beyond the rhetoric, the future of 
the  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  (TPP)  has  come  into  question,  and  the  trade  agreement 
between Canada and the European Union, while much more advanced, still must go through 
a  long  ratification  process.  We  know  from  history  that  sliding  into  protectionism  would  be 
highly counterproductive. It is important for authorities to continually make the case for freer 
trade. 
Here at home, the announcement this summer of a preliminary agreement on interprovincial 
free trade is certainly welcome. There are many indications that interprovincial barriers are 
holding back the growth of individual companies and the economy as a whole. 
It is also important to recognize and understand the reasons behind rising anti-globalization 
sentiment. For example, people who have been affected by restructuring brought about by 
globalization often face difficult adjustments, including retraining and moving long distances. 
Policy-makers  need  to  be  sensitive  to  these  difficulties  and  do  what  they  can  to  facilitate 
those adjustments. 
At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  role  for  economists  to  do  compelling  research  that  reminds 
people  of  the  impact  of  trade.  Increasing  trade  is  a  positive-sum  game.  Companies,  too, 
could do more to demonstrate how globalization has made all kinds of goods and services 
more widely available at a lower cost, and how important trade is for their own employees. 
Making infrastructure investments, defending existing trade arrangements and pursuing new 
ones are certainly good candidates for boosting Canada’s economic potential. But when we 
move from theory to practice, how big can those effects be? 
Well,  bearing  in  mind  that  we  start  our  analysis  with  a  projection  that  Canada’s  economic 
potential is likely to grow by only around 1.5 per cent, which is not very inspiring, we need to 
take every decimal point of potential growth more seriously than we have in the past. Now, 
none of the structural initiatives I’ve mentioned is a silver bullet by itself. But together, they 
could  make  a  large  difference  in  our  long-term  economic  prospects.  Let’s  consider  the 
possibilities in light of existing empirical evidence. 
Begin with the removal of interprovincial trade barriers. Conservative estimates suggest that 
removing interprovincial trade barriers could add one- or two-tenths of a percentage point to 
Canada’s potential output annually. Some estimates are far larger. 
As  for  international  trade,  research  conducted  at  the World  Bank  and  elsewhere  suggests 
that  the  TPP  could  add  a  further  one-  or  two-tenths  to  our  potential  output  growth.  The 
Canada–EU trade agreement should also boost potential, though estimates suggest by less 
than the TPP. 
In a low-growth world, these three initiatives taken together could have a significant impact 
on  economic  growth,  year  after  year.  Now,  let’s  add  the  impact  of  targeted  infrastructure 
spending.  A  prudent  estimate  is  that  this  could  add  another  tenth  or  two  of  a  percentage 
point to potential output over the medium term. 
When you consider how the benefits of these policies would add up over years, you’ll see 
why every decimal point counts. A reasonable estimate is that these policies could raise the 
level of real GDP by 3 to 5 per cent by 2025, which would mean up to $100 billion more in 
income  for  Canadians  every  year.  In  a  lower-for-longer  world,  these  are  opportunities  we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  simply cannot afford to miss. This is especially true because other countries are not sitting 
still  –  in  other  words,  we  could  actually  lose  ground  as  other  countries  become  more 
competitive, so failing to take up these structural opportunities might still mean an erosion of 
the status quo. 
Conclusion 
It’s  time  to  conclude.  What  I’ve  tried  to  do  today  is  be  clear  about  the  forces  that  have 
brought about this period of ultra-low interest rates and help identify the implications. While 
monetary policy actions played a role in the decline of interest rates, the Bank sets its policy 
rate to meet its primary mission: returning inflation sustainably to target, thus helping to get 
the economy back to full output. In this sense, ultra-low interest rates are a symptom of the 
conditions we face, conditions that we believe are improving over time. 
But some of the forces leading to low interest rates will persist for a long time, so we need to 
prepare for lower for longer. Individuals need to plan for retirement with different assumptions 
about longevity, interest rates and growth. Businesses need to make sure their expectations 
about  investment  returns  reflect  the  current  and  likely  future  reality  and  reconfigure  their 
investment  plans  accordingly.  And  policy-makers  need  to  make  sure  they  are  working  to 
increase the economy’s potential output and reduce uncertainty – whether economic, political 
or regulatory – that may be holding back investment. 
What the Bank can, and will, continue to do is to provide certainty about the future value of 
money  through  inflation  control.  Together,  we  can  make  the  necessary  adjustments  and 
boost confidence that will foster the economic growth we all want to see. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
