   Jens Weidmann: Opening speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank’s third 
cash symposium 
Opening speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman 
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank’s third cash symposium, Frankfurt am Main, 13 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning  and  a  very  warm  welcome  to  this,  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank’s  third  cash  symposium. We  launched  our  cash  symposium  as  a  platform  for 
fostering  dialogue  and  promoting  interaction  between  the  various  stakeholders  in  the  cash 
space. So it gives me great pleasure today to officially open what is already the third cash 
symposium and to see that there is quite obviously strong and enduring demand for an event 
of this kind. 
And if you ask me, there’s no better place to host this event than Frankfurt. This city, after all, 
has close ties with money, and with cash and coinage, too. And I’m not saying that just because 
of the nearby bank towers or the Bundesbank’s own collection of coins and banknotes, which, 
incidentally,  ranks  among  the  country’s  four  largest  and  will  this  year  be  celebrating  its 
centenary – though that’s not exactly a ripe old age in the world of numismatics. 
No, ladies and gentlemen, the city of Frankfurt’s close ties with cash also have a lot to do with 
where we chose to hold today’s symposium. Many of you will already know, I’m sure, that 
Bethmannstrasse, the street in which today’s venue is situated, was named after Bethmann 
Bank, a credit institution established by the Bethmann brothers back in the 18th century. 
But fewer of you, I suspect, will be aware that back in the late 17th century, an ancestor of the 
Bethmann brothers, a certain Konrad Bethmann, was employed as mintmaster for Princess 
von Nassau-Holzappel in what is today the German federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate. The 
profession of a mintmaster was without doubt a reputable one. But even back in those days, 
people  certainly  had  their  wits  about  them  when  it  came  to  filling  the  state  coffers.  The 
debasement of small coins like the pfennig or the groat was quite a widespread phenomenon, 
especially so in the era in which Konrad lived. 
So back then, mintmaster Bethmann may well have been among those generally suspected 
of debasing the coinage – that is to say, of “tipping the scales”, possibly even at his employer’s 
behest. And to be absolutely honest, aren’t we central bankers, too, often widely suspected of 
“tipping the scales”? After all, in an era in which money is made of paper, and the metal value 
of coins is less than their face value, it has become much cheaper to manufacture currency. 
It  was  to  nip  any  such  suspicions  in  the  bud  that  the  European  Treaties  committed  the 
Eurosystem to the objective of maintaining price stability and made it independent of political 
influence. The rationale for this was that preventing monetary policy from being subjugated to 
the fiscal whims of governments would keep the value of money stable. That is why central 
banks attach such great importance to sound government budgets and fiscal compliance – 
criteria which, at the end of the day, serve the overriding goal of shielding monetary policy. 
Cash – an anchor of confidence 
2. 
German sociologist Georg Simmel wrote more than a century ago that “... money ... is perhaps 
the most concentrated and pointed form and manifestation of confidence in the socio-political 
organisation and order.” Money and confidence are inextricably linked. And confidence in a 
currency has its roots in cash. That is perhaps even more true for the euro than it is for other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   currencies since euro cash – the common means of payment we use throughout the euro area 
– is the most manifest symbol of European integration. 
It’s the calling card, if you will, of every single European institution, something that passes 
through  everyone’s  hands  on  a  regular  basis.  That’s  one  reason  why  cash  is  so  hugely 
important for us. And that’s why we at the Bundesbank set high standards for the quality of the 
cash we introduce into the system. Quality has its price, of course – in this instance, it’s our 
dedication  to  providing  a  sufficient  quantity  of  cash  that  consistently  meets  high  quality 
standards. 
Just over two years ago – at the second cash symposium, in fact – Professor Otmar Issing 
recounted how, shortly after he took office at the Bundesbank in 1990, he was informed, only 
half-jokingly, by the then-Bundesbank President Karl Otto Pöhl that the Bundesbank was not 
only  responsible  for  monetary  policy  but  that  it  was  “primarily  a  business  engaged  in 
transporting  and  distributing  banknotes”. The  staff  levels,  Mr Pöhl  explained,  were  proof  of 
that. 
Not all that much has changed since then in this regard. Cash-related operations endure to 
this very day as the most labour-intensive of our five core business areas. Saying that, the 
number of staff involved in running the Bundesbank’s cash operations has almost halved over 
the past twelve years. 
And it’s not as if cash is a pastime the Bundesbank has chosen to indulge in. It’s a field where 
we mainly respond to the general public’s payment habits. And one thing is for sure: Germans 
love  cash.  Although  overnight  and  short-term  bank  deposits  nowadays  make  up  the  lion’s 
share – more than 90 %, in fact – of money, it is still the case that the majority of purchases in 
Germany  are  settled  in  cash.  Cash  is  used  in  80 %  of  transactions,  though  that  figure  is 
dwindling somewhat. It would only be a slight exaggeration to say that money is what you save 
in accounts but spend as notes and coins. 
Germany is the world’s number one country in the use of cash. For one thing, this is because 
Germans have a strong preference for cash – indeed, this is particularly evident when one 
considers how customers tend to pay at petrol stations. Not only is that a point of sale where 
customers can pay either by card or in cash in all the countries observed; transaction values 
are roughly the same, too. 
But there are still further factors that have a bearing on whether and how much people tend to 
pay in cash. These include ease of access to ATMs, the rates of interest on current accounts, 
the extent to which retail merchants accept card payments, and how much effort card providers 
put into boosting the popularity of card payments by running marketing campaigns or loyalty 
schemes. 
Many  of  these  factors  also  play  a  role  in  the  relatively  strong  propensity  to  use  cash  in 
Germany. As a case in point, if more retail merchants in Germany accepted debit or credit card 
payments, that would undoubtedly drive down the share of cash in higher payment amounts – 
though I admit that this does bring to mind the question “What came first: the chicken or the 
egg?”. 
Even if this scenario were to materialise, debit and credit card payments would not crowd out 
cash  payments  altogether.  Contrary  to  what  some  might  believe,  cash  isn’t  actually  a 
particularly  expensive  form  of  payment.  Indeed,  in  terms  of  costs  per  transaction,  cash 
payments are far cheaper than both debit and credit cards. Only when the costs are regarded 
as a share of the transaction amount does cash lose out to debit cards, but not to credit cards. 
So there’s certainly nothing unreasonable about paying small amounts in cash and using a 
card for larger purchases. 
And of course, cash tends to grow in popularity whenever confidence in the financial sector 
evaporates. Only last summer in Greece did we see banks shutting their doors for days on end 
and long queues forming at ATMs. And Germany, too, saw how popular cash can be during 
the financial crisis, when, in the wake of the Lehman Brothers insolvency, the Bundesbank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   issued as many €500 euro banknotes in a single month as it had done in the entire previous 
year. Only euro banknotes are sole unrestricted legal tender; only they give the general public 
the cast-iron certainty that they are in full possession of their money at all times, free from any 
influence. That’s why it is often said that “cash is king”. 
All these aspects are worth considering in the current deliberations over whether or not to place 
constraints on cash payments. I know full well that politicians are doing their utmost to clamp 
down on terrorism. But there is not a single academic paper I know of that proves, beyond any 
doubt, that restricting the use of cash really is an effective means of combatting organised 
crime, tax evasion and international terrorism. 
Whereas  potential  resolutions  on  an  upper  limit  for  cash  purchases  are  still  pending,  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  already  taken  a  decision  on  the  €500  note,  namely  to 
discontinue production. The new series of euro banknotes will therefore no longer include the 
€500 note. Following an adequate transitional period which will probably last until at least the 
end of 2018, the issuance of €500 notes will be discontinued as well. The time can then be 
used to produce other banknotes. This time will certainly be needed, as €500 notes account 
for as much as one-third of the currency circulating in the euro area (in terms of value). 
What this means is that, in the future, more banknotes will need to be printed in order to cope 
with  a  rise  in  the  quantity  of  currency  in  circulation.  Moreover,  I  do  not  expect  the 
€500 banknotes returning to the Eurosystem to be fully deposited in bank accounts. There are 
initial  signs  that  the  public  is  already  beginning  to  trade  in  their  €500  notes  for  smaller 
denominations. The quantity of euro notes will therefore tend to rise overall – along with the 
costs of their manufacture, quality assurance and transportation. 
At least the €500 note will remain legal tender and can be exchanged at national central banks 
for an indefinite period of time. In other words, €500 notes still in circulation will not be recalled 
or  withdrawn.  This  means  that  an  approach  which  we  at  the  Bundesbank  have  always 
practised has prevailed. In my view, this is an important point. Any other action would not have 
been conducive to confidence in the single currency. 
Moreover, the debate on the abolition of the €500 note has led to the Governing Council of the 
ECB coming out clearly in favour of cash. This signal is especially important in the current low-
interest-rate environment, as restrictions on the use of cash are, in some cases, mentioned in 
the same breath as proposals to do away with cash altogether, as that would be one way of 
making it easier to broadly push through negative deposit rates in the context of an even more 
accommodative monetary policy. 
However,  in  my  opinion,  such  proposals  would  be  wrong  and  an  entirely  disproportionate 
response to the monetary policy challenges close to the zero lower bound. The right approach 
is more a question of strengthening the growth forces in the euro area as a way of moving 
rates  away  from  the  zero  lower  bound  going  forward.  And  there’s  another  thing  I  wish  to 
express  very  clearly:  there  is  no  need to  loosen monetary  policy  any further  in the  current 
environment, either. Let me explain this briefly below. 
3. 
Economic activity and monetary policy 
Economic activity 
3.1  
The global economy is on a moderate growth path. Though its momentum is weaker now than 
we had expected a little over half a year ago, the fears that prevailed in the financial markets 
every  now  and  then  did  not  materialise.  However,  right  now  we  are  seeing  a  shift  in  the 
dynamics of growth. In the emerging markets, where the situation had clouded over perceptibly 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  situation  is  stabilising  to  a  degree.  The  recessionary 
tendencies  plaguing  Russia  have  died  down,  although  a  sustainable recovery  is  not  yet  in 
sight. In China, growth prospects repeatedly required downward revisions in the past. The shift 
in  growth  seen  thus  far,  though,  is  consistent  with  China’s  transition  to  a  more  services-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   oriented, domestically driven economic model; if we look at it that way, we have no cause for 
anxiety. 
And  those  countries  which  derive  a  large  proportion  of  their  value  added  from  commodity 
exports  are  likely  to  benefit  from  the  latest  recovery  of  commodity  prices,  especially  the 
significant increase in oil prices. By contrast, the United States and United Kingdom recently 
saw a slight deceleration of growth, with US growth being curbed by the oil industry delaying 
investment, amongst other factors. Private consumption was also on the weak side in both 
countries. 
On the other hand, the euro area got off to a good start in 2016. Gross domestic product grew 
by a healthy 0.6 % on the quarter. Lively domestic demand, which benefited from low oil prices 
and the accommodative monetary policy, was a pillar of the upturn. However, another decisive 
factor was the surprisingly mild weather at the start of the year, which boosted, above all, the 
construction sector. The strong first-quarter growth should therefore not be extrapolated to the 
year as a whole. 
On aggregate, the euro-area economy’s growth path is still only tepid at present. The latest 
Eurosystem staff projection has the euro-area economy growing by 1.6 % this year, with 1.7 % 
growth assumed for each of the coming two years. 
Economic growth in Germany is looking relatively similar, even though the situation – seen, for 
instance, in terms of capacity utilisation and labour market indicators – is significantly better 
than in the rest of the euro area. Our country did, after all, post respectable first-quarter growth 
of 0.7 %. However, even in Germany, aggregate economic growth will peter out somewhat as 
the year progresses. Bundesbank economists are expecting growth of 1.7 % this year. Owing 
to the difficult external environment, growth is projected to decelerate temporarily to 1.4 % for 
2017 before then climbing back up to 1.6 % in 2018. 
Monetary policy 
3.2  
For us as central bankers, macroeconomic analysis is, of course, not an end in itself. After all, 
our  mandate  is  not  to  steer  the  economy  but  instead  to  maintain  price  stability.  Economic 
growth,  however,  is  one  determinant  of  enterprises’  capacity  utilisation  and  their  scope for 
raising prices. It also indicates how much leeway wage bargainers have in wage negotiations. 
Inflation rates have been very low for some time now in many currency areas, and the euro 
area is no exception. Here, inflation is even in negative territory; in May, prices were down by 
0.1 % on the year. In the past two years, it was mainly the sharp fall in commodity prices, 
particularly oil prices, which pushed inflation down. However, the impact of a change in oil 
prices will automatically be washed out of the inflation rate over time. And the recent rise in oil 
prices is helping to speed up this process somewhat. 
However, the low inflation rates in the euro area are not just an outcome of the fall in oil prices. 
Core  inflation,  i.e.  the  price  index  adjusted  to  exclude  energy  and  food  prices,  is  likewise 
relatively low. The muted domestic price pressures measured in this manner also show that 
some euro-area economies are recovering only gradually and that unemployment levels in 
those countries are still very high. 
Seeing as the euro-area economic recovery is only tepid, the Eurosystem projections foresee 
no more than a gradual increase in inflation to 1.3 % next year and 1.6 % in 2018. 
In  view  of  this  muted  price  outlook,  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  appropriate  at 
present, though reasonable people can disagree about the specific design of the non-standard 
measures. There is one thing I would like to stress, though: Our definition of price stability 
requires the target inflation rate to be achieved over the medium term. This will give us enough 
time  to  see  how  the  adopted  monetary  policy  measures  will  impact  on  price  movements, 
especially since, as I have been pointing out time and again, the Eurosystem is still something 
of a novice when it comes to applying non-standard monetary policy, and the risks and side-
effects of the ultra-accommodative monetary policy are growing over time. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered a wide range of themes: from cash to confidence in 
currency to monetary policy. However, I do not wish to unduly tax your attention span, for, as 
the saying goes, a good speaker can talk about anything – as long as it’s about 20 minutes or 
less. You still have an exciting programme ahead of you today. I hope you enjoy the interesting 
talks we’ve lined up for you and have a stimulating exchange of views. Thank you very much! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
