Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Some thoughts on the new economy
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the Malaysian Institute of Economic Research’s (MIER) 30th Anniversary Dinner,
Kuala Lumpur, 26 September 2016.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I  am  honoured  to  speak  here  at  the  Malaysian  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  (MIER)  30th
Anniversary  Dinner.  I  would  like  to  commend  MIER  on  the  institute’s  continuous  efforts  in
expanding  economic  knowledge,  and  the  commitment  to  research  over  the  past  30  years.
Today,  we  meet  at  a  time  where  the  global  economy  is  becoming  increasingly  dynamic  and
challenging,  underpinned  by  complex  global  interlinkages  and  shifting  trends.  The  challenges
posed  to  policymakers  are  immense.  The  rapidly  evolving  world  also  necessitates  swift,  yet
pragmatic policies in order for us to remain ahead of the competition. Against this backdrop, a
deep understanding of the core issues is absolutely critical in supporting evidence-based policy
responses; not only to manage risks but also to better leverage on opportunities. Tonight, I will be
sharing some thoughts about this “new world economy” that we are in, and along the way, share
some  policy  insights  and  research  ideas  for  the  many  economists  and  policy  thinkers  in  this
room.
Global macroeconomic environment is becoming increasingly challenging
The periods of strong global growth have become something of a distant memory to us. Global
growth for the past 5 years has averaged 3.5%, well below the pre-crisis average of 5.1%. Trade
activity, which was once itself a catalyst of growth is now lacklustre. This was evidenced by the
slower growth in global trade activity relative to global growth, as reflected in the decline in trade
intensity from 1.6 times between 2002 and 2007 to just around 1 time between 2011 and 2015.
Trade  activity  in  the  1990s  was  driven  mainly  by  trade  of  intermediate  goods  following  the
proliferation of global value chains, driven in part by the ICT revolution. However, the expansion of
global value chains has slowed with increasing on-shoring of manufacturing activity. Global trade
has also been dampened by weaker investment growth in several major advanced economies
and China’s efforts in rebalancing its economy. Given these cyclical weaknesses and structural
shifts,  the  prospects  for  global  growth  and  trade  are  expected  to  remain  challenging  going
forward.  In  fact,  the  World  Trade  Organisation  has  projected  for  world  trade  to  grow  by  only
around 3% in 2016 and 2017.
Global  risks  have  also  increased  significantly.  In  a  globalised  and  digitalised  world,  higher
interconnectedness  and  integration  have  resulted  in  greater  transmission  and  amplification  of
risks.  Country-specific  risks  have  become  more  eminent  as  they  could  generate  broader
contagion  effects.  Ongoing  global  developments  such  as  policy  adjustments  in  several  major
economies,  volatile  commodity  price  movements  and  geopolitical  tensions  have  compounded
the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  global  economy.  Although  baseline  growth  forecasts  are
already relatively low, the materialisation of these downside risks could nudge growth even lower.
Unconventional policies during the challenging times fast reaching limits
At  the  onset  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  immediate  policy  responses  were  largely  targeted
towards  stabilising  the  financial  markets.  As  volatility  began  to  subside,  and  as  financial
institutions  and  markets  were  stabilised,  the  policy  focus  subsequently  shifted  to  rejuvenating
growth and raising employment. An immediate policy challenge facing crisis-affected countries
was that conventional policy responses of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies have fast
reached significant constraints. Let me elaborate.
 1 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
In the aftermath of the crisis, public debt in crisis-affected countries reached very high levels, in
large parts due to the high cost of bailing out financial institutions. In the advanced economies,
public debt grew by almost half within the span of 5 years from 2007 to 2012. For Europe, it even
culminated in the European  Sovereign  Debt  Crisis.  The  enlarged  public  debt  levels  and  fiscal
deficit put a hard limit on current governments’ ability to spur real activity, even as growth falters.
Many governments of crisis-affected countries undertook austerity measures to avert financial
market  backlash.  This,  of  course,  have  had  a  further  dampening  impact  on  growth.  In  short,
fiscal policy has lost its ammunition and has been rendered impotent in many countries.
In many of the economies, monetary policy became the only feasible stimulus tool, so called ‘the
only game in town’. However, substantial easing by major central banks has led to global policy
rates reaching historically low levels. In fact, the zero lower bound that was once a theoretical
constraint has now been the norm for the last 8 years. Unconventional policy measures, such as
quantitative easing were adopted. Next came the introduction of the negative interest rate policy,
particularly in the advanced economies. First adopted by the Danish National Bank in 2012, five
other central banks have now lowered their key policy rates to negative territory. The outcomes of
these  unprecedented  policy  measures  remain  uncertain,  with  possibility  of  unintended
consequences and the emergence of yet more risks.
Fiscal and monetary policy, two of the most important macroeconomic policy tools, are reaching
a  point  where  they  have  very  limited  room  to  influence  the  desired  growth  and  employment
outcomes.  This  raises  a  few  questions  –  have  we  reached  a  point  where  macro  economy
becomes a dismal science? Have we reached a macro-policy trap? What have we missed in the
design  of  these  policy  tools?  These  are  very  important  questions.  They  warrant  a  deep  re-
thinking of the underlying basis of the discipline, and a re-examination of the many principles that
we  have  been  relying  on  all  these  while.  To  apply  the  same  solution  over  and  over  again  is
certainly not a viable option.
The international monetary system fosters imbalances and volatility of capital flows and
exchange rates
Since  the  departure  from  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  the  international  monetary  system  has
evolved to reflect on-going changes in global economic developments and economic thoughts.
The  architecture  of  our  current  monetary  system  is  characterised  by  flexible  exchange  rate
regimes, free capital flow and independent monetary policy. This global landscape has expanded
the  cross-border  exchange  of  goods,  services  and  capital.  Importantly,  the  transition  to  more
market-based  foreign  exchange  rate  system  has  accorded  policymakers  greater  control  over
domestic  policies,  accelerated  the  development  of  financial  sector,  and,  ultimately,  boosted
economic growth.
Nonetheless,  this  international  monetary  system  also  has  obvious  shortcomings.  In  the  post-
Bretton Woods period, the frequency of banking and currency crisis has increased dramatically
with large output and employment losses. At the centre of this international monetary system,
policy adjustments in major economies have led to significant volatility in the financial markets.
The initial hint of tapering by the Federal Reserve in May 2013 resulted in large reversal of capital
flows  and  exchange  rate  over-shooting  in  emerging  economies.  Today,  the  complexity  of
managing  an  economy  is  compounded  by  the  impact  of  global  shifts  in  capital  on  domestic
financial markets and real economic activities.
Given  our  high  degree  of  openness,  Malaysia  was  not  spared  by  these  developments.  For
example, global concerns over monetary policy normalisation by the Federal Reserve continue to
impact  the  ringgit.  Ringgit  volatility  since  September  2014  has  exceeded  levels  in  previous
episodes of sharp adjustments such as the European Sovereign Debt Crisis and Taper Tantrum.
The  weak  ringgit  performance  was  further  amplified  by  the  misperception  about  Malaysia’s
reliance  on  commodities  and  our  position  as  a  net  oil  exporter.  Despite  Malaysia’s  lower
 2 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
dependency on commodities, the magnitude of ringgit depreciation is disproportionately higher
and is even comparable to the currencies of countries that rely more heavily on commodities,
such  as Australia  and  Norway.  For  the  record,  in  2015,  commodities  constituted  only  19%  of
Malaysia’s  total  exports.  For  example,  the  oil  and  gas  industry  accounts  for  only  11%  of  total
exports, about 1% of total employment, and 22% of Government revenue. I must emphasize that
adjustments  in  the  ringgit  should  be  viewed  from  a  long-term  perspective.  In  the  short-term,
exchange  rate  movements  could  react  to  new  headlines  and  market  sentiments,  instead  of
reflecting the underlying strength of the economy. What is important, therefore, is to ensure the
availability  of  ample  reserves,  maintain  strong  economic  fundamentals  and  manage  our
exposure to external debt.
There  has  been  increasing  discussion  among  global  policymakers,  including  at  the  recent
symposium at Jackson Hole, on the changing nature of our international monetary system.
Some measures proposed include encouraging the use of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) by
the International Monetary Fund to increase the flexibility of the current monetary system. The G-
20 framework also stressed on countries’ shared responsibility in supporting “strong, sustainable
and  balanced  growth”  globally.  Ultimately,  there  is  an  increasingly  compelling  case  for  a  new
thinking about the international monetary system and ways to reduce excessive volatility in global
markets. Managing excessive volatility is particularly pertinent for small and open economies as
volatile currency fluctuations not only affect trade, external debt servicing and cost of investment,
but  also  affect  domestic  business  and  consumer  sentiments.  In  response,  countries  in  the
region have embarked on greater quest to use local currencies for the settlement of trade and
investment activities.
Against  this  backdrop,  I  shall  attempt  to  outline  some  of  the  core  issues  in  need  of  policy
responses. I will be sharing some thoughts on the so-called “new global economy”, and along the
way provide some policy insights that may spur research ideas for the many economists and
policy thinkers in this room.
A World Defined by Paradoxes
Since the global financial crisis almost a decade ago, the world has continued to be reshaped by
complex and challenging forces with far-reaching implications, both economically and politically.
Some of these forces were not foreseen and are causing many unintended consequences.
So it’s not surprising that some circumstances are seemingly contradictory yet in some sense
expresses a possible truth. In other words, paradoxes. These paradoxes pose a challenge to us
all;  from  policy-makers,  to  businesses,  to  academics  ,  provoking  us  to  question  our
understanding of how the world works, and forcing us to rethink the approaches that we need to
formulate  in  response  to  these  forces  that  are  shaping  the  global  economy.  I  have  three
paradoxes in mind.
is 
first  paradox 
this; while  globalisation  drives  the  world  to  grow  closer
The 
together, we  are  simultaneously  drifting  further  apart.  By  many  measures,  nations  and
people are closer than  ever  in  terms  of  trade,  investment,  information  exchange  and  physical
mobility. Despite the weakness in growth and trade activities, global flows of goods, services and
finance is still more than one-third of global GDP, 150% the level in 1990. Yet, social disparities,
most  noticeably  inequality  in  the  distribution  of  income,  have  worsened  considerably.  Income
inequality has risen in many OECD countries since the 1980s ; we in Asia have not fared well
either, with an average Gini coefficient that is higher than the rest of the world . The distance
between the reality that we live in and our idea of an ideal construct of society is thus at once
both closer and further than it was in our parents’ generation.
1
2
The issues underlying this paradox are complex and different for every nation. In many ways, it is
 3 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
driven by the very forces of globalisation that have brought our economies closer together, but at
the same time undermined the welfare of the middle-class in advanced economies and driven
the ‘haves and have-nots’ further apart in the emerging economies. The problems confronting us
today  are  different  from  the  past.  The  implications  for  policymakers  and  social  thinkers  are
therefore,  immense.  These  new  challenges  require  more  nuanced  understanding  and
approaches, and because of this, our frameworks need to adjust accordingly. For a start, it is
important  to  recognise  that  new  challenges  can  arise  as  a  by-product  of  a  genuinely  positive
development. Indeed it has been argued that rising income inequality is a direct and unavoidable
consequence  of  the  advent  of  technological  revolution  and  the  expanding  process  of
globalisation. Thus, in this new economy, one of the pressing challenges may come down to
reconciling the benefactors of technology and globalisation with those who are excluded, with the
intention of keeping inequality at bay.
This brings me to the second paradox. Despite all the technological advancements that we
have experienced in recent years, labour productivity has not risen in tandem. The world
is  now  at  the  cusp  of  path-breaking  and  fundamental  technological  changes  –  in  the  area  of
artificial intelligence, bio-technology, advanced analytics or ‘Big Data’, and fintech, just to name a
few.
But at the same time, labour productivity has been anaemic in major economies since the global
financial  crisis,  which  in  the  US,  is  currently  experiencing  the  longest  run  of  declining  worker
productivity  since  the  1970s .  Tangible  slowdown  in  productivity  is  also  prevalent  in  many
emerging economies since the global financial crisis.
3
This is a disconcerting trend, as productivity growth is the bedrock of sustained improvements in
standards of living and income. To borrow Paul Krugman’s quote, “productivity isn’t everything,
but in the long-run it’s almost everything”. It’s a real challenge, to truly understand why this is
happening. Advocates of the secular stagnation hypothesis argue that this is a result of under-
investment in capital; others point to declining business dynamism, excessive household debt
that leads to the misallocation of resources, and some attribute it to measurement errors given
the expansion of the digital economy. And then, there are those who question the productivity-
enhancing-value  of  recent  technological  innovations.  What  is  the  value  of  an Apple  Watch  as
compared to the invention of the internet? It is indeed a challenge to comprehend this rapidly
changing  complex  system  that  we  operate  in,  let  alone  diagnose  it.  We  need  to  humbly
recognise the boundaries of our understanding for now, but at the same time relentlessly expand
the  frontier  of  thinking  and  conduct  robust  deliberation  on  the  implication  for  public  policy
formulations.
The last paradox, one that is familiar to many policymakers, a disquieting calmness. In the
financial  markets,  the  VIX  –  a  standard  indicator  to  measure  volatility  in  the  global  financial
markets – is at its lowest in the last two years. In fact, it is close to the all-time low of below 10,
last seen just before the global financial crisis. Yet, a quick scan of financial news would reveal
significant uncertainty in the global economy, amid an ongoing series of policy adjustments in
major  economies,  volatile  commodity  price  movements  and  geopolitical  tensions.  To  a  large
extent,  this  paradox  is  an  outcome  of  the  combined  policy  efforts  by  central  banks  and
governments worldwide to maintain stability since the global financial crisis.
But beneath this sense of calmness is a tense undercurrent. There is an underlying anxiety that
prevails  beyond  the  realm  of  economics,  for  example  in  relation  to  issues  of  international
security,  environmental  change,  and  the  global  spread  of  disease.  Despite  the  tremendous
progress  that  has  been  achieved  in  many  of  these  areas  through  international  treaties  and
institutional  efforts  globally,  anxieties  remain.  Extreme  views  are  becoming  more  prevalent  in
both side of the aisle, and manifests in the form of backlash against conventional wisdom, and
the  establishments.  We  ought  to  be  circumspect  in  expressing  our  views. As  individuals  and
institutions  that  have  influence  to  mould  public  thought  and  perception,  we  have  the  added
 4 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
responsibility to be balanced. We should not be too eager to discard all wisdom that have been
carefully  amassed  over  many  years  but  at  the  same  willing  to  adapt  to  new  thinking,  new
circumstances and new possibilities.
As  policy-makers  and  economists,  these  contemporary  issues  confronting  the  field  of
economics  are  indeed  reinvigorating.  New  rules  are  being  made.  Old  rules  revisited.  The
contradictory forces that I mentioned earlier, are causing great policy tensions. The policies that
have been implemented and experimented in recent years by policy-makers across the world
might themselves appear in contradictions. And the fact that the performance so far has been
mixed  does  not  invoke  confidence  in  some  of  the  policy  prescriptions.  These  ranged  from
continued experimentation of unconventional monetary policies and the need to ‘balance’ that,
with preserving financial stability, to the continued reemphasis in fiscal and structural policies in
both advanced and emerging economies.
But  in  facing  a  world  of  paradoxes,  perhaps  we  too  need  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  strong
foundations  and  conventions  that  were  built  in  the  past,  yet  remain  sufficiently  nimble  and
unafraid to rethink and reconstruct in facing the uncertain future. Errors will be inevitable, but the
more important point is our ability to correct them and to remain committed to achieving the right
outcomes. This is true for policies of central banks as well.
Bank Negara Malaysia’s Approach to Monetary Policy
Within this context, please do allow me to share with you the approach to monetary policy that
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  takes.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  decision-making  processes  and
governance  framework  today  reflect  the  combination  of  the  efforts  and  progress  since  the
establishment of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) a decade and a half ago.
Not many of you might be aware, but the MPC had its first meeting in 2002. In fact, the upcoming
MPC  meeting  in  November  would  mark  our  100th  MPC  meeting  since  2002.  Before  that,
monetary policy formulation was conducted under the absence of an established framework and
a  standard  structure.  Over  the  years  however,  the  MPC  has  evolved  and  enhanced  its
effectiveness as the sole body responsible for the formulation of Malaysia’s monetary policy and
policies for the conduct of monetary policy operations.
Of  note,  the  new  interest  rate  framework  which  was  implemented  in  2004  introduced  the
Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) as a new policy rate and contributed towards improvements in the
conduct of monetary operations.
This  not  only  played  an  integral  role  in  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy
transmission,  it  also  encouraged  a  more  market-oriented  financial  system. At  the  same  time,
foreign exchange administration rules were liberalised, which created the preconditions for us to
shift to a flexible exchange rate regime in 2005.
These developments laid the necessary foundations for the formulation of monetary policy to be
eventually formalised following the enactment of the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009. The Act
was a significant milestone – it institutionalised the autonomy of the Bank in the formulation of
monetary policy and provides greater flexibility in monetary policy implementation.
Prior  to  the  Act,  the  MPC,  which  was  an  advisory  committee  supporting  the  Governor,  had
meetings that typically took place only within a day. In its current form, the MPC meetings are
now conducted over two days. The additional time is noteworthy, as it enabled the evolvement of
the MPC towards a more robust, inclusive and comprehensive decision-making platform. This
extension  allocates  sufficient  time  on  the  first  day  for  in-depth  presentations  by  staff  and
discussion amongst the MPC members on the implications of new economic developments. On
the second day, the MPC members deliberate and decide on the appropriate policy after having
carefully appraised and internalised the assessment and discussion from the first day. All these
 5 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
proceedings are also meticulously minuted, with the intention that the Bank will one day release
the minutes for transparency purposes, and for the benefit of the research community.
Even  after  the  formal  institutionalisation  of  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  continuous  efforts
were made in the years after to further strengthen our policy decision-making framework in face
of the ever-challenging policy environment. For instance, the establishment of the Joint Policy
Committee in 2010, which combines members from both the MPC and the Financial Stability
Committee, was done in recognition of the need to have effective coordination of monetary and
financial  stability  policies  given  their  increasing  interdependence.  The  year  2015  also  marked
another significant milestone for the Bank. We appointed for the first time two external members
to our MPC, a progress that reflected the ongoing maturity and inclusiveness of the MPC as a
decision-making committee.
The inclusion of the external members has brought about additional diversity of views, and their
relevant experiences have further enhanced the collective expertise of the MPC.
It  is  important  for  us  to  outline  the  philosophy  that  underpins  our  policymaking.  The  first  is
pragmatism  –  the  need  to  do  the  right  thing  without  necessarily  being  dogmatic  and  rigid  in
approaches. Our monetary policy framework is not on inflation targeting, but one with primacy
placed on the price stability mandate while giving due regards to developments in the economy.
This was amply illustrated in the way that we managed the challenges in 2007 and 2008. Back
then, monetary policy was faced with the dual challenge of inflationary pressures from escalating
global  commodity  and  food  prices,  as  well  as  headwinds  in  global  growth  from  the  unstable
global financial markets. In this case, despite the upside risks to inflation, monetary policy was
maintained  given  the  need  to  balance  against  the  weakening  global  growth  prospects  and  its
implications on the domestic economy.
BNM recognised that the upside risks to inflation originated mainly from supply-driven factors, in
which  the  members  opined  that  monetary  policy  was  not  the  appropriate  tool  to  alleviate  the
impact. In this situation, raising rates to achieve a stable inflation at all cost would be against our
philosophy and against public interest.
During that time, our monetary policy inaction was criticised for being behind the rate-hike curve
relative  to  the  actions  taken  by  other  regional  central  banks.  But  in  retrospect,  we  were
attempting to do the right thing based on the prevailing data and our assessment. We would like
to think that our departure from the convention stood the test of time, and that we were eventually
proven right when Malaysia was able to withstand the crisis.
Staying committed to our decisions, however, does not imply inflexibility in our approach. When
global conditions deteriorated rapidly, monetary stimulus was swiftly and significantly front-loaded
between November 2008 and February 2009, to cushion the domestic economy from adverse
spillovers. Conversely, as the recovery became more firmly entrenched, Malaysia was the first in
the region to normalise interest rates in March 2009 from the record-low level, well ahead of the
regional counterparts.
We shall continue to strive to make monetary policy decisions based on prevailing data and the
assessment  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  even  if  it  might  be  against  conventional  wisdom  or  no
matter how unpopular the decisions might be.
In  managing  the  exchange  rate,  a  similar  philosophy  of  pragmatism  is  applied.  We  should
recognise that in today’s world of greater interconnectivity, we are all susceptible to the vagaries
of the global financial markets. But to distance ourselves from the global financial markets is not
an option.
In  this  regard,  despite  the  extreme  volatility  experienced  in  recent  years,  our  thinking  has
 6 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
remained the same – market forces ought to determine the direction and level of the exchange
rate. The central bank’s role should be to contain the degree of volatility, which we know has
significant implications for an open economy like ours.
As such, there will be times when the Bank’s presence is apparent in the market, to manage the
degree of volatility, but there will be times when the ringgit movements will be more volatile than
normal so that it will take its course in line with demand and supply in the market that reflects
underlying trade transactions. More recently, the ringgit had adjusted to reflect changes in the
global  economy  including  the  developments  in  the  US  economy  and  global  crude  oil  prices.
Certainly  there  are  risks  associated  with  different  levels  of  exchange  rates  and  that  different
levels  of  exchange  rate  will  benefit  differently  the  various  sectors  and  stakeholders  in  the
economy.
Looking  forward,  while  the  financial  markets  can  be  capricious,  as  market  players  focus  on
short-term  developments,  our  role  as  policy  makers  is  to  look  beyond  these  noises. As  we
continue  to  address  our  vulnerabilities  and  improve  domestic  fundamentals,  the  ringgit  will
eventually reflect the strength of our economy.
Our  path  forward  would  continue  to  be  characterised  by  fast-moving  and  ever-evolving
macroeconomic  risks  and  constantly  evolving  global  trends.  In  facing  the  complex  and
multifaceted risks associated with it, the Malaysian economy is subjected to concerns of price
stability and many other considerations that could affect overall macroeconomic stability.
This brings me to another one of our approaches in relation to ensuring overall macroeconomic
stability. We do not rely on any single policy tool. In particular, dependence on monetary policy as
the  sole  instrument  would  be  too  narrow  an  approach.  Monetary  policy  at  best  provides  an
enabling macroeconomic environment to support growth, and it should not be relied upon as the
primary instrument to drive growth. In this regard, the Bank’s policy toolkit relies on a broad set of
instruments to achieve overall macroeconomic stability. This includes considerations of macro-
prudential and pro-growth policies, as well as our advice on fiscal policy to the government. Such
an approach is key in ensuring that no single tool is overburdened.
Reawakening growth, reigniting productivity and restoring inclusiveness
Before I conclude, let me suggest how we can successfully navigate this global landscape with
contradictory forces held in tension. I have no precise answer. But I will highlight three important
outcomes that need to be achieved jointly in order to secure continued and sustainable progress
in the global economy.
First,  is  the  need  to  reawaken  growth.  Having  had  sub-par  growth  for  nearly  a  decade  now,
policy-makers  need  to  relook  what  we  have  learnt  and  rethink  our  approaches;  from  fiscal  to
monetary policies and structural issues that need to be addressed, to enable us to remove any
impediments to growth. We need to enact policies that enable the private-sector to revive their
dynamism  and  explore  new  strategies  to  enable  them  to  engage  and  uncover  productive
investment opportunities.
The second is to reignite productivity. To this end, just as how technology and globalisation has
resulted  in  many  of  the  paradoxes  outlined  earlier,  it  is  also  an  avenue  that  could  provide
answers to our challenges. Policy-makers and the private sector need to automate and adopt
technology  to  increase  productivity  and  dispense  the  easy  way  out  of  depending  on  low  cost
labour model for competitiveness.
Third,  and  perhaps  the  most  important  of  all  –  to  restore  inclusiveness.  The  socio-  and  geo-
political paralysis that is splicing the centre towards the far-left and far-right in so many parts of
the  world  can  be  traced  back  to  the  unequal  sharing  of  global  economic  progress  in  past
decades. This underscores the importance of broader-based economic growth and the urgency
 7 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
to close the inequality gap. Leaders from the public and private sectors must help boost labour-
market  participation;  across  genders,  creed  and  nationalities  and  cushion  any  negative  social
costs that may arise as a by-product of growth.
Only by reawakening growth, reigniting productivity and restoring inclusiveness, can we reclaim a
positive and sustainable future.
On that note, I would like to congratulate MIER on its commitment to research this past 30 years.
It is my hope that MIER will continue to produce quality policy-informative-research, strengthening
the synergies that exist between policy-making and research efforts. Finally, my wish is for MIER
to  become  the  leading  “global  bearer”  for  economic  research  in  Malaysia;  a  think-tank  that
matters, to the sound policy formulation of the nation.
Thank you.
1
2
3
 Income Inequality: The Gap between Rich and Poor, B. Keely (OECD Insights, 2015).
 Sharing the Growth Dividend: Analysis of Inequality in Asia, S. Jain Chandra et al. (IMF Working Paper, 2016).
 The Morning Ledger: Productivity Slump Threatens Long-Term U.S. Growth, W. Azeez (Wall Street Journal,
2016).
 8 / 8
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
