  Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 19 May 2016. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
Thank you for the opportunity to report on the conduct of monetary policy. My introduction 
here  today  is  based  on  Norges  Bank’s  Annual  Report  for  2015  and  our  monetary  policy 
assessments up to the monetary policy meeting last week. 
Chart: Inflation 
Monetary policy in Norway has since 2001 been oriented towards keeping inflation low and 
stable. The operational target is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 percent over time. 
Over the past 15 years, inflation has averaged around 2 percent. This is close to the target. 
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, giving weight in our interest rate 
setting  to  developments  in  output  and  employment  as  well  as  inflation.  The  effects  of 
monetary policy are uncertain. This normally suggests proceeding with caution. As monetary 
policy also seeks to be robust and take account of the risk of particularly adverse outcomes 
for the economy, the tasks of monetary policy should include contributing towards mitigating 
the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. 
Over  the  past  year,  monetary  policy  in  Norway  has  to  a  great  extent  been  influenced  by 
weaker  economic  growth,  resulting  from  the  fall  in  oil  prices  and  lower  activity  in  the 
petroleum  industry.  To  counteract  the  decline,  the  key  policy  rate  has  been  reduced  by  a 
total of 1 percentage point since December 2014. The key policy rate is now 0.5 percent. 
A small open economy such as Norway is also influenced by the world around us. Norway’s 
low interest rate level is largely a consequence of low interest rates abroad. 
Chart: Global growth projections 
Growth in the global economy has been low in recent years, partly reflecting long-term trends 
such  as  lower  productivity  growth  and  demographic  changes.  Long-term  interest  rates 
abroad  have  shown  a  falling  trend  since  the  1980s.  Over  the  past  few  years,  the 
repercussions of the financial crisis and the need for deleveraging in many countries have 
weighed  on  growth.  While  the  moderate  recovery  in  advanced  economies  continued  last 
year, growth in  China and other emerging economies slowed. In its April World Economic 
Outlook  report,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  revised  down  its  global  growth 
forecasts yet again. At the same time, the IMF stressed the risk that growth may again prove 
to be weaker than projected. 
For  several  of  Norway’s  main  trading  partners,  inflation  is  close  to  zero.  The  low  level  of 
inflation is partly the result of the fall in many manufacturing and commodity prices, including 
oil prices. In addition, cost pressures in many countries are moderate after several years of 
high unemployment and low wage growth. 
Chart: Money market rates for trading partners 
The low level of inflation has led central banks to implement further monetary policy easing 
over  the  past  year.  Policy  rates  are  now  negative  in  a  number  of  countries.  In  addition, 
several central banks have introduced other instruments to stimulate economic activity and 
mitigate  the  risk  of  deflation.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  expanded  its  asset 
purchase  programme  to  include  government  bonds.  The  Riksbank,  the  central  bank  of 
Sweden, introduced a government bond purchase programme at the beginning of last year. 
On the other hand, the Federal Reserve raised its policy rate for the first time in nine years in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
December  2015.  Trading  partners’  policy  rates  can  be  expected  to  remain  low  for  a  long 
period ahead. 
External developments influence the Norwegian economy through several channels: through 
demand for Norwegian goods and services, through financial markets and the exchange rate 
and, not least, through commodity prices. 
Chart: Oil prices 
The fall  in  oil  prices  began  in  summer  2014  and  continued  through  2015.  Oil  prices  have 
picked up again somewhat in recent months to just over USD 45 per barrel, but are still at 
less  than  half  of  their  pre-fall  level.  Futures  prices  have  also  decreased  in  the  past  year. 
These prices now indicate only a moderate rise in oil prices ahead. The decline in oil prices 
partly  reflects  large  oil  supply  surpluses  and  lower  demand  for  oil  in  China  and  other 
emerging economies experiencing weaker growth. 
The  effects  of  the  fall  in  oil  prices  on  the  Norwegian  economy  gradually  became  evident 
through 2015 and were particularly pronounced in regions and sectors closely linked to the 
oil industry. 
Chart: Petroleum investment 
The most direct channel through which the fall in oil prices is transmitted to the economy is 
via the supply of intermediate goods and services to the petroleum industry. Oil companies 
have  postponed  or  cancelled  a  number  of  development  projects  on  the  Norwegian 
continental  shelf  as  a  result  of the  decline  in  oil  prices  and  have  implemented  a  range  of 
measures  to  reduce  operating  and  maintenance  costs.  Total  petroleum  investment  fell  by 
15 percent  between  2014  and  2015.  At  the  same  time,  lower  demand  from  the  global 
petroleum industry has led to a decline in Norwegian oil service exports. 
The decrease in activity in the oil industry is having spillover effects on the wider mainland 
economy.  The  effects  are  most  pronounced  in  industries  providing  goods  and  services 
directly  to  oil  companies,  but  are  also  clearly  evident  in  a  number  of  other  industries. 
Mainland business investment also showed a fall in 2015, driven by a weaker growth outlook 
and uncertainty surrounding economic developments. Growth in household consumption has 
nonetheless  remained fairly  firm.  House  prices and  housing  investment  have  continued  to 
rise, although the fall in oil prices has had a dampening effect in some areas of the country. 
Public demand has also stimulated the economy. 
Chart: Relative labour costs 
The Norwegian krone has depreciated markedly in the wake of the fall in oil prices and is 
now  approximately  15  percent  weaker  than  two  years  ago.  The  depreciation  has  led  to  a 
marked improvement in Norwegian firms’ cost competitiveness. 
The main responsibility for developments in relative wages lies with the social partners. If the 
improvement  in  competitiveness  is  to  be  sustained,  Norwegian  labour  costs  must  develop 
more in line with the labour costs of our trading partners. This will make it easier to build up a 
larger non-oil tradable sector. 
The  krone  depreciation  has  helped  start  the  restructuring  process  in  the  Norwegian 
economy. After a decade of higher growth in imports than mainland exports, export growth 
has recently outpaced import growth. The tourism industry is one of a number of industries 
experiencing an upswing. Many export firms have announced plans to increase investments 
in 2016, which will provide opportunities for an increase in production and market shares. 
Chart: Unemployment 
Employment  in  Norway  has  been  high  for  many  years.  Compared  with  other  countries, 
unemployment has been low. In the competition for labour resources, oil production and oil 
service  companies  have  drawn  the  longest  straw.  The  situation  has  now  changed. 
Unemployment has increased over the past year. Regions with close links to the oil industry, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
which  have  benefitted  from  the  oil  boom  for  many  years,  are  being  hit  hard.  Although 
employment continued to rise last year, employment growth has slowed. 
Total mainland activity increased by 1 percent between 2014 and 2015. This is the lowest 
pace of economic growth since 2009. Growth may edge down even further this year before 
gradually  picking  up  again.  Growth  is  being  restrained  by  the  marked  fall  in  petroleum 
investment  and  weak  growth  in  other  business  investment,  while  it  is  being  supported  by 
household consumption, exports of traditional goods and public demand. 
The  depreciation  of  the  krone  is  also  supporting  inflation.  The  rise  in  prices  for  imported 
goods  has  increased  over  the  past  year,  and  the  year-on-year  rise  in  the  consumer  price 
index has been just over 3 percent in recent months. Inflation may be dampened ahead by 
the decline in wage growth and as the effects of the krone depreciation unwind. 
Chart: Key policy rate 
The  key  policy  rate  was  lowered  to  0.5  percent  at  the  March  monetary  policy  meeting. 
According to the Executive Board’s assessment of the outlook in March, the key policy rate 
may be reduced further in the course of the year. The key policy rate was kept unchanged at 
the monetary policy meeting in May. 
There is no crisis in the Norwegian economy, but we are facing restructuring. Restructuring 
must start in the business sector. Activity in the oil sector will be reduced to a considerably 
lower  level.  Other  industries  must  emerge  and  provide  the  basis  for  new  jobs.  Economic 
policy can only facilitate this process. Restructuring takes time. 
Monetary  policy  is  the  first  line  of  defence  in  managing  the  economy.  In  the  wake  of  the 
sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  since  summer  2014,  the  key  policy  rate  has  been  lowered  several 
times. Monetary policy is facilitating restructuring by supporting a weaker krone and thereby 
speeding up the adjustment to a lower cost level. In addition, lower interest expenses are 
easing the burden for many households and enterprises. There is still room for manoeuvre in 
monetary policy. However, in an economy undergoing restructuring, monetary policy cannot 
fully counteract the effects on output and employment. 
Internationally,  monetary  policy  has  faced  substantial  challenges  in  recent  years.  Inflation 
and interest rates are both close to zero in many countries. The instruments used have rarely 
been used before. The effect of this policy is uncertain and the expected increase in policy 
rates  has  been  repeatedly  pushed  further  into  the  future.  Central  banks  are  in  uncharted 
territory. 
The  experiences  of  other  countries  indicate  that  the  lower  bound  for  policy  rates  is  below 
zero,  although  precisely  how  far  below  is  difficult  to  estimate.  Lower  interest  rates  may 
increase financial system vulnerabilities. Low interest rates also increase the risk of a surge 
in credit growth and property prices. When the key policy rate approaches a lower bound, the 
uncertainty surrounding the effects of monetary policy increases. This suggests proceeding 
with  greater  caution  in  interest  rate  setting.  However,  should  the  Norwegian  economy  be 
exposed to new major shocks, the possibility cannot be excluded that the key policy rate in 
Norway may also turn negative. 
The Ministry of Finance will assess the need to modernise the regulation on monetary policy. 
After  15  years  of  the  current  regulation,  a  review  may  be  in  order.  I  would,  however, 
emphasise that our experience of the current monetary framework is positive. Confidence in 
low and stable inflation is firmly anchored. The primary task of monetary policy must always 
be price stability. When inflation is firmly anchored, monetary policy can also contribute to 
stable  developments  in  the  real  economy.  Monetary  policy  can  react  quickly  to  cyclical 
changes, as was the case during the financial crisis when the key policy rate was markedly 
reduced in order to limit the downturn. The framework has also functioned well in face of the 
substantial  decline  in  oil  prices.  The  flexibility  and  room  for  the  exercise  of  judgement 
provided by the mandate has strengthened monetary policy and the Norwegian economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      5 
      6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      7 
