  Benoît Cœuré: Assessing the implications of negative interest rates 
Speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  at  the  Yale 
Financial Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016. 
 I would like to thank Glenn Schepens and Skander Van den Heuvel for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
All views expressed herein remain mine. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the ECB’s website: Slides (PDF). 
Introduction 
I would like to thank Glenn Schepens and Skander Van den Heuvel for their assistance in 
preparing this speech. All views expressed herein remain mine. 
Interest rates have been low across all major advanced economies for some time now. The 
decline  in  interest  rates  –  both  nominal  and  real  –  has  been  a  persistent  trend  since  the 
1990s and is visible in the long-term interest rates on government bonds [Slide 2: 10 year 
government bond yields]. A range of structural factors have been proposed for this secular 
decline in the rate of return on safe assets, including demographic changes, a slowdown in 
the  rate  of  technological  progress,  and  a  high  demand  for  safe  assets  relative  to  their 
supply.1 
This  decline  in  long-run  interest  rates  has  consequences  for  monetary  policy.  Monetary 
policymakers  often  think  in  terms  of  a  concept  known  as  the  real  equilibrium  rate  or  the 
“natural”  rate  of  interest.2  This  equilibrium  rate  is  the  interest  rate  that  is  consistent  with 
stable inflation and output at its potential level. Setting short-term interest rates above this 
rate puts downward pressure on activity and inflation. Setting them below this rate of course 
has  the  opposite  effect.  While  this  real  equilibrium  interest  rate  is  difficult  to  estimate 
precisely, and while there are competing explanations for it, there is a broad consensus that 
it has declined in advanced economies over the past two decades. By some estimates it is 
currently negative in the euro area.3 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  inflation  has  been  low  worldwide,  and  growth  subdued. 
Central bankers are responding to this low inflation and output below potential by conducting 
accommodative  policies.  Both  these  cyclical  factors  and  the  longer-term  decline  in  the 
equilibrium real rate of interest have required policy rates to be set at record low levels in 
advanced economies [Slide 3: Policy rates in major economies]. As short-term policy rates 
approached zero, central banks carried out further loosening by providing forward guidance 
about the expected future path of interest rates and by lowering term premia through large-
scale asset purchase programmes. 
                                                
1   See Bean C., C. Broda, T. Ito and R. Kroszner, “Low for Long? Causes and Consequences of Persistently 
Low Interest Rates” Geneva Reports on the World Economy 17, 2015. 
2   See  Cœuré  B.,  “The  economic  consequences  of  low  interest  rates”,  lecture  at  the  International  Center  for 
Monetary  and  Banking  Studies,  Geneva,  9  October  2013.  The  natural  starting  point  for  an  economist  is 
K. Wicksell, Interest and Prices, Royal Economic Society, 1936. For a definition of the natural rate of interest 
in the context of dynamic economic models, see Woodford M., Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of 
Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press, 2003. 
3   See Laubach T. and J. Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, Working Paper, No. 2015–16, October 2015, and V. Constâncio, “The challenge of low interest 
rates for monetary policy”, lecture at the Macroeconomics Symposium, Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 
2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In June 2014, following in the footsteps of the Danish National Bank, the European Central 
Bank  (ECB)  became  the  first  major  central  bank  to  lower  one  of  its  key  policy  rates  to 
negative territory. The rate of interest on our deposit facility is now –0.4% while the rate on 
our main refinancing operations is zero.4 At the same time, we launched an asset purchase 
programme (APP) covering a broad range of investment grade securities. 
These various policy measures are complementary instruments and are necessary to ensure 
that sufficient stimulus is provided to the economy to return inflation to the ECB’s objective. 
Failure to take into account the downward trend in real equilibrium interest rates would have 
resulted in downward pressure on inflation and activity, pushing real interest rates up and 
driving the economy further away from full employment. 
It is difficult to know how long these low interest rates will persist, but it seems possible that 
they will be low for quite some time. That certainly is the view of financial markets, where the 
return  on  government  bonds  is  negative  for  a  range  of  countries,  even  at  long  maturities. 
[Slide 4: Government bonds with negative yields] 
While  low  or  negative  rates  and  the  asset  purchase  programmes  are  needed  to  provide 
sufficient monetary stimulus, a number of observers have voiced concern about their impact 
on  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents,  on  the  resilience  of  financial  intermediaries  and, 
ultimately, on financial stability.5 
Today,  I  will  offer  some  thoughts  on  these  issues,  focusing  on  the  banking  sector,  which 
plays a key role in the transmission of monetary policy in the euro area. 
The specialness of negative nominal interest rates 
So  what  makes  negative  rates  special?  [Slide  5:  The  specialness  of  negative  nominal 
interest rates] The first answer is cash. Since cash (i.e. paper money and coins) offers a zero 
nominal return, at some point it will dominate holding assets with negative nominal yields.6 
For example, if banks were to charge significantly negative rates on deposits, then the higher 
return on cash could lead households and businesses to withdraw their deposits. And this 
disintermediation would be likely to pose risks to financial stability. 
Of course, holding cash is not entirely convenient or costless. It would be cumbersome (not 
to mention risky) to buy a car or a house in cash, and storing a large amount of cash requires 
high-security storage as well as insurance. These costs of holding and insuring cash explain 
why the effective lower bound on interest rates is below zero.7 
                                                
4   The ECB’s deposit facility rate has become its most important policy rate in an environment of very ample 
excess liquidity. The overnight money market rate, which was previously driven by the rate on the ECB’s main 
refinancing operations, is now close to the deposit facility rate. 
5   See, for example, The Economist, “Negative creep”, 6 February 2016. 
6   For an early discussion from an ECB perspective, see Cœuré B., “Central banks and the challenge of the zero 
lower  bound”,  intervention  at  the  “Meeting  on  the  Financial  Crisis”  organised  by  the  University  of  Chicago 
Booth School of Business, Miami, 19 February 2012. 
7   The literature on substitution between cash and deposits at the lower bound, and on technical devices which 
can  push  the  “physical”  lower  bound  down,  starts  with  the  proposal  by  Gesell  (1911)  to  attach  stamps  to 
banknotes to accelerate their demurrage. It was revived by Goodfriend (2000) and Buiter and Panigirtzoglou 
(2001) and more recently by Agarwal and Kimball (2015). See Gesell S., Die Natürliche Wirtschaftsordnung, 
1911, published by Rudolf Zitzman Verlag, 1949; Fisher, I. “Stamp scrip”, Adelphi Company, 1933; Buiter W. 
and N. Panigirtzoglou, “Liquidity traps: How to avoid them and how to escape them,” in W. Vanthoor and J. 
Mooij  (Eds.),  Reflections  on  Economics  and  Econometrics,  Essays  in  Honour  of  Martin  Fase,  De 
Nederlandsche Bank, 2001, pp. 13–58; Goodfriend M., “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 1007–1035, 2000; and R. Agarwal and M. Kimball, 
“Breaking Through the Zero Lower Bound,” IMF Working Paper, No. 15/224, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The academic discussion of negative rates has centred around cash, but in public debate 
other issues have recently emerged. 
One issue is associated with money illusion, i.e. the tendency of people to value assets and 
goods in nominal rather than in real terms.8 This led to the notion that negative nominal rates 
are unnatural, which has become a popular theme in the public debate.9 In contrast, we have 
been  through  episodes  of  negative  real  rates  in  the  past  without  having  such  debates. 
Indeed, as the Bundesbank has noted, negative real rates of interest on deposits have been 
the  norm  rather  than  the  exception  in  Germany  in  recent  decades.10  [Slide  6:  Real 
remuneration  of  savings  deposits  in  Germany]  People  may  gradually  understand  the 
rationale  behind  negative  nominal  rates  and  adapt  to  this  new  situation.  For  instance,  the 
popular  assumption  that  the  negative  income  effect  on  household  consumption  dominates 
the  positive  substitution  effect  when  nominal  yields  are  very  low  is  not  in  line  with  the 
evidence. In fact, the average net interest income of euro area households has been largely 
unaffected, thanks to lower interest payments. Low interest rates have mainly redistributed 
resources from  net  savers to  net  borrowers.  As the  latter  typically  have  a  higher marginal 
propensity to consume than the former, this has further supported consumption.11  But one 
cannot rule out that negative nominal interest rates raise broader cognitive issues as they 
challenge the rules of thumb used by economic agents in their everyday decisions. 
Finally, negative rates may be special due to institutional features embedded in the financial 
system, such as legal restrictions on the application of negative rates or at least uncertainty 
regarding  the  legal  standing  of  such  an  arrangement,12  or  the  tax  treatment  of  negative 
interest rate income, which is often not symmetric with the treatment of positive interest rate 
income. In addition, some IT systems may not be able to cope with negative rates. 
In the euro area, however, these scenarios have  not yet materialised. Thanks to intensive 
technical cooperation between the ECB and market participants ahead of the introduction of 
negative rates, our experience has been very smooth, allowing large parts of the government 
bond and secured and unsecured money markets to operate at negative rates without any 
disruption.13  The  introduction  of  negative  rates  has  been  smooth  also  in  other  jurisdictions 
outside of the euro area.14 
                                                
8   On  money  illusion,  see  Shafir  E.,  P.  Diamond  and  A.  Tversky,  “Money  Illusion”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics,  Vol.  112,  Issue  2,  1997,  pp.  341–374.  On  the  interaction  between  negative  rates  and  money 
illusion,  see  Borio  C.  and  A.  Zabai,  2016  “Unconventional  monetary  policies:  a  re-appraisal”,  BIS Working 
Paper No 570, 2016. 
9   “Imagine  a  world  in  which  tax  offices  harry  people  who  file  their  returns  promptly;  where  big  supermarket 
chains pay their suppliers before the goods fly off the shelves and not months afterwards; and where a pre-
paid annual gym membership is more costly than paying month by month. It sounds fanciful, absurd even.”, in 
The Economist, op. cit. 
10   See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  “Nothing  new  about  real  interest  rates  on  deposits”,  30  June  2014, 
https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Topics/2014/2014_06_30_nothing_new_negative_interest_rates.ht
ml. 
11   See European Central Bank, “Low interest rates and households net interest income”, ECB Economic Bulletin, 
Issue 4 / 2016, Box 3. 
12   See McAndrews J., “Negative Nominal Central Bank Policy Rates: Where Is the Lower Bound?”, remarks at 
the University of Wisconsin, 8 May 2015. For example, some financial contracts (e.g. money market funds or 
floating rate notes) may not foresee the possibility of payments from the lender to the borrower and in any 
case the logistics of collecting interest payments from holders of securities can be complex. 
13   See Cœuré B., “Life below zero: learning about negative interest rates”, presentation at the annual dinner of 
the ECB’s Money Market Contact Group, 9 September 2014. 
14   Jackson, H. “The international experience with negative policy rates”, Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper, 
No. 2015–13, November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  How low and for how long? 
There are two key questions for central bankers [Slide 7: How much lower can we go?]. First, 
how much lower can we go? Second, does the persistence of low and/or negative interest 
rates pose particular challenges to the stability of the financial system? 
Answering  the  first  question  appears  to  be  simple.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  “physical  lower 
bound” of nominal interest rates, at which disintermediation risk will materialise, is imposed 
by the opportunity cost of holding cash. 
But is there an “economic lower bound”, different from the physical one, where further rate 
cuts cease to provide aggregate stimulus to the economy? This economic lower bound could 
then potentially but not necessarily impose an earlier binding constraint for monetary policy. 
Indeed, in the current discussion, it has been suggested that at some point the level of rates 
can become low to the extent that the detrimental effects on the banking sector outweigh the 
benefits of lower rates. In a recent paper, Brunnermeier and Koby refer to this rate as the 
“reversal rate”.15 At the reversal rate, bank profitability will fall, reducing capital generation via 
retained  earnings,  which  is  an  important  source  of  capital  accumulation,  and  thereby 
eventually  restricting  lending. The risk  that  low  rates might cause  short-term  dislocation  in 
financial markets was already identified by Bernanke and Reinhart in their 2004 paper on the 
implications of very low rates.16 
Low (and negative rates) have both a one-off short-term impact and more persistent effects 
on  a  bank’s  profitability  and  capital.  And  bank  capital  matters  for  credit  provision  and  for 
financial stability, as low bank capital means high leverage. 
The  short-term  impact  partly  stems  from  one-off  capital  gains  on  the  outstanding  fixed-
income portfolio of a bank. When rates are falling, the value of fixed-income securities on a 
bank’s balance sheet goes up, leading to higher profits. A decline in the level of interest rates 
can also boost net interest margins in the short run. Banks carry out maturity transformation 
by  borrowing  short  term  and  lending  long  term.  As  short-term  interest  rates  fall,  funds 
become cheaper. Since existing fixed-rate loans take some time to reprice to lower rates, the 
initial impact of lower rates on net interest margins could be positive. 
Other things being equal, lower rates will decrease net interest income over the long term. If 
the decline in rates is accompanied by a flattening of the yield curve, the margin between 
lending  and  borrowing  eventually  compresses,  reducing  net  interest  income.  Such  a 
flattening may result from expectations of a prolonged period of low short-term rates, and it 
may be compounded by a compression of the term premium if the central bank also operates 
a large-scale asset purchase programme. 
Even for a given slope of the yield curve, a low level of interest rates can also compress net 
interest margins for banks reliant on retail deposits. The reason is that retail deposits tend to 
have low and sticky interest rates, and banks are reluctant to charge negative rates on them. 
As market rates decline, the yield on bank assets will eventually drop, but this funding source 
will still cost the same to banks, resulting in a decline in net interest margins. The decline in 
present and future net interest margin reduces the forward-looking measure of bank capital, 
                                                
15   See  Brunnermeier  M.  and  Y.  Koby,  “The  “Reversal  Rate”:  Effective  Lower  Bound  on  Monetary  Policy”, 
See 
presented 
meeting, 
https://www.bis.org/events/confresearchnetwork1603/brunnermeier.pdf. 
research 
network 
March 
2016. 
BIS 
the 
14 
at 
16   See  Bernanke  B.  and  V.  Reinhart,  “Conducting  Monetary  policy  at  Very  Low  Short-Term  Interest  Rates”, 
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 94, No. 2, pp. 85, May 2004. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
hence the risk-bearing capacity of the bank, and its supply of credit. This is turning upside 
down Adrian and Shin’s “credit supply channel” of transmission of monetary policy.17 
The exact magnitude of the effect of negative interest rates on aggregate bank profitability is 
uncertain,  since  it  has  to  be  put  in  the  context  of  what  would  happen  in  the  absence  of 
monetary  policy  action.  First  of  all,  servicing  floating-rate  loans  and  mortgages  becomes 
more affordable as interest rates fall. Borrowers who are struggling in the adverse economic 
climate  are  therefore  less  likely  to  default.  Second,  and  more  importantly,  accommodative 
monetary policy should create a more favourable macroeconomic environment, which ought 
to  improve  the  financial  situation  of  bank  borrowers.  Indeed,  empirical  research  shows  a 
clear  negative  relation  between  economic  growth  rates  and  non-performing  loans.18  These 
positive  effects  are  present  at  all  rate  levels  and  are  likely  to  dominate  when  rates  are 
moderately negative. 
Also, the economic lower bound is not uniquely determined at the aggregate level, since it 
will vary across banks and markets. The larger the share of floating-rate lending in the stock 
of loans, the faster the negative impact on interest margins will be. Banks with large fixed-
income holdings and holdings of bonds which benefited the most from spread compression 
will  be  better  able  to  offset  decreases  in  interest  margins,  due  to  the  revaluation  effect  I 
mentioned earlier. The reversal rate is also likely to be lower for those banks that are more 
reliant on wholesale rather than retail funding. Market-based funding suffers less from this 
zero  lower  bound,  meaning  that  these  banks  will  be  better  able  to  protect  their  interest 
margin. Similarly, banks with greater market power will be better able to avoid passing on the 
lower rates to borrowers, which will shield their interest margin. 
In  the  euro  area,  this  translates  into  geographic  differences  based  on  national  banking 
structures,  implying  that  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  has  distributional  consequences 
across banks located in different jurisdictions. 
The second important question for central bankers is whether the persistence of low and/or 
negative interest rates poses other challenges to the stability of the financial system. 
Challenges to financial stability could potentially materialise if banks were to increase their 
exposure  to  lower  quality  counterparties  in  order  to  boost  returns.19  This  could  reflect  a 
portfolio rebalancing towards riskier assets when yields on safe assets are low, or a greater 
concentration  of  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  which  generate 
higher returns but have historically exhibited higher default risk. 
The  effect  is  similar  to  the  “search  for  yield”  by  managers  targeting  a  minimum  return  on 
assets.20 Note that this mechanism may as well apply to shadow banks insofar as they rely 
on  short-term  funding.  Financial  stability  risks  could  also  materialise  outside  of  banks, 
through  excessively  inflated financial  asset  prices  and  if  zero  or  negative  rates  encourage 
asset price volatility. 
Existing empirical evidence, mainly relying on periods with low, but positive rates before the 
global financial crisis, indicates that periods of lower interest rates are indeed associated with 
                                                
17   See Adrian, T., and H.S. Shin (2011), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, in B. Friedman and 
M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Chapter 12, pp. 601–650. 
18   See  Beck,  R.,  P.  Jakubik  and  A.  Piloiu,  “Non-performing  loans:  What  matters  in  addition  to  the  economic 
cycle?” ECB Working Paper, No. 1515, February 2013. 
19   See  Borio,  C.  and  H.  Zhu,  “Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the 
transmission mechanism?”, Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 8, 2012, pp. 238–251, and Caballero R., Hoshi 
T. and A. Kashyap, “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan,” American Economic Review, 
Vol. 98, 2008, pp. 1943–77. 
20   See Rajan R., “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, European Financial Management, 12(4), 
2006, pp. 499–533. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
lower bank lending standards and with a shift of credit towards borrowers with a lower credit 
quality.21 Additionally, the latest ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the 
Euro Area (SAFE) shows an improvement in the availability of bank loans for SMEs between 
October  2014  (shortly  after  negative  rates  were  introduced)  and  March  2016.22  This  could 
indicate that one way that banks are taking on more risk is by lending more to smaller, and 
typically riskier, firms. 
Of  course,  promoting  lending,  including  to  risky  borrowers,  is  one  of  the  goals  of 
accommodative monetary policy. 
But the main question, however, is whether negative rates can also lead to excessive risk-
taking by banks. If accommodative monetary policy works as intended, then more investment 
projects will gain a positive net present value and will be financed – including some riskier 
ones.  That’s  the  “good”  risk-taking.  However,  banks  may  be  tempted  to  finance  risky  but 
negative net present value loans – that is excessive or “bad” risk-taking. The theory suggests 
that this possibility is more likely when interest rates are low, if banks are highly leveraged or 
if they can easily adjust their capital structure.23 
Empirical evidence 
While  theoretically  appealing,  a  precise  estimate  of  the  point  where  accommodative 
monetary  policy  becomes  contractionary  and/or an  issue for financial  stability  is  extremely 
challenging. 
What I can offer you today is an overview of the situation of financial intermediaries in the 
euro area, in order to see whether there are signs that we have reached or are reaching a 
reversal rate. 
But let me start by referring to the most recent data on monetary developments in the euro 
area.  They  show  no  signs  of  cash  substitution,  indicating  that  we  are  still  far  from  the 
physical lower bound for nominal interest rates.24 
In  a  second  step,  let  me  focus  on  bank  income  and  profitability.  Slide  8  shows  the  main 
sources  of  operating  income  for  banks  in  the  euro  area,  based  on  aggregate  numbers. 
[Slide 8: Euro-area banks: Income sources] In recent years, the distribution of these sources 
has been fairly stable, with approximately 60% of income coming from net interest income, 
25% from fees and commissions and 15% from other income sources. 
Given its large share, net interest income thus plays an important role in bank profitability. As 
I mentioned, a reduction in interest rates could harm interest margins, and this could be even 
                                                
21   See, for example, Ioannidou V., S. Ongena, and J.-L. Peydrò, “Monetary policy and subprime lending: a tall 
tale  of  low  federal  funds  rates,  hazardous  loans  and  reduced  loan  spreads”,  European  Banking  Centre 
Discussion  Paper,  No.  45,  2009;  Maddaloni  A.  and  J.-L.  Peydrò,  “Bank  Risk-Taking,  Securitization, 
Supervision and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro Area and U.S. Lending Standards”, Review of 
Financial Studies, Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 2121–165, 2011; Jiménez G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydrò and J. Saurina, 
“Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of 
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?”, Econometrica, Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 463–505, 2014; and Dell’Ariccia 
G., L. Laeven, and G. Suarez, “Bank Leverage and Monetary Policy’s Risk-Taking Channel: Evidence from 
the United States”, Journal of Finance, forthcoming. 
22   See the October 2014 – March 2015, April 2015 – September 2015 and October 2015 – March 2016 SAFE 
surveys. 
23   See Dell’Ariccia G., L. Laeven, R. Marquez, “Real interest rates, leverage, and bank risk-taking,” Journal of 
Economic Theory, 149, 2014. 
24   The annual growth rate of the narrower aggregate, including currency in circulation and overnight deposits 
(M1), decreased to 8.6% in June, from 9.1% in May. See ECB, “Monetary developments in the euro area: 
June 2016,” https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pdf/md/md1606.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
more pronounced when rates enter negative territory, due to a potential zero lower bound for 
retail deposit rates. 
Slide  9  illustrates  average  loan  and  deposit  rates  for  both  non-financial  corporations  and 
households in the euro area.25 [Slide 9: Euro-area banks: Interest rates on new loans and 
deposits] The vertical red line indicates June 2014, the first time deposit facility rates became 
negative in the euro area. The gap between loan rates and deposit rates narrows because 
declining rates are passed on more strongly to loan rates than to deposit rates, indicating 
that there indeed seems to be a zero lower bound for deposits. While average deposit rates 
only  decreased  by  around  0.2  percentage  point  between  June  2014  and  May  2016,  loan 
rates  decreased  by  around  0.8  percentage  point,  effectively  reducing  the  interest  margin. 
This is also shown on slide 10, using profit and loss data of a group of large euro area banks, 
which on average indeed have seen a reduction of their net interest margins – defined here 
as net interest income over total assets – since mid-2014. [Slide 10: Euro-area large banks: 
Net interest margin] 
But what about overall income? ECB staff estimates show that the overall impact on bank 
profitability  of  recent  monetary  policy  actions  is  net  positive,  compared  with  a  scenario 
without  any  monetary  policy  action.26  [Slide  11:  Monetary  policy  and  bank  profitability: 
estimates]. Decreasing net interest income and charges on excess liquidity do put pressure 
on bank profitability. But there are also two strong positive effects of lower rates. First, the 
positive impact of lower rates on the macro environment reduces firm default risk and lowers 
the  debt  servicing  cost  of  borrowers,  which  should  improve  credit  quality.  Second,  lower 
rates will lead to capital gains on the bond portfolio of banks. 
The ECB’s latest Financial Stability Review[27 broadly confirms these model-based estimates. 
As slide 12 shows, the net income of euro area significant banking groups actually increased 
between 2014 and 2015 [Slide 12: Euro-area large banks: Aggregate net income]. This was 
mainly  driven  by  lower  impairments  and  higher  non-interest  income.  Even  net  interest 
income made a positive contribution, despite a small decline in interest margins. This reflects 
an  increase  in  volumes,  which  is  of  course  an  intended  consequence  of  accommodative 
monetary policy. As discussed earlier, however, interest margins are likely to stay low and 
might  even  further  decline,  while  profits  from  one-off  capital  gains  will  fade  away.  Indeed, 
analysts forecast a decline in bank profitability in 2016 and 2017, mainly due to lower net 
interest  income.  And  the  recent  decline  in  euro  area  bank  share  prices  can  be  at  least 
partially ascribed to market concerns over future banks profitability. 
As  such,  if  very  low  or  negative  rates  are  here  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  due  to  the 
structural drivers highlighted above, banks might have to rethink their business models. The 
revenue structure of euro area banks was stable for a long time but it has recently begun to 
change and there is at least some evidence of banks tending to offer fee-based products to 
clients as substitutes for interest-based products.28 Another way forward is to improve cost 
efficiency.  Although  a  number  of  banks  have  reduced  their  operating  costs  over  the  last 
couple of years, overall cost efficiency has remained low in the euro area, with aggregate 
cost-income ratios between 63% and 65% over the last five years.29 Action taken by euro-
                                                
25   See  English  W.,  J.  Skander  Van  den  Heuvel,  and  E.  Zakrajsek,  “Interest  Rate  Risk  and  Bank  Equity 
Valuations”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012–26, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, for evidence on the reaction of net interest margins of US banks to changes in rates. 
26   See Rostagno M. et al., “Breaking through the zero line: The ECB’s Negative Interest Rate Policy”, Brookings 
Institution, Washington DC, 6 June 2016. Presentation available on the Brookings website. 
27   See the May 2016 ECB Financial Stability Review, p. 60, Chart 3.4. 
28   See  Nouy  D.,  “Risks  and  resilience  –  the  European  banking  sector  in  2016”,  speech  at  the  Bank  Capital 
Forum, London, 23 February 2016. 
29   Consolidated ECB banking data for domestic banks in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
area banks to remedy this situation will also help them cope with a prolonged period of very 
low rates. Action to dispose of their stocks of legacy non-performing loans, which has been 
identified by ECB Banking Supervision as one of its priorities for 2016, will also safeguard 
their profitability. 
Moving away from profitability, deposit growth rates for euro area banks show that there is no 
sign of disintermediation risk at the moment. Deposits of both households and non-financial 
corporations  have  been  growing  over  the  past  two  years,  at  a  similar  pace  to  the  period 
before  we  entered  negative  interest  rate  territory  [Slide  13:  Euro-area  banks:  Deposit 
growth]. This risk is not materialising mainly because rates on retail deposit seem to have a 
zero lower bound, as shown earlier. 
With regard to bank lending, it is clear that we have not yet reached the reversal rate for the 
euro  area.  Bank  lending  has  improved  since  mid-2014,  both for  non-financial  corporations 
and households. [Slide 14: Euro-area banks: Loan growth] Similarly, results from the ECB’s 
July  2016  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  clearly  indicate  that  loan  supply  conditions  for 
enterprises in the area are continuing to improve. 
Finally,  what  about  the  risks  to  financial  stability?  The  ongoing  economic  recovery  should 
help  bolster  the  income  and  earnings  position  of  euro  area  households  and  non-financial 
corporations, thereby mitigating the risks associated with a continued debt overhang which 
persists in some countries. At the same time, the recovery of euro area real estate markets 
has  gained  further  momentum.  While  overall  residential  property  valuations  remain 
contained,  prime  commercial  property  valuations  have  moved  above  long-term  averages. 
Against this backdrop, as highlighted in the ECB’s latest Financial Stability Review, the best 
way to counter any potentially emerging risk in any market segment is targeted action by the 
macroprudential authorities. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. As is well known from the academic literature, the “physical lower bound” 
of  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  is  equal  to  the  opportunity  costs  of  holding  cash. 
Monetary developments in the euro area show no signs of cash substitution, indicating that 
we  are  still  far  away  from  the  physical  lower  bound.  Central  bankers  should  however  be 
mindful of a potential “economic lower bound”, at which the detrimental effects of low rates 
on  the  banking  sector  outweigh  their  benefits,  and  further  rate  cuts  risk  reversing  the 
expansionary monetary policy stance. 
The ECB is mindful of these risks. In the euro area, the potential adverse impact on bank 
profitability, if it materialises, would be compounded by low growth prospects and a legacy of 
high  non-performing  loans.30  The  current  conditions  of  financial  intermediation  suggest, 
however,  that  the  economic  lower  bound  is  safely  below  the  current  level  of  the  deposit 
facility  rate  and  that  the  impact  of  negative  rates,  combined  with  the  APP  and  forward 
guidance,  has  clearly  been  net  positive.  Indeed,  we  should  not  look  at  the  implications  of 
negative interest rates in isolation. Negative nominal rates have reinforced forward guidance 
in the euro area, sped up the process of portfolio rebalancing associated with the APP and 
supported the effectiveness of the recent targeted longer-term refinancing operations. 
But there can be cumulative effects on financial intermediation and financial stability if rates 
remain  very  low  for  a  very  long  time.  One  might  argue  that  disintermediation  may  have 
benign effects if non-bank entities are equally capable of collecting and channelling savings, 
while being less vulnerable to the adverse effects of negative interest rates. The shift towards 
a  more  market-based  financial  structure,  as  promoted  by  the  European  Union’s  capital 
                                                
30   See Constâncio V., “Challenges for the European banking industry”, lecture at the conference on “European 
Banking Industry: what’s next?”, University of Navarra, Madrid, 7 July 2016. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
markets union project, would then help our economy cope with a longer period of very low or 
negative rates. But there is a limit to this argument. Non-banks are also affected by very low 
rates: for example, fixed net asset value money market funds may not be able to maintain 
the value of their shares close to par, while asset managers and insurance companies face 
the same shrinking margins as banks. Regardless of the entities that originate and distribute, 
household savings will be collected and long-term assets will sit on a balance sheet. 
So  what  can  be  done  to  address  this  situation?  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures, 
including the deposit facility rate set at its current negative level, are proving to be effective in 
lifting inflation towards its medium-term objective and reducing the overall level of risk in the 
economy.  Fiscal  and  structural  policies  should  act  more  decisively  to  support  aggregate 
demand and productivity, thereby preventing the economy from falling into a low interest rate 
trap.  And  banks  should  adapt  continually  to  the  changing  environment  by  adjusting  their 
business  models,  cutting  their  operating  costs and  reducing  their  non-performing  loans.  In 
doing so, they will also improve their resilience to a prolonged period of very low rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
