Daniel Mminele: Recent economic and monetary policy developments in 
South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at a 
Breakfast  Meeting  hosted  by  Ethical  Foundation  for  Leadership  Excellence,  Polokwane, 
Limpopo, 27 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to the Ethical Foundation for Leadership Excellence for creating an opportunity for 
us  to  interact  over  this  business  breakfast  today.  Allow  me  to  start  by  commending  the 
Foundation on the important initiatives it has been undertaking since its official launch last 
year, to contribute to improved governance standards through ethical leadership excellence. 
I  have  been  asked  to  give  you  an  update  on  recent  economic  and  monetary  policy 
developments.  Many  studies  have  highlighted  the  economic  and  social  costs  of  bad 
leadership  in  various  spheres  of  society,  and  thus  one  should  not  under-estimate  the 
important  role  that  ethical  leadership  can  play  in  addressing the  economic  challenges  that 
the world, including South Africa, currently faces. 
We  strongly  believe  that  the  credibility  and  reputation  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
(SARB), which is very critical to our work, depends on excellent leadership. Thus the Bank 
pays particular attention to its own leadership. Having engaged for two years in a bank-wide 
authentic  leadership training  programme,  to  access  and  use  reflective  and  coaching  skills, 
the  Bank  is  now  embarking  on  leadership  development  customised  for  each  management 
level. 
We concluded the most recent of our Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meetings less than 
a  week  ago,  and  my  remarks  today  will  be  largely  informed  by  our  assessment  from  that 
meeting.  After  some  points  on  the  global  backdrop,  I  will  talk  about  recent  economic  and 
financial market developments in South Africa, and provide an update on monetary policy in 
this  challenging  economic  environment.  Before  I  conclude  I  will  briefly  touch  on  economic 
developments in the Limpopo province, relative to national trends. 
Global economic developments 
2. 
A  week  ago  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  released  the  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO)  update,  which  confirmed  that  the  global  economy  continues  to  struggle  to  find 
momentum.  The  IMF  noted  lackluster  growth  in  most  advanced  economies,  low  potential 
growth  and  a  gradual  closing  of  output  gaps,  while  prospects  remained  diverse  across 
emerging  market  and  developing  economies.  Similarly,  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and 
Central  Bank  Governors  indicated  over  the  weekend  that  the  global  economic  recovery 
continues, but is facing challenges and downside risks, amid fluctuating commodity prices, 
high  financial  market  volatility,  geo-political  conflicts,  terrorism  and  refugee  flows.  While 
some  of  these  factors  have  been  with  us  for  a  number  of  years  now,  more  recently,  the 
downside  risks  facing  the  global  economy  have  been  compounded  by  the  outcome  of  the 
British referendum vote, or Brexit, as it is more commonly referred to. As a result of Brexit, 
the global outlook for 2016–17 has worsened, as the vote added significant uncertainty to an 
already  fragile  global  economic  environment,  and  is  likely  to  affect  confidence  and  weigh 
negatively on consumption and investment. I should add that Brexit has also highlighted the 
importance  of  inclusive  growth,  an  issue  which  was  highlighted  in  the  latest  G20 
communique. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The IMF noted that prior to Brexit, economic data and financial market developments pointed 
to an improvement in the outlook for a few large emerging markets and a modest upward 
revision to global growth for 2017 (0.1 percentage point). In the aftermath of Brexit, however, 
the IMF downgraded global growth projections by 0,1 percentage points for both 2016 and 
2017 to 3,1 and 3,4 per cent respectively. Advanced economies were primarily responsible 
for the more pessimistic outlook, with the IMF revising the United Kingdom’s 2017 outlook 
downwards by almost a full percentage point, while the euro area’s outlook was downgraded 
by a lesser 0,2 percentage points. 
With  the  exception  of  sub-Saharan  Africa,  where  the  IMF  downgraded  its  outlook  by  over 
1 percentage  point  for  2016,  mainly  on  account  of  adverse  developments  in  Nigeria  and 
South  Africa  (the  two  largest  economies),  the  outlook  for  emerging  markets  has  generally 
remained  steady,  with  stronger  than  expected  recoveries  in  Russia  and  Brazil  in  the 
forecasts.  Although  the contribution  of  emerging  markets  to global  growth  has  dwindled  in 
recent  years,  they  continue  to  account  for  around  58  per  cent  of  global  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) and therefore remain significant. 
Given that the Brexit outcome was generally unanticipated, the outcome was initially followed 
by  heightened  financial  market  volatility  and  renewed  risk  aversion.  Emerging  market 
economies were subjected to a strong negative impact from Brexit, however, the emerging 
markets most strongly affected have been those that are highly dependent on the EU as an 
export  market,  like  South  Africa.  Notwithstanding  the  short  term  financial  market  volatility, 
financial markets have since recovered and asset prices have rallied. This development was 
supported by a good level of preparedness by major central banks and quick responses after 
the referendum, demonstrating readiness to act decisively in dealing with any fallout in the 
financial markets. 
While there has been some reprieve in financial markets, it is to be expected that until Brexit 
negotiations  have  been  completed  or  the  likely  outcome  becomes  clearer,  there  could  be 
significant  bouts  of  volatility  and  heightened  uncertainty.  This  means  that  forecasts  will  be 
subject to further revisions as the impact of Brexit unfolds, and the respective positions of the 
negotiating partners are revealed. Heightened uncertainty is likely to spill over into financial 
markets, which usually means capital outflows from emerging market economies which are 
perceived to be more risky, as investors look for so-called safe haven assets. At the same 
time, however, Brexit appears to have swung the monetary policy pendulum more towards 
an even easier stance in advanced economies, and as such, in the short term we could still 
witness  inflows  into  emerging  markets  as  investors  search  for  higher  yields.  The  US  Fed, 
which had embarked on a normalisation path for its monetary policy, may now slow down its 
pace, again adding to uncertainty and volatility. The results of their most recent deliberations 
will be announced tonight, and the markets are waiting to glean from their statements what 
the likely future trajectory of interest rates might be. 
It  has  been  argued  that  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  Brexit  could  potentially  have  severe 
repercussions given that the European Union is one of the region’s biggest trade and foreign 
investment partners. South Africa’s trade links are relatively small, but could suffer the most, 
given its strong investment and financial links with the UK and the relatively high integration 
of  domestic  markets  with  global  financial  markets.  According  to  Moody’s  South  Africa  has 
been  the  largest  recipient  of  UK  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  in  Africa,  accounting  for 
about 30 per cent of total UK investment in Africa in 2014.1 Moody’s further assert that given 
South Africa’s lowest FDI levels in 10 years in 2015, Brexit-related uncertainty might delay 
investment decisions and introduce a downside risk to FDI inflows into South Africa.2 
                                                
1  http://www.fin24.com/Economy/why-sa-is-most-exposed-to-brexit-impact-moodys-20160708. 
2  http://www.focus-economics.com/countries/south-africa. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Market expectations of even easier monetary policy in advanced economies are reflected by 
the decline in long term government bond yields, across all maturities. Since the date of the 
referendum  the  yield  on  10-year  US  Treasury  bonds  has  declined  by  19  bps,  while  the 
10-year  German  bond  yields  and  the  UK  bond  yields  are  down  by  12  and  57  bps 
respectively.  The  universe  of  negative  yielding  fixed  income  instruments  is  now  around 
US$13 trillion, an unusual state of affairs that may harbour many risks for financial stability. 
Therefore  there  is  a  need  for  increased  vigilance  to  guard  against  distortive  allocations  of 
capital and asset price bubbles. 
Other  risks  facing  the  global  economy  include  unresolved  legacy  issues  in  the  European 
banking system; continued reliance on credit as a growth driver in China which heightens the 
risk of an eventual disruptive adjustment; and non-economic risks already mentioned earlier 
such as geopolitical threats and terrorism, amongst others. 
Recent domestic economic and financial market developments 
3. 
As  noted  in  the  recent  MPC  statement,  the  domestic  economic  growth  outlook  remains 
extremely  challenging.  Real  economic  activity  in  South  Africa  has  contracted  in  the  first 
quarter of 2016, declining at an annualised rate of 1,2 per cent, whilst also contracting on a 
year-on-year basis for the first time since 2009 when economic conditions were dominated 
by the effects of the global financial crisis. The poor performance in the first quarter reflected 
a further decline in the real output of the primary sector coupled with slower growth in the 
value  added  by  the  tertiary  sector.  Two  key  factors  need  to  be  mentioned  in  this  regard, 
namely  the  unfavourable  climatic  conditions  which  had  a  considerable  impact  on  the 
agricultural  sector,  and  the  challenging  trading  environment  encountered  by  the  mining 
sector. Together these two factors caused the primary sector to contract at a rate of 15,5 per 
cent in the first quarter of 2016. 
Similarly  concerning  are  trends  in  real  gross  domestic  expenditure  which  declined  at  an 
annualised rate of 1,3 per cent in the first quarter. Contractions were recorded in real final 
consumption expenditure by households and real gross fixed capital formation, while growth 
in real final consumption expenditure by general government also slowed in the first quarter 
of 2016. Gross fixed capital formation contracted sharply in the first quarter of this year, the 
second  consecutive  contraction,  and  accounted for  by  both  the  private  sector  and general 
government. Confidence levels have deteriorated, as measured by the FNB/BER consumer 
confidence  index,  while  the  BER  retail  confidence  index  declined  sharply  in  the  second 
quarter.  The  deterioration  in  consumer  confidence  means  that  household  consumption 
expenditure is likely to remain subdued, further exacerbated by high debt levels, rising costs 
of debt servicing, and slow employment growth. Consumption expenditure has been further 
constrained by the absence of significant wealth effects owing to the weak performance of 
asset markets, particularly the housing market. These factors have contributed to persistence 
of  high  rates  of  unemployment.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2016  the  official  unemployment  rate 
increased  to  26,7  per  cent.  Annual  losses  in  employment  have  been  recorded  in  the 
manufacturing,  private  households,  electricity,  agriculture  and  transport  sectors.  Youth 
unemployment remains a serious challenge, having increased markedly to 54,5 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2016.3 The unemployment challenge was emphasized by Mr David Lipton, 
First  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF,  in  Johannesburg  last  week.  In  his  speech  he 
pointed  to  the  limited  progress  on  reforms  to  remedy  the  unemployment  situation  and 
recommended a fresh and energetic review of South Africa’s policies, followed by action.4 
                                                
3  SARB Quarterly Bulletin, June 2016. 
4  David  Lipton.  2016.  “Bridging  South  Africa’s  Economic  Divide”  Lecture  given  at  the  University  of 
Witwatersrand. July 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Although the negative growth in the first quarter of this year is anticipated to have been the 
low point of the cycle, the recovery is expected to be weak. At the July meeting of the MPC, 
the  SARB  revised  downward  the growth  projection for  this  year to  zero per  cent, from the 
previous projection of 0,6 per cent. In order to achieve a growth rate of zero per cent, the 
economy will need to grow by between 0.8 and 1.0 per cent in each of the three remaining 
quarters. For growth to be at 0.5 per cent for 2016, we would require growth of above 2 per 
cent  for  the  remainder  of  the  year.  Furthermore,  the  SARB  does  not  believe  that  a 
contraction  in  the  second  quarter  is  likely  –  a  result  that  would  tip  the  economy  into  a 
technical recession. The reasons for this are reasonably positive economic data thus far for 
the second quarter, in particular, the mining and manufacturing sectors are expected to add 
positively  to  growth,  consistent  with  the  Barclays  PMI  which  has  been  above  the  neutral 
50 level  since  March.  In  addition,  the  BER  manufacturing confidence  index  also  improved, 
while the real value of building plans passed is indicative of some improvement in the sector, 
particularly with respect to residential construction. 
Looking further out, growth rates of 1,1 per cent and 1,5 per cent are forecast for the next 
two  years,  down  from  1,3  per  cent  and  1,7  per  cent  previously.  The  Bank’s  estimate  of 
potential output has been revised down marginally to 1,4 per cent in 2016, rising to 1,7 per 
cent in 2018. 
Turning to the external sector, although the prices of some of South Africa’s major exports 
such  as  iron  ore  and  coal  have  recovered,  the  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  is 
generally  expected  to  keep  commodity  prices  depressed  in  the  immediate  future. 
Fortunately, whilst growth in merchandise exports remain subdued, the value of imports has 
edged only slightly higher, with increases in the value of imported capital and intermediate 
goods  largely  offset  by  lower  imports  of  consumer  goods.  As  a  result,  the  country’s  trade 
deficit narrowed to R38 billion in the first quarter of 2016 from R41 billion in the fourth quarter 
of 2015. 
South  Africa’s  current  account  balance  nonetheless  deteriorated  in  the  first  quarter  from 
4,6 per cent of GDP in the fourth quarter of 2015 to 5,0 per cent of GDP. This outcome was 
largely  as  a  result  of  the  widening  deficit  on  the  services,  income  and  current  transfer 
accounts.  South  Africa’s  current  account  deficit  leaves  it  vulnerable  to  short-term  capital 
outflows  if  investors’  risk  perceptions  and  appetite  were  to  be  adversely  influenced.  South 
Africa relies on short-term private-sector capital inflows to finance its current account deficit 
and a decline in capital inflows will put pressure on the country’s balance of payments. 
Monetary policy 
4. 
The  SARB’s  primary  mandate  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability  in  the  interest  of 
balanced and sustainable economic growth. 
In  this  respect, the  SARB follows  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  (IT)  policy  framework,  where 
temporary  breaches  of  the  target  can  be  tolerated  in  the  interest  of  smoothing  out 
fluctuations  in  the  growth  trajectory.  However,  the  disappointing  growth  outcomes  and 
outlook highlighted earlier have been accompanied by rising inflationary pressures. This has 
presented a challenging policy environment for the MPC. 
The  inflation  rate,  as  measured  by  the  increases  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  was 
recorded at 6,3 per cent year-on-year in June 2016 compared to a 6,1 per cent in May 2016. 
The inflation rate has exceeded the upper band of the target since the beginning of the year 
averaging 6,3 per cent for the first 6 months of 2016. The main drivers were increases in the 
prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages which increased by 11,0 per cent in June, only 
slightly  below  the  recent  peak  of  11,3  per  cent  in  April.  Goods  price  inflation  measured 
6,7 per cent, up from 6,6 per cent in May, while services inflation increased to 5,8 per cent 
from  5,7  per  cent  in  May.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  measure  of  core  inflation,  which  excludes 
food, fuel and electricity increased marginally to 5,6 per cent compared with the 5,5 per cent 
annual increase in the previous month. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On  the  other  hand,  producer  price  inflation  for  final  manufactured  goods  has  been  on  a 
downward trend, declining from 7,0 per cent in April to 6,5 per cent in May mainly due to a 
moderation in price inflation of food, beverages and tobacco products. This was below the 
consensus  forecast  of  6,9  per  cent  but  the  impact  of  the  drought  is  still  evident  in  the 
increase in prices of agricultural products, particularly cereals and other crops as well as live 
animals and animal products. 
Inflation  expectations,  as  reflected  in  the  survey  conducted  by  the  Bureau  for  Economic 
Research, have remained anchored near or just above the upper end of the inflation target 
range. In the second quarter, average expectations for 2016 were 6,3 per cent, marginally up 
from 6,2 per cent. Average expectations for 2017 were unchanged at 6,2 per cent and were 
marginally down to 5,9 per cent for 2018. Average 5-year inflation expectations declined from 
6,1 per cent to 5,9 per cent in the second quarter, with downward revisions by all groups. 
The  yield  differential  between  inflation  linked  bonds  and  conventional  government  bonds 
(break-even inflation expectations) declined across all maturities but remain elevated. 
The latest inflation forecast of the Bank shows a marginal improvement compared with the 
previous forecast, although an acceleration in inflation is still projected for the second half of 
this year. Inflation is only expected to return to within the 3 – 6 per cent target range during 
the  third  quarter  of  2017,  averaging  5.5  per  cent  in  2018.  According  to  SARB  forecasts, 
inflation is expected to average 6,6 per cent in 2016 and 6,0 per cent in 2017, compared with 
forecasts of 6,7 per cent and 6,2 per cent at the MPC meeting in May. The expected peak, at 
7,1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016, has been revised slightly down from 7,3 per cent 
due  in  part  to  lower  administered  price  inflation  (mainly  petrol  prices).  An  encouraging 
development is the moderation in the forecast for core inflation, from an average of 5,8 per 
cent  in  2016  to  5,3  per  cent  by  2018.  Whereas  previously  core  inflation  was  expected  to 
breach  the  upper  end  of the  target  range  in  the  third  quarter  of  2016 for four  consecutive 
quarters, a one-quarter breach, at 6,1 per cent, is now expected in the fourth quarter of this 
year. 
A discussion on the inflation outlook would be incomplete without referring to developments 
in the exchange rate of the rand, one of the biggest risks to the inflation outlook. The recent 
volatility experienced by the rand exchange rate has been driven mainly by external factors 
and  changes  in  global  risk  perceptions.  Although  the  rand  depreciated  sharply  in  the 
immediate aftermath of the British referendum, it has reversed these losses. At the time of 
the most recent MPC meeting, the rand had appreciated against the major currencies, and 
on a trade-weighted basis, the rand had appreciated by 12,2 per cent. The rand has been 
supported  by  the  global  search  for  yield,  the  improvement  in  commodity  prices,  and  also 
reacted  to  the  unexpectedly  large  trade  surplus  recorded  in  May.  Despite  this  recent 
strength, the rand remains vulnerable to possible changes in investor sentiment; changes in 
US monetary policy expectations; and domestic concerns including the possibility of ratings 
downgrades later in the year. 
Other risk factors for inflation include increases in average wage growth in excess of inflation 
and productivity gains; elevated food price inflation; and potentially higher oil prices should 
global demand recover. On the other hand, a weaker global growth scenario could also imply 
that there may be a degree of downside risk to the international oil price assumption; a sharp 
decline  in  agricultural  prices  next  year  should  favourable  weather  patterns  transpire  as 
forecast and the absence of demand pressures and weak consumption expenditure growth 
may also contribute to downside pressures. 
As  you  will  know,  the  MPC  felt  that  local  and  international  developments  since  our  last 
meeting in May in relation to inflation and growth overall justified a pause in the hiking cycle 
at  the July  meeting. The  situation  will  continue  to  be monitored closely  as  the risks  to the 
inflation  forecast  are  assessed  to  continue  to  be  tilted  to  the  upside,  even  if  they  have 
moderated somewhat recently. It remains to be seen if some of the favourable factors that 
contributed  to  the  decision  to  keep  interest  rates  unchanged  will  be  sustained.  This  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
require  ongoing  vigilance  and  careful  analysis  of  incoming  data  and  information,  and  the 
MPC will not hesitate to act when deemed appropriate. 
As  I  move  towards  the  end  of  my  speech,  please  allow  me  to  briefly  touch  on  some 
economic developments in the Limpopo Province. 
Limpopo Province 
5. 
The growth performance of the province – like that of the South African economy – has been 
disappointing.  The  average  growth  rate  for  the  period  2009–14  averaged  1,3  per  cent  as 
compared to the national average of 1.8 per cent.5 Unfortunately, statistics are not available 
to  assess  the  most  recent  economic  growth  performance  of  Limpopo  in  relation  to  the 
national growth rate. However, an assumption can be made that, given the dominant role of 
mining and agriculture in the province, developments will likely have mirrored national trends. 
As for inflation developments, while the inflation rate in Limpopo has declined from 8,2 per 
cent in May 2016 to 7,4 per cent in June 2016, it is nevertheless still over 1 percentage point 
higher than the national average and significantly above the top end of the inflation targeting 
rate.  This  has  both  adverse  welfare  and  competitiveness  effects  and  is  something  that 
warrants attention at the provincial level particularly in terms of addressing the bottlenecks 
that are adversely affecting the price formation process in the province. 
With  an  estimated  share  of  national  GDP  of  just  over  7  per  cent,  Limpopo  makes  an 
important contribution to the economy of South Africa. The primary sector has always played 
a key role in the province, with its contribution growing from 17 per cent in 1996 to just over 
27 per cent in 2014. This has in large part been due to the mining sector, with its contribution 
increasing from around 15 per cent in 1996 to around 25 per cent currently. Approximately, 
41  per  cent  of  South  Africa’s  platinum  group  metals  (PGMs),  90  per  cent  of  red-granite 
resources and approximately 50 per cent of the country’s coal reserves being located in the 
province.  In  addition,  it  has  been  found  that  antimony,  a  highly  strategic  mineral  found  in 
large  quantities  in  China,  is  another  of  Limpopo’s  major  assets6.  In  addition  to  mining, 
agriculture  and  tourism  are  the  other  pillars  of  the  Limpopo  economy,  with  the  province 
having identified infrastructure development, industrialisation and manufacturing as potential 
new game changers that will enable it to achieve higher growth rates in the future. 
The  potential  of  this  province  is  beyond  question.  The  province  is  well-endowed  with 
minerals.  While  the  fortunes  of  the  mining  industry  are  subject  to  international  commodity 
price movements, the policy challenge is to ensure that the potential benefits that could be 
derived from the natural resource endowment are optimized. 
Conclusion 
6. 
In  conclusion,  it  is  clear  that  the  global  and  domestic  economies  face  challenging  times 
ahead,  riddled  with  uncertainty  which  could  exacerbate  volatility  and  dampen  confidence, 
and  thus  undermine  consumption  and  investment  required  to  support  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth.  What  the  impact  of  the  added  complication  of  Brexit  will  bring,  will  only 
become clear over time. While we may have little control over many of the external factors, 
we need to decisively tackle some of the local impediments that are well within our control 
through collaborative leadership from Government, business and labour. The SARB remains 
fully committed to making a constructive contribution in line with its mandate of achieving and 
maintaining price stability in the interest of sustainable and balanced economic growth. 
Thank you. 
                                                
5  Statistics South Africa: available http://www.statssa.gov.za/?page_id=1854&PPN=P0441. 
6  John Young, Investing in Limpopo, September 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
