   Benoît Cœuré: Structural reforms on the way to a complete Economic 
and Monetary Union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the International Conference on Structural Reforms in Advanced Economies, Hertie School 
of Governance, Berlin, 17 June 2016. 
The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Many people would like central bankers to remain quiet about the need for structural reforms. 
In  the  end,  we  have  a  clear  and  narrow  mandate  defined  as  price  stability[1].  And  in 
undergraduate-level economics we learn that inflation in the long run is always and everywhere 
a monetary phenomenon. So why do we bother? And why should we, unelected policymakers, 
venture into policy debates so obviously shaped by political considerations? 
I agree that central bankers should tread very cautiously in other economic policy areas. But 
monetary  policy,  and  particularly  so  in  a  monetary  union,  does  not  operate  in  a  vacuum. 
Although  central  bankers  take  their  decisions  independently,  they  also  have  to  take  into 
account what other parties are doing. As I have already said elsewhere, monetary policy is 
independent and interdependent.[2] 
In this respect, there are at least three reasons why central bankers cannot be indifferent to 
structural  reforms.  First,  the  combination  of  low  potential  growth  and  the  debt  overhang 
inherited from the crisis threatens the European social contract, a contract that was established 
in the post-war era and that was fair and affordable at that time[3]. This in turn is a threat to the 
sustainability of our social market economy, which is the environment in which our monetary 
policy operates. Second, factor reallocation over time and across sectors is necessary in order 
to adjust to shocks and therefore key to the smooth transmission of monetary policy. And third, 
convergence between economies is both an economic and political prerequisite for a well-
functioning monetary union.  
I will argue today that for structural reforms to successfully lift potential growth in a monetary 
union, they have to fulfil two important criteria: (i) they need to be comprehensive and well 
sequenced and (ii) all-encompassing. 
“Comprehensive”  means  that  a  narrow  focus  on  labour  market  reforms  is  not  sufficient. 
Structural  reforms  are  also  about  incentivising  innovation,  competition  and  fighting  rent-
seeking and monopolistic structures. They entail offering new income chances – particularly 
for  the  younger  generations  –  by  reducing  and  redistributing  rents,  and  by  encouraging 
economic players to adjust.[4]  
“All-encompassing”  means  that  reforms  cannot  focus  only  on  addressing  inefficiencies  in 
Member States, but have to take into account externalities and inefficiencies at the level of the 
Union. This implies reforms in the area of economic governance, and progress in completing 
the Single Market. And they will form the basis for a better functioning Economic and Monetary 
Union.  
Why do we need structural reforms? 
Potential output growth in the euro area, as in other advanced economies, has been on a 
steady downwards trajectory for several decades. There are however a few things that make 
our situation even more problematic than that of other large economies. First, the decline in 
trend  growth  has  gone  much  further  here  than  in,  for  instance,  the  US:  the  European 
Commission estimates potential output growth in the euro area to be about 1% this year, half 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   of the equivalent figure for the US. In contrast, the difference in 1992 was small: euro area 
potential output growth was estimated at 2.6%, compared with 2.8% for the US.[5] Although this 
is already a serious problem in itself[6], a close examination of the composition of potential 
output  uncovers  the  full  extent  of  the  problem.  Total  factor  productivity  in  the  US  has 
consistently outperformed the euro area for the last 15 years and is expected to continue doing 
also in the coming decade[7]. In other words, using Paul Krugman’s famous words, the euro 
area trend growth risks becoming a product of “perspiration rather than inspiration”[8].  
There  are  two  issues  associated  with  this  observation.  First,  as  we  know  from  the  growth 
literature,  input-based  growth  risks  incurring  diminishing  returns.  Second,  in  an  imperfect 
monetary union, it raises the question of how those inputs are being allocated. 
Indeed, when it comes to allocating capital, we are still making a bad job of allocating and 
utilising existing resources[9]. The high-risk projects with high expected returns, which we would 
like to see giving a boost to potential growth, are more difficult to finance than in other parts of 
the  world.  This  is  mainly  because  of  Europe’s  bias  towards  bank  and  debt  financing  as 
opposed to equity[10], and the persistent fragmentation of our financial systems, not to mention 
high administrative burdens[11].  
And the reallocation of labour is hampered by rigidities in national labour markets as well as 
obstacles to cross-border labour mobility, such as the lack of transferability of social rights, 
language barriers and cultural differences. 
And even when our firms have sufficient access to capital, they do not seem to be innovative 
enough and also do not fully exploit new technologies and working methods[12].  
There are also several other reasons for the secular decline in Europe’s growth. Consider the 
demographic  “handicap”.  Over  the  next  15  years,  the  working  age  population  will  actually 
shrink substantially or at best plateau out in almost all euro area countries. Worse yet, in that 
same period, the most innovative segment of the population[13] will contract even more. Let me 
give you some data on this: according to the European Commission’s ageing working group[14], 
the population between 26 and 50 – which several studies identify as being the most innovative 
– will shrink by 12% in Germany, 2% in France, 11% in Italy and by a whopping 29% in Spain. 
Not only is the share of young people declining in the euro area, but unfortunately, despite 
being the best-educated generation ever, they have more trouble in entering the labour market. 
Youth unemployment exceeds overall unemployment in all countries and for the whole area 
the difference is a staggering 12 percentage points. This is already harming the economy, 
because  the  young  who  are  willing  to  work  but  unable  to  find  a  job  are  prevented  from 
developing their skills. To avoid creating a “lost generation” we need to act quickly. 
The younger generation is also being dragged down by the high level of debt it is set to inherit. 
A combination of negative demographics, weak productivity growth, poorly functioning labour 
markets and a steep increase in public and private sector debt burdens means that a dwindling 
number  of  young  people  in  our  societies  will  have  to  carry  an  increasingly  heavy  financial 
burden[15]. This limits their ability to be entrepreneurial, to innovate and compete in international 
markets.  
The good news is that a lot can be done to improve that gloomy outlook[16]. Today, I won’t be 
talking  much  about  fiscal  reforms,  or  about  policy  initiatives  that  could  improve  the 
demographic outlook, but I will instead focus on reforms that could boost medium- to long-term 
growth and employment.  
Comprehensive and well-sequenced reforms 
When you look at a range of OECD structural indicators, it is clear that most euro area countries 
are well down the league table for best international practice in one or several policy areas. 
Measured against the OECD’s top three performers, the euro area is lagging far behind in both 
product and labour market efficiency, with no euro area country in the top three and with the 
largest euro area countries often underperforming the euro area average[17]. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In recent years we have seen a number of important reforms, particularly in those countries 
that carried out economic adjustment programmes. The main focus has been on reforms in 
the labour market. The nominal and real labour market rigidities that we have traditionally lived 
with in Europe have resulted in what is being called the “European unemployment disease”: 
persistently high unemployment rates and a limited ability to adjust to economic shocks. You 
get a very telling picture if you plot the unemployment rate in the euro area and in the US over 
several decades – say, from the 1970s. Every time there is a downturn in economic activity, 
the unemployment rate goes up in both regions. However, whereas the US quickly readjusts 
when  the  economy  picks  up,  the  euro  area  takes  much  longer  to  do  so  and  once  the 
unemployment rate actually starts falling it almost never seems to return to that previous low. 
The end result is that euro area unemployment has risen steadily for 40 years.[18] 
That  said,  there  is  solid  theoretical  and  empirical  evidence  showing  that  greater  flexibility 
results  in much  lower  equilibrium  unemployment  rates[19].  It  is  therefore  very  welcome  that 
labour market reforms have recently been implemented in several countries where rigidities 
were considered to be particularly onerous, such as Spain[20], Italy, Portugal and Greece, and 
here in Germany too, some years ago. France is still lagging behind and although a labour 
market reform is now being discussed, whether it is sufficiently ambitious to significantly lower 
the equilibrium unemployment rate remains to be seen.  
Although increased flexibility in labour markets will produce a better outcome in the medium 
term, some reforms may create losers in the short term[21]. It is only natural that such reforms 
are  opposed  by  those  fearing  short-term  personal  losses,  even  when  the  reforms  are 
eventually beneficial for society as a whole. We should take such concerns seriously. There 
are  policies,  however,  that  can  help  to mitigate  or  compensate for the negative  short-term 
effects.  
First, labour market reforms should be sequenced carefully, in such a way that a negative 
short-term effect on employment is ideally felt only when the recovery is gaining momentum. 
This could in practice mean that employment protection is liberalised only when reforms to 
increase  nominal  wage  flexibility  have  been  carried  out.  This  can  have  a  quick  effect  on 
reducing unemployment even shortly after its implementation[22]. Second, active labour market 
policies can help to reallocate workers across sectors of the economy while an adjustment is 
taking place. Third, expansionary fiscal and monetary policy can also dampen the negative 
short-term impact of labour market reforms. The current low interest rate environment and the 
mildly expansionary fiscal stance on aggregate in the euro area provide a good opportunity for 
governments  to  minimise  the  short-run  costs  of  labour  market  reforms.  Finally,  there  are 
reforms in other areas of the economy that can compensate for some of short-term loss in 
disposable income that households might suffer in bad times[23]. 
Indeed, having the right sequence is a point often made: if you have to implement product and 
service market reforms as well as labour market reforms, then hold back with the latter[24]. The 
underlying  reason  is  partly  that  the  short-term  negative  macroeconomic  effects  are  much 
greater when a liberalisation of, say, employment protection leads to a spike in unemployment 
than when product market reforms decrease excessive rents margins, to the immediate benefit 
of consumers. Another argument made is that product market reforms should be prioritised 
since they boost output regardless of the overall economic situation, and because they do not 
weigh on public finances.  
Why then have we seen exactly the opposite sequence in the euro area countries that have 
gone through significant reform in recent years, that is, labour market reforms before product 
and service market reforms? It’s because, unlike in the labour market, where a few changes 
can often produce major results, product and service market reforms are in practice made up 
of a huge array of small reforms. Moreover, many product and service sectors are represented 
by powerful lobby groups with vested interests that sometimes conflict with the interests of 
consumers and society as a whole. The Greek programme is one example; the authorities 
there faced strong resistance from pressure groups[25]. I have absolutely no doubt that one 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   would meet similar obstacles when reforming, say, the German or French product and service 
markets. In fact, both these countries have been opposed to wider service sector reform at 
European level. And Germany is one of the countries that has realised the smallest share of 
potential benefits from the Services Directive according to the European Commission[26].  
Strengthening the single market and governance 
If we view the euro area as a single economy and not as the sum of its 19 national members, 
we must have a common growth strategy based on identifying our structural weaknesses. The 
key words must in my view be “productivity” and “employment”, which are positive-sum games 
– not “competitiveness”, which could end up as a zero-sum game. The Member States will not 
lend  much  support  to  euro  area  growth  by  merely  competing  for  their  neighbours’  market 
shares. We have to act together to raise productivity and employment.  
Improving the functioning of the service market in the euro area is therefore important not only 
because of its large share of overall gross value added, 65% on average in the euro area, but 
also because 75% of the total labour force is employed in this sector. Even though there has 
been  a  steady  shift  towards  more  service  production,  we  are  still  lagging  behind  other 
advanced  economies  such  as  the  US  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  Japan,  which  have  higher 
production of services per capita. In particular, it is striking that service sector output per capita 
(in PPP terms) is 33% higher in the US than in the euro area, which is the main reason for a 
smaller difference in overall GDP per capita levels (26%)[27].  
To a large extent this is due to old-fashioned restrictions that prevent competition in many 
countries  in  the  euro  area.  The  European  Commission  has  estimated  that  an  ambitious 
implementation of the 2006 Services Directive would have the potential to increase euro area 
GDP by around 2.5%. The latest estimates show that only around 0.8 percentage point of this 
has been realised – and this is ten years after the Directive entered into force. Also, bear in 
mind  that  these  figures  significantly  underestimate  the  gains  from  a  wider  service  market 
reform,  given  that  some  of  the  most  important  sectors  –  for  instance  health  care  –  are 
completely  excluded  from  the  Directive.  Another  factor  in  services  that  is  sometimes 
overlooked is that of scale. In today’s fragmented service market in Europe, there is insufficient 
pooling  of  resources  to  drive  large-scale  R&D  initiatives,  new  distribution  platforms  and  to 
increase competition between market participants. 
We  therefore  need  to  take  a  step  back  and  consider  what  can  be  done  to  complete  the 
European Single Market for services. To give an example, the original idea of applying the so-
called country of origin principle should be reconsidered. This would mean that the regulation 
of the exporting country is applied. The benefits from such a change are straightforward: first, 
it  becomes  easier  for  a  service  provider  that  no  longer  has  to  deal  with  the  regulations  of 
28 countries when exporting across the Union. Second, it would incentivise countries to put in 
place  efficient  and  well-functioning  legislation.  In  addition,  the  Single  Market  for  services 
should be expanded to additional sectors: there is, for instance, no good economic reason for 
excluding health care. 
As  I  said  earlier,  reforms  are  also  about  improving  economic  governance.  When  the  first 
European Semester was launched in January 2011, it marked a sea change in the economic 
governance of the euro area. With this new tool, Europe recognised that ex ante coordination 
of economic policies – and not only fiscal policies – at European level was necessary. Later in 
the same year, the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) strengthened the European 
Semester further. For the euro area, the corrective arm of the MIP even foresees sanctions in 
case of non-compliance.  
The European Semester and the MIP are powerful tools that no doubt have made the euro 
area stronger. Yet – five years later – we have to admit that the sun does not shine everywhere. 
The implementation record for country-specific recommendations (CSRs) was not very high 
from  the  start  and  has  declined  further  recently.  In  2015  only  4%  of  CSRs  were  fully 
implemented,  down  from  7%  in  2014.  In  some  countries  excessive  economic  imbalances 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   persist  and  could  harm  other  Member  States.  More  can  be  done  to  improve  national 
implementation and I see a lot of merit in the IMF's proposal that CSRs should be linked to 
outcome-based benchmarks that are concrete, measurable, and clearly linked to the ultimate 
reform objective[28]. The dismal implementation record of the CSRs nevertheless suggests that 
a governance framework that envisages European economic policy priorities being legitimised 
and implemented at national level has its limits. Looking forward, we will need to engage in a 
process  at  European  level,  based  on  shared  institutions,  that  provides  both  economic 
resilience and the appropriate legitimacy. In such a process, consensus would be needed on 
(i)  the  policy  areas  that  are  crucial  to  preserve  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area,  and  on 
(ii) designating those policy areas as shared competences with democratic legitimisation at 
European level. And as I have said before, getting there will require both economic and political 
convergence.  
The success of the Single Market is one of the few uncontroversial achievements of the EU. It 
has shown that shared competences can be used to implement economic policies that lead to 
greater prosperity in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of the euro 
area and the EU as a whole. We should build on it if we want to make further progress. 
Conclusion 
It  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  current  expansionary  monetary  policy  discourages 
governments from undertaking the necessary structural reforms in the euro area. But that begs 
the question: why weren’t these reforms carried out when interest rates were higher? We have 
to stop searching for reasons why structural reforms are not being addressed. 
To lift potential growth and strengthen the underpinnings of our Economic and Monetary Union, 
we need comprehensive, well-sequenced structural reforms in national Member States, as well 
as at European Union level. And we need them now. 
European citizens started losing trust in the European Union and its institutions when they 
started losing sight of their tangible benefits, that is, the impact of the integration process on 
their jobs and standards of living. Rapidly vanishing trust in turn prevents those steps towards 
European integration from being taken which are indispensable if we want to meet today's 
challenges. The burden of breaking this deadlock cannot be borne by the people of Europe: 
the burden must be borne by the EU and its institutions and by European governments. Indeed, 
the best way to respond is to identify a sequence of reforms for creating jobs and growth. If 
carefully designed, such a sequence can gradually recreate trust and lead us to where we 
want  to  be:  to  the  point  where  a  discussion  on  the  future  of  Europe,  and  the  degree  of 
sovereignty which needs to be shared to secure it, is again possible. 
This is not low-hanging fruit. Overcoming entrenched scepticism and resisting vested interests 
will always be challenging, all the more so as the reforms are comprehensive. But such an 
approach  would  hit  several  birds  with  one  stone.  It  would  provide  a  positive  impulse  for 
employment and growth. And it would form the basis for future institutional change which would 
put our Economic and Monetary Union on a solid and permanent footing. 
I thank you for your attention. 
[1]  See 
last  year’s  discussion  at 
“ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking” 
https://2015.ecbforum.eu/en/content/programme/overview/programme-overview.html. 
the 
in  Sintra,  Portugal. 
[2]  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2016),  “Time  for  a  new  Lamfalussy  moment”,  Lamfalussy  Commemorative  Conference, 
Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
[3]  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2013),  “The  three  dimensions  of  the  euro  area  crisis”,  Asia-Europe  Economic  Forum 
conference on “European troubles, Asian worries”, Brussels, 21 January. 
[4]  See Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomics effects of regulation and deregulation in goods 
and labor market”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, No. 3, pp. 879–907.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   [5]  See European Commission (2013), “The growth impact of structural reforms”, Quarterly Report on the Euro 
Area, Vol. 12, No. 4. This report provides a good overview of productivity developments in Europe and in the 
US. 
[6]  See Cœuré, B. (2014a) “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, speech at the Economic 
conference, Latvijas Banka, Riga, 17 October. 
[7]  According to European Commission estimates, the average annual contribution from TFP to growth in potential 
output was 0.6 p.p in the euro area and 0.9 p.p in the US between 2001 and 2015. The equivalent figures for 
capital accumulation are 0.5 and 0.8 p.p., while labour contributed by 0.2 p.p. in both cases. 
[8]  For a similar argument made in a different context, see: Krugman, P. (1994), “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle”, 
Foreign Affairs, 73:6. 
[9]  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2014b),  “Credit  and  Investment  in  the  European  Recovery”,  speech  at  the  IMF/Banka 
Slovenije high-level seminar on “Reinvigorating Credit Growth in Central, Eastern and Southern European 
Economies”, Portoroz, 26 September. 
[10]   See Hege et al. (2009), “Venture Capital Performance: The Disparity Between Europe and the United States”, 
The paper provides evidence for the existence of a gap between the value generated by US venture capital 
investments and European investments that is statistically significant and very large in economic terms. 
[11]  See ECB (2016): “Financial Integration in Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ 
financialintegrationineurope201604.en.pdf. 
[12]   See,  for  instance,  Pellegrino  and  Zingales  (2014),  “Diagnosing  the  Italian  Disease”,  available  at 
http://www.haas.berkeley.edu/groups/finance/Diagnosing.pdf.  The  paper  says  that  the  slowdown  in  Italy’s 
labour productivity is also associated with its failure to take full advantage of the ICT revolution. 
[13]   See Jones, B.F (2005): “Age and Great Invention”, NBER Working Paper No. 11359. 
[14]   See European Commission (2015), 2015 Ageing Report. 
[15]   For a thorough analysis of the crisis- and demographics-based burden of young generations, see the European 
Report: 
Commission’s 
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/eeip/pdf/ip018_en.pdf. 
Sustainability 
Fiscal 
2015 
[16] See for an overview ECB  (2015), “Progress with structural reforms across the euro area and their possible 
impacts”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February.  
[17]   See Koske, I., I.Wanner, R. Bitetti and O. Barbiero (2015), “The 2013 update of the OECD product market 
regulation  indicators:  policy  insights  for  OECD  and  non-OECD  countries”,  OECD  Economics  Department 
Working Papers, No. 1200, and “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection 
legislation”, Chapter 2 of the 2013 edition of the OECD Employment Outlook (2013) 
[18]   The official Eurostat aggregate for the euro area unemployment rate is unfortunately only available from 1998, 
but back-data can be estimated based on individual country data. A good analysis, based on a long historic 
sample is given in the IMF’s “Chronic Unemployment in the Euro Area: Causes and Cures”, WEO 1999:1. 
[19]   See  IMF  (2016a),  “Time  for  a  Supply-Side  Boost?  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  Labor  and  Product  Market 
Reforms in Advanced Economies”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April, pp. 101-142 
[20]   See Font, P., Izquierdo, M. and Puente, S. (2015) “Real wage responsiveness to unemployment in Spain: 
asymmetries along the business cycle”, IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, Springer, 4:13, June.  
[21]   See Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, and G. Fiori (2012), “Short-Term Gain or Pain? A DSGE Model-Based Analysis 
of  the  Short-Term  Effects  of  Structural  Reforms  in  Labour  and  Product  Markets”,  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Papers No. 948, OECD Publishing. This study provides useful insights into the short-
term effects on structural reforms. 
[22]   See Vansteenkiste, I. (2016), “Did the Crisis Permanently Scar the Portuguese Labour Market?: Evidence from 
a Markov-Switching Beveridge Curve Analysis”, forthcoming. 
[23]   See OECD (2016) “Going for growth”. Chapter 2 of the report gives a good overview of the literature on reform 
priorities in a difficult macro context. 
[24]   See IMF (2016a), op. cit. 
[25]   A good example of the depth and detail of the Greek reform programme is given in “The Second Economic 
Adjustment Programme for Greece Fourth Review – April 2014”, European Commission Occasional Papers, 
192, April 2014. 
[26]   See  Monteagudo  et  al.:  “The  economic  impact  of  the  Services  Directive:  A  first  assessment  following 
implementation, European Commission Economic Papers 456”, June 2012. 
[27]   According to European Commission AMECO database. The latest observation is 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   [28]  See IMF (2016b), "Euro Area: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2016 Article IV Mission", 16 June, and Banerji, 
A. et al. (2015), "Building a Better Union: Incentivizing Structural Reform in the Euro Area", IMF Working Paper, 
WP/15/201, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
