   Theodore Mitrakos: Distressed loans in the Greek banking system – 
restructuring portfolios, reviving enterprises 
Address by Mr Theodore Mitrakos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the workshop 
co-organised by the Bank of Greece and EBRD on “Distressed loans in the Greek banking 
system – restructuring portfolios, reviving enterprises”, Athens, 10 March 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests,  
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome here at the Bank of Greece Mr. Nick Tesseyman, 
Managing  Director  Financial  Institutions  of  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and 
Development (EBRD), the distinguished speakers and all the participants in today’s workshop, 
focusing on the management of non-performing exposures (NPEs).  
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  the  activity  of  the  EBRD  in  Greece.  The  EBRD 
Governors,  following  a  request  of  the  Greek  authorities,  voted  in  February  2015  with 
overwhelming  majority  for  the  Bank  to  invest  in  Greece  until  the  end  of  2020.  The  Bank’s 
investments, backed by technical assistance and policy dialogue, are intended to strengthen 
progress in the reform of Greece’s economy and contribute to its recovery. In this vein, as you 
probably know, the EBRD Representative Office in Athens was recently established. Greece 
will  benefit greatly from the  expertise  and  the finance  that  the  EBRD  can  bring  to  projects 
designed to contribute to sustainable growth and encourage trade. The EBRD has already 
participated in the recapitalisation of the four significant Greek banks in late 2015, which shows 
its confidence in the prospects of the entire Greek banking sector, and has invested overall 
around  €300  million  in  Greece.  Moreover,  as  of  early  March  the  EBRD  is  supporting  the 
expansion of international trade with a facility to National Bank of Greece under the EBRD’s 
Trade Facilitation Programme (TFP). Through the programme, the EBRD provides guarantees 
to  international  confirming  banks  and  short-term  loans  to  selected  banks  and  factoring 
companies for on-lending to local exporters, importers and distributors. The facility will help 
National Bank of Greece to scale up its trade finance activities, despite the financial market 
conditions, and reaffirm itself as a prime trade partner, supporting trade activities of exporters, 
importers and distributors of imported goods in Greece. It is anticipated that similar agreements 
will  be  signed  with  other  Greek  banks  in  the  near  future.  More  generally,  the  EBRD’s 
commitment to the country sends a strong signal to private sector investors that Greece is 
serious about reform and rebalancing its economy. I would like therefore to thank Ms. Sabina 
Dziurman, EBRD Director for Greece and Cyprus, for her contribution so far, as well as for 
putting forward the idea of holding a joint workshop on non-performing exposures. Ladies and 
gentlemen,  
The Bank of Greece, as you all know, has taken a series of initiatives to promote more rigorous 
and efficient management of non-performing exposures. It has also underpinned government 
efforts towards shaping and implementing a national NPL strategy.  
In this regard, let me very briefly mention some of these Bank of Greece initiatives: 
• 
The issuance of the Executive Committee Act 42/2014 on the supervisory framework 
regarding the NPE management by commercial and cooperative banks.  
The  activation  of  the  Code  of  Conduct,  which  provides  guidelines  regarding  the 
interaction of credit and other financial institutions with borrowers in arrears.  
The conduct of several on-site inspections to monitor banks’ progress in implementing 
the supervisory framework.  
The  conduct,  with  the  support  of  an  external  consultant,  of  a  study  on  NPL 
segmentation and the preparedness and capacity of banks to deal with each NPL 
segment in a rigorous manner.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     The issuance of the Executive Committee Act 82/2016 (under publication) regarding 
the framework for the licensing and operation of NPL servicing and acquiring firms. 
  Last but not least, the Bank of Greece, in cooperation with the ECB Banking Supervision and 
the  commercial  and  cooperative  banks,  is  in  the  process  of  agreeing  a  set  of  operational 
targets for NPEs. Meanwhile, the Bank of Greece is setting up a Coordination Office to support 
the monitoring of the implementation of the national NPL strategy. 
• 
Against  this  background,  in  today’s  workshop  we  will  have  the  opportunity  to 
extensively discuss three main topics:  
Solutions for borrowers with exposure to multiple banks. The bulk of distressed 
large corporate borrowers have exposures to multiple banks rendering necessary a 
coordinated  approach  among  creditors  to  agree  comprehensive  and  sustainable 
solutions in a reasonable timeframe. The Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) has 
recently launched a study regarding this pertinent issue of “common borrowers”.  
Development of a secondary market for NPL servicing and sales. The recent Law 
4354/2015 laid down the framework for the development of a secondary market for 
NPL servicing and sales. There will be two panels covering essential aspects in the 
process of setting up the local infrastructure for NPL servicing and sales respectively.  
The  banks’  internal  workout:  managing  distressed  SMEs.  SMEs  are  the 
backbone of the Greek economy. The shift of banks towards long-term forbearance 
measures  coupled  with  the  restructuring  of  viable  businesses  with  appropriate 
changes in their structure, business model and, if necessary, corporate governance 
would help stimulate an uptick in economic activity and assist the rebalancing of the 
Greek  economy  towards  export-oriented  sectors.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  The 
successful completion of the recapitalization of Greek banks in late 2015 has been a 
decisive  first  step  towards  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  restoring  the 
intermediation role of banks. The capital adequacy ratio of the Greek banking sector 
stands  (pro  forma)  at  around  18%  and  compares  favorably  with  the  average  for 
European Union banks. The next milestones for the Greek banking sector relate to a 
return  to  profitability,  a  return  of  deposits  through  the  restoration  of  depositors’ 
confidence  and,  more  importantly,  the  supply  of  credit  for  working  capital  and 
investment. Undoubtedly, these goals are closely linked to the politically and socially 
sensitive issue of tackling non-performing exposures, which poses a real challenge 
for us all. As of September 2015, non-performing exposures stood at €107 billion, 
representing  43.6%  of  total  exposures.  Hence, the  more  effective  management of 
non-performing  exposures,  avoiding  the  pitfalls  of  regulatory  forbearance  or  over-
enforcement  alike,  will  bring  about  multiple  benefits  for  banks,  households, 
businesses and the society at large. In the process, it will unlock funding to the real 
economy, bolstering investment and employment. This in turn will enable the Greek 
banking sector to protect and strengthen the productive fabric of the country, while 
concurrently enhancing its social role. I am confident that today’s workshop will show 
the significant progress that has already been made regarding the development of an 
appropriate  institutional  and  supervisory  framework  for  a  more  effective  NPE 
management. Moreover, it will help to identify the appropriate tools and approaches 
to this end. I look forward to an exciting discussion and a very fruitful exchange of 
views. The overwhelming interest of market participants, from Greece and abroad, to 
join this workshop is, I think, a key ingredient for its success.  
Thank you again for being here today.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
