  Andrew Bailey: Post crisis reforms – the lessons of balance sheets 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  International 
Financial Services Forum, Dublin, 27 January 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak this morning. We are approaching the ninth anniversary of 
the beginning of the global financial crisis. And we are still talking about it; but not just talking, 
also publishing books, reports, holding conferences and of course releasing films. There is 
no doubt more than one reason for the continued interest in the crisis, but as public officials 
charged with putting into place the measures to prevent a repeat and thus produce a more 
stable financial system, the work is still in progress and thus for us very much a matter of 
debate.  Today,  I  want  to  put  that  work  into  perspective,  looking  at  banks  and  the  wider 
financial system. 
I  am  going  to  organise  my  comments  around  something  very  basic  to  the  system,  the 
balance sheets of banks. It is a striking fact, that the combined balance sheet of the major 
UK  banks  increased  by  around  fourfold  between  2000  and  2007.  That’s  a  stark  fact:  yes, 
there  was  an  accounting  change  in  that  period,  but  still  this  was  a  massive  change.  And 
other countries often matched that change – the story of Ireland is sadly well known. Let me 
stop the story of the past for a moment and draw out one message: when we hear people 
say things like, “credit isn’t back to pre-crisis growth rates”, “there is a gap in the stock of 
credit to the economy relative to the pre-crisis trend”, “the level of national output is this much 
lower  than  it  would  have  been  had  the  crisis  not  intervened”,  “banks’  so-called  market 
making in financial assets is much less than it was immediately pre-crisis”, just pause and 
consider that all of these statements imply that the pre-crisis years were sustainable. They 
were not. 
Let’s turn to the balance sheet of banks in a little more detail, starting with the liabilities side. 
In this respect, banks are different from other firms because they provide deposit contracts. A 
deposit  is  a  very  particular  form  of  debt  contract.  For  all  of  us  the  essential  feature  of  a 
deposit  contract  is  simple  –  we  put  our  money  (our  asset)  on  deposit  at  a  bank,  and  we 
expect all of it back, with whatever rate of return is agreed, and we expect to have access to 
it, in part or whole, in line with the terms of the contract. Some deposit contracts provide for 
more  ready  availability  than  others,  and  this  affects  the  return  on  the  deposit.  Of  course, 
there is also insurance on a deposit contract up to a well publicised level. 
Let’s contrast that with non-deposit debt (bonds) and equity contracts. If you invest in either 
of these, you are not promised all of your investment back, though of course you expect to 
make  a  return.  A  debt  investor  ordinarily  expects  the  full  return  of  their  investment,  but 
viewed from a corporate restructuring perspective this is not assured. I will come back to this. 
Investment in debt and equity can be managed on a collective basis, as asset management. 
You may remember the Woody Allen quote that a stockbroker is someone “who invests your 
money until it’s all gone”. Cruel I know, but it illustrates the difference between deposits, debt 
and equity. 
Turning  back  to  banks,  they  have  deposits,  debt  and  equity  on  the  liabilities  side  of  their 
balance  sheet.  The  problems  of  the  pre-crisis  period  in  this  area  of  bank  liabilities  can  be 
summarised quite easily: they had too little equity to absorb losses, and particularly so given 
the major expansion of balance sheets (more leverage of the equity); they had issued forms 
of hybrid debt-equity that were supposed to absorb losses after equity but could only do so if 
the bank became formally insolvent, something that could not be allowed to happen in view 
of the threat to the financial system; they had taken on a very large increase in short-term 
wholesale market funding which was assumed by the providers to have the characteristics of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  deposits. Moreover, short-term wholesale funding was footloose, more so than retail deposit 
funding. 
What  have  we  done  to  deal  with  these  problems? We  have  increased  the  required  equity 
capital held by banks – the first loss absorbing element of their liabilities. We have required 
that hybrid debt – equity instruments have automatic and transparent triggers which are not 
exercised  only  by  an  event  that  cannot  happen.  In  the  UK,  banks  have  set  the  trigger  for 
conversion  to  equity  high  enough  at  a  7%  common  equity  tier  one  capital  ratio  to  seek  to 
ensure that conversion happens well before the bank has run out of capital. This is the right 
thing to do. We have introduced liquidity regulation designed to enable banks to withstand 
the loss of more footloose, short-term wholesale funding, which has gone alongside a sharp 
shrinkage  by  banks  in  their  use  of  that  funding.  In  the  UK,  we  are  introducing  structural 
reform or ring-fencing which will provide for an internal separation inside the major banks so 
that  the  so-called  qualifying  EU  customer  deposits  must  be  inside  the  ring-fence.  Being 
inside the ring fence does not I should emphasise protect against all risk; indeed, the crisis 
saw the failure of a number of banks that were predominantly of the same nature as a ring-
fenced bank will be. But it does keep the balance sheet on which most customer deposits will 
appear  in  the  large  UK  banks  in  a  more  simple  state,  and  that  should  be  conducive  to 
effective governance and supervision without being burdened with great complexity, and also 
facilitate recovery and resolution actions should they be necessary. 
Also on the policy response to the crisis, we have invested in stress-testing to examine how 
the balance sheet performs under stress, and thus establish whether the bank is robust in 
terms of its loss absorbency to extreme but plausible outcomes. This is a central part of what 
we describe as our forward looking judgemental approach to supervision. 
I have not so far mentioned one other very important part of the post-crisis reform package, 
namely  ensuring  that  banks  can  be  resolved  if  they  fail.  This  should  be  done  without 
recourse  to  public  funds  or  the  disruption  of  the  critical  economic  functions  provided  by 
banks, such as continuity of access to deposits. At the heart of the resolution reforms is the 
concept of bail-in, which is that private creditors of a bank absorb the cost and provide the 
new equity to sustain the provision of these critical functions in the event that it suffers large 
losses  that  cause  failure.  There  is  nothing  radical  about  the  concept  of  bail-in,  which  is  a 
debt-equity conversion should a trigger event occur. That is consistent with well-established 
principles of company restructuring. But with banks it has to happen very quickly if the trigger 
event  that  the  bank  is  no  longer  viable  occurs.  We  cannot  wait  for  a  lengthy  bankruptcy 
process.  TLAC  (Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity)  or  MREL  (Minimum  Requirements  on 
Eligible Liabilities) are used to describe the specific liabilities which banks will be required to 
maintain to ensure there are enough liabilities which can feasibly and credibly be converted. 
TLAC and MREL are comprised of debt-instruments and equity. 
The key point here is that this important reform requires a very clear distinction among debt 
contracts between forms of subordinated debt contracts which will bear losses in resolution 
first and deposit and other senior funding contracts on the liabilities side of the bank balance 
sheet. This may seem like a very simple point, but past arrangements meant it was unclear, 
and the moral of the painful story is “don’t leave the providers of debt funding in any doubt 
about their creditor status.” The lack of clarity about the instruments on the liabilities side of 
bank balance sheets and the order and mechanisms by which they would absorb losses was 
an important issue in the crisis. Looking ahead, clear disclosure of creditor hierarchies at a 
legal  entity  level  will  be  a  critical  component  of  the  resolution  regime,  so  that  all  creditors 
know where they stand before resolution occurs. 
Let’s  turn  now  to  the  other  side  of  a  bank’s  balance  sheet,  the  assets  side.  The  massive 
increase  in  balance  sheet  size  pre-crisis  accompanied  what  came  to  be  known  as  the 
“search  for  yield”,  which  could  be  re-named  the  “search  for  risk  which  turns  out  to  be 
unsustainable”.  On  the  banking,  as  opposed  to  trading  book  side  of  the  assets  of  major 
banks, the search for yield often took the form of loans which included too much equity-like 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  risk because the equity stakes of the owners of the companies were too small. This was not 
equities themselves, but rather equity components embedded in loans. Commercial property 
lending in the UK is a good example, as it was in Ireland. 
Commercial property prices in the UK have over time tended to vary more than, say, prime 
residential house prices and that points to a need for larger equity-like component of funding 
to absorb losses from that variability. The search for yield however meant that banks were 
more happy to lend against equity risk of this sort. Since the crisis in the UK we have seen a 
shift  in  commercial  property  finance  towards  a  larger  share  coming  from  funds  which 
explicitly take this equity-like risk. This strikes me as a good thing in terms of reducing the 
exposure to such risks of banks, whose liabilities tend more to be in the form of deposits. I 
sometimes hear comments that banks are losing the race to new innovations such as peer-
to-peer  lending  for  the  supply  of  what  I  would  describe  as  finance  with  a  heavy  equity 
component. I think we need both in a well organised financial system because as banks have 
a predominance of deposit liabilities with the characteristics I described earlier they are not 
on their own natural equity providers. 
This  brings  me  to  the  last  part  of  the  story,  namely  the  growth  of  non-bank  asset 
management in its broadest sense as the size of bank balance sheets has tended to reduce 
post-crisis. It is striking that if you were familiar only with a chart of the evolution of global 
assets under management over the last twenty years, you should be excused for failing to 
spot that a global financial crisis had occurred. 
It follows from what I have said that this shift from banks to non-banks makes sense as we 
seek to achieve a clearer demarcation of the types of liability or funding contracts and the 
assets best suited to go with them. But it only makes sense if a few conditions are met, two 
in particular. First, that there is no lack of clarity about the nature of the assets held under 
management. Thus the label on the can is an accurate description. Take as an example the 
recent  failure  in  the  US  of  the  Third  Avenue  Focused  Credit  Fund  (focused  on  what  a 
comedian might say). The purpose of the Fund was to invest in high yield debt. The  label 
seems  to  have  made  that  clear,  and  it  wasn’t  therefore  in  the  form  of  a  AAA  label  which 
obscured the reality. The failure of this Fund has not made major ripples all on its own. Why? 
I would argue because there was no obvious lack of clarity around the assets, and this is a 
reminder against the re-appearance of opaque instruments and complex tranching. 
The second condition to meet is that there is no illusion about the liquidity of the assets. It is 
critical that investor expectations are well adjusted to the prevailing liquidity conditions. A lot 
of work is under way to assess the market liquidity implications of the expansion of assets 
under management, and this is important for our remit in financial stability. An important part 
of this work is to do all we can to ensure that investors understand the characteristics of the 
assets they hold, and that the liquidity promised by funds to their investors mirrors the market 
liquidity of the underlying investments. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the objective of the financial reform programme is clearly not to return to the 
unstable  pre-crisis  years,  however  attractive  some  of  the  statistics  of  that  period  look  in 
isolation. The response has been to strengthen the loss absorbency of the banking system 
but also to enable greater clarity between the different forms of bank liabilities consistent with 
the  economic  terms  of  the  contracts.  This  may  seem  like  dry  balance  sheet  stuff  but  the 
benefits  are  major.  First,  greater  clarity  on  liabilities  should  encourage  more  appropriate 
matching with assets in a way that was absent in the run-up to the crisis – some assets suit a 
deposit  contract,  some  do  not.  Second,  resolving  failed  banks  without  the  use  of  public 
money  depends  on  a  very  strong  delineation  of  bank  liabilities  to  make  clear  what  can  be 
bailed in. This is a key to unlocking the answer to the too big to fail problem. Third, as the 
Bank of England announced in December, we are now in a position to clarify the expected 
steady state regime for bank capital and because we can distinguish going concern capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and thus loss absorbency from resolution or gone concern absorbency, we can put a lower 
number on the former. Clarity is therefore a good thing when it comes to balance sheets. Put 
like that, the wonder is that so much was unclear in the previous system. And, finally, the 
same  principle  holds  for  assets  under  management.  Make  sure  investors  know  the 
characteristics  of  the  assets  they  hold  and  that  they  are  not  promised  access  to  their 
investment  on  terms  or  with  a  promise  (explicit  or  implicit)  that  is  out  of  line  with  what 
financial markets could deliver. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
