  William C Dudley: Panel remarks at Bank Indonesia-Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Joint International Seminar 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bank Indonesia-Federal Reserve Bank of New York Joint 
International Seminar, Bali, 31 July 2016. 
 Linda Goldberg, Jonathan McCarthy and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I will  focus  on  why  global  growth  has  been  so  anemic  following  the 
financial crisis and what we can do about it.  
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  global  recovery  following  the  financial  crisis  has  been 
disappointing.  Growth  is  below  pre-crisis  levels  for  the  United  States,  Europe,  Japan  and 
China. For example, in the U.S., real GDP growth has averaged only about 2.2 percent per 
year  over  the  period  from  2010  to  2015,  below  the  pre-crisis  average  of  2.4  percent  from 
2003  to  2008.  This  slower  growth  performance  has  been  accompanied  by  relatively  low 
inflation  rates  –  persistently  below  the  objectives  of  the  monetary  policy  authorities  in  the 
United States, Europe and Japan. 
As  I  see  it, there  are  many  causes for these  persistent  shortfalls  in growth,  and  they  vary 
across regions and countries. Let me focus on the reasons for the United States in the post 
crisis period. 
Growth has been weaker than expected for many reasons. The financial crisis was a searing 
experience  that  damaged  household  and  business  confidence  in  a  profound  way  –  with  a 
more  lasting  effect  than  the  typical  economic  downturn.  The  housing  bust  created  both  a 
large housing supply overhang and a large number of households that were underwater on 
their mortgages. Households needed to repair their balance sheets and bring down their debt 
service  burdens  to  more  manageable  levels.  Higher  levels  of  unemployment  further 
depressed demand. 
Credit availability contracted. The tightening of credit standards occurred quite broadly – in 
housing  credit,  consumer  credit  cards  and  business  lending.  Some  of  the  credit  supply 
restrictions were imposed by banks that needed to repair their balance sheets, deleveraging 
by building up capital and working down their bad assets. 
Fiscal outlays were not high enough to compensate for the contractionary impulse from these 
first  three  sources.  The  crisis  led  to  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  U.S.  federal  budget 
deficit and put pressure on state and local budgets. After the federal budget deficit reached 
around 10 percent of GDP at the peak, fiscal consolidation occurred at the federal level, as 
well as at state and local levels, restraining economic activity instead of supporting growth. 
Productivity growth has also been quite low. In the period before the crisis (2003 to 2008), 
U.S. nonfarm productivity growth averaged 2 percent per year. Since 2010, productivity has 
been  closer  to  1  percent.  While  some  of  this  decline  can  be  explained  by  lower  capital 
spending, the decline is difficult to fully explain. 
Another  explanation  some  have  offered  is  that  there  is  a  measurement  problem  –  we  are 
understating output growth and overstating price inflation. This type of issue, long flagged as 
a  hedonic  adjustment,  seems  most  credible  in  particular  market  segments,  such  as  in 
healthcare. Alan Blinder has posed this question: Would you rather have 1970 healthcare at 
1970 prices or 2016 healthcare at 2016 prices? Based on the measurement of prices, 1970 
healthcare  is  a  much  better  deal.  Yet,  when  offered  this  choice,  almost  all  choose  2016 
healthcare.  Why?  The  reason  is  that  people  highly  value  the  advances  in  healthcare 
technology, such as in cardiac care, or in the procedures that are practical today, such as hip 
and knee replacement, that simply weren’t available 50 years ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  U.S.  economic  performance  has  also  been  held  back  by  developments  in  the  rest  of  the 
world.  Growth  outside  of  the  United  States  has  slowed.  In  the  euro  area,  comparing  the 
period from 2003 to 2008 to the period from 2010 to 2015, annual real GDP growth slowed 
from 1.9 percent to 0.8 percent. Japanese growth has remained muted over these periods at 
0.1  percent  and  1.0  percent  respectively.  In  China,  reported  growth  rates  over  these  two 
periods slowed from 11.3 percent to 8.3 percent. These developments, along with policy and 
risk events that have increased demand for U.S. assets, have contributed to significant U.S. 
dollar  appreciation  over  the  last  two  years.  This  dollar  strength  has  created  competitive 
challenges for U.S. exporters, especially in manufacturing, and has caused the trade sector 
to be a drag on U.S. economic activity. 
Looking  forward,  despite  the  fact  that  U.S.  economic  growth  has  been  disappointing,  we 
have actually made considerable progress toward our monetary policy objectives. The United 
States is quite close to its employment and inflation objectives. On employment, there still 
seems to be a bit of slack in the U.S. labor market. But, that margin has shrunk greatly over 
the past few years. Payroll gains have been at least as robust as anticipated. 
On  inflation,  we  are  still  somewhat  below  our  2  percent  objective.  But,  even  here,  I  think 
there has been progress. Despite the strengthening of the dollar and the decline in energy 
prices,  core  PCE  inflation  has  been  quite  stable  over  the  past  year  –  currently  running  at 
around 1.6 percent. That is not a tremendous difference from our 2 percent objective. 
So why has the United States done a bit better compared to Europe and Japan in terms of 
achieving our monetary policy objectives. I think there are a number of contributing factors. 
First, U.S. household balance sheet repair occurred relatively quickly. This is in part because 
the housing foreclosure process wiped out many mortgage debts. Part was accomplished by 
a long period of very slow household debt growth. And part was accomplished by the sharp 
fall in interest rates that helped cut debt servicing costs. 
Second, in the U.S., the banking system was recapitalized and deleveraging occurred quite 
quickly  following  the  financial  crisis.  Capital  from  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program,  or 
TARP, was put into the large banks and soon many of them replaced this TARP capital by 
raising  new  equity. The SCAP  stress  test  in  2009,  and the  annual  CCAR  stress tests  that 
followed,  worked  to  constrain  the  rate  of  bank  capital  distributions  and,  thereby,  helped  to 
build up bank capital ratios. And, U.S. banks worked hard to clean up their balance sheets. 
Poor assets were managed down or run off, and underwriting standards were tightened. 
Third,  the  Federal  Reserve  was  particularly  aggressive  early  on  in  its  pursuit  of  monetary 
policy  accommodation  in  order  to  keep  inflation  expectations  well-anchored.  This  is  a 
necessary  condition,  in  my  view,  to  maintain  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy.  If  inflation 
expectations were to get unmoored to the downside, then it becomes more difficult to pursue 
a stimulative monetary policy. 
Could  things  have  been  done  differently  in  the  U.S.  in  such  a  way  that  would  have  led  to 
better outcomes? Absolutely. With the benefit of hindsight, we could have and should have 
been even more aggressive on the monetary policy side. While we made progress with some 
of  the  innovations  on  monetary  policy  that  we  eventually  introduced  –  such  as  the  open-
ended  purchase  of  $85  billion  of  Treasury  and  MBS  securities  per  month  –  it  would  have 
been better if we had done this sooner. 
There is a lot as well that is outside the Fed’s purview that could have been done to make 
the  U.S.  economy  perform  better.  This  includes  tax  reform,  job  retraining  programs  and 
infrastructure investment. 
So,  what  can  we  do  to  bolster  global  growth  in  the  future?  The  first  is  to  undertake  the 
necessary  structural  reforms  to  make  our  economies  more  efficient.  Productivity  growth  is 
not  preordained.  The  steps  we  take  as  countries  to  eliminate  and  lessen  bottlenecks  and 
improve  our  human  and  physical  capital  are  important.  The  second  is  to  ensure  that  our 
financial  systems  are  well-functioning.  Tremendous  progress  has  been  made  globally  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  implementing  higher  capital  and  liquidity  standards  post-crisis.  But  we  still  see  some 
important banking systems impaired by bad loans, low profitability and inadequate capital. 
The  population  aging  in  the  developed  world  does  imply  that,  purely  from  the  productive 
factor side, less of the global growth contribution is likely to come from Japan, Europe and 
the United States. And economies like China are likely to continue to slow as their per capita 
income increases and they make the transition from investment-to consumption-led growth. 
But  this  doesn’t  imply  a  bad  outcome.  There  are  many  other  countries  with  tremendous 
potential for growth in areas such as Africa, Asia, and South America. Take, for example, the 
surge in growth that we are seeing out of India. 
I am an optimist. To a large degree we do control our destiny. It is up to us to seize those 
opportunities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
