  Guy Debelle: Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign Exchange Market – 
Phase 1 
Opening remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve 
Bank of Australia, at the Launch of Phase 1 of the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign 
Exchange Market, New York City, 26 May 2016. 
 I  am  very  pleased  to  launch  Phase  1  of  the  Global  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Foreign 
Exchange Market. It has taken a concerted effort by a dedicated group of people, working on 
top of their normal responsibilities, to get us to this point today. 
Before talking about the material we have put out today, let me remind you why this work is 
occurring. As I have stated on previous occasions, the foreign exchange (FX) industry has 
suffered  from  a  lack  of  trust  in  its  functioning.  This  lack  of  trust  has  been  evident  both 
between participants in the market, but at least as importantly, between the public and the 
market. The market needs to rebuild that trust, so that participants and the public have much 
greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately. 
A  well-functioning  foreign  exchange  market  is  very  much  in  the  interest  of  all  market 
participants. This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants 
but also as the exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a 
globalised world, the foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial 
plumbing. 
The Global Code sets out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market 
to  provide  a  common  set  of  guidance  to  the  market,  including  in  areas  where  there  is  a 
degree  of  uncertainty  about  what  sort of  practices  are  acceptable,  and  what  are  not. This 
should help to restore confidence and promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX 
market. 
To  that  end,  one  of  the  guiding  principles  underpinning  our  work  is  that  the  Code  should 
promote  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,  open,  and  transparent  market.  A  diverse  set  of  buyers  and 
sellers,  supported  by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively 
transact at competitive prices that reflect available market information and in a manner that 
conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour. 
The  work  to  develop  the  Global  Code  commenced  in  May  last  year,  when  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  Governors  commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets 
Committee of the BIS to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the 
wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the 
code.1 
There  are  two  important  points  worth  highlighting:  first,  it’s  a  single  code  for  the  whole 
industry and second, it’s a global code. It’s intended to cover all of the wholesale FX industry. 
This is not a code of conduct for just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, 
non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth is both across the globe and across the 
whole structure of the industry. The Code is intended to apply to all aspects of the wholesale 
foreign exchange market. 
I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading 
the  work  on  developing  the  Code  and  Chris  Salmon  of  the  Bank  of  England  leading  the 
adherence work. Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all 
the  major  FX  centres  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  drawing  on  the 
                                                
1   http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
membership of the Markets Committee which is comprised of heads of the market operations 
areas of the 15 major currency areas. Given our roles, we are all very much interested in the 
effective  functioning  of  the  FX  market.  Again,  it  is  very  much  a  global  effort  reflecting  the 
global nature of the foreign exchange market. 
This work is also very much a public sector-private sector partnership. In that regard, we are 
being ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired 
by David Puth, CEO of CLS. The group contains people from all around the world, on both 
the buy side, including corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading 
platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank  participants,  drawing  from  the  various  Foreign  Exchange 
Committees  (FXCs)  and  beyond.  Hence  all  parts  of  the  market  are  being  involved  in  the 
drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives and insights are heard and appropriately 
reflected. At the global meeting of the Foreign Exchange Committees yesterday, the eight 
regional FXCs unanimously endorsed the first phase of the Code. 
At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. This 
first  phase  covers  areas  such  as  ethics,  information  sharing,  aspects  of  execution  and 
confirmation  and  settlement.  The  second  phase  will  cover  further  aspects  of  execution 
including  e-trading  and  platforms,  prime  brokerage,  as  well  as  governance,  and  risk 
management and compliance. We intend that the second phase will be completed in twelve 
months, such that the full Code can be published in May 2017. 
One  factor  influencing  our  choice  of  which  topics  to  cover  in  the  first  phase  was  our 
assessment of what issues the market was looking for clarity on sooner rather than later. We 
have attempted to provide greater clarity on issues such as information  sharing and order 
handling in the document released today. 
Alongside  drafting  the  Code,  we  have  also  been  devoting  considerable  time  and  effort  to 
thinking  about  how  to  ensure  widespread  adoption  of  the  Global  Code  by  market 
participants. Clearly, that has been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in 
place  in  a  number  of  markets  over  many  years.  It  is  evident  that  they  were  ignored  on 
occasion, wilfully or otherwise. 
As  I  said  earlier,  we  are  working  with  the  industry  to  produce  a  principles-based  code  of 
conduct  rather  than  a  set  of  prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or 
regulatory obligations on market participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards 
or expectations. But we do expect the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted 
across the entire FX market. 
So we are setting out today our overall approach to adherence to the Code and we intend to 
work  closely  with  market  participants  in  the  coming  year  to  facilitate  the  development  of 
market-based mechanisms which demonstrably embed the Global Code within firms’ culture 
and practices. These mechanisms need to be sensitive to existing law and regulation and to 
the diverse nature of FX markets globally. Hence a ‘one size fits all’ approach to adherence 
would  not  be  appropriate.  We  need  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  respecting  the 
existing diversity across different markets, and establishing globally consistent and effective 
adherence mechanisms. 
The  success  of  the  Global  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the 
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants. That is why the Global FXCs have 
issued today a joint statement of support making clear their intention for the Global Code to 
become an integral part of the wholesale FX market. 
Furthermore the BIS central banks are today signalling their commitment by announcing that 
they themselves will follow the Code, and that they expect that their counterparties will do so 
too. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
