  Agus D W Martowardojo: Building resilience, diversifying growth 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Agus  D  W  Martowardojo,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
Euromoney Indonesia Investment Forum, Jakarta, 22 March 2016. 
 The past few years have brought us many economic surprises and challenges. Even 
Indeed, growth in Emerging Markets – while still accounting for over 70 percent of 
It  has  always  been  a  great  pleasure  to  be  part  of  the  Euromoney  Indonesia 
Honorable speakers, Distinguished guests; Ladies and Gentlemen,….Good Morning. 
1. 
Investment Forum. Let me first thank the organizers for inviting me to this prestigious event. 
2. 
This morning, I would like to share my views, on how we should build resilience and 
diversify  growth  engines,  and  how  Bank  Indonesia’s  role  in  supporting  the  Indonesian 
economy as we venture ahead in the volatile world. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
3. 
today the global economy is still surrounded by substantial risks and uncertainties. 
4. 
Concerns and uncertainty about the global outlook have weighed heavily on world 
financial  markets.  Last  year,  Emerging  Market  have  been  particularly  hard  hit  and  their 
currencies have weakened and sovereign credit spreads have continued to widen. 
5. 
Entering  2016  market  developments  have  taken  a  further  turn  for  the  worse. 
Concerns about growth and financial stability in China came back to the fore in early January 
2016 that struck global investor risk appetite. 
6. 
Coupled  with  worries  about  the  broader  Emerging  Market  economic  outlook  and 
ample  supplies,  these  concerns  affected  heavily  on  commodity  prices,  with  oil  and  metal 
prices falling to their lowest level in years. 
7. 
global growth – declined for the fifth consecutive year. 
What may be most disconcerting is that the rise in global risk aversion is leading to a 
8. 
sharp  retrenchment  in  global  capital  and  trade  flows.  Last  year,  for  example,  Emerging 
Markets saw about – $735 billion in net capital outflows, compared with – $111 billion in net 
capital outflows in 2014. 
9. 
as some EM central banks have consistently intervened to support their currencies. 
10. 
Global  trade  flows,  meanwhile  are  being  pulled  down  by  weak  export  and  import 
growth in large Emerging Markets such as China, Russia, and Brazil, which have been under 
considerable pressure. 
11. 
Everywhere,  inflation  has  fallen  to  historical  lows.  At  the  recent  G20  meetings  in 
China there was broad recognition of the risk of a prolonged low global demand, and adverse 
feedback loops between the real economy and financial markets may engender the global 
economy fall into deflation. 
12. 
The global risks of deflation are clearly much more pronounced than before, whose 
vicious and self-reinforcing dynamics―in the form of higher real interest rates, falling nominal 
GDP, and rising unemployment―are notoriously difficult to combat once they become deep-
rooted. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
13. 
Notwithstanding  headwinds  from  (i)  the  taper  tantrum  episode  in  2013,  (ii)  the 
economic  slowdown  in  China,  (iii)  the  continued  fall  in  commodity  prices,  (iv)  the 
normalization  of  US  interest  rate  policy,  and  (v)  the  increased  volatility  in  global  financial 
Heavy capital outflows from emerging markets have fed into falling official reserves, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Furthermore, international reserves continued to be sufficient at US$105.9 billion as 
 
 
markets,  the  Indonesian  economy  has  thus  far  held  up  well,  emerge  with  its  economic 
standing intact, standing out among the fastest growing and stable emerging economies. 
14. 
Certainly,  this  has  been  made  possible  owing  to  mix  of  prudent  and  consistence 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  exchange  rate  flexibility  –  while  managing  to  enact  a 
comprehensive  set  of  bold  reforms,  which  mutually  reinforce  each  other  to  bring  in 
macroeconomic stability while nurturing stronger growth. 
15. 
Growth has continued at a solid pace and remains among the highest in Emerging 
Market.  Private  consumption  remains  solid  with  domestic  demand  compensating  for  the 
slowdown in the external sector. 
16. 
Inflation  is  well  contained  at  3.35  percent  (yoy),  which  is  within  the  target  of 
4±1 percent  for  the  year.  Well-managed  inflation  expectations,  lower  exchange  rate  pass-
through, and a small negative output gap, have all contributed to lowering core inflation. 
17. 
Indonesia  is  convincingly  in  an  era  of  structurally  lower  inflation,  in my  view.  This 
was evidently reflected from the trajectory of Consumer Price Inflation (CPI) which have been 
converging towards Core Inflation. 
18. 
The stability over growth strategy demonstrated in monetary policy tightening since 
mid-2013, fuel subsidy reform, and greater exchange rate flexibility, have helped improve the 
external position. In 2015, the current account deficit falling to a healthy level at 2.06 percent 
of GDP, from – 3.00 percent of GDP in 2014. 
19. 
of end-2015, which is equivalent to 7.45 months of imports and official debt repayments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
20. 
Going forward, Indonesia’s economic outlook remains solid. We are confident that 
growth  will  pick  up  to  the  5.2–5.6  percent range  in  2016.  Domestic  demand  would  be  the 
main driver of growth, while exports are expected to remain weak reflecting low commodity 
prices. 
21. 
Growth will be led by capital spending of the government in the first half of the year, 
and by private investment later in the year conditioned on positive reform momentum. Private 
investment is fairly pro-cyclical and should therefore improve as public sector infrastructure 
spending accelerates and the overall growth outlook improves, in my view. 
22. 
The current account deficit (CAD) is projected to increase to around –2,5 percent of 
GDP  in  2016,  on  the  back  of  a  pickup  in  fixed  investment  and  a  further  deterioration  in 
commodity  export  prices,  while  the  balance  of  payments  (BOP)  is  projected to return to a 
surplus. 
Inflation in 2016 is expected to stay within the 4±1 percent target, backed by well 
23. 
managed  domestic  capacity  utilization,  anchored  inflation  expectations,  and  declining 
commodity prices. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
24. 
Indonesia, being a small open economy, cannot escape from greater volatility in the 
global economy and financial markets. Therefore, positive outlooks, such as the one I just 
described, may change quickly as subject to critical risks tilted to the downside. 
25. 
While global financial markets in recent weeks appear to be coping better, risks and 
vulnerabilities  could  elevate  at  some  time  in  the  future.  Monetary  policy  developments  in 
advanced economies will continue to shape EM capital flows in important ways, particularly 
volatile portfolio flows. 
26. 
The fact that the long-awaited beginning of the Fed’s interest rate hiking cycle did 
not  spark  excessive  market  volatility  was  encouraging,  given  the  long  road  of  policy 
normalization  that  lies  ahead  for  the  Fed.  Nonetheless,  we  have  to  be  mindful  with  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
unpredicted shifts in investor expectations of Fed tightening speed which again would likely 
to spark periods of volatility in coming quarters. 
27. 
Hence, in an unforgiving global environment we need to make ourselves as resilient 
as possible to ride the waves, being prepared and well equipped with buffers and policies to 
cope with adverse shocks, and require a high degree of vigilance and ingenuity. 
28. 
On domestic front, we should also acknowledges that there remain key challenges, 
including  (i)  low  productivity  in  the  agriculture  sector,  (ii)  land  acquisition  problems  for 
infrastructure projects, and (iii) bottlenecks at the local government level. 
29. 
The  headwinds  blowing  from  abroad  and  challenges  at  home  calls  for  a  broad-
based  policy  mix  focused  on  the  need  to  manage  short-term  vulnerabilities  and  to  boost 
potential growth as well as diversify growth engine in the medium-term. 
30. 
In the short term, we face the inescapable task to reduce some vulnerabilities to put 
Indonesian economy on a strong footing to deal with some turbulence on the external front 
ahead. Countries with large current account and fiscal deficits, high levels of FX corporate 
indebtedness,  and  questionable  macro  policy  frameworks  typically  come  under  particular 
pressure in the event of global market risk-off. 
31. 
Over the medium term, we need a mix of mutually-reinforcing demand and supply 
policies, which both supports growth in the short term and essentially lifts “potential growth” 
over the longer term. 
32. 
At the current juncture, both fiscal and monetary policies are sharing burden to lift 
aggregate  demand.  Nonetheless,  in  tandem  with  demand-side  policies,  we  need  to  boost 
supply  side  in  order  to  unlock  the  long-run  potential  growth  through  structural  reforms. 
Without structural reform long run growth prospects will be inadequate. 
33. 
In  this  context,  a  wide  ranging  reform  initiatives  taken  to  address  long-standing 
infrastructural  bottlenecks  and  improve  the  business  climate  are  currently  seem  gaining 
traction, with the government continuing to emphasis on a more consistent basis the need to 
improve implementation. 
34. 
Structural  reforms  to  close  the  infrastructure  gap,  streamline  business  regulation, 
improve the trade and investment regime, enhance the functioning of the labor market, and 
foster human resource development, remain critical to strengthen the export base connected 
to global values chains, create jobs, and raise growth potential. 
And,  this  can  benefit  greatly  from  the  favorable  demographics,  abundant  natural 
35. 
resources,  and  large  domestic  market.  Hereafter,  provided  that  we  could  unwaveringly 
sustain  the  reforms’  momentum,  I  am  convinced  that  GDP  growth  will  turn  up  above 
6,0 percent in the medium term. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
36. 
I hope we are now in the same page about the need of Indonesia to move forward 
with structural reform. This brings me to the final part of my address about Bank Indonesia 
commitment to safeguard economic resiliency and sustainable growth path. 
37. 
We  believe  the  relatively  tight  monetary  stance  of  2015,  which  reflected  the  our 
emphasis  on  stability,  allowing  exchange  rates  flexibility,  together  with  modest  use  of 
international  reserves  to  ensure  orderly  market  conditions,  has  enabled  the  economy  to 
weather  external  turbulence,  bring  inflation  back  to  within  the  target,  without  putting  much 
risk on growth. 
38. 
Against the background of much lower inflation and a small negative output gap, the 
Board Meeting carefully adjusted the degree of policy stance to ensure sufficient support to 
domestic demand since December 2015. Indeed, with a more volatile and uncertain external 
environment,  calibrating  monetary  policies  towards  supporting  growth  have  become  a 
delicate task. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Moving forward, priority would continue to be placed on stability, although with policy 
To end my address, allow me to conclude that with a strong buffer, Indonesia has 
39. 
calibrated carefully and gradually to support economic growth. 
40. 
We will remain vigilant and stress the importance of monitoring risks to price stability 
closely, while stand ready to respond if external pressures resume or inflationary pressures 
reemerge.  This  holds  particularly  true  given  the  high  volatility  of  food  prices  as  well  as 
potential pressure on the financial account in an uncertain external environment. 
41. 
To  help  manage  external  financial  volatility,  we  will  further  progress  on  financial 
market  deepening  as  a  continued  priority,  allowing  exchange  rate  volatility  as  automatic 
stabilizer while its extreme movements will be carefully managed through judicious foreign 
currency interventions, and preserving the relatively comfortable international reserves as the 
first line of defenses. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
42. 
fared well from external headwinds. However, this does not mean we can be complacent. 
43. 
As  the  world  economy  is  in  transition  to  a  new  steady  state,  we  are  still  facing 
greater volatility ahead. Hence, we have to continuously build a robust macroeconomic policy 
management  -primarily  well-tailored,  consistence,  and  prudent  monetary  and  fiscal  policy 
mix-, which should be underpinned by a well implemented structural reforms. 
44. 
We are  convinced  that with  maintaining  reform momentum  would  shore  up  public 
confidence  and  create  investment-friendly  environment.  Apart from  that,  it  would  allow  the 
country to diversify economic growth away from its reliance on natural resources, in a better 
position to withstand against global shock, and ultimately to sustain its economic growth in 
the longer term. 
45. 
We  applaud  the  government  bold  steps  and  moving  rapidly  in  implementation  of 
many of the reforms initiatives. At the same spirit, Bank Indonesia will continue to strengthen 
coordination  with  government  to  ensure  that  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy,  and  structural 
reform  mutually  support  each  other,  to  preserve  macroeconomic  stability  and  achieve  a 
strong and sustainable growth. 
46. 
I hope that this investment forum will also provide us with a clearer understanding 
and pave way for effective preparation to meet future challenges as well as to smooth our 
journey towards the sustainable growth. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
