  
 
Eddie Yue: Asian Development Bank – working to reduce poverty in Asia 
Statement by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
and Head of Delegation, Hong Kong, for the 49th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3–5 May 2016. 
 I would like to thank the Government of Germany for hosting the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  and  the  Management  and  staff  of  ADB  for  the  excellent 
arrangements  of  the  event.  I  would  also  like  to  congratulate  ADB  for  the  successful 
conclusion  of  the  Eleventh  Replenishment  of  the  Asian  Development  Fund,  which  would 
provide critical resources to ADB to further its work in poverty reduction in Asia. 
ADB  is  approaching  its  50th  Anniversary  this  year.  Over  the  past  fifty  years,  Asia  has 
undergone  tremendous  development.  The  economic  miracle  in  Asia,  together  with  the 
important  work  of  the  Bank,  have  lifted  millions  of  people  out  of  poverty  and  substantially 
improved  our  standard of  living.  After  decades of  rapid  growth,  however,  there  have  been 
signs that the trend growth of the region is slowing. This reflects, to a considerable extent, 
supply-side constraints on potential output. In particular, a number of emerging economies in 
the region have been held back by infrastructure bottlenecks. As I have noted during the past 
few  Annual  Meetings,  to  sustain  growth  and  propel  the  economy  to  the  next  stage  of 
development,  boosting  infrastructure  investment  is  a  top  priority  for  many  developing 
members in the region. 
The  infrastructure  demand  in  Asia  is  huge.  ADB  estimates  put  the  overall  infrastructure 
investment  needs  of  Asia  at  US$750  billion  per annum  over  the  2010–2020  period. In the 
meantime, there is no lack of investors interested in infrastructure investment or financing. 
Despite a generally longer investment cycle, infrastructure projects can offer relatively stable 
returns and a hedge to inflation. That is why sovereign wealth funds, insurance funds and 
institutional  investors  have  shown  a  growing  interest  in  infrastructure  investment  in  recent 
years. 
However,  despite  this  increasing  interest  in  infrastructure  investment,  there  are  significant 
impediments in channeling savings into infrastructure financing in emerging Asia. Put it in the 
language  of  bankers,  there  is  a  shortage  of  “bankable”  projects,  due  to  lack  of  a  credible 
public-private  partnership  (PPP)  framework;  deficiency  in  regulatory  regime  and  legal 
for  contract  enforcement; 
environment 
for  monitoring  project 
implementation; and political uncertainty. 
The above impediments call for coordinated efforts to facilitate financial intermediation, lower 
barriers  to  investment,  enhance  PPP  standards,  and  improve  project  governance  and 
delivery.  A  number  of  international  and  regional  efforts  have  been  made  on  this  front, 
including  but  not  limited  to the  establishment  of  the Global  Infrastructure  Hub  by  G20, the 
launch  of  the  Global  Infrastructure  Facility  by  World  Bank,  and  the  setting  up  of  the  new 
Asian  Infrastructure  Investment  Bank  focusing  on  promoting  infrastructure  development  in 
the region. 
To contribute to the concerted efforts by the international community, the Hong Kong SAR 
Government  has  recently  asked  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  to  establish  an 
Infrastructure  Financing  Facilitation  Office  (IFFO).  As  its  name  suggests,  IFFO  aims  to 
provide  a  platform  to  bring  together  key  stakeholders,  including  developing  countries, 
multilateral development banks, potential investors and financiers (e.g. private equity funds, 
sovereign  wealth  funds,  banks  etc),  project  developers  such  as  corporations  capable  of 
developing  and  operating  large-scale  infrastructure,  and  professional  service  providers. 
Through  information  exchange,  experience  sharing  and  capacity  building,  we  hope  to 
facilitate  more  efficient  and  sustainable  infrastructure  investment  flows  to  developing  Asia. 
transparency 
lack  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  IFFO  will  seek to  collaborate  with  other  development  partners  in  the region  and  so far  we 
have received support from a number of them including ADB. If everything goes smoothly, 
IFFO will be formally inaugurated this summer. 
As an international financial and business center in the region, Hong Kong, China has long 
been playing an active role in supporting infrastructure financing in Asia. By  leveraging on 
our unique position as an IFC, we hope the IFFO initiative will help mobilise private sector 
financing  and  bridge  the  gap  between  investors  and  viable  projects.  We  look  forward  to 
working closely with our partners in this process. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
