   Mugur Isărescu: How can the EU generate a virtuous circle in the Black 
Sea Region – the case of food and energy security 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  opening  the 
European League for Economic Cooperation (ELEC) conference, Bucharest, 26 April 2016. 
 Commissioner,  
Ministers,  
Your Excellencies (Ambassadors),  
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am honoured to open this ELEC conference that will focus on how the EU can generate a 
virtuous circle in the Black Sea Region in the case of food and energy security.  
It is the fifth time that the National Bank of Romania is the host for an ELEC conference.  
The fact that we gather here, today, not at the National Bank of Romania office, but at the 
Romanian  Banking  Institute  is  quite  significant:  this  establishment  is  a  hub  of  financial 
education committed to passing knowledge both to experts and non-experts. I wish this to be 
a substantial debate in an open and insightful manner, which will cast more light and clarity on 
the topics you are going to discuss.  
I am pleased to welcome Miguel Arias Canete, Commissioner for Climate Action and Energy; 
and Rudi Mögele, Deputy Director General, DG Agriculture and Rural Development. They will 
be keynote speakers today.  
Allow  me  to  greet  Baron  Bernard  Snoy,  President  of  ELEC  International  and  Jerry  van 
Waterschoot, Secretary General of ELEC International.  
The European League for Economic Cooperation has been, ever since its foundation in 1946, 
an independent network of business people who put their knowledge and influence together 
to deepen European integration.  
The League has stood out over the decades for a lot of significant reasons, including the very 
diverse  nature  of  its  membership  and  their  interests,  as  well  as  a  specific  concern  for 
independence in formulating their opinions. It is exactly this diversity and independence that 
prompts ELEC to ask the right questions and, in the answers it provides, to give priority to the 
common European interest.  
I salute the close cooperation between government officials in the region with high European 
officials, as well as, with the private sector and prestigious organizations such as ELEC. The 
Prime Minister of Romania, Mr. Dacian Ciolos, will have a brief address on this topic.  
Mr. Achim Irimescu, Minister for Agriculture and Rural Development will chair the round table 
on agriculture, together with his counterpart from the Republic of Moldova, Minister Eduard 
Grama and other renowned authorities who are ready to share their expertise on the factors 
that  generate  food  insecurity  in  the  extended  Black  Sea  region  in  the  context  of  the 
21st century challenges.  
Mr.  Vasile  Iuga,  Partner  at  PricewaterhouseCoopers  will  chair  the  round  table  on  energy 
security and together with prominent experts will focus on long term development of energy 
networks in Central and Eastern Europe.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Now, a few words about the topic of this conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   We all agree that the Black Sea Region is increasingly becoming a priority on the international 
agenda.  In  fact,  a  regional  approach  is  emerging  as  actors  completely  understand  that 
common problems need to be addressed jointly. Over the past five years the region and the 
world  have  faced  many  troubled  moments;  fast  changes  have  influenced  the  way  peoples 
choose to look to the future.  
The idea of strengthening cooperation in the Black Sea Region is not new. It sprang from a 
paradox: although the countries in the area shared geographical proximity, they came from 
different  historical  and  political  backgrounds  and,  as  a  consequence,  had  poor  or  quasi-
inexistent economic relations.  
As a veteran in this field, I can give you a simple example: in the ‘90s, to reach either Baku or 
Tbilisi one had to fly through Vienna. In effect, in the autumn of 1997, the Governor of the 
Central Bank of Turkey contacted me and suggested the founding of a Governors' Club of 
Central Asia and Black Sea Region, with the Bank for International Settlements serving as a 
model.  
It was officially instituted on May 1st, 1998, in Istanbul, when nine countries signed the founding 
protocol. During the following years, thirteen more countries gradually joined our Club, now 
spreading from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean, from Central Asia to the centre of Europe.  
Regional cooperation in different fields like food and energy security – focal points of today’s 
conference  –  might  be  initiated  at  a  high  political  level,  but  its  implementation  requires  an 
active, broader and more informed participation of private sector and civil society, as the main 
vehicles of cross-border cooperation. The expansion of each one’s participation has a double 
effect; it allows for more informed regional policies and faster project implementation, on one 
hand,  and  it  cultivates  an  understanding  that  regional  cooperation  has  a  direct  impact  on 
everyday life and individual citizens’ welfare on the other hand.  
The Romans used to say “mens sana in corpore sano”. The way I see it, it greatly matters what 
you fuel your body with. Greater food production for an increasing population goes hand in 
hand with ensuring access to affordable, safe and nutritious food. The way food nourishes our 
bodies, energy fuels the economy. So, energy needs to be secure, affordable and sustainable.  
I could go further and stress once again that for a healthy economy there is a substantial need 
for a healthy financial and banking systems.  
However,  today’s  conference  will  not  generate  either  solutions  or  concrete  answers  to  the 
multiple of issues the food and energy security rises, but it will most certainly cast a new light 
on possible ways to handle the challenges ahead of us.  
These discussions aim to help us all on a journey we have embarked, a journey that can only 
be made through constant and diverse dialogue until we reach common ground and close to 
perfection possible solutions.  
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for your attention.  
I wish you a lively and successful debate.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
