  Hiroshi Nakaso: Central bank policy on financial market infrastructure 
Remarks by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Conference 
on Retail Payments, Tokyo, 12 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you all today to this Conference on Retail Payments. 
Today, I would like to say a few words on the Bank of Japan’s views on policies related to 
financial market infrastructures (FMIs), including payment and settlement systems, in light of 
innovations  in  information  technology  that  have  brought  about  various  innovations  in 
payments. 
For  every  central  bank,  payment  and  settlement  are  its  primary  functions.  Many  central 
banks, including the Bank, were established to stabilize payment and settlement systems as 
a single issuer of the currency. Compared to such history of central banks’ deep involvement 
with  payments  and  settlements,  history  of  monetary  policy  for  macro-management  of 
aggregate demand is fairly new. 
After the recent global financial crisis, various initiatives have been introduced at international 
forums  over  FMIs  including  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Moreover,  in  line  with 
development  of  information  technology  and  various  financial  innovations,  which  are  often 
referred to as “FinTech”, the frontier of the policies related to FMIs is rapidly expanding, and 
has become a major policy field that could be called  “financial market infrastructure policy 
(FMI policy)” for central banks around the world. 
In order to ensure the stability and enhance the efficiency of FMIs as a whole, it is important 
not  only  to  ensure  stability  of  individual  players  including  financial  institutions,  but  also  to 
understand complicated interactions and market dynamics among these players as well as 
the impacts of technological innovations, and to fully mobilize available policy toolkits of the 
central bank. For central banks, FMI policy is deemed as “the oldest and the newest” policy 
field, which is also intellectually challenging. 
I. 
Origin and evolution of central bank policy on FMIs 
The role of money in the economy 
“Money”, like “language”, is undoubtedly one of the greatest of human inventions. Language 
has  enabled  human  beings  to  share  knowledge  among  others  and  wisdom  across 
generations  and  has  played  a  critical  role  in  developing  civilizations.  Similarly,  money  has 
enabled human beings to exchange goods and services “across space” and “over time”, and 
has served as a foundation for the development of an economic society. The transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  too,  is  ultimately  dependent  on  the  fact  that  money  has 
enabled us to exchange expenditures over time. 
The exchanges via money is build upon a “chain of trust” among human beings The reason 
why I can purchase goods with money is because the recipient believes that it can be used 
for its own payments and will be accepted by unknown others. As such, the fact that human 
beings were able to create a chain of trust among many others, including among those with 
no  personal  acquaintance,  was  the  key  to  the  development  of  an  economic  society.  This 
shows how important “trust” is for the payment system and the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Central banks and payments infrastructure 
To put it in another way, one break in the chain of trust could have a catastrophic impact on 
the  payment  system  and  the  overall  economy.  Indeed,  many  central  banks,  including  the 
Bank,  were  founded  with  the  aim  of  restoring  and  maintaining  confidence  in  payment 
systems when people’s trust in them were about to be lost or damaged, which also shows 
that  payments  and  settlements  are  inherently  the  primary  function  of  central  banks.  The 
central banks’ other core functions – such as the lender of last resort and monetary policy – 
are  also  ultimately  based  on  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  provide,  without  constraints, 
central bank money, which provides  “finality” to payments and settlements in a sense that 
receivers of central bank money do not have to worry about payment unwinding or its credit 
risks  any  more.  Such  power  also  gives  central  banks  the  ability  to  influence  real  interest 
rates, which are regarded as the “rate of exchange” on expenditures exchanged over time, 
as a foundation of monetary policy. 
Most  central  banks  around  the  world,  including  the  Bank,  support  economic  activities  by 
issuing  banknotes  and  operating  large-value  payment  and  settlement  systems,  which 
constitute  basic  infrastructures  of  the  economy. Following  the  emergence  of  money  in  the 
form of banknotes and coins, various types of payment instruments, including checks, bank 
transfers, credit cards, debit cards, and e-money, have emerged to meet people’s evolving 
needs. At the same time, the role of central bank payment and settlement infrastructure is 
playing  a  more  important  role  in  light  of  economic  developments  and  innovations  in 
information  technology,  since  the  central  bank  is  the  only  entity  to  be  able  to  settle  more 
diverse and complex transactions with finality. 
Payment  infrastructures  intrinsically  have  the  characteristics  of  a  “network”.  The  value  of 
participating in a network increases as more participants use it. At the same time, a single 
payment  failure  could  spill  over  across  the  network,  potentially  leading  to  systemic  crisis. 
Moreover, participation in the network by a high risk profile member could increase the risk 
for all others. Given such characteristics, central banks, including the Bank, determine the 
range  of  participants  to  be  granted  access  to  its  payment  infrastructures,  ensure  the 
soundness of those participants through on-site examinations and off-site monitoring, and, 
where necessary, serve as the lender of last resort to avoid negative spill-overs and systemic 
crisis. 
Another important contribution to the economy by central banks is to enhance the safety and 
efficiency  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  they  operate.  The  Bank  has  made 
continuous efforts also in this regard. Indeed, a number of improvements have been made to 
the BOJ-NET over time, including the adoption of delivery-versus-payment (DVP) and real-
time gross settlement (RTGS). Liquidity-saving features have also been introduced with the 
aim of enhancing efficiency while avoiding payment delays. Furthermore, in October 2015, 
the  new  BOJ-NET  was  fully  launched,  with  its  operating  hours  extended  to  9  p.m.  in 
February 2016. 
II. 
Frontiers of FMI policy 
The financial crisis and FMI policy – the importance of interactions and market 
dynamics 
The  global  financial  crisis,  triggered  by  the  Lehman  Crisis  in  2008,  put  payment  and 
settlement systems under the spotlight of international debates, and frontiers of FMI policy 
have been expanding. The FMIs as a whole could be regarded as an “eco-system”, since 
they  have  similar  interconnectedness,  complexities  and  interactions  as  biological  eco-
system.  Policymakers  including  central  banks  are  increasingly  asked  to  grasp  those 
complicated interactions and market dynamics among various players as well as the impacts 
of technological innovation, and to maintain not only the soundness of individual players but 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
also the stability of whole FMIs as an eco-system, with making full use of all the available 
policy tools. 
At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, G-20 leaders agreed that all standardized over-the-counter 
derivatives  contracts  should  be  centrally  cleared  at  central  counterparties  (CCPs).  This 
agreement was one example of the expanding frontier in that the policymakers took a step 
forward  to  consider  the  “structure”  of  post-trade  processing  of  financial  transactions,  in 
addition to the risks in individual transactions or counterparties. 
Stepping into unexplored policy areas raises a  number of intellectually  challenging  issues. 
For example, central clearing might accompany the accumulation of risks in CCPs and make 
CCPs “too-big-to-fail.” There are also issues of “trade-off”, in a sense that a CCP’s call for its 
participants  to  provide  additional  capital  or  liquidity  in  times  of  market-wide  stress  could 
weaken  the  capital  and  liquidity  positions  of  those  participants.  Similarly,  terminating 
membership of a financially troubled participant would make the recovery of the participant 
difficult, while maintaining its membership could increase risks for other participants and the 
CCP itself. Moreover, a CCP’s efforts to enhance its stability by collecting an extra layer of 
margin  could  undermine  the  incentives  of  participants  to  make  use  of  CCPs,  possibly 
increasing aggregate risks in the overall market. 
Adding on to such complex challenges is the perspective of globalization. Also on this front, 
there  emerge  many  issues,  such  as  what  should  be  the  appropriate  framework  for 
international oversight of CCPs operating across borders, how liquidity shortages at cross-
border CCPs dealing with multiple currencies should be addressed, and how central banks 
should contribute to the resolution of those issues. 
Various  international  forums  also  recognize  the  importance  of  good  understanding  of 
complex interactions and market dynamics by central banks and policymakers in enhancing 
stability and efficiency of FMIs as an eco-system. In 2012, the Committee on Payment and 
Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  –  which  is  now  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures  (CPMI)  –  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the  Technical 
Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) published 
the “Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs).” Since then, effective framework 
has been developed for central banks and other authorities to ensure, through their oversight 
and international peer reviews, that FMIs including payment and settlement systems meet 
the PFMIs. The Bank is actively engaged in this initiative as an overseer of FMIs in Japan. 
in 
innovation 
information 
in  accordance  with 
Innovations in information technology and FMI policy 
Continuous  efforts  are  being  made  to  develop,  enhance  and  sophisticate  FMI  policy.  In 
recent  years, 
technology  and  rapid 
popularization  of  internet,  mobile  phones  and  other  digital  outlets,  wide-ranging  financial 
innovations,  which  are  often referred to  as  “FinTech”,  have  been  taking  place.  In  such  an 
environment,  central  banks  and  other  policymakers  need  to  grasp  the  impacts  of  those 
technological  innovations  on  financial  architecture  and  FMIs,  and  to  make  full  use  of  the 
benefits of those innovations while effectively addressing any new risks. 
The safety and efficiency of FMIs including payment and settlement systems have always 
been  closely  linked  to  the  information  technology  of  the  time.  For  example,  many  of  the 
operational  practices  and  security  features  of  traditional  financial  instruments,  such  as 
banknotes, paper securities and ledgers, have been to a large extent based on paper-based 
and printing-related technologies. For example, the security of banknotes is reliant on paper-
based  anti-counterfeit  features  such  as  watermarks  and  holograms,  and  bill  and  check 
clearing  houses  were  established  to  facilitate  and  reduce  the  burden  of  their  physical 
delivery. 
Given  that  the  financial  service  industry  has  strong  characteristics  as  an  “information 
industry,”  it  is  not  surprising  that  innovations  in  information  technology  have  a  particularly 
large  impact  on  financial  services  and  infrastructures.  FMIs  including  payment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
settlement systems have been all the more characterized as “information infrastructures” for 
recent  developments  in  information  technology.  With  “FinTech”  developments,  which 
combine finance and information technology, financial services are expanding their frontiers, 
while new players are venturing into the financial services market. Such dynamics are also 
evidenced by the rich variety of participants attending today’s conference. 
Innovations in financial services and FinTech have significant potential to bring wide-ranging 
benefits  to  the  overall  economy  by  expanding  also  the  frontier  of  economic  activities, 
including  e-commerce,  sharing  economies,  big  data  processing,  smart  contracts  and  IoT 
(internet  of  things).  At  the  same  time,  FinTech  may  also  have  the  potential  of  drastically 
reshaping the forms of financial services and financial architecture. 
Traditional  financial  infrastructure  is  built  around  “centralized  ledgers,”  where  banks  have 
managed ledgers of deposits and other financial products. On the other hand, “blockchain” 
and “distributed ledger” – technologies underpinning digital currencies such as “Bitcoin” – are 
considered  as  enabling  to  keep  ledgers  in  a  de-centralized  manner  without  relying  on  a 
trusted  third  parties  to  manage  ledgers.  Owing  to  such  characteristics,  blockchain  and 
distributed  ledger  have  attracted  considerable  attention,  since  international  forums  are 
focusing  on  their  potential  to  be  applied  to  wide-ranging  businesses  and  practices.  The 
application  of  those  technologies  would  also  change  the  structure  of  the  financial 
infrastructure  that  has  been  built  around  centralized  ledgers  managed  by  trusted  third 
parties.  Thus,  central  banks  will  and  have  to  follow  these  issues  closely  and  with  great 
interest. 
FinTech  has  also  the  potential  to  unbundle  and  reconstruct  various financial  services.  For 
example, there may be payment-related services having substantial synergies with services 
provided  by  non-financial  businesses  such  as  e-commerce  and  big  data  processing.  As  a 
result of exploitation of “economies of scale” under technological innovations, new players 
may become the providers of new services that incorporate financial solutions. 
Moreover, it could be considered that such changes in financial architecture may change the 
risk profiles of financial systems and infrastructures. 
Commercial  banks  have  long  been  the  main  provider  of  payment  services.  Commercial 
banks,  based  on  their  deposit-taking  as  the  core  of  their  services,  have  kept  on  providing 
both financial intermediations such as lending through maturity transformation and payments 
services.  Various  financial  infrastructures  were  built  around  such  structure  of  commercial 
banking. For example, access to the current account at central banks, including the Bank, 
have been provided primarily to commercial banks and other depository institutions. The risk 
of  “bank-runs,”  which  stems  from  maturity  transformation  by  commercial  banks,  has  been 
considered as the main trigger of systemic crisis. Reflecting the above, central banks have 
traditionally been assumed to provide its “lender of last resort” function mainly to commercial 
banks and other depository institutions. 
Since  more  and  more  non-financial  institutions  are  providing  payment  services  under 
“FinTech”  developments  and  there  seem  to  be  structural  changes  in  the  supply-side  of 
financial services, however, risk profiles might also change from those originally assumed. 
For  example,  it  is  hard  to  assume  the  risk  of  bank-runs  in  “crowd-funding”,  which  directly 
matches demand and supply of funds through the internet, and in remittance services that 
are  fully  covered  by  deposits.  Deputy  Governor  Ben  Broadbent  of  the  Bank  of  England 
pointed  out  in  his  speech  in  March  the  possible  shift  towards  a  risk  profile  that  traditional 
debates  on  “narrow  banking”  or  “free  banking”  suggested  due  to  the  application  of 
technological innovation to finance.1 On the other hand, with the expansion of access points 
                                                
1   Ben  Broadbent,  “Central  banks  and  digital  currencies”  (speech  made  at  London  School  of  Economics  on 
March 2, 2016). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
to financial services through the popularization of internet, mobile phones and other digital 
outlets, there are risks that would require higher attention, such as cyber attacks and hacking 
against vulnerabilities on information security. 
Bank of Japan’s FMI policy 
III. 
Taking  into  account  the  above-mentioned  technological  innovation,  the  Bank  has  been 
actively enhancing the stability and the efficiency of Japan’s FMIs by utilizing various policy 
tools.  They  include  providing  banknotes  and  BOJ-NET  as  basic  infrastructures  to  the 
economy,  conducting  on-site  examination  and  off-site  monitoring  of  financial  institutions, 
oversight against FMIs including payment and settlement systems, and playing a “catalyst” 
role to facilitate communication among wide-ranging players involved in FMIs. 
Under  globalization  of  the  economy  and  technological  innovations,  more  and  more 
transactions  and  payments  are  being  made  across  borders  and  time  zones,  and  more 
diverse  players  are  now  providing  payment-related  services.  One  of  the  challenges  for 
private-sector entities to provide payment services related to global cash management and 
e-commerce is how to deal with unsettled exposures that arise from time-zone differences 
and payment operations at night hours and on weekends. Central bank money is the solution 
that  would  ultimately  erase  these  unsettled  exposures  through  settlement  with  finality,  but 
providing central bank infrastructure also involves costs. In taking both possible benefits and 
costs in account, the Bank will continue to consider the most appropriate way to provide its 
central bank accounts and BOJ-NET from both “time” (i.e. operation hours of the BOJ-NET) 
and “space” (i.e. eligibility criteria of the Bank’s accounts), so as to contribute to the overall 
economy. 
Besides, banknotes are payment instruments that all the people can use 24/7, and under the 
innovation in information technology, there emerges an issue about whether central banks 
themselves  should  provide,  in  the  future,  digitalized  payment  tools  that  would  substitute 
paper-based banknotes. Indeed, some central banks have recently mentioned the possibility 
of  central  banks’  issuing  digital  currencies,  and  there  are  arguments  that  central  banks’ 
digital  currencies  would  be  similar  to  the  provision  of  central  bank  accounts  not  only  to 
financial institutions but also to the general public.2 The Bank does not have a specific plan to 
issue digital currencies at this stage, but will deepen its research and analytical activities so 
as to understand the impact of technological innovations, FinTech and distributed ledger on 
financial architectures and FMIs while keeping all options open, including the possibility of 
the Bank’s utilizing such advanced technologies in its own operations in future. 
Moreover,  taking  into  account  the  importance  of  the  people’s  “trust”  towards  financial 
services and FMIs, the fact that the Japanese financial system has maintained its stability 
during the recent global financial crisis could be a great advantage in developing innovative 
financial  services  in  Japan.  On  the  other  hand,  as  access  to  financial  services  expands 
through  internet  and  mobile  devices,  new  types  of  threats  to  financial  systems  and 
infrastructures,  such  as  hacking  and  cyber-attacks,  are  gaining  prominence.  In  order  to 
maintain  people’s  trust  towards  financial  infrastructures  and  innovative  financial  services, 
relevant  entities  are  strongly  encouraged  to  take  effective  countermeasures  against  these 
new  risks  also  by  utilizing  new  technologies  such  as  digitalized  encryption  and  biometrics 
authentication. Furthermore, it is important to establish business continuity plans (BCPs) for 
FMIs  with  sufficiently  conservative  stress  scenarios  such  as  natural  disasters  and  acts  of 
terrorism. The Bank will work to deal with these important tail risks on FMIs. At the recent 
                                                
2   As documents mentioning the possibility of central banks’ issuing digital currencies, see, for example, 
Andrew Haldane, “How long can you go?” (speech given at the Portadown Chamber of Commerce on 
September 18, 2015 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/840.aspx) and 
the 
2016 
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/3008070/index.html. 
the  People’s  Bank 
of  China 
document 
published 
January 
20, 
on 
by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 the  Bank  will  conduct  monitoring  and  dialogues  with 
 
 
earthquake  in  Kumamoto,  the  Bank’s  Kumamoto  Branch,  other  area  branches  and  Tokyo 
Head  Office  took  immediate  and  coordinated  actions  to  firmly  maintain  the  functions  of 
financial infrastructures in the region through various efforts such as ensuring smooth supply 
of banknotes and funds settlement. The Bank will make use of those experiences so as to 
strengthen overall BCP strategy. 
In addition, in order to ensure the stability and enhance the efficiency of FMIs as a whole, 
including those operated by the private sector, it is important to cooperate with the private 
sector  and  encourage  their  efforts.  Through  the  oversight  of  private-sector  payment  and 
settlement  systems, 
these 
infrastructures, and when necessary, will strongly urge them to take actions to ensure the 
stability and enhance the functionality of these infrastructures. 
Furthermore,  while  more  players  with  wider  backgrounds  have  entered  in  the  market  of 
providing payment-related services, it has become important to facilitate interactive dialogue 
among  wide-ranging  entities  beyond  traditional  financial  industry,  in  order  to  make  the 
expansion of the financial service frontiers under the technological innovations fruitful for the 
customers and the overall economy, and to enhance the stability and efficiency of FMIs. The 
Bank, as the nation’s central bank, is firmly committed to being a “catalyst” in fostering such 
developments, and the establishment of the Bank’s “FinTech Center” on April 1 is a part of 
such commitment. 
The  Bank  is  ready  to  mobilize  all  the  policy  tools  available  while  paying  attention  to 
interactions  among  various  players  involved  in  FMIs,  market  dynamics  and  impacts  of 
technological  innovations,  and  make  maximum  efforts  as  a  central  bank  to  enhance  the 
stability and the efficiency of Japan’s financial infrastructure. 
I would like to close my remarks by wishing that today’s Conference on Retail Payments will 
generate fruitful discussions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
