  Daniel Mminele: Reducing systemic risk in South Africa 
Remarks by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
launch of the T+3 Equity Market Settlement Cycle, Johannesburg, 4 August 2016. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) for inviting the South African Reserve 
Bank (SARB) to be part of this significant occasion to mark the launch of the T+3 settlement 
cycle for the equity market in South Africa. Thank you for the opportunity to make some brief 
remarks this morning. Allow me to start by congratulating the JSE and the T+3 Project Team, 
under the guidance of the JSE, on a smooth and successful implementation on the go-live 
date on 11th July, which represented the culmination of close collaboration over an extended 
period  between  numerous  stakeholders,  and  including  with  the  National  Treasury,  the 
Financial Services Board, and the SARB. This is indeed a major milestone, as many of us 
gathered here today know how much work has gone into this project. 
The move  to  this settlement  cycle  is  a  welcome  development  that contributes towards  our 
continuous efforts to improve the efficiency of, and reduce the risk in, our financial market 
systems  and  infrastructures.  Not  only  does  T+3  in  the  equity  market  align  this  market 
segment with the implementation in the bond market, which happened some time ago, it also 
aligns  the  South  African  market  to  international  best  practice.  Beyond  just  creating  these 
efficiencies and synchronising our markets with the rest of the world, an important element of 
this particular initiative is that its benefits are shared by many of us as stakeholders in this 
project,  be  it  as  companies  listed  on  the  exchange,  brokers,  investors  and  indeed  as 
regulators. 
The project team at the JSE has done well in highlighting some of the benefits1, and if I can 
remind everyone present here today, these include: 
• 
• 
• 
Aligning operational practices of the local equity market to global standards; 
Improving the credibility and operational efficiency of the local market; 
Protecting the financial markets through systemic risk mitigation that will follow from 
reduced credit and liquidity risk; and 
Through  increased  credibility,  assisting  in  making  South  Africa  a  more  attractive 
investment destination to international investors. 
 These are only a few of the direct and indirect benefits of a shorter settlement cycle, and for 
South Africa it comes at a time when the JSE is becoming a home to an increasing number 
of  dual-listed  companies.  According  to  JSE  statistics,  the  share  of  companies  with  dual 
listings  increased from  14  per  cent  of  all  companies  listed  on  the  JSE  in  January  2006  to 
about 24 per cent in July 2016. As such, harmonising settlement cycles across regions will 
help  with  better  cash  flow  and  treasury  management,  and  thus  facilitate  better  and  more 
efficient allocation of capital. 
Reducing systemic risk and contributing to broader financial system stability 
In  addition  to  its  primary  mandate  of  price  stability,  the  SARB  is  also  responsible  for 
protecting and enhancing financial stability. We consider financial stability to exist when we 
have  a  financial  system  that  is  resilient  to  systemic  shocks,  facilitates  efficient  financial 
                                                
1  Johannesburg Stock Exchange T+3 Project Overview and Frequently Asked Questions, August 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  intermediation  and  mitigates  the  macroeconomic  costs  of  disruption  in  such  a  way  that 
confidence  in  the  system  is  maintained.  The  focus  on  financial  stability  is  in  line  with  the 
global trends where the regulatory community, in reaction to the global financial crisis, has 
been dedicating more effort and resources to reducing risk, achieving greater transparency 
and accountability, and improving efficiency in order to establish a safer market environment. 
A  shorter-settlement  cycle  will  foster  a  reduction  of  settlement  risk  and  counterparty 
exposure  by  reducing  the  time  period  between  trade  execution  and  settlement.  The  faster 
delivery of cash and stock to the seller and buyer, respectively, allows for a reduction in the 
risk  of 
level  of 
interconnectedness or network structure of the various agents of our financial systems, within 
and  across  borders,  speaks  directly  to  the  potential  risks  that  may  arise  from  poor  or 
outdated  risk  management  practices.  However,  if  risk  is  reduced  and  continuous  risk 
reduction strategies are being pursued, such as will be the case with the shorter settlement 
period in the equity market, then systemic financial crises are less likely to occur. 
loss,  especially  during 
financial  stress.  The 
times  of 
financial 
Increased market credibility and operational efficiency improving the attractiveness of 
South Africa to international investors 
Other  benefits  that  this  initiative  promises  to  unlock  relate  to  the  improvement  of  the 
credibility  and  operational  efficiency  of  the  local  market.  These  benefits  should  help  boost 
South Africa’s status in the global competitiveness rankings of the World Economic Forum 
(WEF).  The  competitiveness  rankings  are  informed  by  a  number  of  pillars  which  are 
organised  into  three  main  stages  of  development,  factor-driven,  efficiency-driven  and 
innovation-driven.  Each  stage  focusses  on  different  market  structure  issues,  i.e.  basic 
requirements,  efficiency  enhancers  and  innovation  and  sophistication  factors.  Financial 
market  development,  for  which  South  Africa  is  ranked  an  impressive  12th  out  of  140 
countries, falls under the second stage of development.2 This initiative, together with various 
other initiatives that are currently under way in our markets, will help improve the process of 
more  efficient  and  safer  intermediation  of  capital,  enhance  our  competitiveness  and 
contribute to the attractiveness of our markets for foreign investments. As a country that runs 
both budget and current account deficits, that are being predominantly financed by short term 
foreign capital flows, this becomes rather crucial. The sophistication and depth of our capital 
markets also play an important role when the country’s credit ratings are being assessed. 
Contributing to South Africa’s delivery on its G20 commitments 
Before I conclude, let me briefly touch on how this initiative also helps South Africa to meet 
its G20 commitments. South Africa as a member of the G20 was invited to join the Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  Committee  on  Payment  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI), 
and it is also a member of International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). As 
a member of the BIS CPMI, the SARB contributed to the development of the Principles for 
Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs). The PFMIs update, harmonise and strengthen the 
international risk management and associated standards applicable to systemically important 
payment  systems  (PSs),  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs),  securities  settlement 
systems (SSSs), central counterparties (CCPs) and trade repositories (TRs).These principles 
were published in 2012 and G20 member countries were expected to adopt them and also 
apply  them  in  their  jurisdictions.  South  Africa  embraced  these  principles  and  issued  a 
position paper to drive their application by identified FMIs in the payment system. Once the 
Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  has  been  enacted,  followed  by  other  consequential 
legislative  amendments,  we  will  be  able  to  fully  adopt  the  PFMI.  It  is,  however,  also 
encouraging to note that with assessments of compliance on South Africa as a jurisdiction by 
                                                
2  The Global Competitiveness Report 2015–2016, World Economic Forum. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the BIS CPMI/IOSCO, we have been scored quite favourable overall when it comes to the 
expected  outcomes.  Furthermore,  we  have  requested  our  recognised  payment  FMIs 
(including  STRATE)  to  conduct  self-assessments,  which  were  reviewed  by  our  National 
Payment System Department prior to engagement with the FMIs on appropriate action going 
forward. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  reiterate  that  as  the  SARB,  we  are  pleased  with  the  industry’s 
collaboration and commitment to align the equity market to international standards, and allow 
me to once again convey my appreciation to all stakeholders that had to play a constructive 
role  since  the  inception  of  the  project  in  2013  right  up  to  ensuring  smooth  execution  in 
connection  with  the  recent  launch.  As  previously  stated,  the  shorter  settlement  cycle  will 
reduce systemic risk and release funds earlier into the market, thereby increasing liquidity for 
local and international investors which will translate to growth in our capital markets and also 
enhance public confidence. 
With these words, I would like to thank you all very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
