  Daniel Mminele: Key financial market developments in South Africa 
Remarks by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Financial Markets Department Annual Cocktail Function, Pretoria, 21 April 2016. 
 Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  once  again  an  honour  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  annual  cocktail  of  the  Financial 
Markets Department (FMD). This cocktail is a small gesture from the South African Reserve 
Bank (Bank) to show appreciation for the good working relationship we have with you, our 
partners in the financial markets. These relationships are of critical importance to us, and we 
are  keenly  aware  of  the  efforts  you  make  in  assisting  us  with  our  task  of  analysing  and 
interpreting  market  events,  executing  our  daily  market  operations,  and  the  support  you 
provide through various forums, such as the Financial Markets Liaison Group (FMLG), when 
it  comes  to  formulating  the  rules  that  govern  the  functioning  of  our  markets.  Ensuring 
success in the execution of these activities is aimed at enhancing the effective functioning of 
our markets as well as their integrity and reputation, ultimately for the benefit of all market 
participants and society as a whole. 
Central  banks  have  been,  for  a  number  of  years  now,  operating  in  a  challenging  and 
increasingly  complex  environment.  Not  only  are  some  central  banks  implementing  policy 
measures  that  have  never  been  tested  before,  but  increasingly,  authorities  in  different 
countries  are  facing  challenges  that  are  becoming  more  diverse,  and  the  implications  of 
measures being implemented across different jurisdictions, and the effectiveness of policies, 
are  becoming  more  difficult  to  assess.  Many  central  banks  may  indeed  yearn  for  less 
interesting times, as what they believed to be temporary unconventional measures, appear to 
be assuming more permanent characteristics. 
As usual, my intent is to use this opportunity to provide you with an update on our views of 
key market developments. Consequently, there is no better place to start than a very brief 
reminder of the thoughts I presented last year. At that time, we believed there were four key 
factors  that  would  dominate  the  outlook  for  our,  and  other  emerging  countries’,  financial 
markets  in  2015,  namely:  the  pace  of  normalisation  in  US  interest  rates,  growth  and 
monetary policy dynamics in the Eurozone, growth developments in China (and to a lesser 
extent in other emerging market countries), and the outlook for commodity prices. We also 
highlighted our concern that volatility in financial markets was likely to increase. 
While this analysis seemed very reasonable in early March 2015, by the time we got to the 
third quarter, it had seemed that our fears may have been misplaced. Equity market volatility, 
as expressed by the VIX index, had declined from its highs of 21,0 in January 2015 to 12,0 in 
July 2015, before it increased rapidly to 40,7 in August 2015, following the devaluation of the 
Renminbi  by  the  Peoples  Bank  of  China.  After  this  the  VIX  remained  elevated,  but 
nevertheless continued its declining trend. Volatility in the bond market had also subsided, 
albeit  to  a  lesser  extent.  By  and  large,  global  markets  had  tracked  sideways.  The  S&P 
500 index  in  the  US  had  hardly  moved  from  the  2,100  level,  and  the US  dollar  index  and 
Treasury bonds were range trading throughout the period. 
In  the  domestic  markets,  things  were  not  much  different.  The  yield  on  the  benchmark 
R186 bond had drifted slightly weaker, from below 8.0 per cent to around 8.25 per cent, and 
money  market  yields  had  also  drifted  higher.  This  slight  deviation  from  trends  in  the  US 
markets was not really a surprise as the Monetary Policy Committee had raised the repo rate 
by 50 basis points by July and the trade weighted rand had depreciated by around 4.5 per 
cent. The only sign of stress at that time was in the US market with the  widening of high 
yielding and other corporate debt relative to Treasury yields. However, this was largely seen 
as a reflection of the impact of lower oil prices on the earnings of oil producers. It therefore 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
appeared as if our concerns about a possible increase in market volatility may have similarly 
been misplaced. 
But as has become such a regular feature of financial markets, things were not as benign as 
they  seemed.  The  first  real  cracks  on  the  global  stage  started  to  show  with  the  sudden 
decline of the Chinese equity markets in June, when the Shanghai Composite Index declined 
by  32  per  cent  in  less  than  a  month,  and  a  further  16.5  per  cent  by  the  end  of  August. 
Besides  some  modest  weakness  in  our  local  equity  market,  South  Africa  seemed  largely 
unscathed by these events. 
Unfortunately, this relative stability in our markets was not to last. As we progressed through 
the third quarter, domestic factors started to have a negative effect on the price formulation in 
local  assets  and  the  market  increasingly  anticipated  further  ratings  downgrades  from  the 
rating  agencies.  In  this  vein,  South  African  asset  prices,  specifically  bonds  and  foreign 
exchange,  weakened  in  the  latter  months  of  the  year  as  market  participants  became 
increasingly  convinced  that  further  negative  ratings  actions  were  imminent.  Unfortunately, 
they were proven to be correct. 
At this point, it is worth commenting on the interplay of different asset prices to get a better 
understanding of the nature of the market views. Here I would like to highlight the divergence 
in the pricing of cash interest rate assets versus their derivative counterparts. Specifically, 
from  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015,  the  spread  of  bond  yields  over  swaps  widened  quite 
considerably. The benchmark R186 yield, which was trading around 15 basis points below its 
matched-maturity interest rate swap, weakened to nearly 30 basis points over the swap yield 
in  early  2016.  This  effect  was  even  more  pronounced  when  one  looks  at  longer  maturity 
bonds. The swap spread of the 32-year R2048 bond has widened from less than 50 basis 
points to more than 130 basis points over the swap curve. Such pronounced weakening of 
bonds is of concern as the cost of funding for the government increases, but also, it seems to 
reflect  a  steady  deterioration  in  ‘real  money’  investor  confidence  as  the  bond  curve  has 
steepened  sharply  in  relation  to  the  swap  curve.  Similar  price  action  was  observed  in  the 
spread of South Africa’s foreign currency yields and credit default swaps (CDS) spread when 
compared  to  emerging  market  averages  (such  as  the  JP  Morgan  Emerging  Market  Bond 
Index in the case of bond yields). 
Price action in the rand appears to confirm this interpretation. For much of 2015, the rand 
was steady against its commodity and emerging market peers. However, by early 2016, it 
had depreciated meaningfully against these peers. By comparison, the JP Morgan Emerging 
Market Currency Index had depreciated 14,0 per cent from end-June 2015 to mid-January 
2016, while the rand had declined 37 per cent against the US dollar! 
As  indicated,  the  rand  was  not  the  only  currency  to  weaken  during  this  period.  Many 
emerging  market  and  commodity  currencies  were  on  the  back  foot  in  reaction  to  poor 
economic data in China. In addition, market expectations for the US Federal Open Market 
Committee to increase its interest rate at the December meeting had risen sharply. To some 
extent,  with  the  rand  being  viewed  as  a  high-beta  currency,  whereby  it  trades  in  an 
exaggerated manner to its emerging market peers, the larger sell-off in the rand was to be 
expected in such an environment. However, local factors played a key role as Standard & 
Poor’s,  while  affirming  the  country’s  credit  rating,  had  revised  the  outlook  on  the  rating  to 
negative, a move that was not generally expected by the market. In addition, the changes in 
the  Ministry  of  Finance shortly  after  the ratings action,  drew  an  adverse  reaction from  the 
markets and contributed to further significant depreciation. 
Since the low of the rand to the dollar at R16.87 on 18 January 2016, the rand has recovered 
considerably.  By  the  close  of  business  yesterday,  the  rand  was  trading  at  R14.21,  an 
appreciation  of  15.8  per  cent  against  the  dollar  from  the  18  January  low.  This  strong 
appreciation  in  the  rand  was  predominantly  driven  by  global  factors  as  the  JP  Morgan 
Emerging Market Currency Index had rallied 9.8 per cent over the same period. This rally 
was triggered by a more benign  view  in the market on the likely trajectory of interest rate 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
increases  in  the  US,  unexpected  policy  stimulus  in  Europe  and  Japan,  and  improving 
economic data out of China. Portfolio flows to emerging markets, which had been negative in 
the  second  half  of  2015  and  early  2016,  reversed  into  significant  inflows  in  February  and 
March. According to Institute of International Finance (IIF) data, portfolio flows into emerging 
markets totalled USD36,8 billion in March compared to the outflow of USD53,7 billion for the 
second  half  of  2015.  In  South  Africa,  portfolio  inflow  totalled  USD1,6  billion  in  March 
compared to outflows of USD2,2 billion for the second half of 2015. However, local factors 
also played a role. The Budget delivered  in February showed strong commitment to fiscal 
prudence,  and  the  75  basis  points  of  interest  rate  increases  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee in 2016 seemed to assure the market of the Bank’s commitment to maintain price 
stability. 
The recent strengthening of the rand is welcomed, following the sharp sell-off late last year. 
However, as the rand remains vulnerable to negative external and domestic factors, we will 
need to continue to monitor economic and financial developments in China as a key driver 
for commodity  prices and emerging market currencies. Ongoing concerns about a shallow 
and hesitant global economic recovery (as again highlighted last week with the release of the 
IMF’s World Economic Outlook) will also be a key factor. Also, the expected trajectory of the 
policy  rate  in  the  United  States  will  be  important,  with  there  still  being  a  significant 
discrepancy  between  expectations  of  policy  makers  when  compared  to  those  of  market 
participants, and uncertainties arising from how the Fed will factor in what seems to be an 
increased  sensitivity  of  policy  makers  to  international  developments.  In  addition,  at  this 
juncture the jury is still out on the likely effectiveness and impact of negative interest rates as 
a policy tool. Lastly, decisions by the credit rating agencies may have an important effect on 
asset prices in South Africa. 
By this time, I am sure there is a need to replenish your refreshments, but before I conclude, 
allow  me  to  take  this  opportunity,  on  a  slightly  different  note,  to  announce  that  the  Bank 
published its Official Gold and Foreign Exchange Reserves Management Investment Policy 
on  its  website  today.  The  Investment  Policy  outlines  the  governance  structures,  roles  and 
responsibilities  pertaining  to  the  reserves  management  operations.  Our  objective  is  to 
improve transparency around the reserves management and to align the Bank with global 
best practices. 
Also,  you  will  recall  that  we  launched  the  department’s  newsletter,  the  FMD  Update,  last 
year, which provided a high-level review of the FMD operations and projects. Copies of the 
2016 FMD Update are available here tonight, and you will also be able to find the newsletter 
on the Bank’s website. 
In conclusion, and to emphasise my comment at the start, the Bank extends its appreciation 
to market participants for their co-operation and support over the years and we look forward 
to continuing our positive interactions in the future. Last but not least, I would like to sincerely 
thank our financial markets team, under the leadership of Leon Myburgh, for the sterling work 
over the past year, for their dedication and commitment to the task. Thank you also to our 
staff at the Conference Centre for organising this event. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
