  
 
Boris Vujčić: Challenges for policy responses within the European Union 
in the context of post-crisis reconstruction 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Boris  Vujčić,  Governor  of  the  Croatian  National  Bank,  at  the 
international conference “Economic and Financial Cycle Spillovers: Reconsidering Domestic 
and Cross Border Channels and Policy Responses”, organized by the National Bank of the 
Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, 7–8 April 2016. 
 I would like to thank Saša Cerovac and Ivana Herceg for their help in preparing these remarks. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am truly honoured to be invited as a keynote speaker at this conference that gathers central 
bankers and policy makers in the region to discuss issues raised by the heightened levels of 
distress and volatility in financial markets. With two episodes of severe distress behind us, 
the  global  financial  crisis,  followed  by  the  euro-area  crisis,  many  observers  share  a 
conviction that today we might be observing the seeds of a new similar incident waiting to 
happen.  Some  point  to  possible  bubbles  in  asset  markets,  some  to  distorted  business 
models in (parts of) the financial industry, and quite a few of them see a new crisis lurking 
behind  emerging  market  developments,  which  may  start  the  latest  episode  of  a  “  crisis 
trilogy”,  as  recently  pointed  out  by  Andrew  Haldane  from  the  Bank  of  England1.  To 
circumvent  the  reoccurrence  of  a  lengthy  and  costly  crisis,  we  need  to  improve  our 
understanding  of  the  processes  underlying  crisis  episodes  and  adjust  our  policies 
accordingly.  This  is  a  great  challenge  for  our  trade,  even  more  so  amid  the  current 
deconstruction  of  overarching  paradigms  and  a  slow,  if  any,  emergence  of  new  central 
banking  principles.  Such  principles  need  fundamental  research  as  a  foundation  to  help 
redesign the policy frameworks of central banks and to guide our corrective actions. 
This is an exceptional opportunity to address the challenges of shaping policy responses in 
an  increasingly  integrated  and  changing  world,  particularly  from  a  perspective  of  countries 
that are or aspire to become members of the European Union and the euro area. I hope I can 
raise a few relevant issues with the potential to provoke a constructive discussion and obtain 
much needed research insights. 
Allow  me  to  briefly  summarize  the  main  points  for  my  discussion,  structured  here  in  three 
interrelated topics. First, real and financial cycles exhibit some regular patterns relevant for 
designing policy responses in open economies exposed to frequent shocks. Second, it is of 
major importance for the future of the euro area to advance the institutional design in order to 
make all of the envisaged protective mechanisms operational and enhance setting the right 
policy  mix,  which  encompasses  both  EU  and  national  policies.  Finally,  such  a  policy  mix 
should pay a particular attention to careful coordination, given the interdependences among 
different  national  and  supranational  policies  and  immense  potential  for cross  border  policy 
leakages. I will elaborate briefly on each of the mentioned topics. 
Economic and financial cycles: five important patterns 
1. 
The financial crisis in 2007–08 has induced a change in the hierarchy of central bank goals. 
The  concern  of  central  banks  for  business  cycles  and  economic  growth  has  moved  far 
beyond  the  extent  to  which  those  did,  or  did  not,  generate  inflationary  (or  deflationary) 
pressures. Price stability has proven insufficient to deliver financial stability and the lack of 
                                                
1  Haldane, A. (2015): How low can you go? – speech given at the Portadown Chamber of Commerce, Northern 
Ireland, 18 September 2015 (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/840.aspx). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the latter has once again disclosed the overwhelming economic and social costs generated 
by the episodes of financial instability2. This has altered our view of financial stability issues, 
inaugurated  the  notion  of  systemic  risks,  and  subsequently  led  to  the  broadening  of  our 
policy  mandate.  The  establishment  of  the  dual  mandate  for  central  banks  implied  that  the 
traditional  monetary  policy  function  was  “supplemented”  by  macroprudential  policy  as  a 
response to the interplay of financial cycles and systemic risk. 
The  broadening  of  the  central  bank  mandate  and  the  need  to  add  new  measures  and 
instruments to the policy toolkit have opened several avenues for central banks to expand on 
their knowledge. We need to re-examine the phenomena of regular disturbances, or cyclical 
processes taking place with different frequencies, as well as their inherent structures. While 
the  nature  of  shocks  and  propagation  mechanisms  still  largely  remain  on  the  battlefield  of 
economic theory, empirically observed patterns and the consequences of the materialisation 
of risks necessitate our reaction, which should be based on our best knowledge and abilities. 
Allow me to get into more detail here. 
Optimal policy responses in a multi-country setting require a careful examination of real and 
financial  cycles,  both  domestic  and  international.  For  that  purpose,  let  us  look  at  five 
important  patterns  that  seem  to  characterise  them.  First,  financial  cycles  seem  to  have  a 
lower frequency and higher amplitudes compared to standard business (real) cycles. Credit 
and  asset  price  cycles  may  take  long  to  develop  their  potential  to  destabilize  the  financial 
system.  Further  on,  such  a  potential  may  emerge  regardless  of  watchful  micro-prudential 
supervision or stable inflation. The resulting notion of systemic risk may be identified as the 
interplay  of  macroeconomic  shocks  that  make  financial  sector  vulnerable,  the  contagion 
resulting from financial interconnectedness and endogenous financial imbalances associated 
with credit booms, credit leverage and risk taking behaviour of financial institutions3. 
Second,  there  are  still  no  mechanisms  in  place to  engineer  sustainable synchronisation  of 
cyclical  movements  across  Europe.  The  question  of  cyclical  synchronisation  arises  as 
particularly  important  within  the  international  setting.  This  is  the  factor  that  makes  policy 
responses  even  more  complex,  especially  within  a  currency  union  such  as  the  euro  area, 
where the damage of suboptimal policy responses might exceed mere fiscal costs and output 
losses – they may threaten the future of the euro itself. Due to the recent events, therefore, 
researchers have focused their attention on testing for the endogeneity of optimal currency 
areas, further enriching the vast literature on the synchronisation of business cycles4. This 
literature substantiates the conclusion of diverging real and financial cycles across member 
states, both during the pre-EMU and post-EMU regimes. The single monetary policy has not 
                                                
2  D.  Miles,  Monetary  Policy  and  Forward  Guidance  in  the  UK,  speech  given  at  the  Northumbria  University, 
Newcastle, 2013,  D.  Kapp,  M.  Vega,  Real  Output  Costs of  Financial  Crises:  A  Loss  Distribution  Approach, 
MPRA Paper No. 38988., 2012, A. G. Haldane, The $100 Billion Question, comment by Andrew G. Haldane, 
Financial Stability, Bank of England, Institute of Regulation & Risk, Hong Kong, BIS Review 40/2010. 
3  Constâncio,  V.  (2015):  Financial  stability  risks,  monetary  policy  and  the  need  for  macro-prudential  policy; 
speech  at  the  Warwick  Economics  Summit,  13  February  2015  (https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/ 
date/2015/html/sp150213.en.html). 
4  Grigora,  V.,  Stanciu,  I.E.  (2015):  New  Evidence  on  the  Synchronization  of  Business  Cycles:  Is  there  an 
European  Business  Cycle?,  National  Bank  of  Romania,  Macroeconomic  Modelling  and  Forecasting 
Department, Bucharest University of Economic Studies; Basten, C. (2006): Business cycle synchronisation in 
the  euro  area:  Developments,  determinants  and  implications,  Working  Paper  Series,  Research  Notes  22, 
Deutsche Bank research; Stremmel, H. (2015): Capturing the financial cycle in Europe, Working Paper Series, 
No.1811/June  2015,  European  Central  Bank;  Sybille,  L.  (2012):  Has  the  Euro  Changed  Business  Cycle 
Synchronization?  Evidence  from  the  Core  and  the  Periphery,  Ifo  Working  Paper  No.  122  (www.cesifo-
group.de); Gouveia, S. and Correia, L. (***):Some facts about business cycles synchronisation across the euro 
area  countries:  the  case  of  small  countries,  Centre  for  Transdisciplinary  Development  Studies  (CETRAD), 
Department of Economics, Sociology and Management (DESG), University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro 
(UTAD), Portugal. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  brought cycles together, although a few efficient and credible shock absorbers were devised 
at the eve of the euro. 
Further  on,  there  is  some  evidence  on  the  increasing  correlation  between  real  cycles  and 
financial  cycles  across  different  groups  of  EU  member  states,  as  provided  by  Meller  and 
Metiu (2015)5. Such a pattern emerges regardless of different sources and well-documented 
differences  in  frequencies  and  amplitudes  between  real  and  financial  cycles.  Moreover, 
researchers  from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  have  shown  that  the  correlation 
between real and financial cycles gets stronger over time as the duration and amplitude of 
financial cycles increases. The main explanation for the increasing correlation between the 
real  and  financial  cycle  is  the  so-called  “unfinished  recession”  phenomenon,  according  to 
which globalization and a more activist monetary policy, which fails to take into account the 
state of the financial cycle, eventually cause a bigger recession down the road6. 
We  are  left  with  two  more  interesting  features  of  cyclical  (co)movements.  The  degree  to 
which real and financial cycles converge across groups of member states is neither constant, 
nor does it increase in linear fashion over time. All the previously described processes might 
deliver the periods of high synchronisation, followed by rapidly collapsing convergence. 
Finally, the (in)famous duality between the core and the peripheral countries emerges as a 
theme here as well, as country groups tend to cluster in terms of real and financial cycles. All 
of these notions call for further research and better understanding, but they are nevertheless 
useful information for shaping policy responses. 
The  expectations  of  convergence  in  real  and  financial  cycles  due  to  increased  trade  and 
financial  integration,  pursued  strongly  within  Europe  (the  euro  zone)  during  the  last  few 
decades,  have  far  from  materialized.  In  addition  to  some  old  suspects,  theoretical  and 
empirical  literature  have  identified  some  new  channels  at  work  to  explain  for  such  a 
phenomenon7.  The  traditional  view  that  increasing  trade  integration  may,  or  may  not  be, 
supportive  for  the  synchronisation  of  business  cycles,  depending  on  the  specific  trade 
pattern,  has  certainly  been  warranted  (Krugman  vs.  Frankel-Rose  hypothesis).  Further  on, 
stronger  financial  linkages  have  also  proven  to  be  an  elusive  channel  for  engineering 
sustainable convergence of real and financial cycles. While debt flows remain a theoretical 
channel that might increase the extent of international risk sharing, the actual effect depends 
on what happens during the crises. For example, an increased risk premium and depressed 
collateral prices in a country hit by an asymmetric shock may reverse capital flows exactly 
during the period when higher inflows are most needed. Such effect is usually known as a 
sudden-stop in capital inflows and the mechanics of the process is not too different from the 
disrupting  effect  of  the  financial  accelerator  on  the  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy  in 
developed countries.8 
Finally, even an analysis of trade and financial integration, while improving our understanding 
of complex open economic systems, may fall short of explaining the synchronisation of real 
and financial cycles. Since cyclical patterns are largely attributable to different cost structures 
and  profitability  profiles  that  affect  investment  decisions  and  output  volatilities,  another 
                                                
5  Meller, B., Metiu, N. (2015): The synchronisation of European credit cycles, Discussion Paper No. 20/2015, 
Deutsche Bundesbank. 
6  Drehmann,  M.,  Borio,  C.,  Tsatsaronis,  K.  (2012):  Characterising  the  financial  cycle:  don’t  lose  sight  of  the 
medium term!, BIS Working Papers No 380, Monetary and Economic Department. 
7  Duval, R., Cheng, K., Hwa Oh, K., Saraf, R., Seneviratne, D. (2014): Trade Integration and Business Cycle 
Synchronization:  A  Reappraisal  with  Focus  on  Asia,  IMF  Working  Paper  14/52;  Davis,  S.  (2011):  Financial 
Integration  and  International  Business  Cycle  Co-Movement:  The  Role  of  Balance  Sheets,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Dallas, Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, Working Paper No. 89. 
8  Bernanke  B.S.,  speech  at  the  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Twenty-first  Century  Conference, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, June 15, 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  potential explanation should be sought on the production side, which operates in conjunction 
with trade and finance. What is often left out of the euro area storyline  is the fact that the 
monetary  union  came  on  top  of  diverging  trends  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  as  the 
catching-up  process  in  the  EU  came  to  a  stall  during  the  early  1990s9.  A  reversal  in  the 
catching-up process came regardless of high investments in some peripheral countries and 
high capital output ratios – rather than a sign of success, high investments were an indication 
of deeper-rooted problems.10 Many peripheral countries did not need more investments per 
se to restart convergence – what they needed was a more efficient allocation of investments. 
The  efficiency  of  investments  fell  victim  to  poor  economic  governance,  rigid  labour  and 
product  markets,  low  investments  in  information  and  communication  technologies,  defunct 
educational  systems  and  the  poor  quality  of  corporate  management.  What  the  monetary 
union  accomplished  against  such  a  background  was  to  create  an  illusion  of  continuing 
convergence on the back of increasing foreign borrowing and investment in non-tradables, 
rather  than  to  enact  discipline  in  the  economic  governance  of  peripheral  countries.  The 
adoption  of  the  single  currency,  followed  by  the  consistent  private  sector  interest  spread, 
elimination of exchange rate risk and implied fiscal bail-out clause, cemented the duality in 
the quality of economic governance and boosted the suboptimal reallocation of resources in 
the  periphery.  So,  we  have  observed  financing  low-productivity  sectors  (via  real  estate  or 
government spending) with debt inflows, instead of capital flows fuelling further “catching-up”. 
This  has  produced  asset  bubbles  and  large  exposures  of  banks  from  core  euro  area 
countries,  as  well  as  world-wide  creditors,  towards  the  euro  area  periphery,  and  created 
strong  contagion  channels  that  have  increased  the  amplitude  of  swings  in  comparison  to 
historical  business  cycles.  Such  a  phenomenon  has  in  quite  a  few  instances  also  been 
observed  outside  of  the  euro-area,  regardless  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  implemented, 
which brings me to the discussion of challenges in finding an optimal policy mix in a small 
open economy. 
2. 
Mutations of the traditional monetary trilemma: policy responses in open 
economies or “Ray in European clothing” 
According  to  the  newly  emerging  set  of  principles,  this  dual  central  banks’  mandate  is 
supposed  to  function  via  two  independent  sets  of  policies.  As  real  and  financial  cycles 
diverge,  central  banks  need  a  set  of  two  independent  policies.11  Monetary  policy  should 
target  the  real  cycle  in  order  to  stabilize  inflation,  while  macroprudential  policy  should  be 
used to tame the financial cycle. The task of maintaining price stability and financial stability 
should be even easier if central banks adopt a flexible approach to inflation targeting, the one 
that  allows  for  temporary  deviations  and  the  gradual  convergence  towards  the  inflation 
target, as pointed out by Stanley Fischer (2010)12. 
Such a simple story of two independent policies – monetary and macroprudential – aiming at 
two  separate  goals,  has  some  weaknesses.  Such  a  framework  is  underlined  by  the 
traditional  monetary  trilemma  theorem  launched  by  the  Mundell-Fleming  model.  The 
traditional monetary trilemma limits policy choice to only two among the three dimensions: 
independent monetary policy, free capital mobility and exchange rate stability. However, the 
usefulness  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  as  the  shock  absorber  has  been  increasingly 
questioned over time. A more sceptical view on the usefulness of flexible exchange rates has 
changed the trilemma into an “irreconcilable duo: independent monetary policies are possible 
                                                
9  Gros, Daniel. (2011) What is holding Italy back?, CEPS Commentary, 8 November 2011. 
10  Hassan F., G. I. P. Ottaviano (2013), Productivity in Italy: the great unlearning, VoxEU.org, 30 November. 
11  Constâncio, 2015. ibid. 
12  Stanley Fischer (2010): Myths of Monetary Policy, Israel Economic Review, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  if  and  only  if  the  capital  account  is  managed”  (Ray,  2013)13.  Those  who  believe  that 
exchange  rate  flexibility  should  not  be  abandoned,  even  in  the  cases  of  small  open 
economies,  have  largely  deflated  their  expectations  of  flexible  exchange  rates  to  act  as 
shock absorbers14. Therefore, the notion that “the global financial cycle constrains national 
monetary policies regardless of the exchange rate regime” has now become part of common 
knowledge. 
With  supranational  “one-size-fits-all”  monetary  policy,  the  role  of  national  fiscal  policy  in 
stabilizing real activity and inflation has, accordingly, increased in euro-area member states. 
However, the configuration of single monetary policy, coupled with national fiscal sovereignty 
and the no bail-out clause, has generated suboptimal policies and frictions that threaten the 
monetary  union.  With  single  monetary  policy,  commitment  not  to  bail-out  heavily  indebted 
member  states  is  necessary  to  eliminate  potential  for  moral  hazard.  However,  the  actual 
euro-area  experience  demonstrates  strong  incentives  for  sovereign  fiscal  policies  to 
“trespass” on the prudent fiscal stance, either in the expectations of non-enforcement of the 
no  bail-out  clause,  with  the  implicit  assumption  that  sovereign  default  will  be  politically 
unacceptable,  or  through  a  direct  support  of  common  monetary  authority  through  special 
monetary operations. This uneasy triangle is usually referred to as the fiscal trilemma of the 
monetary union. Such a “holy trinity” makes impossible the cohabitation of the independent 
monetary policy of a supranational central bank, national fiscal sovereignty and the no bail-
out  clause15.  In  order  to  ease  the  frictions  stemming  from  national  fiscal  policies,  the 
monetary framework of the euro area was reconstructed by implementing the elements of the 
banking  union (the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism), 
setting  up  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM,  previously  the  European  Financial 
Stability Fund (EFSF)) as well as by starting the ECB’s quantitative easing program (QE). All 
these mechanisms should help to decouple bank distress and sovereign debt pressures.16 
The described trilemmas in the European economic and monetary framework, with the still 
absent  synchronisation  of  real  and  financial  cycles,  have  given  birth  to  a  specific 
quadrilemma  that  demonstrates  difficulties  faced  by  policy  makers  in  the  euro  area.  With 
supranational  monetary  policy  concerned  primarily  with  the  overall  price  stability  objective, 
symmetric  (global)  shocks  transmitted  through  financial  linkages  and  domestic  (national) 
divergent  cycles,  the  burden  of  adjustment  has  to  be  borne  by  national  macroprudential 
policy. The absence of other adjustments mechanisms, such as a perfect labour mobility or a 
transfer mechanism in the form of unemployment insurance17, adds to the burden on fiscal 
policy, which is already suffering from moral hazard issues. The Vice-President of the ECB, 
Vitor Constancio, is right to emphasize that “macroprudential policy is therefore essential in 
any economy as the business and financial cycles are not synchronised. Even more so in a 
monetary  union  where  vulnerabilities  identified  in  each  country  can  be  addressed  with 
macroprudential  policy,  allowing  for  the  appropriate  heterogeneity,  while  countries  remain 
subject to a single monetary policy”18. 
                                                
13  Ray,  H.  (2013):  Dilemma  Not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  And  Monetary  Policy  Independence, 
Working Paper 21162, NBER Working Paper Series. 
14  Couré, B. (2015): Paradigm lost: Rethinking international adjustments, speech atEgon and Joan von Kashnitz 
Lecture, Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November 2015. 
15  Beck, H., Prinz, A. (2012): The trilemma of a Monetary Union: Another Impossible Trinity, Leibniz Information 
Centre for Economics. 
16  Pisani-Ferry, J. (2012): The Euro Crisis and the New Impossible Trinity. 
17  Bernoth,  K.,  Engler,  P.  (2013):  A  Transfer  Mechanism  as  a  Stabilization  Tool  in  the  EMU,  DIW  Economic 
Bulletin, 1.2013. 
18  Constâncio, V. ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  There  are  a  couple  of  other  difficulties  related  to  the  use  of  national  policies.  The  shock 
absorbing capacity of fiscal policy is in too many instances limited by the narrow fiscal space 
existing before the crises. The recession has further eroded fiscal positions and fiscal rules 
have failed to tame unsustainable fiscal paths so that the ability of fiscal policies in the EU to 
deal  with  another  blow  of  crises  is quite  limited.  Also,  a  need for  national  macroprudential 
policy immediately opens the issues of harmonisation and coordination on the international 
level in order to avoid unintended consequences, which I will comment in more detail later 
on. Additionally, for macroprudential policy to be effective it must be intrusive, affecting the 
“normal  behaviour”  of  agents  and  markets19,  yielding  benefits  in  reducing  long-term  costs 
generated by the systemic risk that makes it hard to attenuate public interest thus creating a 
central bank’s legitimacy paradox20. 
Unconventional  expansionary  monetary  policy,  which  was  pursued  after  reaching  the  zero 
lower  bound,  and  out  of  the  fear  of  “the  risk  of  doing  nothing”21,  may  be  risk-inducing  by 
fuelling  search  for  yield  behaviour.  Abundant  liquidity  and  low  borrowing  costs  have  the 
capacity to generate bubbles, confirming a notion that rational individual decisions may lead 
to irrational social outcomes – albeit as a reaction to highly non-conventional policies. When 
inflationary impulses eventually pick up, the present monetary support will dry up and trigger 
a  renewed  divergence  of  national  real  and  financial  cycles,  the  phenomenon  termed 
“unfinished recession”. 
The reconstruction of the euro area is clearly the work in progress. We need to get the policy 
framework right in order to pursue optimal policies. But given the magnitude of challenges, a 
good  policy  framework  will  not  be  enough  to  set  the  right  policies  –  a  lot  of  talent  and 
ingenuity will be needed as well, making our job an art much more than before. 
3. 
Critical moments in the post-crisis reconstruction of the European Union and 
specificities of macroprudential policy 
The  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  more  recent  euro  area  debt  crisis  has 
motivated the reconstruction of the European economic and monetary framework along the 
pillars  presented  in  the  Fiscal  Compact  and  Five  President’s  Report22  on  completing  the 
monetary union. These issues need to be put into the described perspective in order to value 
the  potential  of  the  new  framework  to  reduce  the  chance  of  catastrophic  scenarios  and 
provide us with adequate instruments should such a scenario take place. 
First, the rebalancing of the euro area has often been associated with reducing labour costs 
in  order  to  improve  competitiveness.  Coeuré  (2016)23  vocally  reinforces  the  view  that 
productivity growth is central to competitiveness and to growing out of debt, as opposed to 
benefits  of  wage  moderation.  Seeing  rebalancing  as  being  all  about  cutting  costs  is 
misguided  as  benefits  diminish  with  more  countries  engaging  in  such  activities.  However, 
pursuing  structural  reforms  to  raise  productivity,  in  contrast  to  wage  moderation,  benefits 
substantially and uniformly all countries. “We do not need all euro area countries to adopt 
identical structural reforms. What we need is a framework that takes into account both how 
                                                
19  Constâncio, V. ibid. 
20  Baker,  A.  (2013):  The  bankers’  Paradox:  The  Political  Economy  of  Macroprudential  Regulation,  School  of 
Politics, International Studies and Philosophy, Queen’s University of Belfast. 
21  Draghi, M. (2016): How domestic economic strength can prevail over global weakness, keynote speech at the 
Deutsche Börse Group New Year’s reception 2016, Eschborn, 25 January 2016. 
22  European Commission (2015): Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, Report by: Jean-Claude 
Juncker in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz. 
23  Coeuré, B. (2016): Rebalancing in the euro area: are we nearly there yet?, speech at the Danish Economic 
Society, Kolding, 15 January 2016, (https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160115.en.html). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  countries differ based on their national conditions, and how they are similar by virtue of being 
in  a  monetary  union.  Within  those  parameters  there  are  various  combinations  of  country-
specific institutions that can produce smooth adjustment.” (Praet, 2015)24. 
These  notions  should,  of  course,  be  the  key  ingredients  of  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance 
Procedure and the Structural Reform Support Programme (as of 2017). If these conditions 
are  met  through  institutional  reform  plans  (until  2025),  relying  on  deeper  convergence, 
entailing, for example, Competitiveness Authorities and further financial and fiscal reforms, 
including the Deposit Insurance Scheme, Capital Markets Union and European Fiscal Board, 
should  help  resolve  the  quadrilemma.  In  the  words  of  the  Report:  “...the  Macroeconomic 
Imbalance  procedure  (MIP)  could  be  utilised  as  a  tool  not  only  to  prevent  and  correct 
imbalances but also to foster reforms and monitor progress in each euro area Member State 
towards these common standards. Significant and sustained convergence towards similarly 
resilient economies should be a condition for access to a shock absorption mechanism to be 
set up...”. 
As  central  bankers  we  need  to  be  aware  of  the  role  and  importance  of  structural  reforms. 
And we also need to communicate this to the general public. However, even if convergence 
in  TFP  as  a  source  of  sustainable  catching  up  gets  kick-started  and  risks  arising  from  it 
eventually get ironed-out, fiscal and macroprudential policies will still be needed to take care 
of  residual  idiosyncratic  shocks.  Moreover,  we  are  directly  responsible  for  getting 
macroprudential  policy  right,  and  in  order  to  be  able  to  do  that,  we  need  a  profound 
understanding of all the issues relevant for its smooth and efficient implementation. Some of 
the critical issues for macroprudential policy at this point in time encompass (i) cross-border 
spillovers, (ii) the coordination of macroprudential and monetary policy and (iii) devising an 
internally consistent structure of macroprudential instruments. 
International  policy  coordination,  harmonisation  and 
the  consistent  application  of 
implemented instruments are vital to ensure effectiveness and limit the possibility and impact 
of adverse cross-border spillover effects25. The potential spillover of nationally implemented 
macroprudential  policies  largely  depend  on  the  degree  of  financial  cycle  synchronisation, 
especially within the highly integrated (economically and financially) states, as in the case of 
the  European  Union,  or  even  more  so  within  the  currency  union  members  with  a  single 
monetary  policy.  Several  aspects  of  the  potential  spillover  should  be  considered  when 
formulating  the  policy  stance  in  a  highly  integrated  environment  that  challenges  us  in 
pursuing financial stability. Outward cross-border spillovers of systemic risk create a need for 
countervailing  macroprudential  measures,  clearly  emphasising 
for  policy 
coordination  and  measure  reciprocation.  In  contrast,  inward  spillover  effect  is  a  direct 
consequence  of  the  regulatory  arbitrage  that  motivates  internationally  operating  financial 
institutions to seek organisational restructuring that minimizes regulatory costs. The issue of 
converting  subsidiaries  into  branches  has  recently  attracted  a  lot  of  attention,  as  some 
member states are actively trying to reduce this risk,26 alongside international efforts directed 
towards formulating a framework for voluntary cross-border reciprocity27. Some countries, for 
example,  try  to  internalize  the  costs  of  registering  subsidiaries  as  branches  by  increasing 
depositor and retail consumer legal protection through an option for retail clients to cancel 
the  need 
                                                
24  Praet, P. (2015): Structural reforms and long-run growth in the euro area, intervention on the panel “Long-run 
growth,  monetary policy  and  financing  of  the  economy”  at 43rd  Economics  Conference of  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank, Vienna, 15 June 2015. 
25  European  Central  Bank  (2015):  A  framework  for  analysing  and  assessing  cross-border  spillovers  from 
macroprudential policies, Financial Stability Review, Special features, May 2015. 
26  Czech  National  Bank  (2014):  Box  7:  Fragmentation,  Ring-fencing  of  Local  Activities  and  Foreign  Bank 
Branches, Financial Stability Report, 2013/2014. 
27  Recommendation  ESRB/2015/2  on  the  assessment  of  cross-border  effects  of  and  voluntary  reciprocity  for 
macro-prudential policy measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  liability/claim without penalty, extraordinary contributions to deposit guarantee systems, etc. 
The potential for intra-banking-group arbitrage could also be diminished if a macroprudential 
measure is applied at the appropriate level of consolidation and/or exposure location, making 
reciprocity arrangements a necessary condition for mitigating these effects. 
Since it may be difficult to simultaneously hit macroprudential and monetary objectives due to 
the  general  low  degree  of  synchronisation  between  real  and  financial  cycles,  the  policy 
coordination of the two is an essential prerequisite for simultaneously stabilizing the general 
price  level  and  financial  movements  as  there  are  “important  synergies  and  interactions 
between the two policy functions” (Constancio, 2015). This is especially evident today in the 
environment of the anaemic growth and low inflation that require pursuing the expansionary 
stance of monetary policy, yet at a price of jeopardizing financial stability through the search 
for yield behaviour that might create new asset bubbles. To tame these risks, the tight stance 
of  macroprudential  policy 
to  be  seen  how  effective 
macroprudential policy can be in taming the risks that emanate from a long period of ultra-
loose monetary policy. 
The macroprudential ammunition at the disposal of central banks is another potential source 
of concern. The CRR/CRDIV has provided us with various tools: supply-side (such as capital 
and  liquidity  buffers)  and  demand-side  instruments  (such  as  LTV,  LTI  or  DSTI  ratios). 
However, one should be very careful not to err in calibration of those instrument, whether on 
the side that leaves insufficient coverage (effectively producing policy inaction) or on the side 
that creates too much of a burden (exceeding the net benefit of macroprudential policy in the 
medium term). 
is  needed.  Still, 
it  remains 
Conclusion 
I  hope  this  overview  comes  as  a  stimulus  for  further  theoretical  ad  empirical  research, 
regardless  of  the  degree  of  agreement  on  the  specific  issues  outlined  in  this  speech. 
Therefore, I am looking forward to this conference. Hopefully, we will leave with answers to 
at least some of the questions raised and with a strengthened sense of obligation to continue 
with demanding work. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
