  David Rule: Managing risk in a soft market 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Rule,  Executive  Director  of  Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the General Insurance Research Organisation conference, Dublin, 21 September 
2016. 
 Good morning. 
This is my first speech as the Bank’s Executive Director for Insurance Supervision. Since I 
took  on  this  role  in  July,  I  have  been  trying  to  meet  with  as  many  chief  executives  and 
chairmen of UK insurers as possible. I have been struck by the variety of business models 
and  strategies  but  one  theme  has  dominated  discussions  of  the  risks  facing  insurers:  the 
current low rate environment. For life insurers, this can create direct solvency pressures to 
the extent that they are not fully matched against the increasing value of their future liabilities 
as  discount  rates  fall.  That  can  also  be  an  issue  for  some  general  insurers  with  long  tail 
liabilities. More generally, low investment returns mean earnings on the “float” can no longer 
cushion  a  poor  underwriting  performance.  The  margin  for  error  in  the  running  of  general 
insurance firms has reduced – firms have to underwrite profitably. On the positive side, this 
emphasises the importance of underwriting discipline. 
The soft market 
But of course the current soft market makes profitable underwriting more difficult to achieve. I 
am  going  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  the  wholesale  London  markets.  Although  I  have 
been told of some tentative signs of premium rates stabilising recently, they have been falling 
across most wholesale lines for around a decade now. For example, Guy Carpenter’s Global 
Property Catastrophe Rate-On-Line Index has reduced by more than a third since its peak in 
2006. Our market survey earlier this year found further year-on-year declines (Chart 1). 
Looking  at  the  possible  causes  of  the  current  soft  market,  it  is  surely  in  part  just  another 
manifestation of the wider low return environment. The most obvious evidence is the inflow of 
capital to the market from institutional investors. Perhaps to a greater extent than historically, 
insurance  is  interconnected  with  wider  capital  markets  and  market  forces  have  driven 
expected returns more into line with other investment opportunities. 
These wider pressures may explain a squeeze on profits. But insurers should still be pricing 
to cover their view of risk. At the beginning of 2016 we carried out a survey that captured 
views on the rate adequacy of new and renewed business. The results suggested that the 
estimated rate adequacy of new business is, in most cases, higher than renewed business. 
Whist this may reflect what many insurers tell us – that they only want to grow in segments 
that they believe are adequately priced; another interpretation is that some insurers are being 
overly optimistic on risks for which they have no or limited historical claims data and which 
previous risk carriers have declined as they no longer believe them to be adequately priced. 
Despite  falling  premium  rates,  general  insurer  profits  in  the  past  few  years  have  been 
sustained by both benign catastrophe experience and levels of prior year reserve releases 
that are now the highest for thirty years (Chart 2). 
Natural  catastrophes  are  a  major  component  of  many  GI  firms’  risk  profiles.  Catastrophe 
losses returned to more normal levels by historical standards in the first half of this year. But 
the low incidence of catastrophic events in recent years may have given support to the idea 
that this component has in some way diminished, whether due to trends in nature or more 
effective management of risks by policyholders and insurers. I have also heard speculation 
that some man-made risks may have decreased: for example, if planes and ships are built 
better than previously, or if companies are better at managing their risks. Mindful of both the 
impact and the uncertainty involved in considering this, we would expect firms to seek the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  best available evidence and to take a prudent and comprehensive view to the assessment of 
risks. Put simply, we would not expect a handful of recent data points to lead to a marked 
reduction in a firm’s assessment of its best estimate of liabilities nor its “1 in 200” risk. 
Turning to reserve releases, our obvious concern is that these should reflect genuine reserve 
redundancy  with  the  decisions  taken  by  risk  managers  and  actuaries  using  their  best 
professional judgement and not in any way influenced by a desire to sustain reported profits. 
For long tail lines, such as casualty, a key assumption in setting reserves is the expectation 
of future claims inflation. In most cases this assumption is derived implicitly using the recent 
actual data and trending this forward. Given that the recent past has seen falling inflation in 
many  sectors  the  obvious  question  is  –  is  it  reasonable  to  assume  that  these  trends  will 
continue?  It  does  seem plausible  that  claims  inflation  has  often  been  lower  than  expected 
against the background of the current low inflation environment. But our calculations suggest 
reserve  releases  have  in  some  cases  got  to  a  point  where  implied  future  claims  inflation 
looks  very  low.  In  an  extreme  case,  we  estimated  past  claims  inflation  for  the  class  of 
business  to  be  5%  per annum,  whereas  to  obtain  the  particular  insurer’s  booked  reserves 
would imply a future claims inflation assumption of –2%. If the future trend is in fact in line 
with past inflation, booked reserves would need to be 25% higher than currently assumed. 
Insurers  that  have  sought  to  diversify  and  grow  their  business  into  longer-tail  liability 
insurance  classes  have  critical  questions  to  answer  about  the  future  direction  of  claims 
inflation. 
Managing risk in a soft market 
Speaking  to  firms  about  their  approach  to  the  market,  they  often  talk  about  prioritising 
margins over growth, focusing on more profitable lines of business – for example, where they 
have established strong market positions or a particular niche, and making more active use 
of reinsurance. These all seem sensible approaches for an individual firm but, in aggregate, 
the risk must end up with someone. One indicator of the competitive pressure on insurers to 
source  new  business  in  the  wholesale  markets  is  that  brokerage  commissions  have  been 
increasing as a share of gross written premiums despite the common desire to lower costs in 
line with lower premium rates. 
Looking  forward,  the  key  challenge  for  insurers  is  how  they  preserve  or  even  grow  their 
activities while avoiding the “Winner’s Curse” of under-pricing in order to get the business. 
The PRA is a not a price-regulator. But we are concerned to see that firms are adequately 
managing  their  exposures  –  that  they  can  identify  and  quantify  the  risks  being  covered, 
manage and control overall exposures, and estimate likely claims costs under different loss 
scenarios. 
Against this background, I make no apology for repeating the points made earlier this year by 
my  colleague  Chris  Moulder,  our  Director  of General  Insurance,  in  a  Dear  CEO  letter  and 
subsequent speech. 
First,  underwriting:  we  expect  Boards  to  be  relentlessly  inquisitive  in  understanding and 
challenging the effectiveness of underwriting controls, pricing trends, exposure changes and 
rate adequacy in order to make informed decisions, and provide meaningful challenge, to the 
business. Fundamentally, the Board should seek evidence that underwriters are maintaining 
appropriate discipline. 
Second,  reserving:  a  robust  approach  to  the  setting  of  reserves  and  appropriate  and 
adequate  oversight  of  the  reserving  process  is  vital.  We  expect  Boards  to  demonstrate 
independent  challenge  of  key  issues,  material  uncertainties  and  significant  assumptions  in 
the reserves and the rationale for their choice of booked reserves. 
Third, reinsurance: we expect Boards to ensure that the economic impact of the reinsurance 
transaction is appropriately reflected in business plans, capital setting and reserving; and to 
be  alive  to  the  wider  risks  to  which  reinsurance  placements  can  give  rise.  This  includes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ensuring the total risk and uncertainty over the claims run off has been captured in your risk 
management system and considered within your ORSA. 
Fourth,  capital:  we  expect  Boards  to  ensure  that  firms  assessment  of  risk  and  capital 
requirements remain valid in this challenging trading environment. 
The new System of Governance requirements under Solvency II and the Senior Insurance 
Managers  Regime  are  timely  additions  to  the  insurance  regulatory  regime,  ensuring  that 
clear expectations are being set as to the strength of systems and controls, and that there is 
clarity as to the roles and responsibilities of senior managers in firms. 
Possible market-turning events 
Previous soft phases of the insurance cycle have ended, sometime quite dramatically, with a 
major  loss.  Examples  include  Hurricane  Andrew  in  the  early  90s,  Asbestos,  Pollution  and 
Health losses in the mid-90s and “9/11” in 2001. Whilst it is understandable that some in the 
industry  talk  of  the  need  to  have  naïve  capital  and  capacity  cleared  out  of  the  market, 
restricting supply and supporting premium above the technical price level, there is a sense 
that,  this  time,  things  may  be  different.  Many  believe  that  further  capital  is  “waiting  in  the 
wings” to invest in the sector in the event that prices rise. 
Nonetheless, it is sensible to plan on the basis that a significant, market-turning event might 
occur  at  some  point. Taking  this  as  the  starting  point,  we  think  there  is  an  opportunity  for 
firms to think through what issues might then arise and to consider what steps can be taken 
now to plan for these events, not least because  we know some firms will be  very keen to 
respond to any improvements in market conditions which might arise after a large loss event. 
We are publishing today a consultation paper setting out our expectations of firms in planning 
for these types of extreme insurance loss events; focussing on some of the governance, risk 
management,  capital  management  and  reporting  capabilities  that  we  think  firms  need  to 
consider.  The  guidance  also  sets  out  an  indicative  template  containing  the  type  of 
information  we  think  we  will  request  from  firms  following  a  loss,  and  also  expectations  of 
firms with approved internal models. 
We note that this is an area where the Industry itself is keen to ensure that it is well prepared 
and  we  welcome  working  with  it  on  this  topic.  None  of  us  will  have  a  crystal  ball  to  plan 
perfectly  for  such  an  event,  and  as  decision  makers  we  will  only  be  able  to  make  final 
judgements on how to respond at the time, once we have the facts as best as we can gather 
them. However, we still think there is more that can be done to think through how firms would 
go about gathering initial loss information, what information their boards are likely to need to 
see  to  inform  their  response,  and  some  of  the  practical  challenges  which  might  arise  for 
firms. 
Capital and model drift 
Given  the  challenging  market  conditions  I  have  referred  to  earlier,  and  the  uncertainties  I 
have  just  discussed,  it  is  all  the  more  important  that  firms  hold  adequate  and  appropriate 
capital against the risks they face. As you will also be well aware, your and our work in the 
run  up  to  January  this  year  included  significant  work  on  internal  models,  and  it  would  be 
unsurprising if there was not some collective sigh of relief within the industry after January 
given the work involved to get to that point. 
But we all know that running an internal model is not just a one-off task, and there is a need 
for firms to continue to refine the models in the light of experience and as new data becomes 
available.  As  regulators,  we  need  to  be  alive  to  the  risk  that  when  firms  select  the  areas 
where change is required, and as internal models are updated, there is not some inherent 
bias towards changes which reduce the firm’s capital requirement, at the expense of areas of 
the model which might be insufficient. We are publishing today our supervisory statement on 
changes  to  internal  models,  setting  out  our  expectations  in  respect  of  firms  applying  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  approval for a major change to their approved internal models or an extension of scope to an 
approved internal model (e.g. to cover new business units or risks). In May 2016, the PRA 
consulted  on  its  proposed  approach  to  monitoring  “model  drift”  for  firms  with  an  internal 
model, where model drift is defined as the risk that the capital level generated by an internal 
model moves gradually over time. Even acting in good faith, business pressures may create 
the risk that model changes generating lower capital requirements are favoured over time, 
and therefore that solvency standards might deteriorate. 
The PRA’s proposed approach includes monitoring the internal model SCR against a number 
of objective measures such as premium levels, technical provisions, MCR and the standard 
formula SCR. None are perfect but all are independent of the internal model, and therefore 
can help provide us with a different view on the evolution of risk exposures and a safeguard 
against model drift. 
All risk measures have their limitations. So we plan to use a range of measures alongside 
other supervisory review process initiatives, such as the analysis of internal model outputs. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  given  today’s  audience,  I  want  to  stress  the  critical  professional  role  of 
actuaries in current soft market conditions, where there may be a greater tension between on 
the  one  hand  underwriting  discipline  and  appropriate  reserving  and  on  the  other  hand 
business growth and current-year profits. Actuaries are responsible for providing assurance 
on  reserves  and  opinions  on  both  the  underwriting  and  reinsurance  strategies  of  firms, 
implying strong engagement with the risk function, as well as independence and objectivity in 
their assessments. Events like today’s, where actuaries come together to share knowledge, 
with the aim of raising professional standards, are particularly important and welcome. 
Chart 1 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
