   Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Recent developments in central bank 
governance, accountability and transparency as core drivers for effective 
financial supervision and the importance of board effectiveness for 
banks and central banks 
Speaking note by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  at  the  Conference  “Central  Bank  and  Supervisory  Governance”, 
organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 12 February 2016. 
 At  the  beginning  of  2016,  the  global  economy  looks  set  to  enter  another  challenging  year 
ahead.  The  risks  for  policymakers  remain  multifaceted  as  global  transitions  continue  with 
adjustments happening on multiple fronts. First source of vulnerability is China as it transits 
from earlier main engine of global economic growth to a new phase of growth rebalancing, that 
is  almost  certain  to  result  in  a  major  slowdown  internally  and  adverse  spillovers  externally 
through the trade linkages and prices of commodities. As second, is the protracted period of 
low commodities prices straining growth prospects for commodities exporters, including some 
major emerging markets like Brazil, Russia and South Africa. Third front is Europe that along 
with the debt crisis, now faces another challenging struggle to effectively manage the migrant 
crisis that has brought to a test the EU’s absorption capacity and the political system. Fourth, 
the US FED has launched the normalization of monetary policy leading to a policy divergence 
in  advanced  economies  and  building  fears  of  potentially  tighter  financing  conditions  and 
declining  
capital  flows  that  may  adversely  affect  emerging  market  economies.  The  international 
community  response  to  the  crisis  in  the  Middle  East  and  the  risks  of  potential  Brexit  are 
additional factors  that  add  to the geopolitical risks.  Global growth  prospects  remain  cloudy 
again, with IMF now (WEO, January 2016) expecting more gradual pick up in global growth 
from the estimated 3.1% in 2015 to 3.4% in 2016 and 3.6% in 2017 (as compared to 3.6% for 
2016 and 3.8% for 2017 in October 2015, WEO). Risks continue to weigh on the downside 
and are particularly prominent for the emerging and developing economies given their higher 
vulnerability to sudden switches in global confidence, reversals in capital flows and financial 
markets volatility.  
The  challenging  world  translates  into  challenging  environment  for  monetary  policy  making. 
Continuous vigilance on multiple fronts, while successfully juggling between difficult trade-offs 
in decision making is what has become the new art of central banking nowadays. The main 
challenge for monetary authorities, not only today, but for years back, is how to deliver the 
most appropriate policy mix that will support demand and activity, while safeguarding against 
macro-financial risks. Recent crisis has brought financial stability to the fore acknowledging 
the  importance  of  central  banks  in  financial  stability,  a  task  which  they  have  historically 
performed,  though  to  a  varying  degrees.  According  to  a  BIS  study  (2009)  central  banks’ 
arrangements for financial stability as they stood before the crisis have differed widely across 
countries, both for normal and crisis times. Banking supervision was not always tasked to the 
central bank, with many central banks lacking a clear mandate for macro prudential policies. 
As  it  comes  to  advanced  economies,  the  common  practice  before  the  crisis  was generally 
characterized by separation in responsibilities with respect to monetary policy and banking 
supervision, delegating each function to a different regulator. Looking at EU, the integrated 
model  of  supervision  was  predominating  across  the  member  states,  capturing  the  form  of 
unified financial and banking oversight under one single national authority, but generally, not 
the central bank. The situation was quite different in emerging countries where central banks 
tended to be the main micro prudential supervisor for banks. In response to the crisis, there 
was a visible convergence in both, advanced and emerging economies, towards integrated 
supervision under the common roof of the central bank, usually by using the “new” formula of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   macro-supervision.  The  role  of  sound  supervision  was  endorsed  as  absolutely  vital  for 
promotion and maintenance of healthy financial system, while central banks got recognized as 
leading protagonists in the area of prevention, management and resolution of financial crises.  
Thus, in 2010, the US has passed the Dodd-Frank Act redesigning the role of FED in financial 
supervision,  while  in  EU  there  is  an  ongoing  process  towards  a  banking  union  assigning 
banking  supervision  to  the  ECB  together  with  the  national  supervisory  authorities  of  the 
participating  member  states.  The  benefits  of  integrated  supervision  rest  on  the  synergies 
between banking supervision and monetary policy given that banks play the crucial role in 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  In  such  a  context,  the  supervisory  information 
regarding the individual banks’ health can be highly beneficial to central banks in enhancing 
monetary policy effectiveness. On the other hand, expanding the central bank’s mandate with 
additional tasks may pose challenges with respect to central bank governance. As noted by 
Georgsson et al. (2015) the broader the mandate a central bank has, the more often it will be 
forced to find a balance between different objectives, tasks and tools. Studying the implications 
of financial  stability  tasks  on  central  bank governance,  BIS (2009)  underlines  the  need for 
effective governance arrangements that should be designed to deliver sustainable conduct of 
monetary policy functions in combination with the additional mandate to contribute to financial 
stability. Further, the Report stresses the importance of clarity with respect to financial stability 
responsibilities, policy transparency as to promote accountability, full autonomy to safeguard 
against  political  pressures  and  undue  influence  from  business  and  industry  and  close 
collaboration with other regulators in the country. Another important aspect is the central bank 
balance  sheet  which  should  be  sound  enough  with  strengthened  risk-bearing  capacity  to 
enable successful implementation of monetary policy and support financial stability in case of 
emergency.  
Going back to banking supervision, besides the institutional setup, another important question 
raised by the crisis relates to the role of transparency and accountability in promoting more 
effective  banking  supervision.  According  to  the  literature,  for  supervision  to  be  considered 
effective it should be able to effectively develop, implement, monitor and enforce supervisory 
policies  under  normal  and  stressed  economic  conditions.  BIS  (2012)  defines  several 
preconditions for effective supervision in practice: 1) sound and sustainable macroeconomic 
policies as a core precondition for stable financial system; 2) a well established framework for 
financial stability policy formulation i.e. clear framework for macro prudential surveillance and 
financial stability policy formulation; 3) proper regulatory environment; 4) a clear framework for 
crisis management, recovery and resolution; 5) an appropriate level of systemic protection (or 
public safety net) such is a system of deposit insurance which contributes to public confidence 
in the system and thus limit contagion from banks in distress and 6) effective market discipline. 
Transparency is another factor that gains growing importance in recent years. Thus, in order 
to  restore  confidence  and  rebuild  financial  stability  there  was  a  strong  push  towards 
supervisors  to  increase  their  transparency  to  the  markets  and  the  public.  One  supporting 
argument for these trends is the role of transparency as prerequisite for accountability. Higher 
transparency enhances the legitimacy of the supervisor, also safeguarding his independence. 
When transparent, the supervisory actions become more predictable thus helping to shape 
expectations and foster linkages across institutions and markets. Finally, transparency sets 
the  ground  for  careful  and  consistent  decision-making,  reducing  the  scope  for  arbitrary 
decisions. Empirical research (Arnone et al., 2007), finds a positive correlation between the 
transparency of the supervisor and the effectiveness of banking supervision. They also report 
higher transparency of banking supervision (based on adherence to the IMF code) in industrial 
countries than in emerging economies. Another, more recent research (Liendrop at al., 2011) 
suggests that the overall level of transparency of supervisors in industrial countries is very 
similar to transparency of supervisors in emerging economies indicating to positive movements 
in  emerging  markets  in  the  area  in  recent  years.  Indeed,  supervisors  seem  to  endorse 
transparency.  In  2006  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  in  the  Basel  Core 
Principles  for  effective  banking  supervision,  first  mentioned  that  supervisors  should  follow 
transparent  processes.  This  means  that  supervisors  should  disclose  their  objectives  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   framework and be held accountable for performing their duties in line with those objectives and 
framework. The Capital Requirements Directive IV (CRD IV) stipulates that supervisors need 
to  publish relevant  information  on  the  laws,  regulations,  administrative rules  and guidance, 
information  on  options  and  discretions,  the  general  criteria  and  methodologies  used  in  the 
supervisory  review  and  evaluation  process,  and  aggregate  statistical  data  on 
the 
implementation of the prudential framework, including the number and nature of supervisory 
measures taken and administrative penalties imposed.The European Banking Authority (EBA) 
acknowledges the need for supervisory transparency and has set up guidelines for supervisory 
transparency (CEBS, 2010) intended to increase the transparency of supervisory practices 
and to enhance the comparability of national practices. Furthermore, EBA publishes relevant 
information  of  all  EU  countries  on  supervisory  laws  and  regulations  and  statistical  data  on 
national banking sectors, risk indicators and supervisory actions.  
While the benefits of greater transparency in supervision are broadly recognized, the level of 
disclosure remains a challenging issue. This relates to the specifics of the supervision as it 
obtains  sensitive  information  with  respect  to  the  state  of  individual  banks  that  if  publicly 
disclosed  may  affect  its  competitive  position.  Given  this,  what  one  could  expect  is  for 
supervisors to continue to increase transparency when it comes to the authority itself disclosing 
more information on the supervisory model and the methodology used to evaluate the risk 
profile of individual banks, while retaining their “secrecy” when it comes to sensitive information 
concerning individual banks. This should enable markets to better understand the supervisory 
actions, enhance accountability of the supervisors in front of the general public while protecting 
market-sensitive information.  
Tackling the issue of board effectiveness, there is a growing consensus nowadays that well-
designed committee makes important prerequisite for qualitative decision-making in central 
banks. The role of the committee for sound policy making is probably best noted by Warsh 
(2015) in his observation that “monetary policy is made neither by rule nor by discretion. It is 
made  by  committee”.  The  literature  shows  that  the  institutional  setup  of  the  board  indeed 
matters for monetary policy (Morgan, 2005; Maier, 2010; Sibert, 2006) suggesting guidelines 
for optimal committee design. Thus, according to Maier (2010) the optimal committee should 
have clear objective and independence; should not be too large in size (up to five members) 
and have measures to avoid free-riding and discourage polarization and group think. When it 
comes to practice, the number of decision-makers, decision-making protocol, and principals in 
attendance  diverge  markedly  among  the  leading  central  banks,  suggesting  for  committee 
dynamics to be appropriately adjusted conditional on the institutional set-up and specifics of 
the central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
