  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Developments in the Philippine microfinance 
sector 
Keynote message by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(BSP,  the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  14th  Citi  Microentrepreneurship  Awards 
(CMA), Manila, 17 May 2016. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today  as  we  launch  the  14th  year  of  this  nationwide 
microentrepreneurship  swards  with  our  partners  –  Citi  Foundation,  Citi  Philippines  and  the 
Microfinance Council of the Philippines, Inc. (MCPI). 
Yes,  14  years  and  counting.  To  me,  what  has  kept  this  awards  program  relevant  and 
meaningful year after year are the changes and enhancements that have been introduced in 
response to developments on the ground. 
For  indeed,  the  environment  for  the  development  of  the  microfinance  sector  continues  to 
improve  based  on  sustained  coordination  and  cooperation  with  industry  players  and 
stakeholders. This includes microentrepeneurs, banks, microfinance institutions, agencies of 
government,  stakeholders  from  civil  society,  the  private  sector  as  well  as  multilateral 
institutions. 
Industry  figures  mark  our  progress.  In  December  2002,  for  instance,  there  were  390,635 
microfinance  borrowers  from  119  banks.  By  31  December  2015,  the  number  of  banks 
providing  microfinance  loans  had  increased  by  nearly  43%  to  170  while  the  number  of 
borrowers had increased by 277% to roughly 1.47 million. 
Overall, microfinance loans increased by 333% from P2.6 billion in 2002 to P11.3 billion in 
2015. 
If  we  base  it  on  their  savings,  we  can  say  that  microfinance  has  improved  the  financial 
standing  of  these  microentrepreneurs.  Together,  they  have  accumulated  savings  of  about 
P4.5  billion  as  of  December  2015.  We  have  no  comparative  data  for  2002  deposits; 
compared however to the deposits of as December 2011, this represents a 22% growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are fully aware that we can do so much more to lift more Filipinos 
from poverty through microfinance. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by global surveys that 
indicate that the Philippines has one of the world’s best environment for promoting the quality 
of life of people through sustained development of the microfinance sector. 
For instance, in recognition of the BSP’s work, the Economic Intelligence Unit’s 2015 Global 
Microscope  on  Financial  Inclusion  ranked  the  Philippines  first  in  Asia  and  the  third  in  the 
world in terms of regulatory environment for financial inclusion. 
And together, we are committed to continue to find better ways to grow microfinance. One 
such strategy is through mentoring of our microentrepreneurs under the CMA program. 
The  mentoring  is  aimed  at  improving  their  enterprises  by  providing  support  suited  to  their 
specific  business  needs.  It  covers,  among  others,  helping  products  and  services  become 
more  competitive  in  local  and/or  international  markets;  providing  guidance  in  identifying 
critical processes and areas for improvement; offering technical advice on infusing innovation 
into enterprises; and facilitating the development of business competencies. The end goal is 
for microenterprises to eventually transition into small and even medium enterprises. 
This mentoring program was piloted last year. This year we plan to fully refine the program 
based on lessons learned from the engagement of the University of the Philippines Institute 
for  Small-Scale  Industries  (UP  ISSI)  which  mentored  13  past  CMA  winners  for  about  7  to 
8 months. Let me share some key lessons. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  instance,  microfinance 
One is the challenge of informality – this is where the informal status of microenterprises or 
their lack of legal personality to conduct business limits their capability to expand and market 
their products. 
Another is the limited capacity of microenterprises when it comes to financial recording and 
documentation which makes them susceptible to poor accounting and planning. This affects 
their ability to make sound business decisions. 
At  the  BSP,  we  recognize  that  informality  and  lack  of  capacity  remain  major  hurdles  that 
impede  the  growth  of microenterprises.  As  a  response,  the  BSP  has  issued  guidelines  on 
sound credit risk management practices (Circular 855) that provide an empowering approach 
to  support  small  businesses.  For 
loans  and  other  credit 
accommodations  not  exceeding  P3  million  are  exempted  from  the  submission  of  financial 
documents such as Income Tax Returns (ITRs) and other supporting financial statements. 
Similarly  exempted  are  start-ups  during  the  first  three  years  of  their  operation  or  banking 
relationship. 
The objective here is encourage microenterprises to build banking relationships that will help 
them grow for the long term. 
Broader  government  initiatives  converge  with  this  way  of  thinking.  For  instance,  the  Go 
Negosyo  Act  and  Negosyo  Centers  provide  support  for  MSMEs  such  as  facilitation  of 
business registration and training in finance and marketing. Negosyo Centers can also link 
MSMEs to value chains that will enable them to access secured and sustainable markets to 
keep them more viable. 
We  also  have  the  Barangay  Micro  Business  Enterprises  (BMBEs)  Act  that  seeks  to 
encourage the formation and growth of micro business enterprises by intergrating them with 
the  mainstream  economy  through  incentives,  marketing  assistance,  as  well  as  training 
programs in production and management. 
In  addition,  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  and  other  financial  service  providers  support 
MSMEs  through  financial  products  and  other  services  critical  to  the  entry,  survival, 
productivity, and growth of enterprises. 
I am happy to share that the ISSI diagnostics also highlighted positive findings. For instance, 
ISSI  found  that  especially  when  faced  with  high  market  demand,  microenterprises  are 
resilient to operational issues – in Filipino we describe them as “madiskarte”. 
This  indicates  that  given  appropriate  training  and  mentoring  as  well  as  adequate  funding 
support, our microentrepreneurs can favourably respond to business opportunities. 
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  stand  to  gain  more  benefits  by  having  an 
increasingly nurturing environment for microenterprises. Given this, I am confident that the 
nomination  process  for  CMA  that  we  are  launching  today  will  generate  an  even  better 
harvest for this year. 
In  this  connection,  we  all  look  forward  to  meeting  more  successful  and  innovative 
microenterprises that have the capacity to grow as well as the readiness and the desire to 
contribute to making lives better not only for their families but also for their communities. 
Indeed, we want MSMEs to develop to their full potential and to help drive economic growth 
that is broad-based and inclusive. 
Mabuhay  ang  microentrepreneurs!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  na  bansang  Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
