  Harun R Khan: Indian debt market 2020 – the underpinnings & the path 
ahead 
Inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  17th  Annual  Conference  of  FIMMDA  (Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and  Derivatives 
Association of India) – PDAI (Primary Dealers’ Association of India), London, 15 April 2016. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Vaibhav Chaturvedi and Shri N.R.V.V.M.K Rajendra Kumar 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Shri  N.  S.  Venkatesh,  Executive  Director,  IDBI  Bank  &  Chairman,  FIMMDA, 
1. 
Shri B. Prasanna, Chairman PDAI, senior colleagues from the banking fraternity, delegates 
from India & UK, ladies and gentlemen. It is my pleasure to be part of the Annual FIMMDA-
PDAI Conference being held in one of the leading financial centres of the world. London is 
home of one of the world’s oldest central banks and epitomizes the intellectual churning that 
has happened internationally about the role of central banks in the regulation of the financial 
sector. From being a poster boy of the philosophy of central bank being divested of all other 
responsibilities other than monetary policy, before the crisis, to the restorer of central bank 
primacy in financial regulation, the experience of London, the pre-eminent financial centre, 
offers valuable lessons for other countries. Going through the rich and intellectually riveting 
debates in the House of Commons and the House of Lords on the Financial Services Bill, 
which was enacted in December 2012, is an across the spectrum study in the philosophy of 
financial regulation. 
2. 
I  have  been  associated  with  the  area  of  market  regulation  long  enough  to  have 
mulled and struggled with different strands of the philosophy of regulation as it has evolved 
over the past few decades. The financial sector in India has developed over the years in the 
context of varying politico-economic considerations at different points of time. The program of 
economic  reforms  initiated  in  the  nineties  was  a  seminal  point  in  India’s  economic  history. 
For billion Indians, this was nothing short of revolution, opening huge opportunities. Due to 
these reforms, we broke the shackles of low growth and recorded impressive growth rates. 
India’s  entry  in  to  the  league  of  top  economies  of  the  world  and  a  preferred  investment 
destination validated the success of the policy. 
3. 
These  changes  were  result  of  well-thought  policies.  Though  the  push  can  be 
attributed  to  the  precarious  economic  situation  of  1991,  the  course  was  set  by  series  of 
calibrated  steps.  Reforms  were  carried  out  keeping  in  view  the  interests  of  all  the 
stakeholders,  especially  large  sections  that  are  economically  weak.  Steady  reforms  have 
proved to be more stable and durable. 
4. 
Financial  sector  reforms  have  been  part  of  overall  scheme  of  reforms  and  have 
complemented  the  other  components  of  economic  policy.  One  notable  feature  of  financial 
sector  reforms  in  India  since  they  were  instituted  in  the  early  1990s  has  been  the 
maintenance of financial stability through a period marked by repeated financial crises across 
the world. Our financial markets have emerged stronger; became deep and liquid during this 
period. They also became more resilient in wake of challenging domestic and global events. 
5. 
Our  approach  to  “market  regulation”  all  these  years  has  evolved  keeping  the 
systemic  imperatives  and  institutional  prudence  at  the  center.  The  pace  of  progress  may 
have varied and, at times, discontinuous but that has more to do with the uncertain macro 
environment.  Policymaking  can  never  be  a  linear,  uni-dimensional  process  unless  it  is 
ideological, which ours is not. But in terms of final outcomes, we have covered a tremendous 
distance.  I  have  in  the  past  talked  about  what  have  been  the  key  attributes  and 
achievements of our approach, so would not want to repeat that. I would just mention that 
our approach has never been statist and the import of a lot of small things being discussed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and implemented does not fully register in the wider deliberations amid the din of absolutist 
arguments. 
6. 
Since we began the financial sector reforms, Indian bond markets have come a long 
way.  Bond  market  activity  has  grown  rapidly.  Government  securities  market  (G-Sec), 
corporate  bond  market  and  derivatives  markets  have  become  broad-based  in  terms  of 
participation. The debt and derivatives products that are available have grown in number and 
complexity. The sovereign yield curve now spans up to 40 years. Primary market issuances 
have increased resulting in large benchmark issuances. The volumes in secondary market 
have  surged.  The  bid-ask  spread  of  on-the-run  securities  continues  to  be  low  and  so  are 
impact  costs.  In  case  of  corporate  bonds  too,  trading  volumes  have  increased  but  lag  in 
comparison with global peers. 
7. 
There  have  been  significant  changes  in  market  micro-structure  and  infrastructure. 
Over the period of past two decades, the Reserve Bank of India has adopted a strategy for 
creation of an efficient market infrastructure to enable safe trading, clearing and settlement. 
State-of-the-art  primary  issuance  process  with  electronic  bidding  and  straight-through-
processing  (STP)  capabilities,  an  efficient,  completely  dematerialized  depository  system 
within  the  central  bank,  Delivery-versus-Payment  (DvP)  mode  of  settlement,  Real  Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS), electronic trading platform (Negotiated Dealing Systems – Order 
Matching)  (NDS-OM)  and  a  separate  Central  Counter  Party  (CCP)  in  the  Clearing 
Corporation  of  India  Ltd  (CCIL)  for  guaranteed  settlement  are  among  the  steps  that  were 
taken by the Reserve Bank over the years. The system makes G-Sec trading practically risk 
free and efficient. 
Today,  I  would  try  to  present  the  big  picture  emerging  a  few  years  from  now  as 
8. 
many  of the  small  pieces  we  are  currently  pursuing finally  coalesce  into  the  larger  theme. 
Both  as  a  result  of  studied  re-assessments  within  as  well  as  convergence  with  globally 
accepted best principles several far-reaching initiatives have been announced in the recent 
past.  It  may,  however,  be  contextual  to  understand  the  underpinnings  of  this  process,  at 
times criticized of not being able to deliver. 
The critique and the response 
9. 
The state of markets and market regulation in India has been often criticized for not 
achieving  an  efficient  bond-currency-derivatives  (BCD)  nexus.  A  seemingly  logical  but 
misleading  conclusion  drawn  from  this  is  that  the  current  institutional  structure  is  to  be 
blamed for this. The argument is that by changing the institutional structure, by itself, would 
succeed in reversing the public policy consensus relating to financial markets. This is at best 
a very facetious argument and completely belies the shared views among all the regulators 
and  the  Government  regarding  the  broad  philosophy  and  objective  of  financial  sector 
policies. 
10. 
The  other  fallacy  is  to  believe  that  BCD  nexus  can  be  enforced  only  through 
exchanges,  which  perhaps  is  an  extension  of  the  earlier  argument.  While  it  is  true  that 
exchanges  play  an  extremely  important  role  in  furthering  development  of  efficient  markets 
and price discovery, and more importantly address counterparty risk issues which are there 
in the OTC market, much of the risk transfer in the most developed markets happens in the 
OTC market  among  large  institutional  players. With the  post  crisis focus  this  segment  has 
received, many of the earlier weaknesses have been addressed. 
11. 
While  the  phrase  “BCD  Nexus”  sounds  intellectually  impressive,  what  it  simply 
means  is  that  there  are  certain  restrictions  regarding  participation  of  various  economic 
entities  in  the  currency  and  interest  rate  markets  and  the  related  derivatives.  Yes,  there 
indeed  these  markets  are  tightly  regulated.  But  what  is  the  underlying  philosophy  behind 
these  regulations?  Instead  of  talking  about  market  regulation  in  abstractions,  it  would  be 
useful to understand what it actually entails. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12. 
Let us take currency markets. The markets have traditionally been OTC, seeking to 
cater to the genuine hedging needs of the entities. Given the capital account management 
framework,  obviously  there  are guidelines  of  who  can  participate  in  what kind  of  products. 
These guidelines have been significantly liberalized over the years and newer products have 
been introduced on the exchanges. Now, the question here is at what stage do we move to a 
completely open capital account which would, in turn, result in freeing up the restrictions on 
participation in these markets. The latter follows from the first, not the other way round. This 
is institutional-structure agnostic. 
13. 
Another  structural  factor  with  regard  to  an  efficient  BCD  nexus  is  the  nature  of 
institutional market. In a bank-centric financial system, it has been the experience that even 
the task of developing non-bank channels, particularly through market-based mechanisms, 
falls  ultimately  on  the  banks  themselves.  Whether  it  is  expecting  banks  to  provide  credit 
enhancement for bond markets or acting as market-makers in various market segments, the 
role of banks becomes critical. This reflects the underlying structural makeup of the financial 
system and implies that any attempt at relaxing market regulation ultimately comes unstuck 
at the altar of prudential regulation. The same, to a lesser extent, applies to other regulated 
entities as well, such as, insurance companies, pension funds, etc. which are seen as natural 
participants in some market segments, such as, corporate bonds, interest rate derivatives, 
credit default swaps but the prudential regulatory framework, perhaps for very valid reasons, 
is  more  conservative.  Again,  it  is  a  matter  of  regulatory  philosophy  than  the  institutional 
structure. 
14. 
As  regard  debt  markets,  the  regulations  essentially  entail  specification  of  broad 
product features and participation norms. While the considerations behind regulating interest 
rate markets are different form exchange rate markets, the objective still remains systemic 
stability. Large sovereign borrowings impact the yield curve through the expectation channel. 
Apart from direct balance sheet effects on the financial sector, interest rate volatility has a 
critical  bearing  on  sovereign  balance  sheet  which  could  translate  onto  financial  sector 
balance sheets. It, therefore, becomes imperative to be watchful of volatility in interest rates 
on account of activities of various market players. 
15. 
Active, unfettered repo market is one of the critical elements of such BCD construct. 
Repo markets were one of the most active funding markets globally before the crisis. Post-
crisis, however, several work-streams under FSB, IOSCO, etc. are working internationally to 
tighten the regulation of repo markets, including regulations on re-use of securities, margins 
and  haircuts,  leverage  built-up  through  repo  markets,  etc.  These  are  not  market  conduct 
issues but prudential issues, being discussed in the context of systemic stability. 
16. 
Market  regulation  cannot  remain  a  value-neutral  term.  Different  markets  have 
different  dynamics  and  inter-connections  with  the  real  sector  and  broader  macroeconomic 
stability. To argue that regulation of equity markets is same as regulation of currency markets 
is  facetious,  ignoring  the  massive  work  going  on  internationally  towards  reforming  the 
financial  sector.  Yes  market  mechanics  can  be  same  and  market  micro-structure  can  be 
convergent across asset classes but in terms of systemic spillover, approach to regulation of 
these markets can be very different. 
17. 
So  the  point  I  am  trying  to  make  is  that  the  debate  needs  to  be  on  the  nature of 
financial  regulation  and  the  underlying  structural  imperatives  rather  than  the  institutional 
structure. Various models have been tried internationally pre-crisis and post-crisis and it’s the 
contextual imperatives which have driven the changes. 
The path ahead 
Planning  towards  future,  I  can  cite  the  policy  direction  provided  by  our  Governor 
18. 
Dr. Raghuram Rajan. While talking about the Five Pillars of RBI’s Developmental Measures, 
Dr. Rajan  identified  ‘broadening  and  deepening  financial  markets  and  increasing  their 
liquidity and resilience’ as an important pillar. The objective is to help allocate and absorb the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  risks entailed in financing India’s growth. He had observed that markets are complementary 
to development of banking sector. The tasks ahead are: 
Building liquidity and improving market access; 
• 
• 
Developing  Government  bond  market  domestically  in  terms  of  investor  class, 
instruments, infrastructure, intermediaries and innovations and opening up to foreign 
investors  in  a  calibrated  manner  to  broaden  the  investors’  base  without  unduly 
exposing it to the risks of sudden stops; and 
Better  communication  of  the  debt  management  policy  to  avoid  uncertainty  in  the 
minds of investors. 
19. 
Going forward, by the year 2020, I would expect macro-economic management to 
become more robust, large scale fiscal consolidation resulting in optimal debt structure, bond 
markets  becoming  more  liquid  and  deep,  host  of  reforms  in  derivatives  space  and  central 
bank communication becoming more robust and effective. I would like to share some of my 
thoughts on the issues. 
 foster 
Debt management: medium term debt strategy 
I. 
20. 
Recently we have articulated, in consultation with the Government, our medium term 
debt  management  strategy  (MTDS).  The  move  was  designed  to  benchmark  our  debt 
management  practices  with  global  sound  practice  and 
transparency  and 
accountability. MTDS comprises objectives, various benchmarks and portfolio indicators and 
yearly  issuance  strategy  (external  and  domestic  funding,  instruments,  maturity  structure, 
etc.).  It  provides  requisite  information,  transparency  &  certainty  and  enables  market 
participants (investors) to plan their strategy for investment in Government bonds market. 
21. 
The MTDS has been articulated for a period of three years and it will be reviewed 
annually and rolled over for the next three years. The scope of debt management strategy is 
presently limited to active elements of domestic debt management, i.e., marketable debt of 
the  Central  Government  only.  Over  time,  the  scope  would  be  progressively  expanded  to 
cover  the  entire  stock  of  outstanding  liabilities  including  external  debt  as  well  as  General 
Government Debt including State Development Loans (SDL). 
22. 
The debt management strategy revolves around three broad pillars, viz., borrowing 
at  low  cost  over  a  period  of  time,  risk  mitigation  and  market  development.  The  intended 
process as part of MTDS entails the following: 
• 
Carrying  forward  transparent  issuance  process  by  providing  clear  information  on 
borrowing programme to investors and having continuous investor interactions and 
appropriate consultation; 
Building up benchmark issues by issuing significant volumes and taking advantage 
of liquidity premia; 
Elongating the maturity of the debt portfolio; 
Building a balanced maturity profile and supply along the yield curve; 
Issuing a variety of instruments, such as, inflation linked bonds that would help the 
investors to manage their portfolio more efficiently; 
Undertaking switches / buybacks for effective liability management; 
Expanding  the  domestic  investor  base  by  encouraging  retail  and  mid-segment 
investors’ participation in G-Sec market and calibrated opening of the government 
securities market to foreign investors and retail investors; and 
Continuing  passive  consolidation  with  large  benchmark  issuances  and  active 
consolidation through buy-backs / switches/ conversions. 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23. 
An important risk mitigation measure aimed at alleviating the pressure at short-end 
was  undertaking  switches/buybacks  from  proximate  maturities  in  order  to  reduce  the 
redemption  concentration  and  create  space  for  further  issuances  that  may  be  needed  to 
meet  the  demand  of  market  participants.  During  the  past  three  fiscal  years,  switches 
amounting to about Rupees one trillion were undertaken by the Reserve Bank in consultation 
with  the  Government.  The  operations  have  eased  gross  borrowing  numbers  and  enabled 
effective borrowings. 
24. 
The  aim  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  always  been  to  conduct  market  borrowing 
operations  in  a  smooth  manner  without  undue  disruptions.  The  strategic  and  tactical 
approaches  of  debt  management  are  meant  to  ensure  the  same.  While  the  strategic 
parameters are set in MTDS and anchored to achieving the main objectives, the tactics are 
not only linked to the objectives but also to ensuring stability of operations. A recent example 
would  bring  out  this  approach.  The  market  participants  were  expressing  apprehensions 
about the potential elevated supply of government bonds due to the issuances by the state 
governments under Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojana (UDAY). 
25. 
The yields had hardened in anticipation, especially for state government borrowings. 
We have acted in a calibrated manner planning issuances to banks that have DISCOM dues 
directly  so  that  the  supply  will  not  enter  the  market.  Selective  regulatory  forbearance  of 
categorizing the bonds as ‘HTM’ was accorded to subscribing banks. The bonds issued to 
pay dues to the central public sector undertakings were offered through private placements. 
The  pressure  on  the  yields  also  moderated  by  modulating  the  issuance  strategy  to  limit 
issuances at long tenors announcing the same in the borrowing calendar for first half of the 
fiscal 2016–17. This was possible because we had over time elongated the maturity profile of 
the Government bonds; weighted average maturity of 10.50 years as on end-March 2016 is 
one of the highest among the peers. This flattened the yield curve bringing down yields at 
15 years  and  above,  thereby  increasing  attractiveness  of  the  state  bonds  issued  under 
UDAY. 
26. 
The timing of issuances was planned keeping in view absence of supply at end of 
fiscal  year.  The  issuances  were  successful  and  UDAY  bonds  of  about  ₹  990  billion  were 
successfully  placed.  The  Fixed  Income  and  Money  Market  Dealers  Association  (FIMMDA) 
played an important role here in co-ordinating with banks for smooth issuances. The market 
behavior  in  this  case,  however,  bears  scrutiny.  The  markets  exhibited  serious  negativity, 
mostly as a response to imaginary stress. There is also evidence of uni-directional bias, i.e., 
the  market  was  unduly  pessimistic  impacting  yields.  It  also  brings  forth  need  for  better 
communication from the issuers. There are lessons to be learnt from the episode. 
II. 
Secondary market trading 
Enhancing liquidity of the debt market 
27. 
In  the  recent  past,  concerns  have  been  raised  globally  about  both  a  decline  in 
current market liquidity, especially for fixed-income assets, and its resilience, as brought out 
in the IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2015. In this context, it may be mentioned that 
liquidity in the Indian G-Sec markets, as indicated by trading volumes, improved significantly 
across markets along with increase in net borrowing. One of the reasons for the improved 
liquidity in G-sec and Repo is due to the electronic platform based trading (Charts 1 & 2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    28. 
The above was also borne out by a study undertaken by the Centre for Advanced 
Financial Research & Learning (CAFRAL) which found a strong positive impact on market 
efficiency through the introduction of NDS-OM and its associated transformational impact in 
the secondary market for government bonds, namely: 
• 
• 
Ten-fold rise in daily trading volume; 
The  enormous  shift  to  NDS-OM  platform  at  the  expense  of  OTC  brokered  sub-
market; 
Lower trade execution search costs; and 
Real-time  reporting  of  trade  book  and  order  book  information  leading  to  real  time 
public dissemination as well. 
29. 
Liquidity  as  measured  by  bid-ask  spread  shows  that  market  liquidity  dried  up  in 
second  half  of  2013.  Market  volumes,  however,  remained  high.  Since  then,  the  bid-ask 
spread has compressed significantly suggesting improvement in liquidity (Chart 3). 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   30. 
Various  measures  have  been  taken  to  enhance  the  secondary  market  liquidity  in 
Government  bond  market.  Consequently,  the  average  daily  trading  volume  has  increased 
more than six times in the last five years. During the taper tantrum, investors could exercise 
the  option  to  sell  securities  in  an  orderly  fashion  and  exit  without  market  disruption.  This 
improved credibility of Indian markets and the investors returned. We have tweaked short-
sale limits, opened “when issued” market and started buy-back operations based on the cash 
position of government. We have initiated switches that would ease redemption pressure as 
well  as  aid  consolidation.  We  are  also  discussing  with  the  Government  a  suitable  market 
making scheme for illiquid and semi-liquid Government securities. There is, however, work 
still to be done. 
NDS-OM version 2 enhancements 
III. 
31. 
NDS-OM,  RBI’s  Anonymous  Order  Matching  System  for  dealing  in  secondary 
market  outright  trades  in  G-Sec  was  launched  in  August  2005  based  on  an  internal 
assessment  of  the  need  for  a  screen  based  dealing  system  as  recommended  by  the 
R. H. Patil Committee appointed by Reserve Bank of India. All trades concluded on NDS-OM 
flow within an STP framework to the CCIL, which acts as the CCP for all these trades, within 
the provisions of its bye-laws, rules and regulations. 
From a relatively simple system when initially launched in August 2005, over time 
32. 
various functionalities have been added to NDS-OM. The application facilitates trading in all 
kinds  of  Central  Government/State  Government/Treasury  Bill  instrument  in  standard  and 
non-standard  (odd)  market  lots.  It  also  facilitates  trading  in  “When  Issued”  (both  re-issues 
and  new  issues).  Other  important  system  capabilities  include  short-selling  and  limit 
monitoring, stock balance monitoring, ‘When Issued’ limit monitoring, web-based module for 
client dealing, etc. The system has been widely accepted by market participants and its order 
matching  segment  now  consistently  accounts  for  80  –  85  per  cent  of  total  G-Sec  market 
volumes. The average daily volumes on NDS-OM have increased from ₹ 50 billion in 2005–06 
to over ₹ 400 billion in 2015–16. 
33. 
As  part  of  vision  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  for  providing  state-of-the-art 
infrastructure to market participants, Reserve Bank has initiated an upgradation of the NDS-
OM  platform.  The  new  system  is  expected  to  have  faster  through-put,  enhanced 
functionalities, rich user interface, internationally compatible message formats, etc. 
Access of demat account holders to NDS-OM 
34. 
One  of  the  major  factors  said  to  be  hampering  trading  interest  in  G-Sec  is  the 
difficulty in access to NDS-OM by non-institutional investor class. There is the gilt-account 
route but a large number of investors holding demat accounts cannot directly access NDS-OM. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  As already announced in the First Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2015–16, Reserve 
Bank  is  working,  along  with  CCIL  and  depositories,  to  give  demat  account  holders  direct 
access to NDS-OM. This is expected to open up a large investor base, hitherto untapped, for 
investment in G-Sec. Even though G-Sec are globally institutional markets, this step is one of 
the most significant ones to facilitate retail investment in G-Sec. 
Integration at the depository level 
IV. 
Currently though intra-depository transfers of G-Sec take place seamlessly between 
35. 
two  beneficiary  owners  within  a  depository,  there  is  no  facility  to  transfer  G-Sec  seamless 
across  depositories.  Further,  at  present,  there  is  no  linkage  between  the  RBI  SGL  system 
and  the  depositories.  As  a  result,  transfer  of securities  between  SGL  and  demat  accounts 
involves  a  manual  process.  The  manual  process  involves  delays  and  inhibits  seamless 
movement  of  securities  between  SGL  and  demat  accounts.  As  announced  in  the  First 
B-monthly  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  2015–16,  Reserve  Bank  is  working  along  with  the 
depositories to implement a seamless transfer of securities among depositories and RBI SGL 
which  would  effectively  lead  to  an  integrated  depository  system  for  G-Secs.  This  would 
greatly facilitate transaction on the exchanges between a SGL-account holder and non-SGL 
account holder. 
New products 
V. 
36. 
Permitting introduction of new products in OTC as well as exchange traded space 
has always been a mutually consultative process between the Reserve Bank of India and the 
market participants. However, the approach adopted for introduction of interest rate options 
(IRO), I can, say, marks a fundamental departure. While the final guidelines are expected to 
be  issued  shortly,  I  can  share  that  the  guidelines  would  be  truly  principle-based  and  not 
prescriptive. It is proposed to permit a broad range of instruments including simple call and 
put  options,  caps, floors,  collars  and  swaptions  on  both  exchanges  as well  as  in  the  OTC 
market.  While  the  Working  Group  on  Introduction  of  Interest  Rate  Options  (Chairman: 
Prof. P.G. Apte) had recommended standardized contracts in the OTC market, the feedback 
received is that this may not be feasible. Another issue that has been flagged in the feedback 
relates to allowing users to hedge their foreign currency interest rate exposures using options 
on  foreign  currency  interest  rate  benchmarks  with  Authorised  Dealer  banks  in  India  on  a 
back-to-back basis. This needs to be examined separately and may not be included as part 
of Rupee IRO guidelines. 
37. 
products – both OTC as well as exchange traded. 
Broadly, the same approach will be followed  while finalizing guidelines on all new 
Regulation of electronic platforms 
VI. 
38. 
Electronic  platform  trading  has  the  benefits  of  improved  transparency,  reduced 
transaction  times,  efficient  audit  trails,  improved  risk  controls  and  enhanced  market 
monitoring.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  last  financial  crisis,  internationally,  there  is  a  move  to 
promote trading of financial instruments on electronic platform. 
39. 
In  India,  as  mentioned  earlier,  we  can  be  considered  pioneers  in  creating 
anonymous electronic platforms for trading. NDS-OM, an anonymous electronic platform for 
trading in Government securities was created a decade ago. Most trades in G-Sec now gets 
executed  on  NDS-OM.  Similarly,  “Clearcorp  Repo  Order  Matching  System”  (CROMS),  an 
STP  enabled  electronic  anonymous  order  matching  platform  to  facilitate  dealing  in  market 
repos  in  G-Sec  is  also  available.  The  availability  of  electronic  trading  platform  with  robust 
clearing  and  settlement  mechanism  has  been  instrumental  in  the  phenomenal  growth 
observed in the outright and repo market in G-Sec. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  40. 
Taking into account the experience of NDS-OM  and CROMS in G-Sec, there is a 
need  to  introduce  electronic  trading  dealing  platforms  for  other  financial  instruments  like 
corporate bonds, CPs, CDs and derivative products. Reserve Bank of India has also been 
receiving  requests  from  various  entities  to  introduce  electronic  platforms  for  these 
instruments.  Accordingly,  it  is  now  proposed  to  prescribe  a  framework  for  authorization  of 
electronic dealing platforms for financial instruments regulated by the Reserve Bank of India. 
The  overarching  philosophy  behind  the  framework  would  be  to  permit  more  than  one 
electronic  platform  subject  to  eligibility  and  demand.  The  transactions  on  such  platforms 
could be piped to the related settlement agency for post-trade processing, etc. 
VII. 
OTC derivative reforms 
41. 
In response to concerns about systemic risks in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives 
markets,  the  G-20  leaders  agreed  in  2009  to  a  comprehensive  reform  agenda  to  improve 
transparency in these markets, mitigate systemic risk, and protect against market abuse. All 
the  jurisdictions,  including  the  Emerging  Market  Developing  Economies  (EMDEs)  have 
progressed  substantially  on  the  above  as  brought  out  in  the  last  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB)  progress  report  on  implementation.  Implementation  is  almost  complete  for  trade 
reporting and higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives. As observed 
in the Report, the authorities, however, continue to report challenges concerning the quality 
and completeness of the data being reported to Trade Repositories (TRs) and the ability to 
access,  use  and  aggregate  this  data.  FSB’s  Thematic  Review  on  OTC  Derivatives  Trade 
Reporting  which  came  out  in  November  2015  identified  several  recurring  issues  that  are 
posing  challenges  including  concerns  over  data  quality,  capacity  to  effectively  aggregate 
information across TRs, existence of barriers to reporting complete data to TRs, and barriers 
to authorities’ access to TR-held data. 
42. 
From an EMDE perspective, the cross-border reporting and access to TR data has 
come out as a major issue which, as recommended, needs to be addressed legally. While 
the  imperatives  behind  this  are  appreciated,  their  implementation  would  require  navigating 
the  existing  privacy  provisions  nationally  which  may  be  challenging.  As  an  alternative,  to 
achieve early compliance, cooperative arrangements may also be considered pending legal 
frameworks. As the legislative process is usually long drawn and requires political support, 
the approach should not mandate legislative changes for all aspects of the reform agenda. 
43. 
One of the biggest challenges for EMDEs remains meeting recognition/ equivalence 
requirements  of  major  financial  centres  in  OTC  derivatives. While  the  concerns  relating  to 
uneven  implementation  of  reforms  may  be  an  issue,  forcing  home  country  jurisdictional 
requirements  onto  host  country  entities,  particularly  financial  market  infrastructure  entities 
could become a sensitive subject. From an EMDE perspective, this also comes in the way of 
achieving other objectives, such as, mandating central clearing for certain standardised OTC 
products. If the CCP is not recognised, participation of banks from other jurisdictions could 
be hampered affecting market development adversely. Some segments of the contributors to 
market  liquidity  may  be  forced  to  withdraw  from  the  market  thereby  making  the  markets 
shallower.  This  could  impact  the  longer  term  market  development.  This  will  also  have  an 
adverse impact on ability of market participants to hedge various risks using these derivative 
instruments. 
44. 
Such  an  approach  defeats  the  very  purpose  of  an  internationally-coordinated 
approach.  Once  any  entity  is  recognised  as  compliant  with  the  internationally  accepted 
principles, subject to all the review mechanisms, additional bilateral requirements are difficult 
to justify. We are aware that the regulators in respective countries requiring this recognition 
are bound by the legal provisions in their jurisdictions but it is best to address such issues on 
a  multi-lateral  basis.  The  Report  of  the  IOSCO  Task  Force  on  Cross-Border  Regulation, 
which was published in September 2015, examined various issues comprehensively. There 
is an urgent need to agree on a broad set of equivalence principles internationally and not to 
insist on introduction of country specific requirements over other jurisdictions. Mutual reliance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Beyond 
the  above  agenda, 
among  the  regulators  within  the  framework  of  agreed  global  best  practices  and  sound 
principles should be the ideal way to resolve avoidable frictions. 
45. 
there  are  several  other  work-streams  whose 
recommendations have a bearing on the functioning of the markets. For instance, the FSB 
work-stream on resolution of financial entities requires host country jurisdictions to allow bail-
in clauses for all deposit liabilities raised by home country entities. The implications of such a 
sweeping mandate could be serious for the interests of domestic depositors. The challenge 
would be to strike a balance of the interest of various stakeholders. 
46. 
In India, a Standing Committee under the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on 
Financial Markets has been constituted to assess, on a continuing basis, the implications of 
recommendations  of  various  international  standard  setting  bodies,  through  different  work-
streams,  on  domestic  OTC  markets.  The  Committee  would  also  help  in  formulating 
appropriate policy response in this area. 
   VIII. Corporate bonds 
47. 
Based on recommendations of a Working Group set up under the aegis of FSDC-
SC,  certain  measures  have  been  announced  in  the  Union  Budget  for  2016–17  for 
development of the corporate bond market: 
• 
Setting  up  of  a  dedicated  fund  to  provide  credit  enhancement  to  infrastructure 
projects by the Life Insurance Corporation (LIC); 
Issue of guidelines by the Reserve Bank of India to encourage large borrowers to 
access a certain portion of their financing needs through market mechanism instead 
of the banks; 
Expansion of investment basket of foreign portfolio investors to include unlisted debt 
securities and pass through securities issued by securitisation SPVs; 
Introduction of electronic auction platform for developing an enabling eco system for 
the private placement market in corporate bonds by SEBI for primary debt offer; 
Development  of  a  complete  information  repository  for  corporate  bonds,  covering 
both primary and secondary market segments; and 
Development of a framework for an electronic platform for repo market in corporate 
bonds. 
48. 
We  are  in  the  process  of  implementing  the  recommendations.  In  addition,  certain 
other  measures  will  be  announced  after  finalization  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
Committee. 
49. 
Enactment  of  the  Bankruptcy  Act  will  be  a  defining  event  as  regards  the 
development of the corporate debt market. Some of the recommendations of the Companies 
Law Committee, particularly relating to private placement of securities, could also have far 
reaching implications for easing the issuance process. Another significant recommendation 
of the Committee is to exclude instruments covered under Chapter III D of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934 in the term “debenture” as defined in Section 2 (30) of the Companies Act, 
2013.  This  will  provide  the  necessary  clarity  regarding  issuance  of  CPs  and  other  money 
market instruments. 
  Use of financial technology 
IX. 
50. 
Use of financial technology (fintech) in strengthening market infrastructure has been 
the buzzword in international fora. In particular, use of distributed ledger technology (DLT) 
holds  a  lot  of  promise  for  all  transaction  networks  requiring  non-repudiation  and  finality 
through maintenance of real time updated transaction ledgers. Conventional “non-distributed” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  systems like payment systems and clearing/settlement systems use centralised ledgers. DLT 
achieves  this  in  a  decentralised  manner  while  (i)  keeping  the  identities  of  the  participants 
unknown  and  (ii)  without  any  central  agency  regulating  the  participants  or  the  flow  of 
transactions.  Bitcoin  represents  one  end  of  the  applications  spectrum  of  “permissionless”, 
completely  decentralised  transactions.  Several  applications  are,  however,  being  attempted 
across  the  spectrum,  trying  to  marry  the  technology  with  the  conventional  centralised 
systems for efficiency gains. 
51. 
While  it  may  be  premature  to  talk  about  regulating  block-chains,  there  is  need  to 
continually  engage  with  the  industry  to  try  to  understand  various  applications  being 
developed  around  the  technology  and  monitor  the  developments  in  this  space.  The 
regulatory  focus  will  be  on  identifying  potential  use  cases,  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
industry, where this technology could be leveraged. Controlled adoption in  identified areas 
will be the preferred approach. 
52. 
Towards  leveraging  the  benefits  of  fintech,  particularly  block-chain  technology,  it 
would be our constant endeavour to engage with industry participants to explore the adoption 
of  various  innovations  in  strengthening  market  infrastructure.  Concept  papers  exploring 
possible  use  cases  of  these  technologies  in  the  financial  market  infrastructure  would  be 
prepared and placed in public domain for wider feedback. 
Role of FIMMDA 
X. 
53. 
As a person who has been involved with the development of the debt market in India 
under various capacities, I can see the growing importance and role of FIMMDA in the fixed 
income and derivatives market. The consultations between the Reserve Bank of India and 
the FIMMDA, both formally and informally, on various issues of policy have not only helped 
us  in  understanding  the  point  of  view  of  the  participants  but  have  also  entrusted  greater 
responsibility on FIMMDA as a market body. 
54. 
Today,  apart  from  coming  out  with  price  valuations  for  G-Sec  and  non-G-Sec, 
FIMMDA has been given added responsibilities of developing and operating critical market 
infrastructure like reporting platform for corporate bonds, repo in corporate bonds, CPs and 
CDs. Further, FIMMDA has been appointed as the accrediting body for brokers in the OTC 
interest rate derivatives market. In the immediate future, FIMMDA will have a greater role to 
play in the rollout of CDS in India. This has widened the scope and responsibility of FIMMDA 
and it has been successful, so far, in fulfilling these responsibilities. Now it is time to reflect 
upon  the  past  achievements  and  have  a  vision  for  the  future.  One  such  vision  could  be 
conferring SRO status to FIMMDA. 
55. 
Changing  nature  of  financial  markets  necessitate  that  organisations  that  are  not 
from  traditional  regulatory  structure  participate  in  bringing  orderliness  in  activities.  Self-
regulation  is  an  important  part  of  the  regulatory  structure  of  securities  markets.  Self-
regulation and Self-Regulatory Organizations (SROs) are considered important in improving 
the  effectiveness  of  securities  regulation  and  market  integrity.  Use  of  SROs  may  lead  to 
more efficient financial markets, thus enhancing businesses’ access to public equity and debt 
markets for accessing capital at a reasonable cost, which supports business expansion and 
economic  development.  The  regulators  designate  SRO  as  a  ‘competent  authority’,  to 
implement certain rules and regulations. 
SROs  exercise  certain  regulatory  authority  over  an  industry  or  profession,  which 
56. 
could  be  in  addition  to  existing  Government  regulations  or  fill  the  vacuum  of  absence  of 
regulations. FIMMDA was created as a voluntary body for the interest rate market, and is a 
not-for-profit  organization.  The  activities  of  FIMMDA  and  its  role  in  the  underlying  market 
clearly indicate its self-regulatory role in the concerned markets and it could be termed as a 
“Quasi-SRO”.  Certain  activities  typical  of  a  SRO  like  prescription  of  Code  of  Conduct  for 
members, oversight over brokers, and arbitration of disputes (in a limited way) are already 
being carried out by FIMMDA. Presently FIMMDA, through the Financial Benchmarks India 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Ltd (FBIL), is also part of benchmark administration which is vital to market integrity. There 
is, however, an urgent need for FIMMDA to strengthen itself and broaden its mission to carry 
out tasks commensurate with the developments in the market and the role envisaged by the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  need  for  active  participation  from  all  the 
members of FIMMDA, especially the public sector banks (PSB) who are major players in the 
banking/financial sector. 
57. 
FIMMDA may have to play a more proactive and preeminent role and for this there 
is  an  urgent  need  to  build  competencies  –  both  technical  and  financial,  to  undertake 
additional  responsibilities  as  SRO.  The  focus  needs  to  be  on  creating  on  robust 
organisational capabilities, by expanding its membership base, to undertake the functions for 
effective  self-regulation  within  a  broad  framework  of  public  accountability.  I  would  suggest 
that FIMMDA draws up an action plan in this direction with clear goal posts to be achieved 
within appropriate time lines. 
Conclusion 
58. 
As laid out above, over the next few years, it can be expected that the Indian debt 
markets  will  evolve  into  a  syncretic  ecosystem  connecting  more  varied  investor  classes 
alongside multiple platforms and trading venues with a seamless integration at the depository 
level.  This  will  be  achieved  in  a  non-disruptive  manner  without  radically  disorienting  the 
existing setup. The market infrastructure would also be greater aligned with the global reform 
process with greater role for innovative fintech. 
59. 
As  announced  in  terms  of  the  Medium  Term  Framework  for  FPIs,  the  total 
investment by FPIs in G-Secs is expected to reach 5 per cent of the outstanding by March 
2018.  This,  along  with  the  additional  space  created  for  SDLs,  is  expected  to  create  a 
predictable  regime.  Based  on  experience,  the  feasibility  of  gradually  opening  up  certain 
segments/tenors  fully  in  order  to  enable  inclusion  of  Indian  G-Sec  in  global  bond  indices 
could be a possibility. 
60. 
increasing 
internationalization  of  Indian  Rupee,  greater  play  by  global  investors  in  onshore  markets 
would become inevitable. The issue of guidelines for “Masala” bonds and agreeing to open 
up investment route for foreign investors through ICSDs all point in this direction. The effort 
would be facilitate this in a non-disruptive manner. 
61. 
In conclusion, I would like to come back to the theme of intellectual openness in the 
context  of  changing  role  of  institutions.  I  can  do  no  better  than  quote  from  the  a 
commencement  address  given  by  John  W.  Gardner  in  1968  where  he  talks  about  the 
reasons for failure of institutions: 
incremental  opening  up  of 
the  capital  account  and 
With 
the 
Twentieth century institutions were caught in savage crossfire between uncritical 
lovers  and  unloving  critics.  On  the  one  side,  those  who  loved  their  institutions 
tended to smother them in an embrace of death, loving their rigidities more than 
their  promise,  shielding  them  from  life-giving  criticism.  On  the  other  side,  there 
arose a breed of critics without love, skilled in demolition but untutored in the arts 
by which human institutions are nurtured and strengthened and made to flourish. 
Between the two, the institutions perished. 
62. 
It is in the spirit of this open debate that we, as critical lovers or loving critics rather 
than uncritical lovers or unloving critics, have to keep reassessing our institutional philosophy 
without disassociating ourselves from our core values. Keeping this spirit in view, I wish the 
ensuing sessions will see very high quality, open and productive discussions. 
63. 
Thank you for patient listening. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
