  Yves Mersch: Current developments in the German banking market 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at an event organised by the Bayerischer Sparkassenverband, Munich, 27 January 2016. 
 Dear Mr Strohmaier (Chair of the Advisory Committee), 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
You have invited me to speak about “Current developments in the German banking market”. 
Allow me to say right at the beginning, not just in my official capacity as a representative of 
the European Central Bank (ECB), that a national banking market in a monetary union must 
be seen in the context of the monetary union as a whole. Therefore, I will first address the 
position of banks in the euro area in general, and then speak about the specific situation of 
German banks. 
Resilience of European banks strengthened despite continued weakness of earnings 
European  banks  are  significantly  more  resilient  than  they  were  five  years  ago. They  have 
strengthened their capital base and reduced their debts. The large, complex banking groups 
still have some catching up to do in this area, however.1 
Credit  risks  vis-à-vis  emerging  economies  in  Asia  are  limited  as  a  whole.  In  the  past  two 
years, fewer than 2% of European banks’ loans have been accounted for by this region. That 
is  why  I  expect  that  the  weakened  economic  situation  there  will  lead,  at  most,  to  limited 
losses for European banks. 
What is more problematic is the increased interest rate risk. Since last spring we have seen 
greater volatility  in interest rates. Rises in interest rates could lead to immediate valuation 
losses on debt portfolios. For example, systemically important banks currently have to value 
around one-quarter of their fixed-rate debt securities at market prices. 
The  earnings  position  of  European  banks  has  recently  improved  somewhat  –  primarily 
because of higher shares of non-interest related earnings. But in the current weak economic 
environment, and in view of low interest rates, earnings are still low. The interest rate margin 
is narrow and has been falling continuously for almost 20 years. 
Portfolios  of  non-performing  loans  are  also  depressing  earnings  prospects.  This  applies 
above all in countries which were particularly badly hit by the financial crisis. Here, there is a 
need for policymakers and others to accelerate the reduction of these legacy assets. By, for 
example,  ensuring  that  judicial  systems  work  more  efficiently  and  that  insolvency  laws 
comply with international standards. 
It  would  be  simplistic  to  attribute  the  weak  earnings  only  to  market  factors  outside  the 
influence  of  bank  managers.  Many  European  banks  continue 
to  have  very  high 
administrative costs, for example. And something could certainly be done about that. 
It is my expectation that interest income will play a less important role in the coming years. 
This is also a reason why there are prospects of rising earnings for Europe’s banks, namely if 
they succeed in adjusting their business models. 
Some  may  argue  that  the  tighter  regulation  of  the  banking  sector  is  weighing  heavily  on 
some banks. No one disputes that we do not need “regulation for the sake of regulation”. 
Neither  is  it  about  shackling  market  participants  unnecessarily;  rather,  an  adequate 
                                                
1   ECB (2015), Financial stability review, November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
regulatory  framework  can  create  room  for  manoeuvre.  That’s  because  regulation  which 
ensures more stability and reduces information asymmetries and other destabilising factors 
helps secure freedom of choice for market participants. 
To  meet  this  objective,  regulators  must  continually  review  whether  the  existing  rules  are 
proportionate  to  current  and  future  expected  risks  in  the  financial  market.  Banks  should 
adjust to this. Just as the situation in the financial markets changes – think, for example, of 
financial innovation – so too does the need for regulation. 
That was why, in the light of the recent financial crisis, it was necessary to adapt the rules. 
But I would not call it a “regulation tsunami” in this context. 
Many  banks  have  held  too  little  capital  to  be  able  to  survive  a  large  economic  shock 
unscathed.  Accordingly,  banks  are  now  required  to  have  larger  and  higher  quality  buffers. 
This also serves to protect the tax payer. And it has proven successful: European banks – 
thanks to higher Tier 1 capital ratios – have become more resilient. 
The  financial  crisis  also  showed  that  panic  situations  can  very  quickly  lead  to  liquidity 
shortages  in  the  interbank  market.  That  is  why  sufficient  liquidity  buffers  are  necessary. 
These buffers are the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and the net stable funding ratio (NSFR), 
the latter being the structural liquidity ratio. 
I am aware that the prospect of new rules can lead to uncertainty. And I know that it is not 
always  easy  for  you  to  deal  with  this  uncertainty.  In  the  meantime,  however,  you  have 
significantly  more  planning  certainty.  What  were  until  recently  loose  guidelines  are  now 
becoming concrete. 
It is clear, for example, that Deutsche Bank, as a global systemically important bank, has to 
hold an additional capital buffer (G-SIB buffer) of 2%. In addition, it will soon be clear which 
banks  will  be  subject  to  stronger  requirements  in  the  future,  as  the  Bundesanstalt  für 
Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht  (BaFin,  the German  Federal  Financial  Supervisory  Authority) 
will  shortly  decide  which  banks  will  be  counted as  other  systemically  important  institutions 
(O-SIIs). Moreover, BaFin has for the first time set the countercyclical capital buffer. This has 
been 0% since the beginning of the month. The buffer will now be reviewed every quarter. 
The Governing Council of the ECB can demand a higher buffer. At the moment, however, we 
agree with BaFin’s judgement. 
These examples of implementation in Germany bring me to the second part of my speech – 
the situation in the German banking market. 
Relatively solid situation of German banks is no reason for complacency 
The  German  banking  sector  is,  in  absolute  terms,  the  largest  in  the  monetary  union 
alongside  the  French  one.  In  2014  the total  assets  of  German  banks amounted to  almost 
€6.8 trillion (€6,750 billion). That corresponds to roughly 250% of Germany’s gross domestic 
product (GDP) and 28% of the total assets in the monetary union. In Germany there is also a 
comparatively  large  number  of  banks.  If  we  leave  out  the  branches  of  foreign  banks  in 
Germany,  there  are  around  1,700  credit  institutions.  That  constitutes  one-third  of  the  total 
number of banks in the monetary union.2 
In  view  of  the  size  of  the  German  banking  sector  alone,  it  plays  an  important  role for the 
ECB, which is responsible for the whole euro area. 
The  German  banking  sector  is  not  just  relatively  large,  it  also  heterogeneous.  Small  and 
medium-sized  banks  –  less  significant  institutions  (LSIs)  –  which  include  the  Sparkassen 
(savings banks), account for around 35% of the total balance sheet of the German banking 
                                                
2   ECB (2015), Report on financial structures, October. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
sector.  Whereas  in  other  euro  area  countries  the  systemically  relevant  banks,  which  are 
directly  supervised  by  the  ECB,  contribute  around  80%-85%  of  the  total  assets  in  the 
respective Member State, this contribution is only around 65% in Germany. 
You yourselves are, of course, the experts on the position of small and medium-sized banks. 
A  survey  carried  out  by  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin3  shows  that  small  and  medium-sized 
institutions, if they do not take appropriate counter-measures, can expect further substantial 
profit  losses.  In  the  survey  banks  said  that,  even  if  interest  rates  rise,  their  profits  would 
decline slightly in the coming years. If the market situation develops as the banks expect, 
then  their  profitability  before  taxes  in  the  next  three  years  would  decline  by  around  one-
quarter  compared  with  2014.  And  this  is  despite  the  fact  that  conditions  in  Germany  are 
relatively  favourable  at  the  moment  and  banks  say  that  they  want  to  reduce  their  costs. 
Assuming a negative interest rate shock of 100 basis points, income would decline by 60% to 
70%. 
The earnings position of small and medium-sized banks – and thus also that of the savings 
banks – is still sound. In the medium term, however, I see some risks if long-term loans are 
granted at very low fixed interest rates. As in the rest of the monetary union, the interest rate 
margin is also narrowing in Germany. 
The  large  German  banks  are  also  experiencing  this.  Although  the  economic  situation  in 
Germany is significantly better than in some other Member States, these banks are hardly 
recording  any  growth  in  profits.4  Under  the  current  conditions,  realising  higher  income  is 
indeed a challenge. Profits, however, are the result of the difference between income and 
expenses, i.e. costs. Possibilities for making the cost structure more efficient certainly exist. 
If  interest  margins  are  low  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  business  models  need  to  be 
reviewed.  That  means,  for  example,  developing  other  sources  of  income.  Large  banks 
already started to do this some time ago. But Landesbanken, which have a similar business 
model to large banks, continue to feature a large share of low-margin interbank business. 
This reduces the possibilities for strengthening the capital base. 
And  smaller  and  regional  banks  have  hardly  adjusted  their  business  model  at  all  over the 
past 50 years. They continue to focus on regional lending to households and firms, financed 
by deposits. 
Small banks, especially savings banks, still play an important role in the financing of small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises.  Not  only  here  in  Germany,  but  in  Europe  in  general. 
However, it’s by no means certain that this will remain so; not least because the large banks 
have adapted their strategies. They’re  scaling back their investment banking activities and 
focusing more on corporate clients and retail business. This means increased competition. 
The stability of the savings bank sector is not set in stone. 
Structural  change  is  an  important  challenge  –  not  only  for  the  smaller  institutions.  For 
instance, I see a need for catching up when it comes to new technology. Foreign institutions 
use such technology to offer loans throughout Europe, and thus also in Germany. That adds 
to the competitive pressure, even if it may only apply to standardised consumer loans at first. 
In addition, I wonder how Germany’s banks will respond to new market participants such as 
Fintech firms, and whether peer-to-peer loans will be of such importance in the future that 
banks will rethink their traditional business model. 
                                                
3   Deutsche Bundesbank and BaFin (2015), Ertragslage und Widerstandsfähigkeit deutscher Kreditinstitute im 
Niedrigzinsumfeld,  September.  Note 
is  available  at 
http://www.bafin.de/SharedDocs/Veroeffentlichungen/DE/Meldung/2015/meldung_150918_pressegespraech_
niedrigzinsumfeld.html?nn=2819248. 
related  English  press 
release 
that 
the 
4   Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), “Structural developments in the German banking sector”, Monthly Report, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
If there is an increase in these and other alternatives to traditional financing via the banking 
sector, this may well provide incentives to push forward the consolidation urgently needed in 
this sector. In particular, the Landesbanken have already seen some changes. If Germany 
still had 12 Landesbanken before the financial crisis, today there are only nine. At the same 
time, the balance sheet total of this group of banks has shrunk by 30%. Overall, the number 
of German credit institutions has only decreased by 10% in recent years. In other Member 
States of the monetary union, the number of credit institutions nevertheless fell by nearly a 
quarter (i.e. 23%) during the same period. Not least because the overcapacity from the pre-
crisis period is weighing on earnings prospects.5 Financial institutions could well profit from 
“creative destruction”. 
After  having  talked  at  length  about  the  difficult  earnings  situation,  I  would  like  to  say 
something positive: the capital base of German banks is in a very good position. Since the 
beginning of 2008 their Tier 1 capital ratio has risen steadily by 6.5 percentage points – to 
the current level of 15.6%. But the German taxpayer has also contributed to this. Between 
2008  and  2013  the  state  provided  some  €144  billion  in  support  to  the  German  financial 
sector,  in  the  form  of  capital  injections  (around  €64  billion)  and  relief  on  assets  (around 
€80 billion).6  State guarantees were of a similar magnitude. Roughly 40% – or €26 billion – 
of the capital increase can be attributed to the Landesbanken. 
Given  the  large  capital  buffer,  even  if  earnings  decline  significantly  (depending  on  future 
interest rate developments and German banks’ willingness to adjust), I presume that there 
are no noteworthy risks to financial stability in this country right now. 
Even in a low interest rate environment, returns can be made on savings 
Let me touch briefly on the situation of savers, as this is a theme that repeatedly receives 
special attention in Germany. Incidentally, German households hold only slightly more than 
40%  of  their  total  financial  assets  as  deposits  with  banks.  That’s  roughly  in  line  with  the 
average euro area saver – so the German saver isn’t really that special.7 
I am well aware that nominal returns on savings deposits are very low right now. The public 
debate  frequently  refers  to  the  nominal  interest  rate.  Understandably,  since  financial 
institutions  usually  use  nominal  interest rates for  marketing  purposes.  But  what  is  actually 
more important is real returns. For example, a Deutsche Bundesbank study shows that, in 
the  last  three  years,  the  real  return  on  households’  financial  assets  stood  at  around  2%. 
Though below the long-term average of 3.5% for the 16 years prior to the financial crisis8, that 
is significantly higher than 0%. 
Indeed,  time  and  again,  there  were  phases  of  negative  real  interest  rates  in  the  past,  for 
example at the beginning of the 2000s and during the recent financial crisis, and also in the 
1970s and at the start of the 1990s – but with significantly higher inflation rates then. If one 
takes residential property assets into account, during the last five years German households 
                                                
5   ESRB (2014), “Is Europe Overbanked?”, Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee, No 4, June. 
6   Bundesanstalt  für  Finanzmarktstabilisierung,  Historischer  Überblick  über  die  Maßnahmen  des  SoFFin, 
Maßnahmestand 31.12.2015; see also the European Commission’s State Aid Scoreboard 2014 – Aid in the 
context of the financial and economic crisis. 
7   ECB  (2013),  “The  Eurosystem  household  finance  and  consumption  survey:  results  from  the  first  wave”, 
Statistics Paper Series No 2, April. 
8   Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2015),  “German  households’  saving  and  investment  behaviour  in  light  of  the  low-
interest-rate environment”, Monthly Report, October. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
have  even  realised  a  higher  return  than  in  the  five  years  before  the  crisis,  because  of 
increased real estate prices.9 
For savers, ultimately, it is longer-term real interest returns that are of importance. And they 
are mainly dependent on factors which we, the central bank, cannot influence on a lasting 
basis.10 For example, economic growth and the real return on physical capital play a decisive 
role  in  terms  of  how  real  interest  rates  develop  in  the  long  term.  Furthermore,  the  overall 
relationship between savings and investment influences real interest rates. Since the end of 
the 1990s, emerging countries in Asia have increased their currency reserves significantly. 
Accordingly, they are contributing to a global savings glut. People in developed economies 
started  to  save  more  because  of  aging  societies.  And,  over  this  period, real  interest  rates 
have also dropped. Thus, the average real interest rates for the ten-year government bonds 
of important industrialised countries, including Germany, fell from the (around) 4% recorded 
at the middle/end of the 1990s to approximately 2% in the year 200711 – note that this was 
before the outbreak of the financial crisis. 
According 
financial 
investments.12 Recent developments indicate that they are slowly showing renewed interest 
in  riskier  types  of  investment.  Thus,  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year  they  invested 
considerably more money in the capital markets than in the previous six years.13 However, 
they also suffered noticeable valuation losses. The savings book or fixed-term deposits still 
remain popular. 
This underlines what studies and statistics14 have long been suggesting: German savers are 
exceptionally risk averse. Weighing risks carefully is in itself a healthy attitude – one that is 
also positive for financial stability. But excessive caution also lowers the return. Here, I see a 
great  opportunity  for  savings  and  cooperative  banks.  Their  strategic  advantage  is  the 
proximity to customers. They can advise their customers competently and contribute to a full 
understanding of financial products and the risks thereof. 
to  survey  results,  Germans  are  presently  satisfied  with 
their 
Concluding remarks 
Lastly, a brief summary: after the financial and economic crisis Europe’s banks strengthened 
their  capital  base. That also  applies  to  the  German  banking  sector, the  largest  one  in  the 
euro area. 
Even if German banks are in a better position than the financial institutions of some other 
Member States, there is no reason for complacency. On the one hand, excessive costs have 
until now prevented the building up of additional equity. And, on the other hand, competition 
in  the  German  banking  sector  is  likely  to  intensify  noticeably.  As  a  result  of  the  financial 
crisis, some of the larger German banks are changing tack. They are increasingly focusing 
                                                
9   Leibniz-Institut  für  Wirtschaftsforschung  Halle  (IWH)  (2015),  ““The  German  saver”  and  the  low  policy  rate 
environment”, IWH Online, No 9/2015. 
10   Bindseil et al. (2015), “Critique of accommodating central bank policies and the ‘expropriation of the saver’ – A 
review”, Occasional Paper Series, No 161, ECB; Executive Office of the President of the United States (2015), 
“Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey”. 
11   Bean et al. (2015), “Low for Long? Causes and Consequences of Persistently Low Interest Rates”, Geneva 
Reports on the World Economy, No 17, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. 
12   See the December 2015 survey conducted by the Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK) on behalf of the 
Bundesverband deutscher Banken (Association of German Banks). 
13 Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), “ Acquisition of financial assets and external financing in Germany in the third 
quarter of 2015 – Results of the financial accounts by sector”, press release, 15 January. 
14   Grabka, M.M. and Westermeier, C. (2015), “Reale Nettovermögen der Privathaushalte in Deutschland sind 
von 2003 bis 2013 geschrumpft”, DIW Wochenbericht, No 34/2015, pp. 727–738. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
on traditional corporate clients and retail business and are scaling back investment banking 
activities. Furthermore, technological progress is making it easier for foreign banks to gain 
access  to  the German market.  Both  the  smaller  and  larger  German  banks  are feeling  the 
effects of this development. 
The pressure to adjust should also rise for German savings banks. Even if there was hardly 
any need for the savings bank sector to adjust its business model in the past, its stability is 
not set in stone. Intensified competition within an environment of low interest rates over a 
longer time period could markedly reduce earnings in the future. In the light of lower interest 
margins, the traditional business models should be put under scrutiny. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
