   William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and the implications for 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Bank  Indonesia  –  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Joint 
International Seminar, Bali, 31 July 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here in Bali. Today I plan to provide a brief 
summary of the U.S. economic outlook, incorporating recent U.S. economic data and global 
and financial market developments. I will then discuss the implications of the outlook for U.S. 
monetary policy, and explain how international and financial market developments influence 
my thinking. I will emphasize two key points.  
First, financial  market  conditions  matter  in  determining the  appropriate  stance  of monetary 
policy. Financial conditions affect households’ and firms’ decisions, so that the transmission of 
U.S.  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  depends,  to  a  large  extent,  on  how  changes  in 
monetary  policy  help  deliver  the  appropriate  financial  market  conditions  to  support  our 
objectives of price stability and maximum employment. But financial conditions also evolve in 
response to domestic and international events. Thus, when I reiterate that U.S. monetary policy 
is  data  dependent, that includes  not  just the  information gleaned from  important  economic 
releases such as payroll employment and retail sales, but also how financial market conditions 
react to economic and financial market developments in the global economy.  
Second, external events – such as Brexit – can have effects that go beyond just their impact 
on global trade. Conversely, what we do in the United States has an impact far beyond our 
borders, and we need to take that into consideration in how we conduct and communicate 
monetary policy in the United States. Put simply, monetary policy is a two-way street, and we 
all need to be cognizant of that. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.1 
The US economic outlook 
Despite  the  many  twists  and  turns  in  the  road  so  far,  my  baseline  outlook  for  growth  and 
inflation in the United States has not changed much in recent months. After a weak first quarter, 
real GDP continued to grow sluggishly in the second quarter. On the positive side, consumer 
spending rose more quickly during the second quarter. On the negative side, business fixed-
investment spending continued to disappoint, residential investment was weak and inventory 
investment was a substantial drag on growth.  
Looking forward, I expect economic activity to expand at roughly a 2 percent annualized pace 
over the next 18 months, appreciably above that of the past three quarters. Over the remainder 
of this year, the economy should continue to get some lift from consumption and from a fiscal 
policy stance that remains mildly stimulative. Moreover, I anticipate that residential investment 
will rebound from its decline in the second quarter. This pace of growth would likely be sufficient 
to continue to absorb any remaining slack in the labor market and to support inflation moving 
back to our 2 percent objective. 
However, any forecast is uncertain and growth could end up higher or lower. Let me turn to an 
assessment of the balance of risks around my growth outlook. I believe that a sizable pickup 
                                                
1   Tobias Adrian, Matthew Higgins, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti, Robert Rich, Giorgio Topa, Joseph Tracy 
and Peter Van Tassel assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   in the rate of growth of economic activity relative to that in my forecast seems unlikely for a 
number  of reasons.  Although  consumer spending  strengthened  substantially  in  the  second 
quarter,  that  stronger  pace  is  unlikely  to  be  sustained  going  forward.  That  is  because  the 
fundamentals  supporting  consumption  have  softened  somewhat.  Real  income  growth 
moderated in the second quarter as the pace of job gains slowed and the inflation rate rose, 
boosted  by  somewhat  higher  energy  prices.  Even  with  the  surprisingly  large  addition  of 
287,000 payroll jobs in June, the pace of improvement in the U.S. labor market appears to 
have slowed somewhat. For example, over the past three months, payroll gains have averaged 
about 150,000 per month, as compared to an average of more than 200,000 per month over 
the course of 2015 and the first quarter of this year. But even 150,000 job gains per month 
would  be  consistent  with gradually  using  up  any  remaining  slack  present  in the  U.S.  labor 
market. 
Although I expect business fixed investment to begin to grow again in the second half, it will 
likely  remain  soft  as  profits  have  stagnated  and  election  year  uncertainty  could  act  as  an 
additional depressant. All else equal, investment tends to be weaker when uncertainty rises 
because this creates an incentive for businesses to delay decisions until the uncertainty is 
resolved. 
Also, trade seems likely to exert a net drag on growth. There are two factors at play here: the 
sluggish growth rate of aggregate demand abroad and the continuing impact of earlier dollar 
appreciation on U.S. export competitiveness.  
With respect to downside risks to the growth outlook, one that is hard to gauge is the potential 
fallout from the result of the recent U.K. referendum. It is widely anticipated that U.K. growth 
will slow as a consequence. Although the direct impact of slower U.K. growth on U.S. trade will 
almost certainly be very small – total U.S. exports to the U.K. are only about 0.7 percent of 
U.S. GDP – there are a number of other channels that could amplify the impact of the Brexit 
decision on U.S. economic activity. These include the potential adverse effects on European 
economic  activity,  on  the  perceived  health  of  the  global  banking  system,  and  on  broader 
financial market conditions. 
To date, the global financial market fallout from the Brexit vote has been short-lived, and U.S. 
financial market conditions remain supportive to economic growth. Nevertheless, I believe that 
the potential aftershocks pose medium-term downside risks to the global economy, and that 
these risks need to be monitored. 
With respect to inflation, I think the outlook has not changed much recently. Headline inflation, 
as anticipated, has climbed a bit this year as earlier energy price declines have fallen out of 
the year-over-year inflation calculations. In contrast, core inflation has been broadly stable, 
with the core PCE deflator rising by 1.6 percent over the past four quarters, moderately below 
our 2 percent objective. 
The fact that core inflation has been broadly stable over recent months in the face of the earlier 
declines  in  energy  and  non-energy  import  prices  is  notable.  It  makes  me  somewhat  more 
confident that overall inflation will return to our 2 percent inflation objective over the medium 
term as long as the economic growth that I expect actually materializes. If the economy were 
to grow at the pace I discussed earlier, this would likely translate into sufficient job gains to 
continue to remove any remaining slack in the labor market – which, by my assessment, is 
already  operating  quite  close  to  a  level  that  is  consistent  with  what  is  achievable  on  a 
sustainable basis. This would likely lead to further pressure on labor resources, higher wages 
and, over time, somewhat higher inflation.  
In contrast, if growth were instead to fall below my forecast, then I would be less confident that 
inflation would return to our 2 percent objective. In addition, I put some weight on the fact that 
surveys from both the University of Michigan and the New York Fed indicate that household 
longer-term inflation expectations have declined somewhat over the past year and are in the 
lower  end  of  their  historical  ranges.  Nevertheless,  I  am  not  unduly  worried  because  the 
magnitude of these declines has been modest, and because the New York Fed’s three-year-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   ahead inflation measure has been gradually increasing since January and has reversed much 
of the decline observed in the second half of 2015. Low longer-term inflation expectations, if 
allowed  to  become  entrenched,  would  act  as  a  restraint  on  actual  inflation  making  it more 
difficult for us to meet our inflation objective.  
In contrast, I put less weight on the significantly larger declines in market-based measures of 
inflation compensation over the past two years. From my perspective, these declines seem 
driven more by changes in bond term premia and the relative liquidity characteristics of nominal 
versus inflation-protected Treasury securities than by sharply falling inflation expectations. 
Implications of the outlook for US monetary policy 
If, as I have indicated, the U.S. growth and inflation outlooks have not changed notably, then 
why have expectations about U.S. monetary policy shifted so much? Compared to the start of 
the year, the expected timing of any further Fed interest rate hikes has been pushed back, and 
the expected upward trajectory of U.S. short-term rates is now much flatter. 
There are several reasons to explain these shifts. First, assessments of the neutral real short-
term interest rate have declined as economic growth has consistently fallen short of consensus 
forecasts. With the U.S. economy having grown at only a 2.1 percent annual rate over the past 
seven years, it has become harder to sustain the view that the neutral real short-term interest 
rate is close to, or will soon be close to, its historical level of around 2 percent. Estimates of 
the neutral real short-term interest rate obtained from many of the DSGE models used within 
the Federal Reserve System are currently clustered around zero, and this seems reasonable 
to me. An implication is that at present there is only a small gap between the actual real short-
term rate of about -1 percent and the neutral real short-term rate. In other words, U.S. monetary 
policy is accommodative, but only moderately so. 
In  addition,  I  suspect  that  many  have  come  to  question  the  view  that  headwinds  from  the 
financial  crisis  are  temporarily  depressing  the  neutral  short-term  rate,  and  that  the  neutral 
short-term rate  will  significantly  rise  in the  near-future  as  these  headwinds  dissipate.  If the 
headwinds have not dissipated to a meaningful degree in the seven years since the recession 
ended, then why should one expect them to necessarily diminish quickly over the next couple 
of  years?  Evidence  is  accumulating  that  some  of  the  headwinds  are  likely  to  prove  more 
persistent. For example, the reduced availability of mortgage financing for those with lower 
credit scores seems likely to continue. Lenders now appreciate that home prices can decline 
significantly. Thus, they cannot rely as much on the value of the housing collateral in securing 
their mortgage loans, and consequently now put more weight on the credit histories of the 
borrowers. 
Market participants may also be taking some signal from the gradual decline in the median 
long-run federal funds rate projection of FOMC participants shown in the FOMC’s Summary of 
Economic Projections (SEP). I think this indicates a growing consensus that the neutral real 
short-term rate will not return anytime soon to its historical norm of 2 percent. 
A second reason for the downward adjustment in U.S. interest rate expectations is that U.S. 
financial market conditions depend, in part, on the stance of U.S. monetary policy relative to 
monetary policies abroad. If the economic outlook abroad deteriorates and this causes foreign 
countries to pursue a more accommodative set of monetary policies, then the dollar would 
likely appreciate – other things equal –  reflecting expectations of lower interest rates abroad 
relative to U.S. interest rates. In this case, the U.S. may need to adjust its own monetary policy 
path. If the FOMC did not make this adjustment, the stronger dollar could result in an undesired 
tightening of U.S. financial conditions. The expected forward interest rate paths in Europe and 
Japan have fallen considerably this year. If the FOMC had followed the median federal funds 
rate  path  from  the  December  2015  SEP  projection,  then  the  U.S.  dollar  would  likely  have 
appreciated much more significantly. Instead, the U.S. interest rate path has come down in 
tandem with the foreign interest rate paths and the dollar has appreciated only modestly.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   This is a crucial point and I want to make sure there is no misunderstanding. The Federal 
Reserve is not targeting the exchange value of the U.S. dollar. What the FOMC considers are 
financial conditions broadly defined, because they affect the saving and investment decisions 
of households and firms. The dollar is but one component of these financial conditions. The 
level  of  short-  and  long-term  rates,  credit  spreads,  and  equity  prices  are  also  important 
components of the financial conditions that we closely monitor. If international developments 
shift U.S. financial market conditions – including the dollar – then we need to take this into 
consideration in our U.S. monetary policy decisions.  
Third, I have found that market participants broadly appreciate that the FOMC needs to take a 
risk management approach in its conduct of monetary policy. There are at least two important 
aspects of this approach. The first is whether the balance of risks to the outlooks for either 
economic growth or inflation are skewed to the upside or downside. The second is whether the 
efficacy of monetary policy itself is asymmetric when monetary policy is at, or close to, the zero 
lower bound for interest rates. In this situation, it may be easier to implement a tighter monetary 
policy through raising rates, than it would be to implement a looser policy using unconventional 
tools. Also, the effects of a policy of raising rates may be more predictable compared to the 
effects from using unconventional tools.  
As  I  noted  earlier,  I  think  the  medium-term  risks  to  the  U.S.  economic  growth  outlook  are 
somewhat skewed to the down side. Thus, this needs to be taken into consideration in terms 
of the appropriate stance for U.S. monetary policy. With respect to the efficacy of monetary 
policy, given how close we remain to the zero lower bound for interest rates, I also think the 
risks are asymmetric. Therefore, we need to be a bit more careful about the risk of tightening 
monetary policy in a manner that proves to be premature, as compared to the alternative risk 
of being a little late. If we were to realize that we were slightly late, policy can be adjusted by 
raising short-term interest rates more quickly.2 
All three of these reasons – evidence that U.S. monetary policy is currently only moderately 
accommodative, the fact that U.S. financial conditions have been influenced by economic and 
financial market developments abroad, and risk management considerations – argue, at the 
moment, for caution in raising U.S. short-term interest rates. So, directionally, the movement 
in investor expectations towards a flatter path for U.S. short-term interest rates seems broadly 
appropriate.  
That said, to my eye, market expectations derived from futures prices – which price in about 
one 25 basis point rate hike through the end of 2017 – appear to be too complacent. If the 
incoming information validates my view of the outlook, then I believe that U.S. monetary policy 
will likely need to move at a faster pace than implied by futures prices towards a more neutral 
posture  as  the  labor  market  tightens  further  and  U.S.  inflation  rises.  Moreover,  market 
expectations  may  be  putting  insufficient  weight  on  the  possibility  that  the  economy  could 
outperform our expectations, that financial conditions could ease, or that the risks to growth 
from  Brexit  and  other  international  developments  could  fade  away.  If  such  events  were  to 
occur, this might necessitate a faster pace of adjustment.  
For these reasons, I think it is premature to rule out further monetary policy tightening this year. 
As I  said  before,  it  depends  on the  data,  broadly  defined,  and,  as  we  all know, that  is  not 
something one can predict with any accuracy.  
                                                
2   Of course, if the economy were to weaken, we still have plenty of tools. Not only could we cut short-term interest 
rates, but we also could extend the maturity of our Treasury and agency MBS portfolio, purchase additional 
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities and engage in forward guidance with respect to the future 
path of short-term interest rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   It’s a two-way street 
The  U.S.  economy  plays  a  large  role  in  the  global  economy.  Most  significantly,  the  U.S. 
economy represents a sizable share of world GDP – roughly 25 percent at current exchange 
rates – and the U.S. dollar is the most important international reserve currency. More than 
60 percent of central bank reserve assets are denominated in dollars, and that share has been 
stable to rising in recent years. Most foreign trade is denominated in dollars and most of the 
foreign currency debt issued by corporations abroad is denominated in dollars. Thus, what 
happens to the U.S. economy, U.S. financial asset prices and the exchange value of the dollar 
has important implications for the global economy.  
At the same time, prosperity is very much a two-way street. Developments outside the United 
States affect our domestic economic outlook through their impact on trade and financial market 
conditions, and we have to take such developments into consideration in our monetary policy 
decision-making.  
In many ways, international linkages have become more important over time. This is because 
international trade has increased rapidly over the past few decades as the world economy has 
become more developed and globalized – notwithstanding the flattening of the global trade-to-
GDP ratio over the past few years. And, global trade interactions have become more complex 
as supply chains have become more extensive and intricate, often involving many different 
countries.  
Financial markets across the globe have also become more integrated. Developments in one 
market  now  appear  to  have  larger  effects  on  other  markets  than  was  generally  the  case 
historically.  Consider,  for  example,  how  European  and  Japanese  central  bank  quantitative 
easing activity has helped drive the sharp decline in long-term U.S. Treasury yields this year. 
Or, in the other direction, consider the global bond market taper tantrum in 2013. In this case, 
markets reacted to then-Chairman Bernanke’s musing that the Federal Reserve was beginning 
to evaluate when the time would be right to begin the tapering of the Fed’s asset purchase 
program. Or, in a similar vein, consider the international financial market reaction to China’s 
decision to alter its foreign exchange rate regime and how the RMB is managed relative to the 
dollar versus a broader basket of foreign currencies.  
The growing interdependence can be seen in the increased correlation of market movements 
both across countries and across asset classes. Periods of “risk on” versus “risk off” trading 
now  occur  on  a  global  basis.  For  example,  equity  market  movements  in  developed  and 
emerging markets have exhibited a 76 percent positive correlation over the past six months. 
This is only slightly below the all-time peak of 82 percent in 2009, and significantly above the 
57 percent correlation that prevailed from 1995 through 2007.  
Correlations across asset classes have also been increasing. For example, consider the set 
of assets comprised of the 10-year U.S. Treasury, U.S. equities, international equities, oil, the 
VIX, a trade-weighted dollar index and the BAA credit spread. We can construct a variable – 
called a common factor – to capture as much of the overall movement and co-movements for 
the series in this set. The more closely the series’ movements are tied together, the greater 
the explanatory content of the common factor. Currently, the derived common factor accounts 
for 50 percent of the variation in these financial variables, up from 30 percent in early 2014.  
Oil, in particular, has become more correlated with other assets. Prior to 2008, oil was virtually 
uncorrelated with equities and Treasuries. Whereas, in 2016, its correlation with these two 
asset classes has been more than 45 percent. 
These effects are transmitted via many linkages, not just through trade and financial markets. 
Consider, the many different channels of potential Brexit influence – not only the impact on 
international trade and global interest rates and currencies, but also on bank equity prices and 
on political uncertainty.  
Given this interdependency, what should we do about it? Interdependency and linkages do not 
mean that U.S. monetary policy should subordinate its domestic goals for international ones. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   it 
formulates 
its  responses 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  clear  domestic-oriented  mandate  that  was  set  by  the  U.S. 
Congress. Instead, I believe that setting U.S. monetary policy to best achieve our domestic 
mandate will help to support sustainable growth and development abroad. As I see it, there 
are two key steps that are essential in the design of an appropriate monetary policy strategy. 
Step one is to take an expansive view of the global eco-system in which we all operate. We 
need to take into consideration that our decisions have broad consequences for the global 
economy and, conversely, that international developments can have significant consequences 
for the U.S. economic outlook and therefore the appropriate stance of U.S. monetary policy. 
As part of this, we need to be nimble in incorporating new developments into our monetary 
policy decision-making.  
Step two is to communicate clearly and consistently. That means clarity about the objectives 
of monetary policy, how the Fed plans to meet those objectives in light of the economic and 
financial  market  environment,  and  how 
to  unforeseen 
circumstances that lead to revisions to its economic forecast.  
In my view the Federal Reserve is making progress in both of these areas. With respect to the 
first step, I believe we do take an expansive view of those factors that might affect the U.S. 
outlook and we revise our views accordingly. Our speeches, statements, and actions this year 
illustrate this is how we operate. For example, after the market turbulence at the start of the 
year, we kept monetary policy on hold at the March FOMC meeting and explicitly referenced 
“readings on financial and international developments” in the FOMC statement. Similarly, in 
speeches prior to the Brexit vote and in the FOMC minutes, we raised our concerns about the 
risks  of  disorderly  outcomes  associated  with  the  U.K.  referendum.  For  instance,  the  June 
FOMC  minutes  state:  “Most  participants  noted  that  the  upcoming  British  referendum  on 
membership  in  the  European  Union  could  generate  financial  market  turbulence  that  could 
adversely affect domestic economic performance.”  
In addition we are doing a reasonably good job incorporating the flow of new information into 
our forecasts. The fact that the federal funds rate projections from the SEP have changed 
significantly from quarter to quarter indicates that FOMC participants are responsive to new 
information.  
Now, some have expressed an alternative view that the movement in these rate projections is 
an indication that the FOMC’s reaction function is unstable and unmoored. I do not see it that 
way at all. The forecasts of FOMC participants with respect to growth and inflation have not 
changed  much  this  year. What  have  changed  are  expectations  about  the  monetary  policy 
stance  that  would  be  appropriate  in  order  to  achieve  those  outcomes.  It  is  important  to 
emphasize that these interest rate projections are not commitments. They are point-in-time 
views of the appropriate interest rate path and are updated as economic circumstances and 
financial market conditions change and evolve.  
With respect to communication, in recent years the Federal Reserve has shifted towards much 
greater  transparency. This  includes quarterly  press conferences  by the Fed  chair following 
FOMC meetings; publishing growth, inflation and short-term interest rate forecasts of FOMC 
participants  on  a  quarterly  basis;  and  a  concerted  effort  to  lay  out  the  guideposts  that  the 
FOMC will look at in assessing progress towards our dual mandate objectives. 
On the communication front, although we have come a long way, I would admit that there is 
still room for further improvement. For example, the focus of the SEP on the each participant’s 
modal forecast does not convey how much uncertainty there is about the economic outlook. 
Similarly, language used in FOMC statements can become stale over time. We tend to make 
relatively few changes to the statement language each meeting because of the acute market 
sensitivity to such changes. One could argue that this might not be the best practice to follow, 
but we should recognize that there would also be significant transition costs if we were to make 
more extensive revisions to the statement at each meeting.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For monetary policy to be effective, it is important to have clarity about what the FOMC can be 
clear and consistent about – its manner of responses to mitigate the potential harmful effects 
of disturbances and the goals of policy. In contrast, our monetary policy projections and the 
actions we take cannot be static. If economic circumstances change, then monetary policy 
needs to change too. Otherwise, we will not be able to achieve our objectives.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
