  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Future banking: reimagining banks – driving 
transformation and innovation 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the ASLI (Asian Strategy & Leadership Institute) 20th Malaysian 
Banking Summit, Kuala Lumpur, 26 May 2016. 
 It is my pleasure to be here at ASLI’s 20th Malaysian Banking Summit. The theme “Future 
Banking: Reimagining Banks – Driving Transformation and Innovation” is especially relevant 
in light of the significant changes taking place in the banking industry and wider economy. 
The new world ahead 
The  financial  crisis  may  have  struck  almost  a  decade  ago,  but  has  left  in  its  wake  a 
profoundly transformed landscape. With global economic growth remaining slow and uneven, 
it is increasingly clear that this is no mere downturn in the business cycle, but a realignment 
of the world economic order. Structural reforms continue to take place in many advanced and 
emerging economies albeit at varying pace across countries. Such reforms are critical as this 
will  contribute  towards  enhancing  future  growth  prospects.  In  an  environment  of  weak 
growth, authorities face considerable challenges in managing the immediate effects of some 
of the reforms. The limits of monetary policy under unorthodox and unprecedented policies 
continue to be tested in a number of economies, with outcomes that still remain debatable. 
Broader  forces  of  change  are  also  underway.  Of  significance  is  the  accelerated  pace  of 
technological  change,  driven  by  increased  processing  power  and  connectivity.  Across 
various  sectors,  disruptive  technologies  are  rapidly  expanding  the  horizon  of  economic 
opportunities while challenging existing business models. In the case of banking for instance, 
we have already seen greater competition from new entrants amid the emergence of fintech. 
Rapid  urbanisation,  which  is  more  pronounced  in  emerging  markets,  and  demographic 
changes such as an ageing population are other key trends which have major implications on 
economic and socio-political conditions. At the same time, there is a growing appreciation for 
the far-reaching impact of climate change, giving rise to calls for more sustainable growth 
models and innovation. 
All these developments that are taking place in the banking industry today have created an 
environment  much  different  from  the  one  prior  to  the  crisis.  And  together  with  the 
implementation of the post-crisis global regulatory reforms, which remains a key priority, their 
implications require careful and deep thinking as banks plan for the future. 
Domestic policy continuity and priorities 
Our  banking  industry  is  facing  the  current  rapidly  changing  and  challenging  economic 
environment from a position of strength, following the successful reform measures that were 
implemented.  Given  the  high  degree  of  openness  of  the  Malaysian  economy  and  the 
increased  integration  with  the  international  financial  system,  external  developments  have 
continuously  affected  our  domestic  economy.  But  the  economy  has  been  able  to  weather 
these challenges and have remained on a steady growth path of 4 to 6% over the past five 
years. 
In  recent  quarters,  economic  growth,  however,  has  moderated.  This  was  attributable  to  a 
number of external and domestic shocks affecting the economy since late 2014. The major 
policy reforms such as the implementation of the GST also saw households and businesses 
adjusting  their  spending.  As  we  move  forward,  these  shocks  will  gradually  dissipate  and 
growth  of  the  Malaysian  economy  will  improve.  Further  support  is  also  forthcoming  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
form of Government measures to increase disposable income; thus, facilitating households 
and firms’ on-going adjustments. The assessment is therefore for the economy to grow by 
4 to 4.5% for 2016. Importantly, our financial system remains resilient and supportive of the 
economy.  It  is  important  to  recognise  the  underlying  reasons  for  the  resilience  of  the 
Malaysia  economy.  This  resiliency  has  been  as  a  result  of  the  continued  strength  of  our 
fundamentals  and  the  successful  reforms  and  structural  adjustments  we  have  undertaken 
over the last decade. 
Three changes to the economy have been particularly instrumental. Firstly, the structure of 
the economy has become more diversified and over-reliance on any particular industry has 
been  mitigated.  Secondly,  growth  has  also  become  more  balanced,  driven  by  continued 
private sector activities with imbalances and excesses kept in check through keys measures 
implemented by the Government and Bank over several years. This has been complemented 
by  crucial  fiscal  reforms  that,  while  having  short-term  costs  and  being  very  unpopular, 
ultimately  put  the  economy  on  a  more  sustainable  growth  path.  Third,  is  the  continued 
strength  of  our  external  position.  This  can  be  seen  from  our  high  level  of  international 
reserves, the manageable  level  of  external  indebtedness  and  the  continued  surplus  in  the 
current account balance. 
Together with the greater flexibility of our exchange rate, this has strengthened the capacity 
of our economy to cope with external shocks and ensure that financing to the private sector 
is not interrupted. 
Going  forward,  continuity  in  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  financial  sector  policies  will  be 
preserved. We  will  continue  to  strengthen  our  prudential  regulatory  framework  in  line  with 
global standards, while introducing new developmental initiatives and maintaining a strong 
focus  on  the  fair  treatment  of  financial  consumers.  Following  transformational  measures 
taken in the past few decades to significantly strengthen the financial system, the banking 
industry in Malaysia is managing this transition from a position of strength. The capitalisation 
of the banking system is at its highest level of 16.5%. The combined excess capital of banks 
above  the  regulatory  minimum  level  stands  at  over  RM120  billion.  The  banking  system 
Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  is  also  comfortably  above  120%  against  the  current  regulatory 
minimum  of  70%.  This  strong  position  has  been  an  important  element  to  facilitate  orderly 
adjustments  in  transitioning  towards  global  standards  without  disruptions  to  financial 
intermediation, thus ensuring the smooth flow of financing to the economy. 
To enhance Malaysia’s growth potential, several initiatives had been identified that will help 
boost  productivity,  improve  the  income-earning  potential  of  Malaysians  and  expand 
opportunities in new markets. Building from Malaysia’s leading position  as an international 
Islamic finance centre, efforts to promote the sustainable growth of Islamic finance supported 
by a dynamic ecosystem will create opportunities for high income employment. At the same 
time, ASEAN integration remains high on Bank Negara Malaysia’s agenda. 
Meeting  the  e-payment  targets  that  Bank  Negara  has  set  is  also  vital  to  enhance  our 
economic efficiency, competitiveness and productivity. And we will continue to direct efforts 
at  ensuring  that  all  Malaysians  can  participate  effectively  in  the  financial  system.  Bank 
Negara will also continue to work with the Government on a range of economic priorities to 
sustain the Malaysian economy on a steady growth path. This includes the continued support 
and development of SMEs, and improvement in access to affordable housing. An area that 
demands greater attention and coordination going forward is the ‘sharing economy’. We have 
already  seen  how  the  likes  of  Uber  and  AirBnB  have  changed  the  business  model  of  the 
transport  and  hotel  sectors,  and  enhanced  the  earning  potential  for  asset  owners,  lower 
costs  for  users,  and  drive  innovation  and  service  quality  improvements  among  incumbent 
providers. They can also bring important benefits for the environment through the reduction 
of  wastage  and  control  of  over-consumption.  Similar  innovative  trends  are  also  emerging 
within the banking and finance sector. To reap the benefits of technological advancements, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the Bank will work closely with relevant agencies and innovators in this space on new ways 
of delivering new products and services. 
I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  this  morning  to  talk  about  some  of  the  measures  that 
Bank Negara Malaysia is taking to support growth in the financial services sector, encourage 
innovation and strengthen resilience. My remarks will touch on the areas of regional financial 
integration, fintech development, systemic focus on regulation, governance and the role of 
banks in ensuring an inclusive financial system. 
to 
financial 
the  2007 
integration 
leading  up 
financial  crisis,  global 
Advancing regional financial integration 
The  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  (or  ABIF)  that  was  finalised  last  year  was  a 
significant  milestone  towards  greater  ASEAN  integration.  An  agreement  forged  between 
10 key economies at different stages of economic and financial systems development is in 
itself a remarkable achievement. This is in sharp contrast with recent global trends. In the 
decades 
took 
unprecedented  strides  forward  as  capital  markets  and  banking  systems  expanded  and 
diversified, increasing the mobility of capital. But of late, there has been a reversal of this 
trend. A recent study by McKinsey found that following the crisis, banks globally have shed 
$722 billion in assets and operations, of which almost half were foreign-based. Cross-border 
flows have also declined significantly, remaining at 60% of pre-crisis levels. To some extent, 
this  is  expected  as  markets  undergo  corrections  and  new  regulations  were  introduced  to 
address weaknesses in existing models for integration. The crisis has led to forces of change 
that are creating two diverging paths ahead: greater fragmentation of finance as operating 
structures adopt a narrower and more domestic focus, or a move towards alternative, more 
sustainable approaches to integration. ASEAN integration however, has adopted sustainable 
approaches  to  integration  and  continued  to  gain  momentum.  Importantly,  this  has  been 
pursued in tandem with the need for greater private sector integration, thereby supporting a 
natural path of evolution for the region’s financial sectors and overall economy. 
As  a  whole,  this  has  resulted  in  a  measured  approach  to  integration,  mindful  of  different 
needs  of  member  countries  and  supported  by  regional 
frameworks  and  bilateral 
arrangements. In doing so, risks are also better managed by preserving a strong focus on 
strengthening prudential frameworks and capacity developments and giving economies more 
time to adjust to new circumstances. With more than 600 million people, with a combined 
GDP of USD2.5 trillion and a burgeoning middle class, ASEAN holds enormous potential for 
economic growth for member countries. We expect that intra-regional trade will flourish and 
consequently sources of growth and trade will become much more diversified. 
Since  the  finalisation  of  the  ABIF,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  signed  three  Heads  of 
Agreement (HOAs) with Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines, paving the way for banks in 
the four economies to expand their presence and contribute towards regional growth. Bank 
Negara  has  also  actively  pursued  initiatives  to  develop  a  viable  regional  cross  currency 
market to support trade and investment by expanding the availability of multiple choices of 
currencies that businesses can use for trade and settlement. Malaysia and Thailand recently 
established  the  first  cross-currency  settlement  and  clearing  arrangement  between  two 
ASEAN  countries,  following  similar  arrangements  with  China  and  South  Korea.  Moving 
forward, Malaysia remains committed to regional efforts to advance financial integration. This 
will  be  guided  by  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  Blueprint  2025,  which  focuses  on  the 
three key pillars of financial integration, financial inclusion and financial stability in the region. 
Facilitating fintech developments 
I  am  pleased  today  to  announce  that  Bank  Negara  will  introduce  a  framework  for  fintech 
firms to test innovations in the financial services operational environment. Earlier this month 
at  the  Global  Islamic  Finance  Forum,  I  spoke  briefly  about  the  work  that  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia has undertaken with respect to fintech. Indeed, Bank Negara has long recognised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
the power of technology in driving the financial sector forward. Over the years, banks have 
harnessed the power of technology to reap significant benefits. Bank Negara has supported 
this development on many fronts including in the areas of payments, internet banking, agent 
banking,  Islamic  finance  and  money  exchange  and  remittances.  Fintech  will  be  a  new 
addition to the list. 
Fintech  developments  such  as  blockchain,  artificial  intelligence  and  biometric  applications 
are  now  expanding  the  frontiers  of  banking.  Because  of  the  profound  implication  of  new 
technology,  we  require  a  re-think  of  the  regulatory  framework  in  addressing  consumer 
protection  and  market  conduct  issues  as  well  as  the  technological  impact  on  the  orderly 
functioning of financial markets. We expect that the framework would enable fintech firms to 
provide  regulated  financial  services  directly  to  the  public,  or  in  partnership  with  financial 
institutions,  and  to  operate  under  more  flexible  regulatory  arrangements.  We  take 
cognisance that some innovations cannot be achieved within existing regulatory parameters. 
Nonetheless, to protect the interests of consumers, this will be subject to certain safeguards. 
The innovation must provide a clear benefit to the general public or financial industry. A firm 
that  operates  within  the  framework  must  also  commit  to  observe  reasonable  standards  of 
service, transparency to customers, appropriate funding and reporting requirements. These 
are not meant to stifle the creative process at play, but rather facilitating an orderly process 
while protecting consumers interests and maintaining market confidence. 
The  Bank  also  expects  the  framework  to  deliver  a  number  of  key  benefits.  It  will  provide 
regulatory clarity for fintech start-ups, and for banks and consumers that use their services. It 
will also lower barriers to entry and accelerate the time-to-market for productive innovations. 
Our aim is therefore to support fintech firms that go on to upscale their activities, and aid 
fintech firms to better anticipate and adjust to appropriate regulatory expectations. 
Strengthening the systemic focus of regulation 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  will  continue  to  reflect  the 
increasing focus on systemic risks. This addresses a key lesson from global financial crisis – 
that greater attention needs to be directed at identifying and managing systemic risks that 
arise from interactions between financial institutions and markets, and their collective impact 
on the broader financial system. 
As interlinkages within and beyond the Malaysian financial system deepen, the sources of 
potential  vulnerabilities  and  shocks  can  be  amplified,  with  larger  and  more  complex 
institutions posing greater risks to system-wide stability. Bank Negara Malaysia’s prudential 
standards  and  the  intensity  of  our  supervision  will  be  more  differentiated  going  forward  to 
reflect these risks. In recent months, we have issued two standards on operational risk and 
compliance. 
These  standards  reflect  the  differentiation  by  setting  higher  expectations  for  larger  and 
systemically important financial institutions. Bank Negara is also assessing options to ensure 
that  systemically  important  institutions  have  adequate  capital  buffers;  that  their  capital  is 
proportionate  to  the risks  posed  to the  broader financial  system  and  the  possible  costs of 
failure.  In  addition,  we  are  progressing  work  in  coordination  with  PIDM  to  develop  an 
effective resolution and recovery framework. Banks are expected to continuously assess and 
identify  critical  functions  from  a  systemic  perspective  within  their  operations,  and  prepare 
contingency and recovery plans to preserve those functions under a stress scenario. Bank 
Negara will engage the banking industry to share more information on this initiative, including 
our implementation approach. A concept paper on this will also be issued for comments. 
Raising the bar on governance 
Finally,  we  will  continue  to  raise  the  bar  on  governance.  The  role  played  by  governance 
failures in the recent crisis is well documented, particularly in respect of incentive systems, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
accountability structures and controls. More broadly, there is also a strengthened emphasis 
on  the  softer  aspects  of  governance  such  as  behavioural  norms,  corporate  culture  and 
ethics. We should not forget these lessons or else history will repeat itself. 
Malaysian financial institutions should be the gold standard for good governance practices. 
Because  of  their  important  role  within  the  economic  system,  banks  have  the  added 
responsibility of maintaining public trust and confidence. 
In  addition,  we  also  expect  the  banking  industry  to  take  the  lead  in  promoting  good 
governance  practices  more  broadly  across  corporate  Malaysia,  through  financing  and 
investment  activities,  or  professional  advice  to  clients.  An  important  regulatory  priority  for 
Bank  Negara  in  this  regard  is  to  align  incentives  with  a  sound  risk  culture  and  ethical 
conduct, underpinned by effective independent oversight by the board. On this, Bank Negara 
recently  published  several  proposals  to  enhance  the  corporate  governance  framework  for 
financial  institutions  in  Malaysia  to  address  these  issues.  While  proposals  on  board 
composition  appear  to  have  generated  more  attention  in  the  media,  the  most  significant 
enhancements actually relate to expectations for the board and senior management to set 
the right “tone from the top”, and the explicit responsibilities placed on them to play a more 
critical role in shaping the core values and culture of the institution. This includes expanded 
requirements  on  compensation  practices  and  disclosures  to  strengthen  market  discipline. 
Banks must also put in place a transparent whistleblowing policy that enables the escalation 
of concerns without the risk of reprisal. 
Good  governance  is  ultimately  driven  by  a  workforce  that  is  committed  to  the  highest 
standards  of  knowledge,  competence  and  conduct.  Competition  for  talent  in  the  financial 
industry has intensified greatly, in an environment where public opinion of banks globally is 
also at an all-time low following the last crisis. Recent trends among graduates of leading 
business schools worldwide indicate a shift towards other well-paying alternatives to careers 
in banking, notably to technology and consulting firms. According to the Financial Times, the 
popularity of banking as a career has dropped 41% since 2008. Globally, banks’ reputations 
have  also  been  dented  to  varying  degrees  by  poor  quality  of  service,  staggering  control 
failures and misconduct. 
The  professionalisation of the  banking  industry  is  therefore  critical  to  strengthen the talent 
pipeline,  while  restoring  and  maintaining  public  trust  in  the  banking  industry.  An  important 
step  in  this  direction  is  the  transformation  of  Institut  Bank-Bank  Malaysia  (IBBM)  into  the 
Asian  Institute  of  Chartered  Bankers  (AICB)  as the  professional  body  for  bankers  and  the 
Asian  Banking  School  as  the  education  service  provider.  The  AICB  plays  a  key  role  in 
spearheading 
the  development  of 
professional qualifications, a specialised certification track to support continuing professional 
development  and  a  membership  framework  that  subjects  members  to  a  strict  code  of 
conduct,  professionalism  and  ethics.  The  prestigious  Chartered  Banker  qualification,  for 
example, aims to provide comprehensive education on banking to support sound judgment 
and  decision-making.  The 
these 
opportunities to build a solid team of professional bankers that are able to perform effectively 
in a rapidly evolving landscape. 
the  vision  of  professionalising  bankers 
full  advantage  of 
industry  should 
therefore 
through 
take 
Fundamental role of banks to support inclusive financial participation for all 
It is important to bear in mind that growth in financial services must also serve to enhance 
economic opportunity for all. Since the establishment of the Financial Inclusion Framework in 
2011,  major  inroads  have  been  made  in  widening  the  accessibility  to  financial  services  in 
Malaysia. 
Agent  banking  has  been  a  key  strategy  to  improve  access,  particularly  in  the  rural  areas. 
92%  of  our  population  has  some  form  of  access  to  financing.  Moving  forward,  expanding 
public  access  to  financial  services  will  remain  important  for  the  remaining  8%  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
unbanked  population  in  Malaysia.  There  will  also  be  greater  emphasis  on  the  quality  of 
services provided. 
The  social  impact  of  greater  financial  inclusion  is  significant  as  it  helps  improve  people’s 
lives. In this respect, banks have a critical role to play to make it easier for people to save, 
make payments and obtain affordable loans to improve standards of living and build more 
resilient  communities.  It  would  be  a  remiss  to  talk  about  the  future  of  banking  without 
embracing this very fundamental role of banks. 
As our economy becomes even more financialised, it is important that banks strike a balance 
between legitimate profit-seeking goals, and their responsibility to provide the public with full 
and fair access to financial services. Some banks today are still falling short of expectations 
to  offer  basic  banking  services  to  the  people  who  only  need  such  services.  We  have 
observed  poor  communications  by  the  front-line  staff  of  such  banks  on  the  basic  banking 
products  which  must  be  offered  by  all  banks.  In  some  cases,  prohibitive  conditions  are 
attached  to  the  opening  of  basic  banking  accounts  in  clear  violation  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia’s requirements. This must change. In offering basic banking services, banks should 
also  leverage  on  technological  advancement  that  can  support  inclusive  finance  initiatives. 
These include adopting more innovative delivery channels, leveraging on big data to reach a 
wider community and to offer suitable products that are priced affordably. 
Concluding remarks 
The  world  as  we  know  it  is  set  to  change  dramatically  just  as  it  had  over  the  last  few 
decades, except that future changes will happen at a much more rapid pace, and in sectors 
where we least expect it. The ability of banks to adapt will be critical to its relevance. More 
likely than not, banks that are agile and have absolute clarity on their value proposition for 
their customer, society and wider economy, will be the ones that will endure. Banking as we 
know today will no doubt change in form as the future takes shape. What is more important 
that  the  core  purpose  of  banking  remains  intact  –  that  is  to  provide  reliable  passage  for 
resources to move to productive use, including under the most challenging conditions. 
I thought I would close these remarks by quoting Machiavelli ‘There is nothing more difficult 
to take in hand, more perilous to conduct, or more uncertain in its success, than to take the 
lead in the introduction of a new order of things’. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the future is about a new order of things. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
