   Már Guðmundsson: Monetary policy after capital controls 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Annual 
General Meeting of the Confederation of Icelandic Employers, Reykjavík, 7 April 2016. 
 Madame Chairman, honoured guests,  
In my speech today, I would like to discuss the monetary policy that might be appropriate for 
Iceland  after the  broad-based  restrictions  currently  imposed  on  capital outflows  have  been 
lifted.  More  specifically,  I  will  discuss  the  monetary  policy  framework  rather  than  its 
implementation, which would naturally depend on economic conditions and prospects at any 
given time.  
But what is meant by monetary policy? In the modern sense of the term, monetary policy entails 
applying the Central Bank’s balance sheet and other instruments at the Bank’s disposal so as 
to affect the economy. In that sense, entering a currency union is not monetary policy; it is 
currency  policy.  Only  central  banks  can  pursue  monetary  policy,  while  governments  take 
decisions on currency policy. In my discussion today, I assume that we will pursue independent 
monetary policy, at least in the near future.  
Designing a monetary policy framework entails deciding what its objectives should be, which 
policy instruments should be applied, how decisions on the application of those instruments 
should  be  taken,  how  these  decisions  should  be  communicated,  and  how  accounting  for 
monetary policy after the fact should be handled. Exchange rate policy is naturally an important 
part of this framework; i.e., whether the exchange rate is pegged, free-floating, or somewhere 
in between.  
The monetary policy framework must be based on sound theory concerning how monetary 
policy  instruments  affect  the  economy  –  theory  that  is  well  supported  by  experience  and 
research. Otherwise, there is the risk either that goals will be set which monetary policy has 
little or no chance of achieving or that appropriate policy instruments will not be used. But the 
problem is that monetary policy transmission changes with developments in the economy and 
the financial markets and the effectiveness of different policy instruments can change over 
time. For example, where financial markets are underdeveloped and repressed, the tendency 
is to use policy instruments based on various kinds of quantitative restrictions such as lending 
ceilings and to actively use reserve requirements instead of price instruments such as interest 
rates, which are usually the most effective tool when financial markets are less restricted and 
more developed.  
In order to lay the groundwork for further discussion of the monetary policy framework, I will 
give you a broad sketch of the key points concerning monetary policy efficacy that must be 
considered when the framework is developed. In order to save time, I will paint with a broad 
brush and emphasise the points that are most important and are well supported by theory and 
research – including research on Iceland. In addition, these are key points that remain valid in 
spite of the experience of the financial crisis. In this context, two aspects are most important.  
The first is that in the long run, monetary policy primarily affects nominal variables such as the 
price level and the exchange rate. However, this statement is not, strictly speaking, true, and 
it probably applies primarily to that which we can call “good” monetary policy. Bad monetary 
policy can probably have a lasting negative effect on GDP growth and living standards and 
other real variables that we consider important in connection with economic well-being and 
stability. An example of this is persistently high and volatile inflation or deflation of the type 
occurring around the world during the Great Depression of the 1930s.  
The second important point is that in the short term, monetary policy can affect real variables 
such as GDP growth, employment, the real exchange rate, and the current account balance. 
This is partly because monetary policy measures affect different prices at differing speeds, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   until full adjustment has taken place, relative prices and the real variables affected by them will 
change. An example of this is the impact of interest rate changes on the nominal exchange 
rate,  which  emerges  quickly  and  changes  the  real  exchange  rate.  To  the  degree  that  this 
change is in excess of what is compatible with underlying economic conditions, it will then 
gradually reverse with an adjustment in prices and wages. A similar story can be told about 
real  wages.  Therefore,  in  the  long  run,  real  economic  variables  are  determined  mainly  by 
underlying factors such as natural resource utilisation, labour force quality, productivity, and 
the propensity to save.  
It follows from what I have just said that it is of little use to set long-term goals for monetary 
policy other than price stability or exchange rate stability. Although this is so, monetary policy 
can  also  attempt  to  mitigate  volatility  in  real  variables  such  as  GDP  and  employment  and 
counteract deviations in the exchange rate from equilibrium, particularly when such volatility 
and deviations originate on the demand-side of the economy.  
It also follows from what I have said that monetary policy must be forward-looking, as it takes 
effect with a time lag. Based on the findings from a number of studies, the rule of thumb is that 
the full effect of interest rate changes on inflation emerges in 2-3 years, while the bulk of the 
effect emerges within about a year. The short-term impact on real variables tapers off within 
the same time frame. And it follows from this that in order to pursue forward-looking monetary 
policy with any degree of success, it is necessary to make forecasts. These call for economic 
analysis and modelling. In order to understand the problems associated with monetary policy 
implementation, one must bear in mind that statistics relating to the recent past often contain 
significant measurement errors, that we do not know what the “right” economic model is, and 
that the future is always in some sense unknowable. In other words, monetary policy is always 
implemented under conditions of uncertainty – to varying degrees, of course. This is why we 
consider a large number of economic indicators and use several models. Furthermore, we do 
not put a single economist in front of a computer and assign that person the task of determining 
the monetary stance; instead, we have a committee that exchanges opinions and assesses 
the current situation and outlook at the time in question.  
The observations I have just made are general in nature and apply to large and small countries 
alike. But we know that monetary policy in small, open economies is accompanied by particular 
challenges – challenges that we must take into consideration when developing a monetary 
policy  framework  for  Iceland.  In  this  context,  it  should  be  noted,  first  of  all,  that  smaller 
economies generally have a tendency to be more volatile than larger ones, owing both to less 
economic diversity and the greater relative weight of individual shocks. Second, the relative 
weight  of  the  tradable  sector  is  often  greater  than  in  larger  economies.  Because  of  this, 
economic developments are more dependent on the exchange rate, and pass-through from 
the exchange rate to inflation is generally stronger. Third, financial markets are shallower than 
in  larger  economies,  other  things  being  equal,  and  this  contributes  to  greater  volatility  of 
financial  prices.  Fourth,  in  an  environment  of  unrestricted  capital  flows  and  increasing 
international  financial  integration,  the  possibility  for  small  economies  to  affect  their  own 
financial conditions through monetary policy diminishes.  
The question then arises: should there be an exchange rate target or an inflation target? The 
answer  is  not  always  straightforward.  Other  things  being  equal,  an  inflation  target  is  more 
appropriate because it stands closer to the factors important to economic well-being, and it is 
easier to decide what an inflation target should be than to estimate the “right” exchange rate 
target. In other respects, the answer is determined by the structure and cyclical behaviour of 
the economy in question, the maturity of its markets, and whether cross-border movement of 
capital is largely unrestricted or not. The more open an economy is, the stronger the arguments 
for  an  exchange  rate  target  because  inflation  is  determined  to  a  greater  degree  by  the 
exchange rate. On the other hand, the less correlated shocks and cycles are with those in 
trading  partner  countries,  the  stronger  the  arguments  for  an  inflation  target  and  a  floating 
exchange rate. Therefore, the two characteristics of small economies that I mentioned earlier 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   pull in opposite directions. This does not change the fact that, other things being equal, smaller 
economies are likelier than larger ones to have an exchange rate target.  
Underdeveloped financial markets can be obstacles to the pursuit of an inflation target and a 
floating exchange rate. An example of this is the conditions in Iceland before the 1990s, when 
we  lacked  a  money  market  for  krónur  and  an  interbank  foreign  exchange  market.  Less 
restricted movement of capital pulls in the other direction, however, as it can be more difficult 
to achieve an exchange rate target, and the negative implications for financial stability, when 
central banks are forced off the target, have often proven more pronounced. As a result, it is 
no coincidence that countries around the world shifted from exchange rate targeting to inflation 
targeting as capital movements were liberalised in the late 1980s and the 1990s.  
The answer to the question of inflation target versus exchange rate target therefore differs from 
country to country and from time to time, as our own history shows so clearly. From the time 
the Central Bank of Iceland was established in the early 1960s until the beginning of the 1990s, 
the  Bank  pursued  an  exchange  rate  target,  with  fixed-exchange  rate  episodes  of  varying 
lengths interrupted by periodic devaluations, apart from one revaluation in 1973. The markets 
were underdeveloped, and reserve requirements and lending restrictions were the main policy 
instruments,  but  they  were  relatively  toothless  because  of  the  Treasury’s  unrestricted 
borrowing from the Central Bank and, for a time, the partial relending of reserve requirements 
as inventory credit to exporters. At the beginning of the 1990s, the interbank markets for money 
and  foreign  exchange  were  developed,  which  created  the  conditions  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy as we now know it, with the Bank’s interest rates for transactions with deposit-
taking institutions as the main policy instrument. Restrictions on movement of capital were 
lifted in the first half of the decade. At the same time, the exchange rate target took the form 
of a target zone, which  was then widened over  the course of the decade, in part because 
capital movements increased exchange rate volatility and it was considered risky to eliminate 
investors’  exchange  rate  risk  entirely. When  growing  economic  imbalances  were  added  to 
increased movement of capital, exchange rate targeting became even more difficult, until the 
dam was about to burst right before the inflation target was adopted and the króna floated in 
March 2001.  
The monetary policy framework adopted in 2001 was based on foreign models that were in the 
ascendant at the time. But it also reflected the broader ideas about economic policy, prudential 
regulation,  and  supervision  that  had  gained  currency  but  have  proven  in  retrospect  to  be 
flawed.  To  simplify,  it  can  be  said  that  these  ideas  were  based  on  separation  and 
independence of individual aspects of economic and prudential policies, but without sufficient 
attention to their interactions. Monetary policy was to focus primarily on the inflation outlook, 
and it was largely to be implemented through a single tool: interest rates. Intervention in the 
foreign  exchange  market  was  to  be  avoided.  Supervision  was  supposed  to  ensure  that 
individual financial institutions were sound. Fiscal policy was supposed to be neutral over the 
business cycle. And the markets would take care of the rest.  
This did not turn out to be the case. Apart from the question of interactions, insufficient attention 
was paid to risks in the financial system as a whole. Furthermore, central banks have more 
instruments than just interest rates, as was revealed during and after the financial crisis, and 
these instruments have some impact on financial stability. The interactions between monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability  are  therefore  important.  The  exchange  rate  and  the  foreign 
exchange markets have proven to be more disorderly than theory on the benefits of floating 
exchange rates has generally admitted. Some market intervention could therefore pay a role 
in improving outcomes. Of course, this topic is more complex than my broad paintbrush can 
capture, and at present, there is considerable discussion internationally of how the experience 
of the financial crisis and its aftermath should affect which policy instruments central banks 
should use and how, in order to preserve long-term price stability, conduct some short-term 
output stabilisation, and promote financial stability. The main points that I mentioned earlier 
concerning  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  and  its  possible  objectives  remain  largely 
unchallenged by this experience, however.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   These flaws were also present in Iceland’s economic policy framework. As a result, there was 
inadequate response to the excessive capital inflows that contributed to credit and asset price 
bubbles and domestic residents’ significant foreign exchange risk, which was to a large extent 
unhedged.  Furthermore,  monetary  and fiscal  policy  were  not  well  enough  aligned,  and the 
same  can  be  said  of  other  Government  decisions  that  affected  demand.  The  burden  on 
monetary  policy  was  therefore  greater  than  it  would  have  been  otherwise,  which  further 
stimulated capital inflows. This, together with strong demand, pushed the real exchange rate 
higher than it would have been otherwise and exacerbated macroeconomic imbalances, as 
could be seen most clearly in a sizeable current account deficit. These developments and the 
banking crisis contributed to the currency crisis that struck in the first half of 2008.  
In  formulating  the  monetary  policy  framework  after  capital  controls,  we  must  take  into 
consideration the experience that has been gained in recent years in pursuing independent 
monetary  policy  in  small,  open  economies  with  unrestricted  capital flows  in  a  world  that  is 
increasingly  integrated  financially.  This  is  becoming  ever  more  difficult,  as  we  saw  in  New 
Zealand and in Iceland before the crash, and more recently in countries such as Switzerland 
and Sweden. We ourselves got a taste of what can happen under these conditions last summer 
and autumn, when strong inflows of capital into the domestic bond market turned the slope of 
the  yield  curve  around.  This  is  because  capital  markets  are  growing  more  effective  at 
smoothing out the difference in risk-adjusted asset returns in different countries, with the result 
that  monetary  policy  transmission  along  the  interest  rate  channel  is  severely  weakened  in 
small,  open,  and  financially  integrated  economies  where  long-term  interest  rates  are 
determined to an increasing degree by rates in large countries. In such cases, monetary policy 
transmission takes place to an ever greater degree through the exchange rate channel. But 
transmission through the exchange rate channel is uncertain and volatile, as the exchange 
rate is also an asset price that fluctuates with speculative capital flows and can deviate from 
equilibrium over extended periods and then correct quite suddenly. Unless the financial system 
is that much better protected, this process can interact negatively with financial stability, as 
was the case in Iceland during the financial crisis. From a theoretical standpoint, it is possible 
to resolve or mitigate the problem facing small countries in this regard in three ways: by joining 
a currency union, adapting monetary policy to that prevailing in larger economies even though 
it is not suitable for domestic conditions, or imposing restrictions or other measures that directly 
reduce  non-residents’  profits  on  carry  trade.  As  has  already  emerged,  such  measures  are 
being examined by the Central Bank, and they could constitute part of our arsenal of policy 
instruments after the capital controls have been lifted. But we mustn’t think that they represent 
some sort of magic bullet. Such instruments would have adverse side effects and could push 
international obligations to their limits, particularly if they are designed for maximum efficacy. 
But experience shows that it could be risky not to have them if they are needed, but we must 
attempt  to  conduct  other  matters  so  as  to  ensure  that  they  will  be  needed  as  seldom  as 
possible.  
I would now like to summarise all of this and give you a sketch of how the post-capital controls 
monetary policy framework might look, after accounting for the points I have discussed today. 
In this context, I would also like to refer you to several reports issued by the Central Bank in 
recent years, including Monetary policy after capital controls (2010), Prudential rules following 
capital  controls (2012), and  Iceland’s  currency and  exchange  rate  policy  options  (2012).  A 
number of the things I have said today can be found in these reports, which have stood the 
test of time quite well. It should also be noted that a number of measures have already been 
put in place, such as, for instance, increased intervention in the foreign exchange market and 
more effective prudential rules to reduce foreign exchange risk in the banking system. But in 
this context, I would like to emphasise that at present, foreign exchange market intervention is 
to  a  large  degree  aimed  at  building  up  the  reserves  during  the  prelude  to  capital  account 
liberalisation.  
What would the monetary policy framework be?  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The main objective of monetary policy would still be price stability, and it would be specified as 
a formal numerical inflation target, as is currently done.  
Instead of a pure float, as we had before the financial crisis, we would have a managed float. 
However, there would not be any explicit exchange rate target; instead, the objective would be 
to  mitigate  excess  volatility  due  to  temporary  capital  flows  and  to  smooth  out  short-term 
fluctuations in the exchange rate.  
The institutional framework would be the same as it is now, based on an independent monetary 
policy  committee  that  takes  decisions  on  the  application  of  the  Bank’s  policy  instruments, 
releases statements explaining its decisions, and gives account of its policies to Parliament 
and the nation through other channels. This system is broadly in line with best practice abroad 
and has worked well.  
Under normal conditions, interest rates on Central Bank transactions with financial institutions 
would continue to be the Bank’s main monetary policy instrument. Foreign exchange market 
intervention is also a monetary policy instrument, as I have mentioned, and other instruments 
can also be used, such as reserve requirements and direct intervention in the bond market. 
Their efficacy is generally less certain than with interest rates, however, and as a result they 
are used less often. The MPC would be entrusted with a capital flow management tool or tools 
to affect carry trade, of the type I mentioned a moment ago. These tools would not be used 
against the regular flows that are a normal part of monetary policy transmission; instead, they 
would primarily be used when flows became too strong and there is the risk that monetary 
policy transmission along the interest rate channel would be weakened excessively  
In implementing monetary policy, the MPC takes into account the impact of monetary policy 
and its interactions with other aspects of economic and prudential policies, insofar as this is 
consistent with medium-term price stability. There will be reliable processes for exchange of 
information, discussion, and analysis of the interactions among these various factors. This will 
take  place  through  consultations  between  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Central  Bank; 
through  the  proposed  macroeconomic  council,  where  the  interactions  between  economic 
policy and labour market decisions would be discussed; or in the Systemic Risk Committee 
and Financial Stability Council and joint meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee and the 
Systemic Risk Committee. The Central Bank plans to strengthen these processes still further 
by launching a new publication next year. The report, which will be issued at least once a year, 
will focus on the external position of the economy and its sustainability, the outlook for the 
balance of payments, and the exchange rate and signs of major deviations from the equilibrium 
exchange rate.  
Honoured  guests:  The  revised  monetary  policy  framework  will  be  finalised  in  the  next  few 
months, before capital controls on residents are lifted. Its final form will be a joint declaration 
by  the  Government  and  the  Central  Bank,  like  that  dating  from  2001.  The  discourse  will 
therefore  continue.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Confederation  of  Icelandic 
Employers  for  having  this  topic  on  its  agenda  today  and  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to 
express my views on the subject.  
But we must keep one thing in mind. The new framework will be better than the one we had 
before the crisis, but it will not be a panacea. Monetary policy is limited in terms of what it can 
deliver in the long run, and it will continue to be implemented under conditions of uncertainty 
in  a  constantly  changing  world.  Under  most  circumstances,  however,  it  should  be  able  to 
provide us with medium-term price stability, and that is no small achievement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
