  Ignazio Visco: Should the current monetary policy framework be 
adjusted to meet (new) post-crisis challenges? 
Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the conference “The ECB and 
Its Watchers XVII”, debate on “Should the current monetary policy framework be adjusted to 
meet (new) post-crisis challenges?”, organised by the Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt 
am Main, 7 April 2016. 
 1. 
I will comment on three issues. First, is the (below but close to) 2 per cent objective 
still appropriate? Second, why does inflation remain low? Do global forces dominate, 
and is monetary policy still effective? Third, should financial stability considerations 
interfere with monetary policy? 
Is the (below but close to) 2 per cent objective still appropriate? 
2. 
The  2003  evaluation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  considered  three 
arguments,1  which  appear  all  the more  valid  today.  All  of them  suggest that  price 
stability must be achieved and preserved through timely and effective action. 
First,  the  risks  of  deflation  and  of  policy  rates  hitting  the  lower  bound  have  been 
shown to be a serious issue, more than we thought in 2003. For more than one year 
now  we  have  had  negative  or  barely  positive  inflation  and  a  short-term  nominal 
interest rate close to its lower bound, a condition that in 2003, when we assessed 
our monetary policy strategy, was considered to be very unlikely. 
Second, there is still need to “grease” the adjustment of relative prices in the euro 
area, within and especially across countries. Price and nominal wage rigidities still 
exist, notwithstanding the reforms in the goods and labour markets that have been 
implemented  in  recent  years;  structural  differences  across  countries  remain 
considerable. 
Third,  as  to the  upward  bias  in  the  measurement  of  consumer  prices,  if  anything, 
there is more reason today to believe that this is an issue that deserves attention. 
Let me quote as an example a recent article in The Economist (March 19, 2016), 
reporting interesting evidence on a ‘digital price index’ that Adobe is developing with 
the  help  of  two  academics  (Pete  Klenow  of  Stanford  University  and  Austan 
Goolsbee of the University of Chicago). The index (which is based on anonymised 
sales  data  collected  from  websites  that  use  the  Adobe  software)  suggests  that 
official  statistics  are  likely  to  measure  the  price  dynamics  of  certain  goods 
incorrectly,  in  particular  consumer  technology,  and,  as  a  result,  might  significantly 
overestimate inflation. 
Let me also add that we should pay attention to the interactions among these (and 
other) conditions. A very relevant aspect is that too low inflation for too long makes it 
more  difficult  to  deal  with  public  and  private  debt.  Related  to  this,  as  shown  by 
recent research, the interaction of falling inflation and nominal interest rates at the 
ZLB  with  nominal  debt  and  downward  nominal  rigidities  can  lead  even  favourable 
transitory  supply  shocks  (such  as  a  reduction  of  the  price  of  oil) to  have  negative 
effects on economic activity.2 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
                                                
1 
2  Neri, S. and A Notarpietro, “The macroeconomic effects of low and falling inflation at the zero lower bound”, 
“The outcome of the ECB’s evaluation of its monetary policy strategy”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, June 2003. 
Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), No. 1040, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Why does inflation remain low? Do global forces dominate, and is monetary policy still 
effective? 
7. 
it  also  reflects  domestic  developments 
Low inflation certainly has a global dimension. It reflects developments in oil prices; 
deflationary  pressures  coming  from  the  Chinese  economy;  possibly  technological 
change.  But 
that  should  not  be 
underestimated. Domestic factors operate both via expectations and via economic 
activity, and in both respects conditions in the euro area differ from those in other 
main advanced economies. 
Although declining inflation expectations has been a global phenomenon, since the 
end of 2014 the risk of a de-anchoring has increased particularly in the euro area, 
where expectations have reached lower levels than in other advanced economies.3 
A  measure  of  this  risk  can  be  inferred  from  the  probability  that  large  changes  in 
short-term expectations will be passed on to long-term expectations.4 This indicator 
climbed  from  October  2014  until  mid-January  2015  in  the  euro  area,  while  no 
increases  were  recorded  in  the  U.S.  or the  U.K.  over the  same  period (Figure  1). 
After  the  extension  of  the  APP  to  include  public  sector  securities  the  indicator 
decreased sharply, but remained volatile and above the historical average. 
Let  me  also  point  out,  in  this  respect,  that  the  importance  of  expectations  of  low 
inflation  in  determining  wage  outcomes,  and  thus  giving  rise  to  second-round 
effects, may  be  increasing.  In  Italy,  in  some  recently  signed  collective  contracts  it 
was agreed that parts of future pay rises will be revised downwards in the event that 
the  inflation  rate  falls  short  of  current  forecasts;  according  to  our  simulations,  a 
generalised adoption of this type of contract would significantly decrease the rate of 
growth  of  wages  and this  would  in  turn  be reflected  in the  dynamics  of  consumer 
prices. 
Very low inflation in the euro-area also depends to a large extent on the persistence 
of economic slack and high unemployment. In the euro area the negative correlation 
between unemployment and core inflation or the rate of growth of negotiated wages 
is very evident even from a simple descriptive analysis (Figure 2). Supporting growth 
and employment is thus crucial to bringing inflation back to target. Indeed, ongoing 
work carried out at the Banca d’Italia based on micro-data suggests that after the 
crisis nominal wages became more reactive to unemployment in Italy, France and 
Spain; in Italy a reduction of unemployment by 3 percentage points would result in 
an increase of wage inflation in a range of 0.5–1.0 percentage points. 
But  is  monetary  policy  still  capable  of  supporting  inflation  and  activity?  The  short 
answer is yes. Although we are not happy with the current outlook for inflation (and 
we are also only moderately satisfied with the growth outlook) there is no doubt that 
the  counterfactual  would  have  been  much  worse  and  could  have  led  to  a 
deflationary  spiral  with  severe  consequences  both  for  the  real  economy  and  the 
financial sector. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
                                                
3  For a comprehensive description of the APP, its impact and remarks on the evaluation of possible unintended 
consequences see: Ignazio Visco, “Global Monetary System: Our Currency, Your Problem?”, Remarks to the 
Monetary Policy Panel, UBS European Conference, London, 11 November 2015. 
4  The indicator is based on the probability of co-movement of long-term and short-term inflation expectations. 
Technically, it is calculated as an odds ratio over a rolling window of 250 working days and ranges from zero 
to  infinity;  an  increase  indicates  a  closer  link  between  sharp  decreases  in  short-term  and  in  long-term 
expectations;  low  values  indicate  that  long-term  expectations  are  better  anchored.  For  details  on  how  the 
indicator is constructed see F. Natoli and L. Sigalotti, “An indicator of inflation expectations anchoring”, Banca 
d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), forthcoming. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
 Constructing counterfactuals is always difficult, but estimates by Banca d’Italia staff 
(which do not consider possible non-linear effects) show that in the absence of the 
monetary policy measures adopted between June 2014 and December 2015, both 
annual inflation and GDP growth in the euro area would have been lower by about 
half  a  percentage  point  in  2015–17.  The  expansion  of  economic  activity  in  2015 
would  have  been  slightly  below  1  per  cent,  against  an  observed  1.6  per  cent; 
inflation  would  have  been  negative,  at  about  –0.5  per  cent,  against  0.0.5  These 
estimates  are  consistent  with  those  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  ECB  staff.6 
Regarding  Italy,  the  effects  are  estimated  to  be  somewhat  stronger:  absent  the 
monetary  impulse,  the  Italian  recession  would  have  ended  only  in  2017;  inflation 
would have remained negative for the whole three-year period.7 
The commitment to pursuing the objective of price stability shown by the Governing 
Council  has  been  essential  for  stemming  the  de-anchoring  of  expectations  and 
maintaining the ECB credibility, which is crucial to avoiding the risk of a deflationary 
spiral. When inflation remains far from target for a prolonged period, the risk of de-
anchoring may be compounded by economic agents revising their expectations for 
future inflation to take account of surprises registered in the past, to an extent that 
also  depends  on  the  share  of  agents  that  lose  their  trust  in  the  central  bank’s 
objective.8 
In order to bring inflation back to target, it is essential to support aggregate demand. 
The  unconventional  measures  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  are 
contributing to increased spending on consumption and investment goods. And I am 
confident that the effects we have observed so far will be strengthened by the new 
decisions we took on 10 March: the strengthening of the APP and the inclusion of 
corporate  bonds,  together  with  the  introduction  of  new  targeted  refinancing 
operations, will contribute to a further decline of the cost of borrowing in the private 
sector. 
A recent debate has centred on the notion of “helicopter money”. Obviously this is a 
“very  unconventional”  policy,  targeted  at  directly  affecting  consumption  and 
investment by households and firms. Such an extreme measure would undoubtedly 
be subject to operational and legal constraints; the redistributive implications and the 
close ties  with fiscal policy  would all make it very complex, all the more so in the 
euro area given its institutional framework. As recently noted by President Draghi, 
and reiterated by Benoît Cœuré and Peter Praet, helicopter money is not currently 
part of the discussion in the Governing Council, although no policy tool  within our 
mandate can or should be dismissed a priori. 
This  discussion  is  noteworthy,  not  much  per  se,  but  because  it  underlines  the 
concern that monetary policy is left to act in isolation. Indeed, the fact that monetary 
policy is still effective does not mean that it can support macroeconomic stability on 
its  own.  In  order  to  achieve  satisfactory  growth,  it  needs  to  be  complemented  by 
budgetary policies aimed at creating appropriate macroeconomic conditions, as well 
as by further reforms aimed at increasing potential output growth. In the past years 
of crisis, monetary policy has bought time for the decisions in other spheres of policy 
                                                
5  See  Locarno,  A.,  A.  Notarpietro,  and  M.  Pisani,  “Sovereign  risk,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  multipliers:  a 
structural model-based assessment”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers) 943, 2013). 
6  Mario Draghi, “Global and domestic inflation”, speech at the Economic Club of New York, 4 December 2015; 
Vítor Constâncio, “In defence of monetary policy”, 11 March 2016. 
7  Estimates computed using the Banca d’Italia Quarterly Model. 
8  F.  Busetti,  G.  Ferrero,  A.  Gerali  and  A.  Locarno,  “Deflationary  shocks  and  de-anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 252, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  making, but beyond a certain limit such a role would inevitably run into unintended 
consequences. 
Should financial stability considerations interfere with monetary policy? 
17. 
My reading is that it is important to consider the implications of monetary policy for 
financial stability, but that financial stability depends on adequate nominal growth. It 
is thus dangerous if monetary policy fails to pursue its own targets. As highlighted in 
the latest (November) Financial Stability Review of the ECB, banks’ profitability and 
debt-sustainability continue to be challenged by a weak economic recovery. 
Are  concerns  for  financial  instability  –  due  to  the  very  accommodative  monetary 
policy  –  currently  justified  in  the  euro  area?  It  does  not  seem  so.  Indicators  of 
imbalances in housing and credit markets do not point to increasing vulnerabilities in 
the euro area as a whole: estimates of over-valuation of residential property prices 
do  not  signal  widespread  risks  (Figure  3),  and  the  financial  cycle  is  still  negative 
(Figure  4).  Of  course,  aggregate  data  may  mask  heterogeneous  developments 
across  and  within  countries.  But  in  the  event  of  risks  in  specific  sectors  and/or 
countries, appropriate macroprudential measures can be implemented to limit their 
accumulation. 
 A protracted, very accommodative monetary policy involves risks which need to be 
monitored carefully, and low or negative nominal rates for too long may hurt some 
institutions. But the current low level of interest rates in the euro area is not a bizarre 
choice  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB;  rather,  it  reflects  the  slack  in  the 
economy and dangerously low actual and expected inflation. A less accommodative 
monetary  policy  in  the  current  circumstances  would  be  harmful  to  everyone.  The 
only sustainable way to raise nominal rates is to strengthen growth and job creation. 
These are necessary conditions for bringing inflation back to target and preserving 
price stability in the interest of all euro-area citizens. And this is why we need to be 
ambitious  in  our  decisions.  The  stronger  our  actions  today,  the  sooner  these 
conditions will be fulfilled. 
18. 
19. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 1 
Indicator of co-movement between short/long-term inflation 
expectations for extremely negative variations 
Note: The indicator is based on the probability of co-movement of long-term and short-
term inflation expectations. It is calculated as an odds ratio over a rolling window of 250 
working  days;  an  increase indicates a  closer link  between  large  reduction  in short-term 
and  long-term  expectations.  See  F.  Natoli  and  L.  Sigalotti,  “An  indicator  of  inflation 
expectations  anchoring”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di  Discussione  (Working  Papers), 
forthcoming. 
Core inflation, negotiated wages and unemployment in the euro area 
Figure 2  
  Source:  European  Central  Bank  and  Eurostat.  Note:  core  inflation  excludes  energy  and 
unprocessed food. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Over/undervaluation of residential property prices in the euro area 
Figure 3 
Source: European Central Bank, Financial Stability Review, November 2015.  
Note: over/undervaluation estimates are based on four different methods, two statistical 
and two model-based. A positive figure indicates overvaluation, i.e. prices above long-
term  average  (in  the  case  of  statistical  models)  or  fundamental  values  (in  the  case  of 
economic models). 
 Figure 4 
Domestic credit-to-GDP gap in the euro area 
Source: European Systemic Risk Board and Banca d’Italia’s calculations.  
Note: the credit-to-GDP gap is calculated as the deviation of the ratio of total credit to 
nominal  GDP  from  its  recursive  one-sided  Hodrick-Prescott  trend.  GDP-weighted 
average of euro area country gaps. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
